Madness Explained OceanofPDF.com

RICHARD BENTALL OceanofPDF.com

Madness Explained OceanofPDF.com

Psychosis and Human Nature ALLEN LANE an imprint of PENGUIN BOOKS

OceanofPDF.com

ALLEN LANE THE PENGUIN PRESS Published by the Penguin Group Penguin
Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England Penguin Putnam Inc., 375
Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA Penguin Books Australia
Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia Penguin
Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11, Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New
Delhi -- 110 017, India Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and
Airborne Roads, Albany, Auckland, New Zealand Penguin Books (South
Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL,
England

www.penguin.com First published 2003 1 Copyright © Richard Bentall, 2003
The moral right of the author has been asserted All rights reserved.
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without
the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above
publisher of this book The Acknowledgements on page x constitute an
extension of this copyright page ISBN: 978-0-14-190932-5

OceanofPDF.com

For my family

Aisling Keeva and Fintan Everyone is much more simply human than
otherwise. Harry Stack Sullivan, The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry
OceanofPDF.com

Contents Acknowledgements Foreword by Professor Aaron Beck Author's
Preface Part One The Origins of our Misunderstandings about Madness

1 Emil Kraepelin's Big Idea The origins of modern psychiatric theory 2
After Kraepelin How the standard approach to psychiatric classification
evolved 3 The Great Classification Crisis How it was discovered that the
standard system was scientifically meaningless 4 Fool's Gold Why
psychiatric diagnoses do not work 5 The Boundaries of Madness Why there
is no boundary between sanity and madness 6 Them and Us Modern
psychiatry as a cultural system Part Two A Better Picture of the Soul

7 The Significance of Biology Psychosis, the brain and the concept of
'disease' 8 Mental Life and Human Nature Madness and the social brain 9
Madness and Emotion Human emotions and the negative symptoms of
psychosis Part Three Some Madnesses Explained

10 Depression and the Pathology of Self Core psychological processes
that are important in severe mental illness

11 A Colourful Malady The psychology of mania 12 Abnormal Attitudes The
psychology of delusional beliefs 13 On the Paranoid World View Towards a
unified theory of depression, mania and paranoia 14 The Illusion of
Reality The psychology of hallucinations 15 The Language of Madness The
communication difficulties of psychotic patients Part Four Causes and
their Effects

16 Things are Much More Complex than they Seem The instability of
psychosis, and the solution to the riddle of psychiatric classification
17 From the Cradletothe Clinic Psychosis considered from a developmental
perspective 18 The Trials of Life How life experiences shape madness 19
Madness and Society Some implications of post-Kraepelinian
psychopathology Appendix A Glossary of Technical and Scientific Terms
Notes Index OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgements Verse p. 118: Extract from 'We and They' by Rudyard
Kipling reproduced by permission of A. P. Watt Ltd on behalf of the
National Trust for Places of Historical Interest or Natural Beauty.
p. 465: Extract from 'This be the Verse' by Philip Larkin reproduced by
permission of Faber & Faber Ltd, on behalf of the estate of Philip
Larkin. Figures and tables Table 3.1: Reprinted by permission of Oxford
University Press. Table 3.4: Reprinted with permission from the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition.
American Psychiatric Association. Table 3.5: Reprinted by permission of
Cambridge University Press. Figure 4.1: From Manic-Depressive Illness by
Fredrick K. Goodwin and Kay R. Jamison © 1990 by Oxford University
Press, Inc. Used by permission of Oxford University Press Inc. Figure
4.2: Reprinted by permission of Cambridge University Press. Figure 6.1:
Reprinted by permission of Cambridge University Press. Figure 7.1:
Reprinted by permission of Elsevier Science. Figure 7.2: Copyright ©
2001 by Oxford University Press, Inc. Used by permission of Oxford
University Press, Inc. Figure 7.3: From In Search of Madness:
Schizophrenia and Neuroscience by R. W. Heinrichs, copyright © 2001 by
Oxford University Press, Inc. Used by permission of Oxford University
Press, Inc. Figure 9.1: Copyright©Addison Wesley Longman Limited 1996,
reprinted by permission of Pearson Education Limited. Figure 10.1:
Copyright © 1999 by American Psychological Association. Adapted with
permission. Figure 11.1: From Manic-Depressive Illness by Fredrick K.
Goodwin and Kay R. Jamison, copyright © 1990 by Oxford University Press,
Inc. Used by

permission of Oxford University Press, Inc. Figure 11.3: Copyright ©
1999 by American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
Figure 12.3: Reproduced by permission of Taylor & Francis. Figure 13.1:
Reproduced with permission from the British Journal of Medical
Psychology, copyright © The British Psychological Society. Figure 14.1:
Reproduced with permission from the British Journal of Medical
Psychology, copyright © The British Psychological Society. Figure 14.2:
Reprinted by permission of Carol Donner. Figure 14.3: Copyright© 2000 by
American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission. Figure
14.4: Copyright © 2000 by American Psychological Association. Reprinted
with permission. Figure 15.1: Reprinted by permission of Loris Lesynski.
Figure 18.1: Copyright © Sage. Reprinted by permission of Sage
Publications. While every effort has been made to contact copyright
holders, the author and publisher are happy to rectify any errors or
omissions in subsequent editions. OceanofPDF.com

Foreword by Professor Aaron Beck As we move into the twenty-first
century, a radical shift in the way many of us look at severe mental
disorders has been taking place. Irrespective of the label -- whether
schizophrenia, psychosis or severe mental disease -- a new humanizing
trend is observable. In contrast to the more mechanistic framing of
schizophrenia in terms of abnormal brain chemistry or anatomical
lesions, the new approach views the patient as a whole person troubled
by apparently baffling problems, but also having the resources for
ameliorating these problems. This New Look can be contrasted with the
prevailing biological paradigm with its emphasis on the disordered
neurochemistry and anatomical defects and especially the perception of
the patient as a passive recipient of the treatment. Although the
laboratory tests, brain scans, and post-mortem studies have advanced our
understanding of the neurological substrate and provided a variety of
new medications, the distancing of the mental patient from the rest of
humanity has persisted. The more recent work spearheaded by Richard
Bentall has brought the patient back into the mainstream of humanity. He
and his co-workers have been able to demonstrate that the apparently
mysterious, incomprehensible symptoms of the mentally ill are actually
extensions of what many of us experience every day. The rather arcane
extreme beliefs manifested by the patients can be seen to be on a
continuum with ideas of the population at large. Beliefs in
mind-reading, clairvoyance and alien possession are especially common in
young people and a surprisingly large percentage of the population
believe that they have received communications from God, the Devil and
aliens. The 'bizarre' thinking of the severely disturbed patient
represents an extract of these common notions. These beliefs, however,
become a problem when they come to dominate the patients' thinking and
especially their interpretations of their experiences. By analysing
these beliefs within the framework of human nature and mainstream
psychology,

we can begin to make sense out of them. Further, the so-called 'negative
symptoms' can be understood as a natural detachment from a stressful
environment. By disengaging, the patients attempt to shut out those
stimuli that activate their delusions and hallucinations. Part of the
withdrawal also represents a 'giving up' produced by the profound
demoralization over others' having given up on them. Concurrent with the
ground-breaking work of Bentall and his team, there has been an upsurge
of interest in cognitive therapy of schizophrenia, with a number of
successful attempts to ameliorate the patients' psychotic symptoms
already published. The new approach, inspired in part by Bentall's work,
views patients as agents in their own change, rather than passive
recipients of the treatments that are administered to them. Further, the
'normalizing rationale' derived from Bentall's formulations provides a
basic construct by which patients can understand and cope with their
distressing, unusual experiences. As the leader in the investigations of
the psychology of psychosis, Bentall is uniquely qualified to explain
this new approach and make it available not only to readers of scholarly
journals, but also to a much broader audience. His approach demystifies
psychosis and restores the patient to a proper place with the rest of
humankind. By reversing the dehumanizing trend, he makes it possible to
relate to the afflicted individuals as though they are just like the
rest of us, although ostensibly quite different. The book is of
particular interest to anybody who is curious about human nature and its
vicissitudes. It will be of a special interest to those individuals who
suffer from these mental disturbances or are related to such individuals
or are professionals who treat them. Like the legendary Theseus winding
his way through the Labyrinth, Bentall has in his personal and private
life encountered many obstacles and taken many twists and turns. As he
faced and solved one problem, he was confronted with another, then
another, which he proceeded to resolve. Like Theseus, he has endeavoured
to slay the monster -- mental illness -- and in this volume he shows how
he has trapped it, if not finished it off.

OceanofPDF.com

Author's Preface In this book have I tried to tell three stories. First,
I have tried to trace the history of our current understandings of
serious mental illness and to show that these understandings are fatally
flawed. Second, I have attempted to draw together recent research to
suggest a radically different way of thinking about the most severe
types of mental disorder, known as the psychoses. Finally, I have tried
to tell a fraction of my personal story, about how I came to conduct
research on delusions and hallucinations, and how the ideas outlined in
these pages have come together in my mind. I have tried to write these
stories in a straightforward way that will be accessible to
non-specialists and lay people, because I believe that the way we think
about psychiatric problems should be important to everybody, given that
most people have some acquaintance with these problems, either through
direct experience or by observing the suffering of a close relative or
friend. At the same time, I have tried to be thorough enough in my
treatment of the various issues to satisfy both my sympathetic
colleagues and my critics from within psychiatry and clinical
psychology. Inevitably, balancing the needs of these two quite different
audiences has been difficult. The extent to which I have succeeded can
only be judged by my readers. The most important of the three stories is
undoubtedly the second. I believe that many psychologists and
psychiatrists can sense that a new way of thinking about psychiatric
disorders is emerging, but few
willhavehadtheopportunitytotrytogathertogetherthemanydifferent strands
of research that are contributing to this shift in thinking. Over the
four years that it has taken me to assemble the relevant evidence I have
found myself exploring surprising avenues, such as, for example,
developmental psychology, medical anthropology, the new molecular
genetics, developmental neurobiology and ideas from the branch of
mathematics known as non-linear dynamics. These explorations have
confirmed a view I

have held for many years: that psychosis shines a particularly
penetrating light on ordinary human functioning. Indeed, I do not think
it is an exaggeration to say that the study of psychosis amounts to the
study of human nature. Of course, in many of the areas that I have
explored I remain an amateur. Inevitably, there are gaps. One virtue
ofwritinga book rather than an academic paper is that it is possible to
speculate. However, the price of speculation may well be that I have got
some things wrong. This is very much an unfinished project. For example,
for completeness it would have been good to have included something
about anxiety and obsessional thinking, thereby bringing the psychoses
and the neuroses within a single framework. I think it is quite easy to
see how this could be accomplished. However, to do so would take fifty
extra pages and at least another year, so this part of the project will
have to wait until another time. I have said something about my personal
story because I believe that it is important to recognize that science,
and especially the scientific study of abnormal mental states, is a
human activity. Scientists, like ordinary folk and psychiatric patients,
are flawed, emotional and excitable human beings who are sometimes wise
and sometimes stupid, sometimes lovable and sometimes bloody irritating.
By talking about my own experiences, both positive and negative, I have
attempted to highlight an important theme of this book, which is the
vanishingly small difference between the 'us' who are sane and the
'them' who are not. At a recent conference I was introduced as 'Someone
who has done more than most to move the dividing line between sanity and
madness', which I think was a compliment. In any case, in these pages I
have tried to demonstrate that the differences between those who are
diagnosed as suffering from a psychiatric disorder and those who are not
amounts to not very much. This is an important insight because of its
implications for psychiatric care. As I hope to demonstrate in a later
publication, the dreadful state of our psychiatric services is not only
a consequence of muddled thinking about the nature of psychiatric
disorders, but also a consequence of the way in which psychiatric
patients have been denied a voice by being treated as irrational and
dangerous, like wild animals in a zoo.

A word to my critics from within the mental health professions.
Commentators on my work (you know who you are) have very occasionally
dismissed my ideas as 'angry', anti-biological, a rehash of old ideas
from the sixties, 'a politically motivated anti-psychiatric rant' (to
quote an extremely unhappy member of the audience at a conference where
I spoke) or Szaszian (readers who are unfamiliar with long-running
arguments about the nature of madness will know, by the seventh chapter
of the book, what this latter epithet means, and that its application to
me is inaccurate). Perhaps I have been angry on occasions; certainly
this seems to be an appropriate response to the way in which psychiatric
patients are often dehumanized by a system that purports to care for
them. However, the rest is false. Because I believe that these
impressions arise from a superficial acquaintance with my work I will
give unsympathetic readers of this volume an important clue: you will
not be able to understand the approach I am advocating without reading
the fourth part of the book, in which I attempt to show how an approach
which is based on symptoms, and which therefore appears to be
fragmented, can be welded together into a coherent whole. Writing this
book has been an interesting journey, during which there have been
several important distractions, including my migration along the M62
from the University of Liverpool to the University of Manchester and,
much more importantly, the birth of my two children Keeva and Fintan. In
developing the ideas herein, I have been influenced by many people, but
above all by the talented Ph.D. and D. Clin.Psychol. students it has
been my privilege to supervise over the last fifteen years. One of the
best-kept secrets in science is that most successful academic
reputations are built onthe backs of hard-working postgraduates, and my
career is no exception to this rule. For their contributions to my
thinking about the psychoses, I single out (in alphabetical order): Kim
Bowen-Jones, Jennie Day, Gill Haddock, Sue Kaney, Peter Kinderman, Peter
Rankin, Rebecca Swarbrick, Sara Tai and Heather Young, all of whom have
since moved on to greater things. Current postgraduates who continue to
keep me on my toes, and who constantly feed me ideas, include Paul
French, Paul Hammersley, Becca Knowles, Peter Simpson, Joanna Teuton and
Justin Thomas. Numerous collaborators who have supported and encouraged
me, while

tolerating my dreadful time-keeping and other idiosyncrasies, include
David Healy, David Kingdon, Shôn Lewis, Tony Morrison, Richard Morriss,
David Pilgrim, Anne Rogers, Jan Scott, Nick Tarrier and Doug Turkington.
I would also like to thank Tim Beck, whose recent interest in the work
carried out by myself and colleagues in Britain has been an important
source of encouragement. Despite his abrupt departure from the British
clinical psychology community a few years ago, it would be wrong not to
mention Peter Slade, who strongly supported me during the early years of
my career. I should also mention Don Evans and Martin Evans who ran the
famous MA course in philosophy applied to health care at Swansea in the
late 1980s; I hope that parts of this book show that their efforts were
not entirely wasted. Thanks for reading early drafts of various chapters
and making encouraging noises go to my partner Aisling O'Kane, to the
father (psychologist) and son (biologist) team of David and Ben Dickins
(who checked my genetics), to Paul French, to John Read and finally to
Tim Beck (who reminded me that it takes much less time to write a good
chapter than a very, very good chapter). I would also like to offer
special thanks to Stefan McGrath of Penguin Books, who first asked me to
write this volume, tolerated my complete inability to stick to
deadlines, and whose helpful feedback ensured that the final product was
not so large that a wheelbarrow would be required to move it from one
place to another. No doubt I have left important people out of this
list, and will find myself apologizing to them at a later date. Of
course, my memory is less than perfect. In any case, it is time to
reclaim my life and move on to projects new. Richard Bentall August,
2002 OceanofPDF.com

Part One The Origins of our Misunderstandings about Madness

Figure 1.1 The North Wales Hospital, Denbigh, photographed in 1930
(reproduced from C. Wynne (1995) The North Wales Hospital Denbigh,
1842--1995. Denbigh: Gee & Son). The hospital was opened in 1848 on
twenty acres of land donated for the purpose by a local landowner,
Joseph Ablett, of Llanbedr Hall. At its peak, during the 1950s, the
hospital was home to some 1500 patients. Its closure, first announced in
1960, was not completed until 1995.

1 Emil Kraepelin's Big Idea What a curious attitude scientists have --
'We still don't know that; but it is knowable and it is only a matter of
time before we get to know it!' As if that went without saying. Ludwig
Wittgenstein1

It is nearly twenty years since I first walked on to a psychiatric ward.
At the time I was an undergraduate psychology student at the University
College of North Wales, naive about the harsh realities of psychiatric
care, but determined to prove myself in the hope of securing a career in
clinical psychology.\* Like most students in the 1970s, I wore faded
blue jeans and a sweatshirt for all occasions. This caused at least one
nurse to mistake me for a patient. (She attempted to overcome her
embarrassment byexplaining that she had assumed I was a psychopath
rather than a schizophrenic. Apparently the patients attending the
hospital's drug rehabilitation unit nearly all wore jeans and nearly all
were thought to show evidence of a 'psychopathic' or anti-social
personality.) The North Wales Hospital was located just outside the
quiet market town of Denbigh. I was visiting in order to carry out a
small research project with some of the hospital's long-term patients. I
commuted the forty-two miles between Bangor and Denbigh in a
disintegrating Austin mini, purchased with £300 I had earned by
labouring in a Sheffield tool factory during my summer vacation.
Descending the winding A543 into the centre of the town, I had to
proceed cautiously because my brakes were not reliable. Unable to afford
repairs, I was no exception to the delusion of immortality that is
peculiarly strong in the ambitious young. From the centre of Denbigh, a
narrow road led up a hill and past a ruined thirteenth-century castle.
Beyond the summit, the hospital came into view -- a stone-grey Victorian
fortress, standing in spacious and neatly maintained gardens, behind
which stood the Clwyd hills. On a sunny day, it looked like an 'asylum'
in the true sense of the word: a refuge, a place isolated from the
troubles of the world. This illusion would be broken only after stepping
through the imposing entrance, into the dark, antiseptic-smelling
corridors that led to the psychiatric wards. The ward on which I
attempted to carry out my research was a large dormitory divided by
wooden partitions into sleeping, sitting and dining areas. The paint was
yellowing and the furniture had seen better times. The ward always
reeked of cigarettes and sometimes also smelt of urine. It was home to
about ten women, mostly elderly, who had spent most of their lives

in psychiatric hospitals, and all of whom had been diagnosed as
suffering from schizophrenia. They were cared for by uniformed nurses
who, like generations of their predecessors, had been drawn from the
population of the nearby town. In order to improve the women's self-care
skills, a form of behaviour-modification programme (known as a 'token
economy') had been introduced under the supervision of one of the
hospital's few psychologists. The women were rewarded with plastic
tokens if they completed various routine tasks (for example, getting up
by a particular time, washing and dressing appropriately) and they could
exchange their accumulated tokens for various forms of 'reinforcement'
(usually cigarettes or sweets). It was a mechanistic form of
rehabilitation (and one that has largely fallen out of favour) but its
effects were occasionally dramatic. Before its introduction, one patient
had been so determined to mutilate herself that the nurses had taken to
tying her arms to her bed to prevent her from harming herself during the
night. A year after the programme had been introduced, she was sleeping
normally and was able to work as a nursing assistant on one of the other
wards. Despite these kinds of benefits, most of the women continued to
exhibit a bewildering range of symptoms. Some appeared to talk to
imaginary voices. Others expressed bizarre ideas. One believed that she
had written a famous Russian novel. Another kept insisting that 'Peter
Pickering has plucked my brain', a delusion which became more
intelligible when inspection of her case notes revealed that she had
been given a prefrontal leucotomy (a crude brain operation) many years
earlier. (The notes recorded that the operation had been given under
local anaesthetic and that she had become highly distressed at the
precise moment that the knife had been inserted into her brain.) One of
the women had been mute for many years. Another spoke in a chaotic
jumble of invented words and half-finished sentences. Most exhibited
emotional or disorganized behaviour of one sort or another. (I recall
that one lady of about 70 would periodically announce 'I'm going up the
pole' before running from one end of the ward to the other, screaming
loudly.) They were all vulnerable to maltreatment and exploitation. For
example, one had been sexually abused in a toilet by a hospital visitor,
who

had attempted to buy her silence with a cigarette. How the women had
come to be at the North Wales Hospital was something of a mystery. Most
of the medical notes were too old and too vague to give any useful
information about their early lives.2 The experiment I conducted under
the supervision of the psychologist who was running the token system was
designed to test the effectiveness of a simple form of psychological
treatment, known as self-instructional training. The aim of the
treatment was to improve the patients' ability to focus their attention
when attempting daily tasks, on the assumption that this would
facilitate their rehabilitation. The study called for each of the women
to be given a short battery of memory and reasoning tests before and
after several sessions of treatment, each lasting for perhaps half an
hour. In each session, I would encourage the women to talk out aloud to
themselves while solving various puzzles -- to literally instruct
themselves about what they were doing. In this way, the psychologist and
I hoped that they would regain the capacity for focused verbal thought
that we assumed they had lost as a consequence of their many years of
living in an institution. Some years later, I formulated what I now
refer to as my 'first law of research', with which I entertain students
who are about to embark on their first scientific projects. The law
states that, by the time an experiment has been completed, the
researcher will know how it should have been done properly. My own first
adventure in experimental clinical psychology was no exception to this
rule. I worked with each of the women for several hours, trying to teach
them the relatively simple strategies that I believed would help them,
becoming increasingly frustrated at their indifference to my efforts
which, in retrospect, had little relevance to their needs. They, in
turn, sometimes became frustrated with me, but more often struggled to
be nice to the scruffy young man in jeans who energetically cajoled them
to speak out loud while assembling simple jigsaws, or while matching
groups of similar patterns. There was not a single aspect of my
relationship with the women that I would now describe as therapeutic for
either party.

Life has been kind to me in the years following the completion of the
study. Some months later, I wrote up my results, said goodbye to the
North Wales Hospital and collected my degree.3 Although I failed to
secure a place on a clinical psychology training course, I was not
particularly disappointed -- competition for training places was very
strong. Plan B was to study for adoctorate in experimental psychology,
so I gratefully accepted an offer to stay on at Bangor. Four years
later, after completing my Ph.D., I secured a place on the clinical
psychology course at the University of Liverpool. Sixteen years later
still, I head up a small research team at the nearby University of
Manchester, studying the kinds of problems that I had observed but
poorly understood at Denbigh. I suspect that life has been less kind to
the women who suffered from those problems. Even a self-absorbed and
ambitious young student could sense that the best they might experience
in their declining years was humane custodial care. I imagine that most
have now died. The North Wales Hospital now lies silent and empty,
closed down like many similar institutions in the effort to move
psychiatric services into the community. From the vantage point of the
hospital bowling green, once immaculate but now overgrown, the building
still looks peaceful in a ghostly sort of way. Because of its fine
architectural features it is protected from demolition. Perhaps it will
find a new lease of life as company offices or a large hotel. With few
exceptions, the psychiatric wards of today are located in general
hospitals alongside surgical, medical and other types of services.
Long-stay patients, unless they are judged to pose a significant danger
to themselves or other people, live in small apartments or hostels
hidden in the suburbs of towns and cities. Admissions to hospital are
restricted to those who are floridly disturbed. Discharge back into the
community is usually after a matter of weeks by which time, hopefully,
the patient's worst symptoms have been controlled by medication.
Visiting such a ward, one sees patients with a variety of diagnoses
wandering aimlessly around. Some talk out loud to their voices, or
charge around in a manic frenzy. However, on closer scrutiny, the
overwhelming impression is one of inactivity and loneliness. Many
patients sit in the ward lounge, silently smoking cigarettes, their
faces glued to daytime television shows. The nurses, who now wear casual
clothes instead of uniforms, spend most of their time in the nursing
office,

talking only to those patients who are most obviously distressed. The
psychiatrists and psychologists are even less in evidence -- patients on
many wards see their psychiatrists for only a few minutes every week and
the psychologists are almost entirely absent, confined by their own
choice to outpatient clinics. There seems to be a lack of therapeutic
contact between the patients and the staff. The patients are simply
being 'warehoused' in the hope that their medication will do the trick.
I do not believe that this reflects much improvement compared to the
standard of care that I encountered twenty years ago. Indeed, the
psychiatrist and anthropologist Richard Warner, who has studied changes
in psychiatric practice over many years, has argued that the success of
psychiatric treatment today is little improved on that achieved in the
first decades of the twentieth century, before the development of modern
psychiatric drugs.4 It would be tempting to blame this depressing state
of affairs on the quality of the staff who work in our psychiatric
services. Certainly, I have met some nurses, psychiatrists and
psychologists who appear to be indifferent to the needs of their
patients, and who would be much better employed in some other line of
work. However, they are the exceptions. Most mental health professionals
are hard-working, caring and thoroughly frustrated at their inability to
do better for their patients. In this book I will argue that the main
problem faced by modern psychiatric services is not one of personnel or
resources (although these may be important) but one of ideas. I will
suggest that we have been labouring under serious misunderstandings
about the nature of madness for more than a century, and that many
contemporary approaches to the problem, although cloaked with the
appearance of scientific rigour, have more in common with astrology than
rational science. Only by abolishing these misunderstandings can we hope
to improve the lot of the most impoverished, neglected and vulnerable of
our citizens. The orthodox approach which I will show must be rejected
is based on two false assumptions: first, that madness can be divided
into a small number of diseases (for example, schizophrenia and manic
depression) and, second, that the manifestations or 'symptoms' of
madness cannot be

understood interms of the psychology of the person who suffers from
them. These assumptions were spelt out explicitly by the early
psychiatrists whose writings have most influenced modern psychiatric
thinking, and whose ideas remain unquestioned by many psychiatrists
today. By tracing the history of these apparently innocuous assumptions,
we will be able to see why they proved so disastrous to the well-being
of patients.

Who was Emil Kraepelin? Trusting in the wings of my will I swore to
dispatch the misery of my people, To drive us through peril and danger
And fulfil the promise of their prosperity Arduous and long the journey.
In bloody victories And with an ardent heart did I execute my mission To
but one enemy was I to succumb: The thanklessness and delusion of my own
people. Emil Kraepelin, c. 19205 Despite important developments
elsewhere, the world centre of psychiatry and most other medical
specialities in the nineteenth century was Germany, partly because more
researchers pursued higher degrees there than anywhere else. It was a
German, Johann Christian Reil, who first coined the term 'psychiatry'
from the Greek 'psyche' (soul) and 'iatros' (doctor).6 Teaching in
psychiatry began in Leipzig in 1811, and professors of the new
discipline began to appear at other German universities soon afterwards.
In 1865 Wilhelm Griesinger established the first modern-style university
psychiatry department in Berlin, where teaching and research were
pursued alongside clinical work. Two years later, he founded one of the
first academic journals in psychiatry, the Archives for Psychiatry and
Nervous Disease. Researchers of the period spent much of their time
staring down microscopes at post-mortem brain tissue in the hope of
discovering the biological basis of mental illness. In the process, they
made many important

discoveries about the structure of the human nervous system. The
historian Edward Shorter has dubbed this era 'the age of the first
biological psychiatry' to contrast it with our own times, in which a
biological approach is also dominant. As Shorter has observed, it is the
German psychiatrist Emil Kraepe-lin rather than Freud who should be seen
as the central figure in the history of psychiatry.7 Kraepelin was born
in 1856 (the same year as Freud) in Neustrelitz, a village near the
Baltic Sea. It is said that he learned early to respect authority, a
disposition that in later life would manifest itself in his unwavering
admiration of Bismarck and in his authorship of nationalistic poems, the
quality of which can be judged from that quoted at the beginning of this
section. He was much influenced by his older brother Karl, a respected
biologist who made contributions to the classification of plant species.
Studying medicine at Würzburg, Kraepelin graduated in 1878, having
earlier won a prize for an essay entitled 'The influence of acute
diseases on the origin of mental diseases'. His enthusiasm for
psychiatry was reinforced by a period of further study in Leipzig, where
he had planned to work under the supervision of the noted psychiatrist
and brain anatomist Paul Flechsig.8 However, Flechsig had little
interest in the psychological issues that interested Kraepelin. (It is
said that Flechsig only once recorded the life circumstances of a
patient, a depressed young man whom he wrote up for his doctoral
dissertation.) The two men did not get on and, after a couple of months,
Kraepelin was sacked, allegedly because Flechsig did not consider him
able enough to deputize in his absence. (This dispute was apparently
quite personal. Flechsig later formally accused Kraepelin of making
derogatory remarks about his official oath, briefly stalling Kraepelin's
promotion, until friends persuaded the Ministry of Culture to intervene
on his behalf.) It was in these difficult circumstances that Kraepelin
was rescued by Wilhelm Wundt, a philosopher who is widely credited with
being the first experimental psychologist. Working in Wundt's
laboratory, he immersed himself in simple psychological experiments. His
new master was to remain an important influence on Kraepelin's life and
work, and encouraged him to write the first, fairly insubstantial
edition of his Compendium of Psychiatry. After a

series of revisions, this book would have near-revolutionary impact on
the theory of psychiatry. In 1883, the year in which the first edition
of the Compendium appeared, Kraepelin became a lecturer at the District
Mental Hospital in Munich. He was appointed professor of psychiatry in
Dorpat in Russia (now Tartu in Estonia) in 1886, and it was there that
he first began to develop his ideas on psychiatric classification. It
was not until 1891, however, when he moved to the psychiatric hospital
of the University of Heidelberg in the German state of Baden, that he
was able to put these ideas to the test by amassing data from a large
number of patients. By 1896 he had collected over 1000 case studies.
This effort brought him into some conflict with the local authorities
responsible for the administration of psychiatric services.9 At that
time, the care of the insane in Baden was organized into three
districts, each served by a hospital, one of which was the University
clinic at Heidelberg. From there, patients could be transferred to the
two other institutions at Emmendingen and Pforzheim, the former
specializing in the care of patients who were capable of productive work
and the latter in the care of patients whose illnesses were chronic and
unremitting. Kraepelin's complaint was, first, that records transferred
with the patients became difficult to access for the purposes of
scientific investigation and, second, that transfers were not happening
speedily enough, limiting the number of new patients that were available
for him to study. The dispute escalated into an argument about
Kraepelin's clinical autonomy and it was partly for this reason that he
accepted a position at the University clinic in Munich in 1902, where he
opened the German Psychiatric Research Institute (now the Max Planck
Institute of Psychiatry) in 1917. Although those who recorded their
meetings with Kraepelin usually wrote about him with some affection, it
is doubtful whether he was fun to be with. Perhaps the closest he came
to his colleagues in his later years was during annual walks in the
countryside (nicknamed 'catatonic walks' by the junior staff), which it
was his custom to take with his assistants. At other times he would
browbeat his colleagues with his strongly held views about the dangers
of alcohol, having decided in 1895 to live a life of uncompromising
abstinence in order to set an example to others.10 An American
psychiatrist

who knew him remarked on the relationship between Kraepelin's
personality and his approach to his work: Kraepelin's personal nature
was guarded by a wall of reserve. He held himself sternly to his goals;
he devoted himself unremittingly to his work, uncompromisingly following
what he believed to be the path of investigation -- exact, demonstrable
and well established by the assembling of all possible testimony step by
step. It was consistent with this nature that only the precision of
experimental psychology should seem applicable, that the more elastic
boundaries of a subjective psychology of mental disease, like
psychoanalysis, should seem forbidden and untrustworthy territory.11
Apparently, Kraepelin's reserve could cross the boundary into complete
insensitivity. One of his assistants, who became seriously ill while
accompanying him on a visit to the United States, remarked on his return
that: 'If I had died on the trip, Kraepelin would probably have
collected my ashes in a cigar box and brought them home to my wife with
the words, "He was a real disappointment to me".'12 Although Kraepelin
is usually remembered for his diagnostic concepts, his research
interests were broad ranging. For example, influenced by Wundt he
advocated the use of psychological tests in psychiatric research, and
carried out simple studies of memory and reaction times with his
patients. He wrote an interesting study of the role of speech in dreams
based on his own dream diary, although, unlike Freud, he believed dreams
to be meaningless phenomena caused by transient neuropathological
conditions.13 He was also a pioneer of psychopharmacology (the study of
the psychological effects of drugs) and carried out experiments on the
mental effects of tea, alcohol and various sedatives. In 1903 he
travelled to Java with his brother in order to determine whether the
forms of mental illness observed there in both Europeans and natives
would correspond to those observed in Germany. He concluded that they
did,14 and returned convinced of the importance of the human will,
although, as a recent commentator has remarked, 'He was in no manner
consistent in conceiving it as being either free or biologically
determined and preferred instead to emphasize the

former in describing his own condition and the latter in diagnosing that
of his patients.'15 Kraepelin wrote about every major type of
psychiatric disorder recognized in his time. However, he was
particularly interested in the more severe forms of madness in which the
individual appears to lose touch with reality. Today, these disorders
are known as the psychoses (although the term was used somewhat
differently in Kraepelin's day). Despite the wide range of information
that he was prepared to draw upon, his approach was uncompromisingly
medical: Judging from our experience in internal medicine it is a fair
assumption that similar disease processes will produce identical symptom
pictures, identical pathological anatomy and an identical aetiology. If,
therefore, we possessed a comprehensive knowledge of any of these three
fields -- pathological anatomy, symptomatology, or aetiology -- we would
at once have a uniform and standard classification of mental diseases. A
similar comprehensive knowledge of either of the other two fields would
give us not just as uniform and standard classifications, but all of
these classifications would exactly coincide.16 This was Kraepelin's big
idea (see Figure 1.2), announced tentatively in the second edition of
the Compendium (renamed the Textbook of Psychiatry), which appeared in
1887, and which he elaborated until just before his death in 1926, soon
after which the ninth and last edition was published. Mental illnesses
fell into a small number of

Figure 1.2 Emil Kraepelin's big idea. Kraepelin assumed that there was a
discrete and discoverable number of psychiatric disorders. Although he
recognized that some symptoms could occur in more than one disorder, he
argued that each disorder has a typical symptom-picture. He also
believed that the different disorders were associated with different
types of brain pathology and with different aetiologies. On this view,
the first step towards discovering the causes of mental illness was to
identify the different disorders on the basis of their symptoms.

discoverable types, and these could be independently identified by
studying symptoms, by direct observation of brain diseases, or by
discovering the aetiologies of the illnesses (for example, by finding
out whether they ran in families and were therefore determined by
heredity). Of course, the only practical method of classification
available at the time was by symptoms, as very little was known about
the neuropathology or aetiology of psychiatric disorders. However,
precisely because individuals with the same illness, defined by
symptoms, were assumed to have the same brain disease, it could
confidently be assumed that the identification of the illness would lead
directly to an understanding of aetiology. On Kraepelin's analysis,
therefore, the correct classification of mental illnesses according to
symptoms would provide a kind of Rosetta stone, which would point
directly to the biological origins of madness. The Rosetta stone,
discovered in 1799 by Napoleon's soldiers during their invasion of
Egypt, contained the same inscription (a decree commemorating the
accession of Ptolemy V Epiphanes to the Egyptian throne in 197 bc) in
Greek, demotic Egyptian and hieroglyphs, allowing linguists to decipher
hieroglyphs for the first time. Similarly, on Kraepelin's analysis, an
understanding of the language

of symptoms would allow the researcher to decode both the biological
underpinnings of madness and their origins.

How Many Psychoses are There? Once Kraepelin had decided that the
psychoses fell into a small number of discoverable types, the next step
was to establish exactly how many different types there were. To achieve
this, he collected information about his patients' symptoms and also
data on the long-term course and outcome of their illnesses.17 It was
the recognition that symptoms changed with time, and therefore that
patients should be observed throughout their lifetimes, that led
Kraepelin to collect the thousand and more case studies which, in 1896,
still seemed inadequate for his purposes. And it was on the basis of
these case studies that he began to conclude that different groups of
symptoms followed characteristically different courses. Between 1893,
when he published the fourth edition of the Textbook, and 1915, when the
eighth edition was published, Kraepelin began to group together
illnesses described by other researchers that apparently had a poor
outcome. He included catatonia, a disorder characterized by stupor and
abnormal postures. Also included was hebephrenia, a disease that struck
during adolescence and which led to a rapid deterioration of mental
functions. Finally, there was dementia paranoides, a disease which again
led to rapid deterioration, but which was characterized by bizarre fears
of persecution. This focus on illnesses with poor outcome reflected a
preoccupation with psychological degeneration that was common among
psychiatrists of his time, and that had been stimulated by the writings
of Augustin Morel, a French psychiatrist who had died in 1873. Morel had
suggested that mental illness (like sin) is passed on and exacerbated by
heredity, weakening successive generations. (Many years later, this
theory would have disastrous implications for the practice of psychiatry
in the Third Reich.) It was therefore striking that Kraepelin, on
deciding that catatonia, hebephrenia and dementia paranoides were
manifestations of the same illness, chose to name the illness dementia
praecox, a term originally proposed by Morel as an alternative name for
hebephrenia.

The Latin term 'dementia praecox' means senility of the young, and that
was exactly how Kraepelin saw the disorder. Its various subtypes -- ten
according to the eighth edition of the Textbook -- were reflected in a
variety of symptoms which usually first appeared in adolescence or early
adulthood. Patients might experience an absence of emotion, or their
emotional responses might be highly inappropriate (for example, a
patient might laugh at a funeral). They might display stereotyped
behaviour (for example, clapping five times before entering a room) or
adopt catatonic postures. Problems of attention were also common, so
that patients became distractible and easily confused. They might suffer
from strange perceptions, particularly auditory (hearing imaginary
voices) and tactile (feeling something touching them in the absence of
an actual stimulus) hallucinations. Irrational beliefs were also
frequently observed, particularly delusions of persecution (for example,
patients might believe that they were being persecuted by the German
royal family) or of grandiosity (believing that they had improbable
powers). However, the common underlying feature that was always present
was an irreversible deterioration of the intellectual functions.
Dementia praecox patients became mentally disabled, unable to lead
productive lives, and they never recovered. It was for this reason that
Kraepelin could confidently assert that: Although there still are in
many details far reaching differences of opinion, the conviction is
gaining ground more and more, that dementia praecox is by and large a
distinct disease entity; and that we are justified in regarding at least
the main group of often very diverse clinical pictures brought here
together as the expression of a uniform morbid process.18 During the
years in which he was developing the concept of dementia praecox,
Kraepelin came to believe that he could recognize a second major type of
mental illness, characterized by a periodic course and a good prognosis.
As was the case for dementia praecox, this second type emerged gradually
over successive editions of the Textbook, in which he collapsed a number
of previously described disorders into a single category. The common
feature of these disorders was a recurrent or 'circular' disorder of
mood in which episodes of illness were followed by periods of normal

functioning. By the eighth edition of the Textbook, Kraepelin had
grouped all mood disorders into the single category of manic depressive
illness.19 His use of this term was broad by modern standards. He
included disorders in which there are episodes of depression but no
episodes of mania, which would now be described as unipolar depression.
He also included illnesses in which the individual experienced only one
episode followed by a complete recovery.20 A final category of illness
described by Kraepelin, but given less attention by later historians of
psychiatry, was paranoia. From the fifth edition of the Textbook
onwards, this term was used to refer to a chronic illness characterized
by delusional beliefs in the absence of significant changes to the
patient's personality. It was differentiated from dementia praecox -- in
which delusions were also observed -- because more general deficits of
thinking or will were absent. Until the eighth edition of the Textbook,
Kraepelin believed that paranoia had a similar unremitting course to
dementia praecox. However, he eventually came to the view that paranoia
included cases of low severity, in which at least a partial recovery was
possible.

Kraepelin's Legacy In the final decade of his life, Kraepelin wrote a
number of papers that attempted to draw together his conclusions about
mental disorders and the methods by which they could be studied. The
most important, published in 1920, was entitled 'Clinical manifestations
of mental illness',21 and has sometimes been mistaken for a retraction
of his previous ideas. To be sure, the tone adopted in the paper was
less certain than in many of his earlier publications. Indeed, he began
by conceding that progress in understanding the aetiology of most
disorders had been painfully slow: In the past, when tissue was first
examined microscopically, new discoveries were made daily. Today we can
only make significant progress by using very refined methods. In the
case of some diseases many questions have already been answered. It is
difficult to broaden our knowledge in such

instances. The more we scratch below the surface, the more obvious the
problems become and the more refined our tools must be. In spite of all
this our successes are becoming more modest. We shall have to resign
ourselves to this state of affairs, which after all corresponds to that
found in other branches of scientific inquiry. In passages that
anticipated debates that would haunt psychiatry for the remaining years
of the twentieth century, he acknowledged the difficulty of
distinguishing between disease entities: No experienced physician would
deny that cases occur with unwelcome frequency in which, despite the
most assiduous observation, it is impossible to reach a diagnosis. The
experience that we cannot significantly reduce the number of
misdiagnoses has a crippling effect on one's job satisfaction. And: We
shall have to get accustomed to the fact that our much used clinical
checklist does not permit us to differentiate reliably manic depressive
insanity from \[dementia praecox\] in all circumstances; and that there
is an overlap between the two, which depends on the fact that the
clinical signs have arisen from certain antecedent conditions. However,
this did not mean that manic depression and dementia prae-cox were no
longer to be regarded as separate diseases. On the contrary: We cannot
help but maintain that the two disease processes themselves are
distinct. On the one hand we find those patients with irreversible
dementia and severe cortical lesions. On the other are those patients
whose personality remains intact. This distinction is too overwhelming
for us to accept much overlap between the two groups, particularly as we
can often predict the course of the two from the clinical signs. The
problem, as Kraepelin now saw it, was that the patient's symptoms are
not uniquely determined by the disease process. Rather, the symptoms

brought out by the disease depend on the individual nature of the
patient. Therefore: It seems absurd to propose that neurosyphilis
\[damage to the brain that occurs in the final stages of a syphilitic
infection\] causes patients to believe that they are the proud
possessors of cars,\* mansions or millions of pounds, and that cocaine
causes visual hallucinations of mites and lice. Rather, the general
desires of such people are reflected in their delusions of grandeur.
These kinds of influences, Kraepelin believed, could be revealed by the
methods of comparative psychiatry, which allowed the varying
manifestations of a disorder to be studied in different people and
different circumstances. Studies of this kind revealed that symptoms
were affected by personal and social factors such as sex ('women show a
greater propensity to erotic delusions and are less flamboyant in the
presentation of delusions of grandeur'), age ('the clinical form of
juvenile dementia praecox is... characterized by occasional excitement
on a background of apathy and obtuseness') and culture ('it goes without
saying that \[in Java\] no one suffered from delusions of guilt because
these have their origins in religion'). These subtle qualifications were
all but ignored by the majority of Kraepelin's followers. To many
readers of the successive editions of the Textbook, his work appeared to
bring order to a field that had previously lacked an agreed language.
However, his system was not adopted immediately or uncritically, partly
because alternative models of psychiatric classification were available
from his academic rivals. In France, Kraepelin was attacked because of
the 'woolliness of his suggested clinical pictures',22 and the concept
of dementia praecox was accepted only grudgingly. In Germany, Great
Britain and the United States his system of diagnosis was vigorously
debated before finally being embraced by most clinicians. This ultimate
triumph partly reflected the simplifying effect that Kraepelin's ideas
had on the theory and practice of psychiatry. He had asked himself how
many different types of psychosis there actually were and had come up
with a surprising answer: only three.

OceanofPDF.com

2 After Kraepelin Every great man nowadays has his disciples, and it is
always Judas who writes the biography. Oscar Wilde1 Unlike Freud,
Kraepelin never encouraged the formation of a group of disciples who
would revere his case studies and proselytize his theories for the
benefit of later generations of clinicians. Nevertheless, those who have
followed him have by and large regarded his diagnostic system as the
foundation stone around which a scientific psychiatry could be built.
Indeed, Kraepelin's success is evident from the fact that his diagnostic
concepts have survived until the present time. Two of the names he
selected to describe major classes of mental illness -- manic depression
and paranoia -- are in use today. The third -- dementia praecox -- was
discarded in the first important revision of his system, which was
brought about by a Swiss psychiatrist, Eugen Bleuler.

The Evolution of Schizophrenia Bleuler was born in 1857 in the village
of Zollikon, approximately one hour's walk from the centre of Zurich,
and now a suburb of the city.2 According to an account of his life
written by his son Manfred (also a psychiatrist), his decision to become
a doctor was partly inspired by observing local dissatisfaction with the
German-speaking medical professors who had been appointed to positions
at the nearby Burghölzli Mental Hospital, which had opened its doors for
the first time in 1870. After graduating in medicine at the University
of Zurich in 1881, Bleuler studied in Paris, London and Munich, before
joining the staff at the Burghölzli. There, he worked under the
director, August Forel, a biological psychiatrist who had developed an
appreciation for the more psychological

aspects of psychiatric care after discovering that laymen were sometimes
better able to cure alcoholics than physicians. (Consulting one
successful lay therapist, Forel was told, 'No wonder, Herr Professor, I
am an abstainer while you are not.')3 In 1886, at the age of 29, Bleuler
became director of a psychiatric clinic at Rheinau, a small farming
village. The clinic was located in an eighthcentury monastery on an
island in the Rhine, which had been turned into a hospital in 1867 and
which, at the time of Bleuler's arrival, was reputed to be one of the
most backward psychiatric institutions in Switzerland. He set about
reforming the hospital and improving the quality of life of its
patients. In Manfred's account: Bleuler was not yet married, and lived
there alone, in contact with his patients. He worked with them (mostly
in agriculture), organized their free time (for instance, hiked with
them, played in the theatre with them, and danced with them). He was
also the general physician of the patients of the Clinic and the
inhabitants of the village. During his life with the patients, Bleuler
had always a memo-pad at hand, where he noted what touched and
interested him in his patients' behaviour. He frequently noted in
shorthand what the patients actually said.4 When a typhoid epidemic
broke out, Bleuler was able to recruit some of his patients as nurses.
They performed well, prompting him to observe that mental illness, far
from dominating the life of patients, could retreat into the background
when a crisis loomed. Because he had formed such close relationships
with the inhabitants of the hospital, it was with regret that he
returned to the Burghölzli, where, in 1898, he was appointed Forel's
successor. Two years later, he appointed Carl Gustav Jung to a junior
post in the hospital. Jung, who was to become Sigmund Freud's most
famous disciple, and later the first rebel of the psychoanalytic
movement, was to have an important impact on Bleuler's thinking about
the causes of mental illness. However, it seems that the two men never
really liked each other, although the fact that most observers commented
on Bleuler's warmth and openness suggests that the fault was Jung's.
Certainly, Jung adapted with

difficulty to the workaholic regime established by Bleuler at the
hospital, which required doctors to make their rounds before breakfast.
At the time, Freud's theory of psychoanalysis was just beginning to
attract the attention of psychiatrists and psychologists outside his
home city of Vienna. According to the theory, mental illness was caused
by unconscious mental forces or repressed ideas, which intruded into
consciousness in a distorted form, and thereby generated the patient's
symptoms. This discovery seemed to promise a new kind of psychological
treatment for the mentally ill. During the period that he worked in the
Burghölzli between 1900 and 1910, Jung therefore formed a small
discussion group dedicated to examining the claims of psychoanalysis. He
also undertook a series of studies of dementia praecox that, although
initially developed with his colleagues in Zurich, drew him
progressively closer to Freud's ideas. Most important of these were
studies in which word associations were used to probe the unconscious
'feeling-toned-complexes' which Jung believed lay at the root of the
patient's dreamlike thoughts and speech.5 Encouraged by the successful
work of his junior colleague, Bleuler participated in the discussion
group and became convinced that psychoanalysis represented an important
breakthrough in the theory and practice of psychiatry. This enthusiasm
became very important to Freud, as Bleuler was the first respected
academic psychiatrist to take the new theory seriously. Unfortunately
for Freud, Bleuler's enthusiasm did not blunt his critical faculties. By
the time of the first international meeting of psychoanalysts, organized
by Jung and held in the Hotel Bristol in Salzburg in April 1908,
tensions had begun to develop between the two great men. These tensions,
which eventually led to Bleuler's resignation from the newly formed
International Psychoanalytic Association, reveal much of Bleuler's
character and his approach to his work. According to a letter written by
Bleuler to Freud in October 1910: There is a difference between us,
which I decided I shall point out to you, although I am afraid it will
make it emotionally more difficult for you to come to an agreement. For
you evidently it became the aim and interest of

your whole life to establish firmly your theory and to secure its
acceptance. I certainly do not underestimate your work. One compares it
with that of Darwin, Copernicus and Semmelweis. I believe too that for
psychology your discoveries are equally as fundamental as the theories
of those men for other branches of science, no matter whether or not one
evaluates advancements in psychology as highly as those in other
sciences. The latter is a matter of subjective opinion. For me, the
theory is only one new truth among other truths. I stand up for it
because I consider it valid and because I feel I am able to judge it
since I am working in a related field. But for me this is not a major
issue, whether the validity of these views will be recognized a few
years sooner or later. I am therefore less tempted than you to sacrifice
my whole personality for the advancement of the cause.6 In March 1911
Bleuler wrote to Freud in defence of a psychiatrist who had been asked
to resign from the Association because of a difference of opinion: 'Who
is not with us is against us,' the principle 'all or nothing' is
necessary for religious sects and for political parties. I can
understand such a policy, but for science I consider it harmful. There
is no ultimate truth. From a complex of notions one person will accept
one detail, another person another detail. The partial notions, A and B,
do not necessarily determine each other. I do not see that in science if
someone accepts A, he must necessarily swear also for B. I recognise in
science neither open nor closed doors, but no doors, no barriers at
all.7 This kind of eclecticism is clearly evident in Bleuler's most
famous work, Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias, which drew
heavily on his observations of patients at Rheinau, and which was rich
in clinical detail. It began with acknowledgements to Kraepelin (for
grouping together and describing the separate symptoms of dementia
praecox) and to Freud (for enlarging the concepts available to
psychopathologists). However, just as Bleuler found it difficult to
swallow the entire body of Freudian theory without reservation, so too
he found it difficult to agree completely with Kraepelin's
characterization of the most severe type of mental illness.

The first and most obvious difference between Kraepelin and Bleuler
concerned the name that should be given to the illness. Bleuler believed
that the term 'dementia praecox' was misleading for two reasons. First,
the illness did not always result in an extreme form of mental
deterioration (it was not a dementia). Second, although it usually began
in late adolescence, the illness sometimes first appeared in later life
(it was not always praecox). To the confusion of lay people ever since,
Bleuler proposed the new term schizophrenia to describe the disorder. In
doing so, he did not mean to imply that the illness caused a split
personality of the kind sometimes portrayed in paperback novels and
Hollywood films.\* Rather, Bleuler was suggesting that, at the core of
the illness, there was a separation between the different psychic
functions of personality, thinking, memory and perception. Bleuler, like
Kraepelin, believed that schizophrenia was the product of some kind of
biological disorder, and toyed with the idea that it was caused by an
accumulation of abnormal metabolites in the blood. However, unlike the
early Kraepelin, he was also interested in the psychology of his
patients' symptoms, and was impressed by the extent to which they could
vary from one individual to another. In order to make sense of this
variation, he made use of ideas borrowed from Freud and psychoanalysis,
and combined them with his own notions about the mental mechanisms
responsible for normal thinking and reasoning. This approach led him to
suppose that, underneath the most obvious but varied symptoms of
schizophrenia, there was a less obvious inner unity. In an attempt to
characterize this unity, he identified four subtle symptoms which he
believed to be fundamental to the illness, and which have since been
known to English-speaking psychiatrists as Bleuler's four 'As'. First,
and most importantly, there was a loosening of the associations that
linked together the stream of thought, so that the patient could no
longer reason coherently. In extreme cases, this could cause the
sufferer to speak in a jumbled word salad, as exemplified by a modern
patient's attempt to answer the question 'Why do you think people
believe in God?' Uh, let's, I don't know why, let's see, balloon travel.
He holds it up for you, the balloon. He don't let you fall out, your
little legs sticking out down

through the clouds. He's down to the smoke stack, looking through the
smoke trying to get the balloon gassed up you know. Way they're flyin'
on top that way, legs sticking out, I don't know, looking down on the
ground, heck, that'd make you so dizzy you just stay and sleep you know,
hold down and sleep there. The balloon's His home you know up there. I
used to be sleep out doors, you know, sleep out doors instead of going
home.8 (Since Bleuler, this kind of speech has commonly been described
as thought disorder. However, in a later chapter we will see that this
term is quite misleading.) The second of Bleuler's four 'As' was
ambivalence -- the holding of conflicting emotions and attitudes towards
others. Third, schizophrenia patients were said to suffer from autism, a
withdrawal from the social world resulting from a preference for living
in an inner world of fantasy. Finally, there was inappropriate affect,
the display of emotions that are incongruent with the patient's
circumstances. Bleuler held that, in contrast to these fundamental
symptoms, the most obvious features of schizophrenia described by
Kraepelin, namely hallucinations and delusions, were mere accessory
symptoms -- psychological reactions to the illness rather than direct
products of the disorder. Indeed, he argued that a substantial subgroup
of patients, who were said to suffer from simple schizophrenia, did not
experience these symptoms at all. Such people might include individuals
who 'vegetate as day labourers, peddlers, even as servants', or 'the
wife... who is unbearable, constantly scolding, nagging, always making
demands but never recognising duties'.9 Enlarging the category of
schizophrenia even further, Bleuler argued that: There is also a latent
schizophrenia and I am convinced that it is the most frequent form,
although admittedly these people hardly ever come for treatment. It is
not necessary to give a detailed description of the various
manifestations of latent schizophrenia... Irritable, odd, moody,
withdrawn

or exaggeratedly punctual people arouse, among other things, the
suspicion of being schizophrenic.10 In his less well known Textbook of
Psychiatry, the fourth edition of which was published in 1924, Bleuler
extended this analysis to reconsider the relationship between
schizophrenia and manic depression. Unlike Kraepelin, he came to the
view that these were not separate disease entities after all, but that
there was a continuum running between them, without a clear line of
demarcation.11 On this view, patients could be regarded as predominantly
schizophrenic or predominantly manic depressive according to the extent
to which they experienced or did not experience schizophrenia symptoms
(the affective symptoms normally attributed to manic depression being
regarded as non-specific). Bleuler's contribution, then, was not only to
provide an account of the psychology of dementia praecox, but also to
widen the concept substantially. Indeed, on his account there seemed to
be no precise dividing line between normality and illness, or between
one type of madness and another. This analysis was entirely consistent
with Bleuler's clinical attitude which, as we have seen, was markedly
different from Kraepelin's. Whereas for Kraepelin the mad were subjects
of scientific interest and scrutiny, for Bleuler they were fellow human
beings engaged in the same existential struggles as the rest of
humanity, struggles that were made more difficult by their illness.

Defining the boundaries of madness: philosophical approach of Karl
Jaspers

the

Broad conceptions of schizophrenia, such as Bleuler's, highlighted the
difficulty of determining exactly who suffered from the illness and who
did not. This important problem was addressed, in different ways, by a
group of psychiatrists whowere Kraepelin's successors at Heidelberg,
whose ideas brought about further shifts in the way that researchers
thought about the illness. Foremost among them was Karl Jaspers, who
became better known

as a philosopher than as a psychiatrist, and who worked as a doctor for
only seven years, between 1908 and 1915.12 Jaspers was born in 1883 in
Oldenburg, close to the North Sea. His father was a jurist and his
mother came from a local farming family. According to Jaspers' own
account, his father actively encouraged him to question authority at an
early age which, unfortunately, led him into conflict with his teachers
and isolated him from potential friends. Seeking solace by exploring the
nearby coast and countryside, Jaspers' mind turned to matters
philosophical. He read Spinoza at the age of 17 but decided to study law
rather than philosophy at university. Almost immediately it became
evident to him that this decision had been a great mistake: 'The
abstractions which were used to refer to social life -- a life still
entirely unknown to me -- proved so disappointing that I occupied myself
instead with poetry, art, graphology and the theatre, always turning to
something else.'13 In 1902, Jaspers decided to abandon his legal studies
and study medicine. In order to explain this decision to his parents, he
wrote them a memorandum: My plan is the following: I shall take my
medical state examination after the prescribed number of semesters. If
then I still believe -- as I do now -- to possess the necessary talent
for it, I shall transfer to psychiatry or psychology. After that I shall
first of all start practicing as a physician in a mental hospital.
Eventually I might enter upon an academic career as a psychologist, as
for example Kraepelin in Heidelberg -- something which I would not,
however, care to express because of the uncertainty and of its being
dependent upon my capabilities... Therefore, I had best state it this
way: I am going to study medicine in order to become a physician in a
health resort or a specialist, for example, a doctor for the mentally
ill. To myself I add: the rest will come if and when. The memorandum
proved to be remarkably prescient. Despite health problems that were to
affect him throughout his later life, he received his MD in 1909. By
this time he had already started voluntary work at the psychiatric
hospital in Heidelberg, seven years after Kraepelin had left for

Munich. Kraepelin's successor at the hospital was Franz Nissl, whose
main research interest was neuropathology, but who encouraged his junior
staff to develop projects across the spectrum of disciplines relevant to
psychiatry. Jaspers experimented with intelligence tests, and with a new
apparatus for measuring blood pressure. Describing the intellectual
environment in which he began to assemble his ideas about the very
nature of madness, Jaspers later recorded that: The common conceptual
framework of the hospital was Kraepelin's psychiatry together with
deviations from it, resulting in points of view and ideas for which no
one person could claim individual authorship. Thus, for example, the
polarity of the two broad spheres of dementia praecox (later called
schizophrenia) and of the manic-depressive illnesses was considered
valid. However, Jaspers doubted whether this broad acceptance of
Kraepelin's doctrine provided a secure basis for progress in the
understanding of madness. On the contrary: The realization that
scientific investigation and therapy were in a state of stagnation was
widespread in German psychiatric clinics at that time. The large
institutions for the mentally ill were built constantly more hygienic
and more magnificent. The lives of the unfortunate inmates, which could
not be changed essentially, were controlled. The best that was possible
consisted of shaping their lives as naturally as possible as, for
example, by successful work therapy as long as such therapy remained a
humane and reasonable link in the entire organization of the patient's
life. In view of the exceedingly small amount of knowledge and technical
know-how, intelligent, yet unproductive psychiatrists, such as Hoche,
took recourse to a sceptical attitude and to elegant sounding phrases of
gentlemanly superiority. Jaspers therefore set himself the task of
rethinking the way in which he and his colleagues studied mental
illness. The originality of his approach first became evident to his
colleagues in 1910, when he published a paper in which he considered
whether paranoia should be regarded as an abnormal

form of personality development or as an illness.14 Jaspers' distinction
between these two possibilities was novel in itself. If paranoia was a
form of personality development it should reflect the understandable
evolution of the patient's inner life. If, on the other hand, paranoia
was an illness it must inevitably be considered a product of the
biological changes that were presumed to accompany the onset of
psychosis. Even more original, however, was Jaspers' method of
addressing this distinction. In his paper he described several cases of
paranoia in unusual detail, paying attention to his patients' accounts
of their lives before they entered hospital, and also their subjective
experience of their symptoms. 'With this mode of presentation, Jaspers
introduced the biographical method into psychiatry: a summons to regard
a patient's illness always as part of his life history.'15 The paper on
paranoia was soon followed by others on a variety of topics, including a
review of the role of intelligence testing in psychiatry, and further
case studies, the last of which was published in 1913. During this
period Jaspers was working on his only book on psychiatry, which was
also published in 1913, two years before he became a professional
philosopher. General Psychopathology, completed when he was 30 years of
age, attempted a grand sweep, bringing together the biological and the
psychological. In it, Jaspers made a distinction between two apparently
irreconcilable methods of comprehending mental symptoms: understanding
and explaining. According to Jaspers, a patient's experiences can be
understood if they are seen to arise meaningfully from the person's
personality and life history. The key to a psychological analysis of a
patient's abnormal experiences is therefore the clinician's empathetic
understanding of the patient's subjective world and life story. In some
cases, however, symptoms arise in such a way that no amount of empathy
can link them understandably to the patient's background. Such symptoms,
Jaspers asserted, cannot be understood but can only be explained as
caused by an underlying biological disorder.16Ununderstandability was,
of course, the hallmark of the psychoses, and allowed them to be
distinguished from the less severe psychiatric disorders, which later
became known as the neuroses.\*

No where is this distinction clearer than in Jaspers' account of
abnormal beliefs. Such beliefs (which are discussed in more detail in
later chapters) are often expressed by psychotic patients and usually
follow particular themes, the most common of which are persecution (for
example, 'The Royal Family and the British Home Office are conspiring to
kill me') and grandiosity (for example, 'I am Christ reborn'). Jaspers
identified three key features of such beliefs. First, they are held with
extraordinary conviction. Second, they are resistant to counterarguments
or contradictory evidence. Third, they have bizarre or impossible
content. However, according to Jaspers, these criteria are not
sufficient to determine whether a belief is a true delusion. True
delusions are ununderstandable because they arise suddenly without any
context. The clearest case of this phenomenon is the delusional
perception, in which the individual interprets a particular stimulus in
a bizarre way. An example (described by Kurt Schneider) is of a young
man who considers the position of a salt-cellar on his table and
suddenly concludes that he will become the Pope. The problem with this
distinction is that, far from making the borderline between normality
and madness more objective, it introduces an alarming degree of
subjectivity. For Jaspers, the empathetic attitude of the psychiatrist
towards the patient functions as a kind of diagnostic test. If the
empathy scanner returns the reading 'ununderstandable' the patient is
psychotic and suffering from a biological disease. However, behaviours
and experiences may vary in degree according to how amenable they are to
empathy. By not empathizing hard enough, we may fail to recognize the
intelligible aspects of the other person's experiences. Moreover, once
we have decided that the patient's experiences are unintelligible, we
are given an apparent licence to treat the patient as a disordered
organism, a malfunctioning body that we do not have to relate to in a
human way. A real-life example illustrates this danger. Some years ago,
my research assistant, Sue Kaney, was administering a battery of
psychological tests to patients suffering from delusions. One patient's
delusional belief, 'Professor B has turned me into a portfolio', had
been dismissed by her doctors and nurses as meaningless. As Professor B
was a well-known gynaecologist it seemed to us a good idea to check
whether the lady had any unusual

medical complaints. Investigation of her medical notes revealed that she
suffered from a rare condition that the Professor was researching.
'Professor B has turned me into a portfolio' seemed an odd way for the
woman to declare that she felt uncared for and an object of scientific
scrutiny. Nonetheless this is what she appeared to be asserting. This
brief anecdote illustrates the central irony of Jaspers' work. In his
great book he tried to identify a role for psychological explanations in
psychiatry. In the process, he gave madness to the biologists and
inadvertently discouraged the psychological investigation of the
psychoses.

Schneider and the 'First-Rank Symptoms' In 1913 Jaspers became a teacher
of psychology in the Department of Philosophy at the University of
Heidelberg. At first, he assumed the move would be temporary but in 1922
he was appointed to a full chair in philosophy, and he never returned to
psychiatric practice. Kurt Schneider's career overlapped with Jaspers'
and was greatly influenced by it.17 Like Jaspers, he studied both
medicine and philosophy and addressed the problem of deciding who was
mad and who was not. Yet, unlike his predecessor, his approach was
pragmatic rather than philosophical. Born in 1887 in Crailsheim in the
state of Württemberg, Schneider trained in medicine in Berlin and
Tübingen. After military service in the First World War, he obtained his
academic qualification in psychiatry in Cologne in 1919. In 1931 he was
appointed director of the Psychiatric Research Institute in Munich,
which had been founded by Kraepelin. In the following years, Nazi
policies were gradually embraced by the German psychiatric
establishment, championed in particular by Ernst Rüdin, who had been
recruited to the Institute by Kraepelin in order to develop the new
field of psychiatric genetics. The eugenic theories that

Rüdin proposed led, first, to the enforced sterilization and then,
later, the killing of mentally ill patients.18 These developments
horrified Schneider, who eventually left the Institute to serve as an
army doctor during the Second World War.\* In 1945, the invading US army
decided to reopen the famous university at Heidelberg and appointed a
group of anti-Nazi academics to advise them. The group, led by Jaspers,
attempted to identify fellow academics who could be safely entrusted
with the rebuilding of the University. Schneider was sufficiently free
of the taint of Nazism to be appointed Dean of the Medical School, a
position he retained until his retirement in 1955. He died, aged 80
years, in 1967. Although Schneider's work was to have a profound impact
on the way in which English-speaking researchers thought about
schizophrenia, his approach became known to the English academic world
largely via accounts provided by British and American psychiatrists who
had studied him in German. Indeed, the English translation of his famous
textbook on Psychopathology, published in 1959, was allowed to go out of
print after one edition, and has never been reissued. It is doubtful
whether Schneider himself felt his analysis of schizophrenia to be his
most important contribution; he also wrote extensively about disorders
of personality, and about forensic problems that lay at the boundary
between legal and psychiatric practice. According to Canadian
psychiatrist J. Hoenig, 'Schneider's work... was not in the area of
system design, but it was firmly planted at the bedside' (a curious
description, as psychiatrists almost never see their patients when they
are lying in bed). Applying Jaspers' phenomenological approach, he
addressed himself to the problem of diagnosing schizophrenia and
differentiating it from more general problems of personality. He hit on
the strategy of identifying those characteristics that were peculiar to
schizophrenia, and which would therefore provide the best guide for the
practising clinician. In this way, he identified what he believed to be
the first-rank symptoms of the disorder, which are listed in Table 2.1.
These symptoms, which were to be distinguished from other symptoms of
the

second rank, were all forms of hallucination, delusion, or passivity
experience. For example, the patient might hear an auditory
hallucination in the form of a voice speaking about him in the third
person and commenting on his actions, or he might feel that his will was
being controlled by some external force or agency. When trying to
determine whether patients suffered from any of these symptoms,
Schneider believed that it was more important to pay attention to the
form rather than the content of the patient's experience: Diagnosis
looks for the 'How?' (form) not the 'What?' (the theme or content). When
I find thought withdrawal, then this is important to me as a mode of
inner experience and as a diagnostic hint, but it is not of diagnostic
significance whether it is the devil, the girlfriend or a political
leader who withdraws the thoughts. Wherever one focuses on such
contents, diagnostics recedes; one sees then only the biographical
aspects or the existence open to interpretation.19 For Schneider
therefore, the meaning of first-rank symptoms was irrelevant to the
diagnostician. Moreover, he was careful to deny that these symptoms were
crucially important features of schizophrenia. They were chosen purely
for convenience, because they were easy to recognize. Accordingly, any
patient who showed any of these symptoms would, more likely than not, be
suffering from schizophrenia, Table 2.1 Schneider's first-rank symptoms
of schizophrenia (adapted from K. Schneider (1959) Clinical
Psychopathology. New York: Grune & Stratton)

Symptom as described by Schneider 1 Audible thoughts

Example given by Schneider

A schizophrenic woman, for instance, replied to the question about
hearing voices with the answer, 'I hear my own thoughts. I can hear them
when everything is quiet.'

2 Voices heard arguing

Another schizophrenic heard his own voice night and day, like a
dialogue, one voice always arguing against another.

3 Voices heard commenting on one's actions

A schizophrenic woman heard a voice say, whenever she wanted to eat,
'Now she is eating, here she is munching again', or when she patted the
dog, she heard, 'What is she up to now, fondling the dog?'

4 Experience of influences playing on the body

A schizophrenic woman speaking of electrical influences said, 'The
electricity works of the whole world are directed on to me.'

5 Thought withdrawal

A definite schizophrenic disturbance may only be supposed when it is
recounted that 'other people' are taking the thoughts away... A
schizophrenic man stated that his thoughts were 'taken from me years ago
by the parish council'.

6 Thoughts are ascribed to other people who intrude their thoughts upon
the patient

A skilled shirtmaker knew exactly how large the collars should be, but
when she proceeded to make them, there were times when she could not
calculate at all. This was not ordinary forgetting; she had to think
thoughts she did not want to think, evil thoughts. She attributed all
this to being hypnotized by a priest.

7 Thought diffusion

The diffusion of thoughts is illustrated by a schizophrenic shopkeeper
who said, 'People see what I am thinking; you could not prove it but I
just know it is so. I see it in their faces; it would not be so bad if I
did not think such unsuitable things -- swine or some other rude word.
If I think of anything, at once those opposite know it and it is
embarrassing.'

8 Delusional perception

Another schizophrenic woman said: 'The people next door were strange and
offhand; they did not want me; perhaps I was too quiet for them. The
previous Sunday my employers had a visitor who embarrassed me. I thought
it was my father. Later on, I thought it was only the son of the house
in disguise. I don't know if they wanted to find out about me.'

9-ii Feelings, impulses (drives) and volitional acts that are
experienced by the patient as the work or influence of others

A schizophrenic student said, 'I cannot respond to any suggestion;
thousands and thousands of wills work against me.'

but 'We often have to base our diagnosis of schizophrenia on the second
rank symptoms, in exceptional cases now and then even merely on
expressional \[behavioural\] symptoms, provided they are adequately
distinct and present in large numbers.'20 Despite these qualifications,
many English-speaking researchers assumed that Schneider had found a
more precise way of identifying 'real cases' of schizophrenia. The term
'Schneider-positive schizophrenia' -- to refer to a group of patients
suffering from his first-rank symptoms -- was first used in 1965 by a
group of investigators searching for metabolic abnormalities in
psychotic patients.21 Somewhat later, Schneider's account was used to
define a core group of schizophrenia symptoms by a British team, led by
John Wing, which was attempting to find more reliable ways of defining
and diagnosing psychiatric disorders.22 As we will see in the next
chapter, subsequent definitions of schizophrenia developed in Britain
and the United States, and now employed throughout the world, have all
emphasized

hallucinations and delusions rather than the intellectual deficits
described by Kraepelin or the so-called fundamental symptoms described
by Bleuler. It is likely that Schneider himself would have been shocked
by these developments. As we have seen, his goal in defining the
first-rank symptoms was merely to make the task of the clinician more
straightforward. Indeed, Schneider the pragmatist denied that
psychiatric diagnosis identified cases with a common aetiology as
supposed by Kraepelin. In an essay celebrating Kraepelin's influence on
psychiatry published in 1956 he remarked that: Today no one will any
longer attempt a sharp differential diagnosis between cyclothymia
\[manic depression\] and schizophrenia (as they are now called). There
is only a differential typology, that means there are transitions... One
should really no longer argue about such cases: 'this is a cyclothymia,
no, this is a schizophrenia'. One can argue this about GPI versus a
cerebral tumour. Here the 'is' can be verified. With the endogenous
psychoses, which are purely psychological forms, one can make
assessments only according to one's own concepts. One can only say: this
is for me, or I call this a cyclothymia or a schizophrenia. The crucial
point in such an argument is merely to make it clear that in a
descriptive psychopathology of this kind Kraepelin's forms are still
basically accepted.23 The sceptical reader may be forgiven for wondering
whether the two main assertions in this quotation (that 'one can make
assessments only according to one's own concepts' and that 'Kraepelin's
forms are still basically accepted') are entirely consistent with each
other.

The Evolution of Manic Depression Just as the concept of dementia
praecox evolved, and even changed dramatically in the years following
Kraepelin's original formulation, so too the concept of manic depression
underwent a series of transformations.

These transformations followed the growing perception among
psychiatrists in Europe and North America that Kraepelin's account
created problems of two kinds. The first problem was the embarrassment
for psychiatric classification presented by patients who suffered from a
mixture of schizophrenic and manic-depressive symptoms. The second
problem was the apparent over-inclusiveness of the manic-depression
concept, which demanded that it be broken down into several subtypes. As
we have seen, Bleuler believed that psychotic patients could be more or
less schizophrenic or manic depressive depending on the extent to which
schizophrenia symptoms were more evident than abnormal mood. Extending
this idea to its logical conclusion, in 1933 the American psychiatrist
Jacob Kasanin proposed the concept of schizoaffective disorder to
describe a kind of illness which combined symptoms of both disorders,
but which was distinct from both.24 According to Kasanin,
schizoaffective patients usually suffered from 'marked emotional
turmoil' and 'false sensory impressions' (hallucinations) but rarely
experienced the passivity symptoms (delusions of control) usually seen
in cases of schizophrenia. These symptoms most often appeared suddenly
after a stressful experience, and there was usually evidence of good
premorbid adjustment (in other words, patients showed little evidence of
social or personality difficulties prior to their illness). Recovery was
often rapid, although many patients went on to suffer further episodes.
A similar but not identical concept of cycloid psychosis was proposed in
1926 by Karl Kliest, professor of psychiatry at Frankfurt University.
His student Karl Leonhard, who, in 1936, became head of the Frankfurt
University Mental Hospital, later elaborated this concept.25 In a series
of papers published in the 1950s, Kliest and Leonhard grouped together
under this term all those disorders that appeared to have such a
variable course that patients appeared schizophrenic at one point in
time and manic depressive at another.26 Despite the apparent
similarities with Kasanin's account, Leonhard denied that the two
proposals were the same. The essential feature of cycloid psychosis was
the change in symptomatology observed over time. In contrast, the
schizoaffective patients described by

Kasanin appeared to experience symptoms of schizophrenia and manic
depression simultaneously. It was Leonhard who introduced a final
modification to Kraepelin's system that appeared to solve the second
problem of over-inclusiveness. Leonhard undertook an analysis of the
varying symptoms of a large group of manic-depressive patients, which he
summarized in his book on The Classification of the Endogenous
Psychoses, which was published in 1957. He observed that some patients
experienced both episodes of mania (characterized by euphoria,
excitement and irritability) and episodes of depression, whereas others
appeared to suffer only from episodes of depression.27 He therefore
proposed the term bipolar disorder to describe the first type of
illness, because patients appeared to experience at different times two
opposite types of extreme mood. (The term 'manic depression' is now
often used exclusively to describe this bipolar type of illness.) The
term unipolar depression was suggested for the second type of illness,
in which episodes of mania never occurred. Importantly, Leonhard and
subsequent investigators observed that mania in the absence of a history
of depression is extremely rare. For this reason, it is usually assumed
that apparently 'unipolar manic' patients either have experienced
episodes of depression which they have forgotten about, or will go on to
develop depression in the future.28 Prior to the 1970s, researchers
studying mood disorders rarely distinguished between patients suffering
from bipolar and unipolar illnesses. Following the publication of an
English translation of The Classification of the Endogenous Psychoses in
the 1970s, it became commonplace to do so. By the last quarter of the
twentieth century, therefore, Kraepelin's model had been substantially
elaborated and yet remained, in most respects, intact. A consensus model
of psychiatric classification, outlined in Figure 2.1, was widely
embraced. It began with the distinction between the psychoses and the
minor psychiatric disorders or neuroses, as outlined by Jaspers. The
psychoses, in turn, were divided into two major categories,
schizophrenia and manic depression as proposed by Kraepelin, and two
perhaps more contentious categories, paranoia and schizoaffective
disorder. Finally, manic

depression was deemed to consist of two subtypes, unipolar depression
and bipolar disorder.

Will the Real Concept of Schizophrenia Please Stand up? In these first
two chapters we have examined the development of the Kraepelinian
approach to psychiatry from its beginnings in the last half of the
nineteenth century through to the last quarter of the twentieth.
Although I have presented no more than an outline sketch of this
process, focusing narrowly on the work of four giants of psychiatry, the
astute reader will already have recognized that Kraepelin's ideas
underwent a series of radical transformations as they progressed through
the hands of Bleuler, Jaspers, Schneider and onwards. This was most
obviously the case for the concept of dementia praecox. For Kraepelin
the cardinal features of the disorder were intellectual, for Bleuler
they were cognitive and emotional, whereas Schneider emphasized
hallucinations and delusions. Indeed, we may be forgiven for wondering
whether these explorers of the mind and its disorders were writing about
the same illness. Writing in 1980, the psychiatric geneticist Seymour
Kety had little doubt about this question, and argued that Schneider's
account of schizophrenia amounted to nothing less than a perversion of
Kraepelin's original concept: Schneider, 50 years later... \[after
Bleuler\] gave renewed support to those who preferred to think of
schizophrenia as a benign process by simply redefining schizophrenia to
make it so. Features regarded by Kraepelin and Bleuler as fundamental
and characteristic (impoverishment of affect, disturbances of personal
contact and rapport, ambivalence, lack of motivation, depersonalisation
and stereotypes) were significantly rejected and the new criteria were
restricted to particular kinds of hallucinations and delusions which
Bleuler had regarded as accessory symptoms. Schneider Figure 2.1 The
consensus view of psychiatric classification, circa 1975.

established a new syndrome with features which are economically put into
check lists and fed into computers. That syndrome may be more prevalent,
have a more favourable outcome, and be more responsive to a wide variety
of treatments, but it is not schizophrenia.29 British psychologist Mary
Boyle has offered a different explanation for the apparent differences
between modern schizophrenia patients and the dementia praecox patients
of Kraepelin's time.30 She has noted remarkable similarities between
Kraepelin's case studies and descriptions of people suffering from
encephalitis lethargica, a viral disease that swept through Italy during
the 1890s, and then through the rest of Europe between 1916 and 1927. In
the epidemic of 1916--27, five million people were affected, about one
third of whom died or fell into a coma after a period of intense
sleeplessness. Many of those who survived went on to develop a form of
post-encephalitic Parkinson's disease (named after a London physician
James Parkinson who, in 1817, first described the non-viral
manifestations of this condition; symptoms include uncontrollable
tremor, sudden accelerated movements interspersed with periods of
stiffness or rigidity, and other crippling disorders of will and
action). Sometimes, survivors would remain conscious but unable to move
for years, frozen in their chairs without obvious motive, emotion or
desire, apparently indifferent to the world around them.31 The
biological basis of the illness was established by Constantin von
Economo, a Greek-born neuropathologist who found characteristic lesions
in the brains of victims at autopsy, and who demonstrated that a
submicroscopic, filterable virus obtained from victims was capable of
transmitting the disease to monkeys.32

So varied were the long-term symptoms observed following the epidemic,
that encephalitis lethargica originally received a variety of other
names, including 'epidemic delirium', 'epidemic disseminated sclerosis',
'atypical poliomyelitis' and 'epidemic schizophrenia'. The last of these
terms was sometimes used because the movement disorders of patients were
similar to those recorded in patients thought to suffer from catatonic
schizophrenia. The important lesson of Boyle's argument is not that
Kraepelin was sometimes mistaken when assigning diagnoses (we will never
know for certain whether some of his patients were suffering from a
brain infection) but that the concept of dementia praecox was less
certain than either he or his followers supposed. As we will see, this
is not the only problem that has threatened to undermine the
Kraepelinian system. OceanofPDF.com

3 The Great Classification Crisis If any man were bold enough to write a
history of psychiatric classifications he would find when he had
completed his task that in the process he had written a history of
psychiatry as well. Robert Kendell1 The philosopher Thomas Kuhn has
observed that sciences do not develop by the mere accumulation of
knowledge (although the accumulation of knowledge is important). Rather,
scientific progress sometimes occurs in abrupt leaps or shifts, for
example when Newton justified a Copernican model of the solar system by
proposing his law of gravitation, or when Einstein abolished the concept
of absolute motion by introducing his theory of special relativity. In
each of these examples (and many others from the physical and biological
sciences that can be easily invoked) one theoretical framework was
eventually abandoned in favour of another, incompatible, framework.
During this process, according to Kuhn, researchers are usually
reluctant to accept the evidence in favour of the new approach until
limitations of the old approach become so obvious that they can no
longer be avoided. 2

Kuhn argued that these sudden theoretical leaps could be understood, at
least in part, in sociological terms. According to his account, each
science begins in fits and starts until researchers eventually accept a
common paradigm (framework or set of assumptions about the nature of
their subject matter). During the subsequent phase of normal science,
researchers work within the paradigm, even though they may be hardly
aware that they are doing so (for example, after Newton physicists
assumed that space was best described by the principles of Euclidean
geometry, until Einstein showed that non-Euclidean geometries were
required to describe the curvature of space under the influence of
gravity). Over time they begin to accumulate observations that cannot be
understood within the existing framework and this leads, eventually, to
a scientific revolution in which a replacement paradigm is accepted.
Afterwards there follows another period of normal science. Although
Kuhn's model has sometimes been criticized for oversimplifying the
processes involved in the growth of scientific knowledge,3 it allows us
to understand Emil Kraepelin's position within the history of
psychiatry. It is a position that bears some resemblance to that of
Newton within the history of physics. Like Newton, he established a
paradigm or a set of assumptions that would guide the activities of
successive generations of researchers, but which were so ingrained that
they have been difficult to question. According to this paradigm,
psychiatric disorders fall into a finite number of types or categories
(dementia praecox, manic depression, paranoia, etc.), each with a
different pathophysiology and aetiology. Of course, modern psychiatrists
and psychologists have sometimes quibbled with details of the system
(for example, arguing whether the true number of psychotic illnesses is
three or more than three). Often they have also acknowledged the
multifactorial origins of particular illnesses ('schizophrenia is caused
by an interaction of biology and the environment...'). Nonetheless, the
practice of most psychiatrists and clinical psychologists -- the way
that they assign diagnoses and decide treatments for their patients, the
way that they conduct their research into the causes of madness --
reveals that the Kraepelinian paradigm remains almost unchallenged
within the mental health professions as a whole. That this is so is
evident from four observations. First, modern textbooks of
psychopathology, whether written by psychiatrists or psychologists,
almost without exception, are organized according to some variant of
Kraepelin's system, with chapter headings on 'schizophrenia', 'manic
depression' and so on. Second, as we will see later in this chapter, the
official diagnostic systems currently advocated by influential bodies
such as the World Health Organization (WHO)4 and the American
Psychiatric Association (APA),5 are similarly organized in a way that
reflects Kraepelin's assumptions about the nature of madness. Third,
most research in psychiatry (whether conducted by psychiatrists or
psychologists) is based on Kraepelin's paradigm. Usually, patients with
a particular diagnosis are compared with other people, on the assumption
that those with the diagnosis have something in common that makes them
different. And finally, clinicians throughout the world typically employ
Kraepelin's diagnostic concepts during their routine work, for example
when explaining to patients what is wrong with them ('I'm afraid you
suffer from manic depression, Mr Smith') and when deciding what
treatment should be offered ('so you should therefore take lithium
carbonate').

Because Kraepelin's paradigm remains the main organizing principle for
psychiatric practice and research, any evidence that draws it into
question has revolutionary implications for both the understanding and
treatment of madness. Evidence of this kind would undermine most of the
research into psychiatric disorders conducted since Kraepelin's death.
(After all, the attempt to find the cause or causes of schizophrenia is
doomed to failure if the diagnosis does not pick out a group of people
who suffer from the same disorder.) It would also undermine any routine
clinical decisions -- for example, advice about whether patients are
likely to recover, or to benefit from particular kinds of medication --
that are based on Kraepelinian diagnoses. These disastrous consequences
of a poorly founded method of classification point to the necessity of
evaluating Kraepelin's system. There are many different ways of
approaching this problem. However, in this chapter we will be concerned
only with the first and most obvious test that a diagnostic system must
pass in order to be deemed useful. This test is known as reliability,
and concerns the consistency with which diagnoses are employed by
different clinicians or on different occasions. If two psychiatrists met
the same patient, we would expect both to make the same diagnosis.
Similarly, we would expect a patient to be assigned the same diagnosis
on two different occasions (unless the patient recovered and later
developed a separate illness altogether). Without this kind of
diagnostic consistency, there would be no way of agreeing about who
suffers from a particular disorder and who does not.

The Problem of Reliability In order to achieve reliable psychiatric
diagnoses it is first necessary to reach a consensus about the main
features of each disorder. Although early attempts to create the
required standard definitions were made elsewhere (the first being a
list of eleven mental diseases agreed at a Congress of Mental Science in
Paris in 1889),6 it is fair to say that this process of mass-producing
psychiatric diagnoses has been mostly an American enterprise. From our
vantage point at the beginning of the twenty-first century, it therefore
seems almost paradoxical that American psychiatrists working in the
middle years of the last century were mostly sceptical about the value
of diagnoses. This scepticism reflected the influence of Adolf Meyer, a
Swiss-born psychiatrist who played a leading role in shaping American
thinking about madness during the first decades of the twentieth
century. Meyer was born in 1866 in Niederweingen, near Zurich, and
studied medicine in Switzerland before undertaking postgraduate work in
Paris, London, Edinburgh and Berlin. In 1892, he migrated to the United
States where, after working in a series of neurology posts, he
eventually became director of the Pathological Institute of the New York
State Hospitals. In 1909 he received an honorary doctorate from Clark
University at the same time as did Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung, who were
mid-way through a lecture tour of the United States. During this early
period of his career, Meyer was a firm advocate of Kraepelin's approach
and has been credited, along with a few other émigrés, for introducing
the concept of dementia praecox to the United States. Indeed, the only
book he published in his lifetime was entitled Dementia Praecox. It
attempted (with somewhat less success than Bleuler's book of the same
title) to integrate Kraepelin's ideas with those of Freud. On being
appointed to a chair in the Department of Psychiatry at Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore in 1910, where he was to remain until retiring
in 1941, Meyer intended to model the new University clinic on
Kraepelin's Institute in Munich. The Henry Phipps Psychiatric Clinic, as
it became known, was housed in an elegant building, with a roof garden
and unbarred windows. Like the Munich Institute, the clinic was run
along medical lines, so that patients usually arrived in ambulances,
physical restraints were employed as rarely as possible, and few
patients were compulsorily detained. It is therefore all the more
remarkable that Meyer's subsequent reputation was as an
anti-Kraepelinian. Historian Edward Shorter was probably unfair when he
described Meyer as, 'a second-rate thinker and verbose writer, \[who\]
was never, in his own mind, able to disentangle schools that were
absolutely incompatible, and ended up embracing whatever new came
along'.7 However, Meyer was certainly enthusiastic about Freud's
theories, and therefore shares some responsibility for the success of
psychoanalytic ideas in the United States. He also supported the
psychologist J. B. Watson's first attempts to apply the theory of
Pavlovian conditioning in a psychiatric setting, and therefore can also
be credited with encouraging the psychological doctrine of
behaviourism\* (an approach to

psychology that is usually regarded as the antithesis of
psychoanalysis). Meyer's later writings, mostly published after his
death in 1950, advocated a holistic approach to psychiatry in which
biological, psychological and sociological approaches were considered to
be equally important. Despite his earlier enthusiasm for Kraepelin's
system, he became pessimistic about the value of psychiatric
classification, arguing that 'We should give up the idea of classifying
people as we do plants.' He felt that psychiatric categories did little
justice to the complexity of patients' problems, their individual
histories, and the social circumstances in which their problems arose.
He also objected to the superstition that a diagnosis led automatically
to a choice of treatment and suggested that, rather than grouping
different behaviours under one name, clinicians should base their
treatment decisions on a concrete specification of the various problems
from which the patient suffered. Despite Meyer's influence, the American
Psychiatric Association contributed a section on psychiatric disorders
to a nationally accepted Standard Classified Nomenclature of Disease
organized by the New York Academy of Medicine, which was published in
1933. It was the attempt to use this classification during the Second
World War that led both military and civilian psychiatrists to
reconsider their attitudes towards the whole process of diagnosis.
During the war, nearly 10 per cent of all discharges from the armed
forces were for psychiatric reasons. However, the range of disorders
contained within the Nomenclature, based largely on clinical experience
within asylums, was inadequate to describe many of the problems suffered
by the returning men. In particular, stress reactions, psychosomatic
problems and problems of personality were inadequately described. To
make matters worse, the US army, the US navy and the Veterans
Administration (responsible for providing medical care to ex-service
personnel and their families) all employed their own idiosyncratic
systems of classification alongside the Nomenclature.8 It was in order
to bring an end to this chaos that the American Psychiatric Association
in 1948 formed a task force to create a new standardized diagnostic
system. The result, published in 1952, was the first edition of the
APA's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. DSM-I (as
it became known) was a triumph of the doctrine of truth by agreement.
Great care was taken to represent the broad spectrum of contemporary
psychiatric opinion in the USA. One tenth of the Association's members
were sent a questionnaire, which elicited their opinions about an early
draft of the manual, allowing revisions to be made before it was
officially adopted by a vote of the entire membership. The final version
came as a handy-sized book with a grey cover. Within its pages, each
diagnosis was given a simple definition, usually accompanied by a
thumbnail description of the disorder. The impact of this simple and
practical system proved to be as great outside the United States as
within, shaping attempts to produce an international consensus about
psychiatric classification. The attempt to achieve such a consensus was
led by the World Health Organization. On its creation in 1948, WHO had
assumed responsibility for an International List of Causes of Death,
which had been first compiled in 1853, and which had undergone four
major revisions sponsored by the French government. Expanding the manual
to include non-fatal diseases, WHO published a sixth edition (now
renamed the International Classification of Diseases, or ICD-6 for
short) in 1951, but was disappointed by its impact. The mental disorders
section of the manual was adopted for official use only in Finland,
Great Britain, New Zealand, Peru and Thailand and, even in these
countries, its use by practising psychiatrists was fairly haphazard. A
committee chaired by Erwin Stengel, a British psychiatrist, was
therefore mandated to consider how the section on psychiatric disorders
might be improved in future editions. Stengel became convinced that
aetiological prejudices were largely responsible for the difficulty in
achieving agreement. Some diagnostic concepts then in wide use seemed to
imply that disorders had particular causes. For example, many
psychiatrists believed that the term 'schizophrenia' implied an
endogenous disorder (that is, a disorder caused by some biological
dysfunction within the individual), whereas other widely used terms,
such as 'reactive depression', seemed to imply that disorders were
largely caused by environmental factors. For these reasons, Stengel
embraced an idea originally suggested by the American philosopher Carl
Hempel, and proposed that future classifications of psychiatric diseases
should include only operational definitions, which is to say definitions
that precisely specified the rules to be followed when making each
diagnosis. DSM-I, with its relatively clear definitions and its
thumbnail descriptions, was the closest he could find to this ideal
approach. Stengel's advice that diagnoses should make no reference to
aetiology was followed for the eighth edition of the International
Classification of Disease, which was published in 1965 and officially
adopted by WHO in 1969. ICD-8 was the product of an unusual degree of
co-operation between psychiatrists in different countries.

Scandinavian and German psychiatric societies supported the new
taxonomy, and the American Psychiatric Association agreed to base a
revision of their Diagnostic and Statistical Manual on the ICD-8 system.
Accordingly, in 1965 the APA appointed a small committee of eight
experts and two consultants, and DSM-II was published three years later
as a spiral-bound notebook, 150 pages in length, available to clinicians
for \$3.50.

Troublesome data By the middle decades of the twentieth century, it was
becoming obvious to many psychiatrists that the achievement of a
consensus about the main features of each psychiatric disorder would not
be enough to ensure that diagnoses were reliable, let alone
scientifically meaningful. Empirical research was required.
Unfortunately, the earliest studies of diagnostic reliability proved to
be discomfiting to those who wished to believe that Kraepelin had at
last discovered the correct taxonomy of psychiatric disorders. Jules
Masserman and H. Carmichael, two American psychiatrists, published the
first study of the reliability of psychiatric diagnoses, in 1938.9 These
researchers followed up 100 patients one year after they had been
admitted to a university psychiatric clinic in Chicago, in order to see
whether their diagnoses had changed during that period. They noted that
the majority of patients had symptoms that seemed to fit more than one
diagnostic category. By the end of the follow-up interval, 40 per cent
of the patients had been assigned diagnoses different from those they
had been given on admission. Although it might be argued that these
disappointing findings were merely a reflection of the poor diagnostic
skills of particular clinicians in a particular city at a particular
time, later studies established that this was not the case. For example,
similar results were obtained in a much larger investigation conducted
by three US navy psychiatrists, William Hunt, Cecil Wittson and Edna
Hunt, published in 1953.10 Nearly 800 enlisted men discharged from naval
boot camps for psychiatric reasons were followed up in the hospitals to
which they were discharged and their diagnoses there were compared with
those they had been given by the navy psychiatrists. There was agreement
about specific diagnoses in only 32.6 per cent of cases. Of course,
diagnoses may change over time for genuine reasons (because patients'
symptoms change), so unstable diagnoses are not incontrovertible
evidence of diagnostic destitution. Of much greater importance is the
extent to which different clinicians assign the same diagnoses to the
same patients when conducting assessments at the same point in time.
This question was first addressed in a pioneering investigation
conducted by an American postgraduate student of industrial psychology,
Philip Ash, which was published in 1949.11 Three psychiatrists
interviewed fifty-two male patients attending an outpatient clinic and
the results, at least on first sight, were even less impressive than
those obtained by Masserman and Carmichael. All three psychiatrists
agreed on diagnoses in only 20 per cent of cases, whereas two out of
three agreed about 48.6 per cent of cases. These figures improved to
45.7 per cent and 51.4 per cent respectively when only major diagnostic
categories (for example, psychosis) were considered, but even then fell
well short of the desired level of agreement. Unfortunately, as later
commentators pointed out, Ash's study suffered from a defect that made
interpretation of his findings difficult. Three quarters of the major
diagnoses given were 'normal with a predominant personality
characteristic'. On the one hand, it might therefore be argued that the
psychiatrists were being asked to make judgements of personality rather
than illness. On the other hand, with such a high base rate for a single
category, relatively high rates of agreement were bound to occur by
chance. (To see that this is the case, imagine what would happen if only
one diagnosis was employed. In these circumstances there would
inevitably be 100 per cent agreement between different clinicians. Now
imagine that there is a choice between only two diagnoses. Even under
these circumstances two psychiatrists deciding diagnoses by a toss of a
coin would agree on 50 per cent of occasions. The chance level of
agreement therefore decreases as the base rate of each diagnosis
decreases, and as the number of available diagnoses increases.) It is
for this reason that simple percentage agreement figures usually give an
inflated impression of diagnostic agreement. Several other early studies
of diagnostic agreement were less affected by these limitations, and yet
produced results that were little better.12 For example, a new standard
in the field was set in a report published by Myron Sandifer, Charles
Pettus and Dana Quade in 1964. Sandifer and his colleagues studied the
diagnoses assigned to first-time psychiatric patients admitted to three
hospitals in North Carolina.13 Ninety-one patients were interviewed by a
psychiatrist in front of a team of experienced clinicians, also mostly
psychiatrists. Levels of agreement

between the interviewing psychiatrists and their colleagues varied
substantially across the different diagnoses. Some diagnoses fared
reasonably well. For example, 74 per cent of the observers agreed when
the interviewer assigned a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Others performed
very badly. For example, only 36 per cent of the observers agreed when a
diagnosis of manic depression was assigned. (Of course, these figures do
not correct for the base rate problem.)

Worlds apart At about the same time that these studies were drawing
attention to difficulties in ensuring agreement between clinicians,
other studies were pointing to substantial differences in diagnostic
practices in different countries. The first detailed study of this
phenomenon was published by Morton Kramer in 1961.14 Kramer compared the
diagnoses given to patients when first admitted to hospitals in England,
Wales and the United States, finding that the diagnosis of schizophrenia
was used much more frequently in the United States than in Great
Britain. The opposite appeared to be true for manic depression. These
observations stimulated a substantial study of transatlantic differences
in diagnostic practices, which became known as the US--UK Diagnostic
Project, and which was conducted by a team of British and American
psychiatrists. In a significant advance on Kramer's approach, the team
examined patients in the two countries using a structured interview
schedule (to ensure that all patients were asked the same questions) and
assigned them ICD-8 diagnoses.15 This procedure largely eliminated the
transatlantic differences in the rates at which various diagnoses were
given. For example, when local diagnoses were examined, 61.5 per cent of
New York patients but only 33.9 per cent of London patients were given a
diagnosis of schizophrenia. However, when ICD-8 diagnoses were assigned,
29.2 per cent of New York patients and 35.1 of London patients were
given the diagnosis. These findings were important because they implied
that different diagnostic practices (rather than actual differences
between the patient populations) were responsible for the transatlantic
differences that had previously been observed. This conclusion was
supported by a further study conducted by the team, in which large
groups of British and American psychiatrists were shown videotaped
interviews with patients. When the diagnoses given by the participating
psychiatrists were studied, it was again found that the Americans in
comparison with the British were much more willing to make a diagnosis
of schizophrenia and much less willing to make diagnoses of mania,
depression or neurosis. These differences were summarized by the project
team in the form of a Venn diagram, reproduced in Figure 3.1, which
shows how the American concept of schizophrenia overlapped the other
diagnostic categories used more frequently in Britain. Figure 3.1 Venn
diagram showing relationships between US and UK diagnostic concepts as
revealed in the US--UK Diagnostic Project (from R. E. Kendell, J. E.
Cooper, A. J. Gourlay, J. R. M. Copeland, L. Sharpe and B. J. Gurland
(1971) 'Diagnostic criteria of American and British psychiatrists',
Archives of General Psychiatry, 25: 123--30).

The World Health Organization subsequently conducted a much broader
investigation of international discrepancies in diagnostic practices,
which became known as the International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia
(IPSS).16 A total of 1202 recently ill patients were recruited from
Columbia, Czechoslovakia (now divided into the Czech Republic and
Slovakia), China, Denmark, India, Nigeria, the then Soviet Union, the UK
and the USA. Three different approaches were made to assigning
diagnoses. First, patients were diagnosed according to the customs and
practices of the local psychiatrists. Second, they were given an ICD-8
diagnosis on the basis of their responses to a standardized psychiatric
interview. Third, a computer program was used to identify a core group
of patients who appeared to have a common set of schizophrenia symptoms.
When presenting its findings, the WHO drew attention to the unsurprising
fact that a 'concordant group' of patients identified as suffering from
schizophrenia by all three methods were very alike, no matter which
country they came from. This observation was, of course, a consequence
of the way in which the study was designed (as these patients were those
who everyone agreed had schizophrenia it was hardly surprising that they
had similar symptoms). Of more interest were the discrepancies observed
between the different approaches to diagnosis. Large numbers of patients
who were diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia according to the
local criteria failed to fall into the concordant group. Moreover, it
was observed that local concepts of schizophrenia appeared to be
especially broad in the USA (confirming the earlier findings of the
US--UK Diagnostic Project) and in the USSR. The apparent over-diagnosis
of schizophrenia in Moscow (the centre for the USSR component of the
study) merits further examination. At the time of the IPSS, Soviet
psychiatrists' attitudes towards schizophrenia were shaped by the views
of Andrei Snezebryakova, an ambitious Communist Party member who had
advocated a politically favoured Pavlovian approach to mental illness.
Snezebryakova had been appointed a full member of the prestigious
Academy of Medical Sciences in 1962. At the same time, he had become
Director of the Academy's Institute of Psychiatry, a position of
considerable power in the Soviet system, as it made him chief adviser in
psychiatry to the Ministry of Health. He had therefore been able to
determine the training given to junior psychiatrists, their progress in
the profession, and the policies that they would pursue when working in
hospitals. Snezebryakova had an extremely broad conception of
schizophrenia, and suppressed views that differed from his own. He
believed that the disorder appeared in a spectrum of guises ranging from
idiosyncratic thinking through to full-blown psychosis, and that it
could develop gradually rather than suddenly, so that its onset was
often indistinguishable from eccentric behaviour. Moreover, for
Snezebryakova, dissatisfaction with the Soviet political and economic
system, or with communism in general, was itself evidence of mental
instability. The consequence of this line of reasoning was a unique
classification of schizophrenia according to both course (whether the
illness was continuous, periodic or intermittent) and severity, as shown
in Table 3.1. Symptoms of the mildest forms of schizophrenia were said
to include 'neurotic self-consciousness', 'conflicts with parental and
other authorities', 'reformism', 'social contentiousness' and
'philosophical concerns'. Small wonder that, by the late 1960s,

individuals who were regarded as political dissidents in the West were
being forcibly treated for schizophrenia in the USSR, notably in the
notorious Serbsky Institute of Forensic Psychiatry in Moscow.17 In a
commentary on this apparent abuse of psychiatry, American psychiatrist
Walter Reich noted that Soviet psychiatrists, far from acting as
conscious agents of the state, were often acting in good faith: Those
Soviet psychiatrists really saw the patients as schizophrenic; or, to
put it another way, the system created a category, first on paper and
then, with training, in the minds of Soviet psychiatrists, which was
eventually assumed to represent a real class of patients and which was
inevitably filled by real persons... Had those psychiatrists been
sensitive to the capacity of diagnostic systems to shape the way
psychiatrists understand, categorise, and perceive psychopathology, they
might have been able, one hopes, to avert this result.18

Rethinking agreement To many psychiatrists working in the mid-1970s, the
findings from these international comparisons, together with the
discouraging results from the earlier reliability studies, signalled
nothing less than a crisis in the theory and practice of psychiatry.
Some clinicians of this era advocated abandoning the practice of
assigning diagnoses, on the grounds that they were meaningless and
dehumanizing to patients (we will examine some of these arguments
later). Others, however, believed that the crisis was caused by an
unrigorous and insufficiently medical approach to mental illness and
that the problems of classification might still be solved. A leading
exponent of this conservative position was Robert Spitzer, a
psychiatrist who would influence American attitudes towards diagnosis in
the second half of the twentieth century as much as Adolf Meyer had done
in the first. Spitzer was an unlikely candidate for this role. Born in
White Plains, New York, in1932, he studied psychology at Cornell
University before Table 3.1 The Moscow school criteria for schizophrenia
employed in the Soviet Union in the early 1970s (adapted from W. Reich
(1984) 'Psychiatric diagnosis as an ethical problem', in S. Bloch and P.
Chodoff (eds.), Psychiatric Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Course Forms Types Life course of the illness Subtypes Some
characteristics

Continuous Steady deterioriation Sluggish (mild)

Paranoid (moderate)

Malignant (severe)

Neurotic selfconsciousness; introspectiveness; obsessive doubts;
conflicts with parental and other authorities

Paranoid delusions; hallucinations; parasitic lifestyle

Early onset; unremitting; overwhelming

Periodic

Shift-like

Intermittent episodes

Intermittent steady deterior Moderate

Acute attacks; fluctuations in mood; confusions

Neurotic, with affectiv colouring; social contentiousnes philosophical
concerns; sel absorption

completing his MD at New York University in 1957.19 While training at
the New York State Psychiatric Institute, he attended the Columbia
University Psychoanalytic Clinic for Training and Research, and
qualified as a psychoanalyst. It was after completing this training that
he was appointed to a research fellowship, which brought him into
contact with epidemiologically sophisticated researchers at the New York
State Psychiatric Institute, most notably Joseph Fliess, a statistician,
and Joseph Zubin and Jean Endicott, both psychologists. His experience
in this position led him to become one of the consultants to the APA's
Task Force on Nomenclature and Statistics, which introduced D S M -II.
Indeed, Spitzer co-authored the article in the American Journal of
Psychiatry which introduced and defended the new manual.20

In a paper published with Joseph Fliess in 1974, Spitzer attempted an
empirical summary of the art of psychiatric diagnosis at that point in
time.21 A novel aspect of their treatment of the reliability problem was
their use of a relatively simple mathematical procedure to compensate
for the base rate problem (that is, to allow for the extent to which
randomly assigned diagnoses would be in agreement by chance, especially
for frequently used diagnoses). The measure of reliability that they
advocated, known as Cohen's kappa, gave a value between 0 for chance
agreement and 1 for perfect agreement, with values above 0.7 being
regarded as acceptable.\* Using this statistic, Spitzer and Fliess were
able to reanalyse data from the six best reliability studies then
available, including the US-UK Diagnostic Project (for which they
reported separate analyses of the New York and London data). Their
findings are summarized in Table 3.2. Their reanalysis suggested more
modest levels of agreement than those claimed by the authors of the
original studies. For example, in the study by Sandifer, Pettus and
Quade, levels of agreement calculated using kappa (for example,
schizophrenia = 0.68; psychotic depression = 0.19; manic depression =
0.33) appeared consistently lower than those calculated as percentages
(schizophrenia = 74 per cent; psychotic depression = 22 per cent; manic
depression = 36 per cent).22 Table 3.2 Kappa measures computed for six
studies (adapted from R. L. Spitzer and J. L. Fliess (1974) 'A
reanalysis of the reliability of psychiatric diagnosis', British Journal
of Psychiatry, 123: 341--7). Specific diagnoses (e.g. schizophrenia) are
listed under the major diagnostic categories (e.g. psychosis). A kappa
value of 1 indicates perfect agreement between raters whereas a value of
0 indicates agreement at chance level. This statistic corrects for the
'base rate problem' (see text) and is a better measure of agreement than
raw percentages. The studies from which the data were derived were (I)
Schmidt and Fonda (1956); (II) Krietman (1961); (III) Beck et
al. (1962); (IV) Sandifer et al. (1964); (V) Cooper et al. (1972); (VI)
Spitzer et al. (1974). The data from (V) (the US--UK Diagnostic Project)
are analysed separately for the New York and London samples. STUDY V
Diagnosis

I

II

III

Mental deficiency Organic syndrome

brain

IV

US

UK

VI

.72 .82

Mean .72

.90

.59

.77

Acute brain syndrome

.44

.44

Chronic brain syndrome

.64

.64

Alcoholism Psychosis Schizophrenia

.73 .77

.62 .42

.74

.68

.56

.42

.43

.54

.55

.68

.32

.60

.65

.57

.19

.44

.59

.41

.20

.10

.26

.24

.30

.24

Mood disorder Neurotic depression

.47

Psychotic depression

.19

Manic depression

.33

.71

.33

Involutional depression

.38

.21

Personality disorder

.33

.56

.19

.22

.29

.32

.42

.26

.30

.48

.40

Neurosis Anxiety reaction Psychophysiologic reaction

.52 .45

.30

.45 .38

.38

DSM-III and the Industrialization of Psychiatry The unsolved problem of
reliability was one factor among many that led the APA to embark on the
production of the third and most influential edition of its Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual. Also important were political and economic
concerns, together with changes in the scientific Zeitgeist. The
political concerns mainly centred on homosexuality, which was listed as
a disorder in DSM-II. Following the emergence of the gay rights movement
in the late 1960s, activists lobbied APA meetings -- at first angrily
protesting outside but later taking part in debates supported by
sympathetic psychiatrists -- in order to have homosexuality removed from
the manual. Robert Spitzer played an important role in these
discussions, shifting his support from those who saw homosexuality as a
disease to those who saw it as part of normal human variation. Although
these developments were peripheral to the classification of the
psychoses, they drew problems of psychiatric classification to the
attention of the American public for the first time, and established
Spitzer as an authority on diagnostic issues in the eyes of many of his
peers.23 The economic issues sprang from attempts to regulate the
availability of psychological and medical treatments for psychiatric
conditions. Health insurance companies in North America required a
diagnosis before they would make reimbursement available to claimants,
and looked to the APA for criteria to discriminate between those who
really needed psychotherapy and those who did not. The US Food and Drugs
Administration's demand that drug companies specify the disorders that
their new compounds were to treat created similar pressures for a
comprehensive and standardized approach to psychiatric diagnosis.24
However, more important than any of these factors was a shift in the way
in which many American psychiatrists thought about psychiatric
disorders. During the decades following the Second World War, Freudian
theory had dominated American psychiatry, and the terminology of DSM-I
had reflected this. For example, psychotic disorders were grouped under
the heading 'disorders of psychogenic origin or without clearly defined
physical cause or structural change in the brain' and, in deference to
the ideas of Adolf Meyer, were individually listed as 'reaction types'
(for example, 'manic-depressive reaction', 'schizophrenic reaction'). By
the end of the 1960s, many American psychiatrists had become
disenchanted with psychoanalysis, partly because it had failed to
deliver effective treatments but also because it threatened to sever for
ever the ties between psychiatry and medicine. It was mainly in reaction
to this threat that Spitzer and others placed their hopes in a
thoroughly biological approach to mental illness. American psychiatrist
Gerald Klerman coined the term neoKraepelinian to describe this new
attitude to mental illness. In a 1978 article, which came close to being
a manifesto, Klerman identified the nine propositions that he believed
united the movement (see Table 3.3).25 These recapitulated the approach
to mental disorder taken by the movement's forefather nearly a century
before and emphasized psychiatry's roots in physical medicine. According
to Klerman, the neo-Kraepelinians assumed that a line could be drawn
between mental illness and normal behaviour (proposition 4), and that
there was a discrete and discoverable number of psychiatric disorders
(proposition 5). There was an emphasis on the biological causes of
mental illness and the psychiatrist's expertise in

biological matters (proposition 6). Finally, emphasis was also placed on
the importance of developing a reliable and valid system of psychiatric
classification (propositions 7, 8 and 9). One of the most important
early achievements of the movement was a new, unofficial diagnostic
system. In a landmark paper published in 1972, a group of
neoKraepelinians from Washington University noted that the unsolved
reliability problem made it difficult to ensure that the patients
studied by one research group were comparable to those studied by
another.26 They therefore proposed what came to be known as Feighner
criteria (after John Feighner, the first author of the paper) for
sixteen commonly researched disorders. The paper became one of the most
highly cited publications in the field of psychiatry. It was successful
because the authors had finally adopted the suggestion made more than a
decade earlier by the philosopher Carl Hempel. For each disorder, a
precise list of symptoms was given, together with rules that specified
exactly how many of the symptoms were required before the diagnosis
could be made. This level of precision promised to abolish entirely the
ambiguity and doubt which had previously affected the Table 3.3 The main
points of Gerald Klerman's neoKraepelinian manifesto (from G. L. Klerman
(1978) 'The evolution of a scientific nosology', in J. C. Shershow
(ed.), Schizophrenia: Science and Practice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press). 1 Psychiatry is a branch of medicine. 2 Psychiatry
should use modern scientific methodologies and base its practice on
scientific knowledge. 3 Psychiatry treats people who are sick and who
require treatment for mental illness. 4 There is a boundary between the
normal and the sick. 5 There are discrete mental illnesses. Mental
illnesses are not myths. There is not one, but many mental illnesses. It
is the task of scientific psychiatry, as of other medical specialties,
to investigate the causes, diagnosis and treatment of mental illnesses.
6 The focus of psychiatric physicians should be particularly on the
biological aspects of mental illness. 7 There should be an explicit and
intentional concern with diagnosis and classification. 8 Diagnostic
criteria should be codified, and a legitimate and valued area of
research should be to validate such criteria by various techniques.
Further, departments of psychiatry in medical schools should teach these
criteria and not depreciate them, as has been the case for many years. 9
In research efforts directed at improving the reliability and validity
of diagnosis and classification, statistical techniques should be
utilized. selection of patients for inclusion in research. The thirst
for certainty in diagnosis had at last been quenched. The Feighner
criteria became the model for DSM-III. The precise strategy for
developing the new edition of the manual was decided at a day-long
meeting in 1974 attended by Spitzer, Melvin Sabshin, then President of
the APA, and Theodore Millon, a psychologist at the Illinois Medical
Center. The production of the manual was to be a major undertaking. The
task force set up to execute this project -- chaired, of course, by
Spitzer -- decided to undertake field trials to determine whether
various draft criteria were usable in practice. By the time the task had
been completed, no fewer than 600 clinicians had become involved. The
DSM-III definitions of schizophrenia and manic episode, which illustrate
the clarity of the manual, are given in Table 3.4. DSM-III definitions
have what some have called a 'Chinese menu' structure. For example, in
the definition of a manic episode there are three main elements. First
of all, the patient must meet criterion A (one or more distinct periods
of elevated, irritable or expansive mood). Second,

Table 3.4 DSM-III definitions of schizophrenia and manic episode
(American Psychiatric Association (1980) Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (3rd edn). Washington, DC: APA).
SCHIZOPHRENIA A At least one of the following during a phase of the
illness: 1 bizarre delusions (content is patently absurd and has no
possible basis in fact), such as delusions of being controlled, thought
broadcasting, thought insertion, or thought withdrawal 2 somatic,
grandiose, religious, nihilistic or other delusions without persecutory
or jealous content 3 delusions with persecutory or jealous content, if
accompanied by hallucinations of any type 4 auditory hallucinations in
which either a voice keeps a running commentary on the individual's
behaviour or thoughts, or two or more voices converse with each other 5
auditory hallucinations on several occasions with content of more than
one or two words, having no apparent relation to depression or elation 6
incoherence, marked loosening of associations, markedly illogical
thinking, or marked poverty of content of speech if associated with at
least one of the following: (a) blunted, flat, or inappropriate affect
(b) delusions or hallucinations (c) catatonic or other grossly
disorganized behaviour B Deterioration from a previous level of
functioning in such areas as work, social relations and self care. C
Duration: Continuous signs of the illness for at least six months at
some time during the person's life, with some signs of the illness at
present. The six-month period must include an active phase during which
there were symptoms from A, with or without a prodromal or residual
phase. MANIC EPISODE A One or more distinct periods with a predominantly
elevated, expansive, or irritable mood. The elevated or irritable mood
must be a prominent part of the illness and relatively persistent,
although it may alternate or intermingle with depressive mood. B
Duration of at least one week (or any duration if hospitalization is
necessary) during which, for most of the time, at least three of the
following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable)
and have been present to a significant degree: 1 increase in activity
(either socially, at work, or sexually) or physical restlessness 2 more
talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking 3 flight of ideas or
subjective experience that thoughts are racing 4 inflated self-esteem
(grandiosity, which may be delusional) 5 decreased need for sleep 6
distractability, i.e. attention is too easily drawn to unimportant or
irrelevant external stimuli 7 excessive involvement in activities that
have a high potential for painful consequences which is not

recognized, e.g. buying sprees, sexual indiscretion, foolish business
investments, reckless driving C Neither of the following dominates the
clinical picture when an affective syndrome is absent (i.e. symptoms in
criteria A and B above): 1 preoccupation with a mood-incongruent
delusion or hallucination 2 bizarre behaviour D Not superimposed on
either schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder or a paranoid disorder.
E Not due to any organic mental disorder, such as substance abuse.
criterion B requires that the patient has suffered from at least three
out of a list of seven symptoms over a period of at least a week.
Finally, criterion C indicates some exclusion criteria, for example
symptoms that, if present, would indicate an alternative diagnosis. The
final manual, at 500 pages, was more than three times longer than
DSM-II.27 During a period when the American publishing industry was
experiencing serious difficulties, it became an unlikely bestseller.
Nearly half a million copies were bought, generating estimated revenue
for the APA of over \$9.8 million (a sum that does not include earnings
from the numerous pocket guides to DSM-III which were later published).
In the USA, the manual was widely embraced both by psychiatrists and
psychologists fearful that, without a DSM-III diagnosis for each of
their patients, payment from health insurance companies would not be
forthcoming. Many journals would not accept papers for publication
unless investigators could reassure their readers that the patients
studied had been diagnosed according to the DSM-III system, thus
ensuring that the criteria became a standard among researchers, not only
in America but also elsewhere in the world. Astonishingly, DSM-III has
been revised twice since its publication in 1980. Within three years, a
new task force, again chaired by Robert Spitzer, set to work on the
changes that would be required for the revised third edition, known as
DSM-III-R, which was published in 1987.28 Despite Spitzer's assurances
that only minor adjustments were necessary, twenty-five committees
involving over 200 consultants worked on the project. The criteria for
half of the diagnostic categories were altered, and thirty new diagnoses
were added. Not surprisingly, the appointment of a DSM-IV task force
within four months of the publication of DSM-III-R led some
psychiatrists to protest. British psychiatrist Robert Kendell suggested
that the exercise was little more than a cynical attempt to repeat the
huge profits the APA had made from selling the earlier editions.29
Despite these objections, the APA decided to proceed with the new
edition, partly to ensure that the official classification would be
consistent with the mental disorders section of the tenth edition of the
International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10), scheduled for
publication in 1992. When it appeared in 1994, DSM-IV weighed in at 900
pages, and credited over 1000 consultants.30 By the end of 2000, over
960,000 copies had been sold, a remarkable volume of sales given that
there were just 42,000 psychiatrists and about 300,000 other mental
health care professionals in the USA.31 At about the same time, the lead
character of the hit television comedy show Frasier read out spoof DSM
criteria for 'phase of life problem' without explaining what the letters
stood for, thereby indicating the extent to which the manual had become
part of American culture. At the time of writing, the American
Psychiatric Association has just released a provisional timetable for
the publication of the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual, which is tentatively scheduled for 2010. Although the structure
of the manual is yet to be determined, some observers have already
speculated about its contents. For example, the American psychologist
Roger Blashfield, in a paper ridiculing the entire approach, used
statistical techniques to analyse trends in DSMs I--IV.32 Based on his
calculations, he predicted that DSM-V will have 1256 pages, will contain
1800 diagnostic criteria and eleven appendices, and will generate \$80
million in revenue for the APA. As the only basic colour that has yet to
be used on the cover of a DSM is brown, Blashfield has predicted that
this colour will be used for DSM-V. By now the reader may be wondering
whether the enormous effort and expenditure required to complete these
successive revisions of the DSM has yielded the promised improvements in
reliability. The neoKraepelinians

clearly believed that they had succeeded in this respect. Reviewing the
results of the DSM-III field trials, Spitzer described the reliability
of the manual as extremely good.33 Similarly, Gerald Klerman (the
psychiatrist who had given the name to the neoKraepelinian movement)
felt able to declare that, in principle, the reliability problem had at
last been solved.34 In a detailed review of the evidence from the field
trials, psychologists Herb Kutchins and Stuart Kirk reached a starkly
different conclusion, arguing that, 'The DSM revolution in reliability
has been a revolution in rhetoric, not in reality.'35 They noted that
the trials were beset with numerous methodological problems. For
example, little control was exercised over the way in which the studies
were conducted at different sites, so that estimates of reliability were
often calculated on the basis of agreements between close colleagues
about small numbers of patients. Even so, the results for many diagnoses
were hardly impressive, and often failed to reach the kappa value of 0.7
defined in advance as acceptable by Spitzer and his colleagues.
Following the publication of DSM-III, ever more ambitious reliability
studies were conducted, but most obtained comparable results. For
example, a seven-centre study carried out in the USA and Germany was
reported by a team that included Spitzer.36 Nearly 400 patients and just
over 200 ordinary people were examined by pairs of specially trained
psychiatrists. The psychiatrists used an interview schedule specifically
designed to yield the information required for assigning DSM-III-R
diagnoses. Even under these ideal circumstances, levels of agreement for
patients averaged at a kappa of 0.61. Of course, the diagnoses obtained
in these kinds of studies are often obtained in ideal conditions. The
diagnosticians taking part usually receive special training and employ
standardized interview schedules that define precisely the questions
they may ask their patients. Australian psychiatrist Patrick McGorry and
his colleagues have argued that the levels of agreement observed
therefore give a spuriously positive impression of what can be achieved
in routine clinical practice.37 To investigate the effects of varying
interview procedures, they asked psychiatrists to assign DSM-III-R
diagnoses using four different methods. Three of the methods involved
the use of special interview schedules or checklists to assess patients'
symptoms. The fourth involved each patient being interviewed by a team,
which then arrived at a consensus diagnosis by discussion. When any two
methods were compared, kappa values varied between 0.53 and 0.67. Full
agreement between all four procedures was achieved for only twenty-seven
out of the fifty patients who participated in the study.

The Vanishing Consensus Effect The development of the DSM system has so
mesmerized recent thinking about psychiatric disorders that it is easy
to forget that rival sets of criteria have also been proposed, such as
the eighth and subsequent editions of the International Classification
of Disease, and the Feighner system. In addition to these major
challengers to the diagnostic hegemony of the American Psychiatric
Association, there are also a number of idiosyncratic definitions of
specific disorders proposed by various researchers (for example,
definitions of schizophrenia suggested by Taylor and Abrams38 and by
Carpenter and his colleagues39 in the United States). When these
different criteria are compared there is little to indicate which, if
any, embodies the most meaningful taxonomy of mental disorders. What is
clear is that the apparent consensus created by the DSM system is
illusory. A dramatic demonstration of this vanishing consensus effect
was reported by Ian Brockington of the University of Birmingham, who
applied various definitions of schizophrenia to symptom data collected
from patients studied in the US--UK Diagnostic Project.40 Eighty-five
patients from Netherne Hospital in London had received a hospital
diagnosis of schizophrenia at the time of the study. Brockington
estimated that 163 would have received the diagnosis according to the
then existing American criteria. When the project team applied the ICD-8
definition, only 65 were found to suffer from schizophrenia. This number
fell to 55 when a computer-generated diagnosis based on Schneider's
first-rank symptoms was employed. When the Research Diagnostic Criteria
(a variant of the Feighner system) were used, the number of
schizophrenia patients was 28, and the use of the DSM-III criteria saw
this number fall even further to 19. Thus, the number of schizophrenia
patients in the sample varied between 163 and 19, according to the
definition chosen.

These troubles have not been restricted to the diagnosis of
schizophrenia. In a study recently published by Jim van Os and his
colleagues in Britain and Holland, over 700 patients with chronic
psychosis were classified according to the RDC, DSM-III-R and ICD-10
systems.41 The numbers of patients meeting various definitions of
schizophrenia, depression, mania and other diagnoses are shown in Table
3.5. For example, it can be seen that the number of patients in the
sample suffering from mania varied from 18 (according to the RDC
definition) to 87 (according to the DSM-III-R definition), a staggering
nearly fivefold difference. As a remedy for the vanishing consensus
effect, some researchers have advocated a 'polydiagnostic' approach, in
which several diagnostic systems are used simultaneously. A leading
exponent of this approach is Peter McGuffin, Professor of Psychiatry at
the Institute of Psychiatry in London, who has developed a computer
program known as OPCRIT, which generates diagnoses according to the
Table 3.5 Distribution of diagnoses in 706 psychotic patients according
to three different diagnostic criteria (from J. van Os et al. (1999) 'A
comparison of the utility of dimensional and categorical representations
of psychosis', Psychological Medicine, 29: 595--606). Diagnosis

RDC N

Schizophreniform disorder

## %

DSM-III-R

ICD-10

N

\%

N

20

2.8

371

52.6

Schizophrenia

268

38.0

Schizoaffective manic

98

13.9

Schizoaffective bipolar

129

18.3

Schizoaffective depressed

118

16.7

Major depression

16

2.3

71

Mania

18

2.6

Bipolar disorder

16

Unspecified functional psychosis

43

Delusional disorder

- 

Not classified

- 

## %

387

54.8

41

5.8

23

3.3

40

5.7

10.1

19

2.7

87

12.3

61

8.6

2.3

66

9.4

6

0.9

6.1

68

9.6

95

13.5

10

1.4

18

2.6

16

2.3

13

1.8

- 

DSM-III, DSM-III-R, DSM-IV, ICD-9 and ICD-10 systems.42 Whether this
approach clarifies or obscures the business of conducting psychiatric
research is open to debate. Certainly, it offers no guidance to the
practising clinician. OceanofPDF.com

4 Fool's Gold In his fantastic essay 'John Wilkins' analytical
language', the Argentinian writer Jorge Luis Borges remarks on a
classification of animals described in a certain Chinese encyclopaedia,
The Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge: In those remote pages it
is stated that animals can be divided into the following classes: (a)
belonging to the Emperor; (b) embalmed; (c) trained; (d) sucking pigs;
(e) mermaids; (f) fabulous; (g) stray dogs; (h) included in this
classification; (i) with the vigorous movements of madmen; (j)
innumerable; (k) drawn with a very fine camel hair brush; (l) etcetera;
(m) having just broken a large vase; (n) looking from a distance like
flies.1 Borges thereby reminds us that not all taxonomies are
meaningful. If his joke seems far removed from reality, consider the
real-life example of astrology, a system of classification that provides
a fool's-gold standard against which to evaluate modern psychiatric
diagnoses. Like diagnoses, star signs are supposed to describe human
characteristics and to predict what will happen to people in the future.
Although there is no evidence to support these claims, astrology is a
system of classification that continues to capture the imagination of
large numbers of otherwise intelligent people. Indeed, a recent poll
revealed that almost one quarter of American adults believe in
astrological theories.2 In the last chapter, we saw that one way of
assessing the usefulness of a diagnostic system is to measure its
reliability. However, the example of astrology illustrates the
limitation of this approach. Star signs are highly reliable (we can all
agree about who is born under Taurus), so reliability alone cannot
ensure that a diagnostic system is scientific. Further tests of the
validity of the system are necessary to determine whether it fulfils the
functions for which it has been designed. We can test the validity of
astrological theories by seeing whether people born under the sign of
Libra really are well-balanced, or whether most Scorpios really do meet
the beautiful stranger of their dreams in the first quarter of the year.
Similarly, we can evaluate the validity of diagnostic categories by
seeing whether they lead us to useful scientific insights or helpful
clinical predictions. Of course, although reliability does not guarantee
validity, it is obvious that a diagnostic system cannot be valid without
first being reliable. Unless psychiatrists and psychologists can agree
about which patients suffer from which disorders there is no possibility
that the process of diagnosis will fulfil any useful function. In the
last chapter I established that, for the most part, modern psychiatric
diagnoses fail to meet adequate standards of reliability. Some readers
might therefore be forgiven for wondering whether there is any point in
proceeding to examine validity evidence in detail. However, there are
two good reasons for doing so. First, some readers, particularly those
who have trained in the mental health professions, may require further
persuasion before abandoning long-held assumptions about the nature of
madness. Second, as we study the validity of psychiatric diagnoses we
will encounter evidence that will be useful when attempting to construct
a scientific alternative to the Kraepelinian system.

Diagnoses as Descriptions One function of a diagnosis is to provide a
shorthand description of a patient's complaints. On the basis of a
diagnosis recorded in the medical notes, a clinician about to meet a
patient for the first time should be able to anticipate the range of
symptoms that the patient will be suffering. However, diagnoses can only
achieve this function if they accurately reflect the way that symptoms
cluster together. Determining whether they do or do not is quite
difficult, and requires the use of complex statistical procedures.
Fortunately, the principles behind these procedures can be readily
understood without knowledge of the relevant mathematical equations.

How many psychoses are there? For a categorial system of diagnosis to
work, diagnoses must be jointly exhaustive (there should be no
psychiatric patients who fail to meet the criteria for a diagnosis) and
mutually exclusive (patients, unless they are very unlucky, should not
suffer from more than one disorder).3 In Kraepelin's original system,
there were only two or three major categories of psychosis. However, in
order to make the DSM exhaustive, its authors have dramatically
increased the number of definitions included in successive editions of
the manual, and have also included catch-all 'not otherwise specified'
diagnoses in order to sweep up anyone who does not fit the criteria for
a specific disorder. At the same time, in order to ensure that diagnoses
are mutually exclusive, the authors have had to include special
exclusion rules to limit the possibility that patients will fall into
more than one category. Including subtypes as well as major diagnoses,
94 categories of disorder were included in DSM-I. This number rose to
137 in DSM-II, to 163 in DSM-III, to 174 in DSM-III-R and finally to 201
in DSM-IV. This expansion has been accompanied by an increasingly
finegrained subdivision of the major categories. For example, DSM-IV
describes five subtypes of schizophrenia; two milder forms of psychosis
(schizophreni-form disorder and brief psychotic disorder);
schizoaffective disorder; delusional disorder (formerly paranoia);
shared psychotic disorder (folie à deux); psychotic disorder due to a
medical condition; substance-induced psychotic disorder; and, finally,
the catch-all 'psychotic disorder not otherwise specified'. Bipolar
disorder appears as two different subtypes (Type I and Type II,
distinguished by the severity of manic episodes) in a separate section
on mood disorders, along with seven other types of mood disorder, 'mood
disorder not otherwise specified', and four types of mood 'episodes'.
The arbitrary exclusion rules designed to limit the risk that patients
will be judged to suffer from more than one type of illness -- a
phenomenon known as comorbidity4 -- are listed at the end of each set of
diagnostic criteria. For example, DSM-IV states that patients may not be
diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia if they also meet the criteria
for schizoaffective disorder, major depression or mania. Similarly, the
criteria for bipolar disorder specify that the patient's symptoms
should, 'Not be better accounted for by schizoaffective disorder and are
not superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreni form disorder,
delusional disorder, or psychotic disorder not otherwise specified.'
That the exclusion rules hide, rather than eliminate, the problem of
comorbidity became evident in one of the most impressive surveys of
psychiatric symptoms ever conducted. Funded by the US National Institute
of Mental Health and carried out during the 1980s, it was known as the
Epidemiological Catchment Area (ECA) Study, and its overall purpose was
to determine the prevalence of various types of psychiatric disorder in
the general population. A total of 18,500 people over 18 years of age
were randomly selected from five US cities, and interviewed about their
experiences of psychiatric symptoms and emotional distress. Over 15,000
agreed to a further interview one year later. The interview data were
then used to assign diagnoses according to DSM-III criteria. When the
researchers suspended the arbitrary exclusion rules built into the DSM
system, they found that 60 per cent of those who had met the criteria
for one disorder during their lifetime had also met the criteria for at
least one other.5 In order to quantify the extent of current comorbidity
-- the presence of two or more DSM-III disorders at the same point in
time -- they calculated a statistic known as the odds ratio, which
indicates the chance of having a second diagnosis if a first one is
present. (An odds ratio of 1 indicates no increased chance of a second
diagnosis, an odds ratio of 2 indicates that the presence of one
diagnosis doubles the chance of another, and so on. The researchers
decided in advance that an odds ratio of 10 implied a strong association
between diagnoses.) On average, the odds that any two diagnoses would
occur together turned out to be 2 (that is, twice what would be expected
by chance). The odds ratio for depression and mania was 36, which was
perhaps unsurprising as both are regarded as phases of a single
disorder. However, the odds ratio for schizophrenia and mania was 46,
and for schizophrenia and depression it was 14. Project leader Lee
Robins and his colleagues concluded that 'The most likely explanation
for co-occurrence is that having one disorder puts the affected person
at risk of developing other disorders.'6 Presumably, they had in mind
the possibility that patients suffering from, say, schizophrenia, might
be so distressed by the experience that they would become depressed as
well. Strangely, they did not discuss the

possibility that their findings might instead reflect the inadequacies
of the neoKraepelinian system. Clearly, the most likely explanation for
the strong associations observed between schizophrenia, depression and
mania is that these diagnoses do not describe separate disorders. We can
test this suspicion by looking at symptoms in a different way. Suppose
that, instead of diagnosing patients as schizophrenic or
manic-depressive, we instead assign them scores indicating the extent to
which their symptoms correspond to one diagnosis or the other. If we
then place patients along this dimension of schizophrenic versus
manic-depressive, we should be able to observe whether they fall into
two separate groups with clearly different scores, or whether many
patients have intermediate scores indicating a mixture of the two types
of symptoms. I have just described, in a very simple way, the rationale
for a statistical technique known as discriminant function analysis. The
actual methods used to calculate the scores of individual patients are
fairly complex and can be ignored for present purposes.7 In a pioneering
study using this method, Robert Kendell and Jane Gourlay studied the
symptoms of nearly 300 patients.8 They used a computer to assign
negative scores to schizophrenia symptoms such as delusions and
hallucinations and positive scores to mood symptoms such as abnormal
gregariousness, manic speech and depressed behaviour. When the scores
for each patient's symptoms were added together, it was found that most
patients fell in the middle range, close to zero, indicating that there
is a continuum between schizophrenia and manic depression, rather than
two separate illnesses. Subsequent studies using variations on the
technique,9 although producing results that have varied in some respects
from those obtained by Kendell and Gourlay, have all failed to find the
neat dividing line between schizophrenic and bipolar symptoms that was
the one of main assumptions of the Kraepelinian paradigm, and which, for
this reason, was described by Kendell and Gourlay as one of the
'cornerstones of modern psychiatry'.

Which symptoms go together? Although psychotic symptoms do not fall into
two main categories as supposed by Kraepelin, this does not mean that
the relationships between them have no structure. Symptoms may cluster
together in ways that were never envisaged by the father of modern
psychiatry, perhaps in ways that cut across the major categories
described in modern diagnostic systems. To discover whether this is the
case, researchers have resorted to another statistical procedure, known
as factor analysis. In the initial phase of this kind of analysis,
information about symptoms is collected from a large number of patients
and a matrix (table) of correlations is calculated showing the
relationships between all possible pairs. (If two symptoms are highly
correlated this means that they typically occur together.) Further
analysis of the matrix then leads to the discovery of different clusters
or groups of symptoms, known as factors. One of the main goals of factor
analysis is to discover the minimum number of factors required to
describe the data. If only one factor is discovered, there is only one
cluster of symptoms, and patients can be placed on a single dimension
running from well (no or very few symptoms) to very ill (many symptoms).
If two or more factors are discovered, it is likely that there are two
or more symptom clusters and that patients vary according to their
severity on each. Factor analysis was developed in the 1920s by
psychologists who were interested in the relationships between different
measures of human intelligence. They wanted to know whether there is
just one type of general intelligence, or several different intellectual
faculties. As the invention of the computer lay some way in the future,
the necessary calculations were carried out by teams of clerks, who
would often take several weeks to complete each analysis.10 The
technique was first applied to the problem of psychiatric classification
by an American psychologist, Thomas Moore, who published his findings in
1930.11 From data on the symptoms of a group of 367 seriously ill
patients, Moore was able to extract no less than eight symptom clusters.
Hallucinations and delusions seemed to occur together (a finding that
has been consistently repeated in later research). However, Moore found
two types of depression, two types of mania, a syndrome of uninhibited
behaviour, a syndrome of catatonic behaviour, and a syndrome of
cognitive deficits.

Following Moore's work, interest in the use of factor analysis in
psychiatry has waxed and waned as the technique has been progressively
refined.12 However, the method has been used extensively in the past ten
years, partly in response to an influential theory proposed by the
British psychiatrist Tim Crow. In a paper published in 1980, Crow broke
away from the Kraepelinian paradigm and suggested that there are two
different types of schizophrenia.13 According to the theory, the main
symptoms of Type I schizophrenia are hallucinations and delusions, which
are caused by a biochemical imbalance in the brain. Borrowing from the
literature on neurological illnesses, Crow referred to these as positive
symptoms (because they consist of experiences and behaviours that we
would prefer to be absent).\* The symptoms of Crow's Type II
schizophrenia consist of apathy, emotional flatness and social
withdrawal. Crow called these negative symptoms (because they involve
the absence of desirable behaviour) and argued that they are caused by a
progressive atrophy of certain areas in the brain. Although this theory
made bold use of evidence from biological studies of brain structure and
function, it was essentially speculative and was not based on analyses
of symptom data. However, the theory leads to some fairly obvious
predictions about what should emerge from a factor analysis of psychotic
symptoms. In fact, the first study that attempted to test Crow's theory
obtained not two symptom clusters but three. Analysing data from a group
of chronically ill schizophrenia patients, British psychiatrist Peter
Liddle obtained one factor consisting of positive symptoms and one
consisting of negative symptoms. The unexpected third factor consisted
of symptoms of cognitive disorganization, for example disturbed speech
and problems of attention.14 These findings have since been replicated
by many other researchers,15 although, to complicate matters further,
some have argued that the three clusters can be further subdivided.16 Of
course, it is impossible to conclude much about psychosis in general
from these findings, as they were obtained from groups of patients who
had already been selected for a diagnosis of schizophrenia. What we
would like to know, therefore, is whether the same three dimensions can
be used to describe the symptoms of psychotic patients with other
diagnoses. There is at least some evidence that they can. For example,
in a recent study published by researchers at Harvard Medical School,
factor analysis was used to investigate the symptoms of psychotic
patients diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia, major depression and
bipolar disorder according to DSM criteria. Although there was some
variation in the results when the analyses were restricted to the
individual diagnostic groups, the overall picture that emerged was
consistent with the three-factor model.17 In this account, I have
simplified the steps involved in carrying out a factor analysis, and
underplayed the difficulties involved. The number of factors revealed
can be affected by decisions about which symptoms to include in the
analysis (if important symptoms are not recorded the results are likely
to be misleading)or about which patients to study (the broader the
sample, the more likely that the results will be meaningful). Moreover,
a number of different methods of carrying out the analysis employ
different rules to determine the number of factors, so that researchers,
finding that a particular analysis is uninterpretable, are sometimes
tempted to experiment with other methods before selecting the one that
yields the most credible results. Despite these opportunities for
subjectivity, and similar limitations affecting discriminant function
analysis, it is striking that analyses of patients' symptoms have never
provided clear support for Kraepelin's theory. Indeed, at first sight,
the results obtained from the two statistical approaches we have
considered appear to deviate from Kraepelin's system in opposite
directions. The findings from discriminant function analysis imply that
we should collapse all the psychotic disorders into one, whereas the
findings from factor analysis seem to suggest that we need to subdivide
the psychoses into many more components than those proposed by
Kraepelin. This apparent paradox is resolved when we remember that the
symptom dimensions revealed by factor analysis seem to describe
efficiently the symptoms of both schizophrenia and bipolar patients.
Therefore, although the distinction between schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder does not seem to survive examination with these techniques, we
can be fairly confident that all psychotic symptoms cannot be explained
in terms of a single underlying disease process.

What Families Can Teach us about Psychiatric Diagnoses A second function
of a diagnosis is to group together people whose problems are likely to
have a common aetiology. Indeed, as we have already seen, the most
common strategy employed in psychiatric research -- comparing those with
a particular diagnosis with people who are psychologically healthy --
assumes that those with

the diagnosis have something in common that is of aetiological
significance. Although discussion of many of the factors thought to
influence the development of psychosis must wait until later chapters,
there is one aetiological factor that has been thought to have special
significance for psychiatric classification, and which we will therefore
consider here. This will require a short digression into the difficult
world of genetics, an effort that will save us time later in the book.
On the assumption that psychiatric problems are, at least in part,
inherited, some researchers have attempted to address the validity of
diagnoses by observing whether they breed true in families. If this is
so, people who suffer from a particular disorder are likely to have many
relatives who suffer from the same disorder, but few relatives who
suffer from any other kind of mental illness. Some researchers
conducting this kind of work have argued that genetic studies provide an
unassailable riposte to those who question the Kraepelinian paradigm.
For example, the American psychiatrist Seymour Kety once commented that,
'If schizophrenia is a myth, it is a myth with a strong genetic
component.'18 As we have already seen, genetic research into psychiatric
disorders has suffered from an unhappy history. Many of the German
pioneers in the field held political views that were in sympathy with
the Nazi movement. The first genetic studies of schizophrenia were
carried out by Ernst Rüdin, who later served with Heinrich Himmler on a
committee that, in 1933, drafted legislation enabling the compulsory
sterilization of psychiatric patients.19 His student Franz Kallman
advocated the sterilization, not only of mentally ill people, but also
of their relatives. *Ironically, Kallman was forced to move from Germany
to the United States in the 1930s because he was halfJewish. Given these
unpromising beginnings, it is understandable that some critics have
viewed all genetic research into madness with suspicion.20 Before
proceeding further, it will be useful to consider the three main
research strategies that psychiatric geneticists have followed when
attempting to determine the contribution of heredity to mental illness.
All exploit the fact that we share alleles (particular versions of
genes) with other individuals according to how closely we are related to
them. For example, we obtain half of our alleles from each of our two
parents who, in turn, obtained half of theirs from each of their two
parents. Half of our alleles are therefore shared with each parent and a
quarter are shared with each grandparent. As ordinary brothers and
sisters are each a product of the random combination of alleles from the
same two parents, it turns out that sibs, on average, also have half
their alleles in common. Matters become slightly more complicated when
it comes to twins. Dizygotic (sometimes called non-identical or
fraternal) twins are born after two eggs, appearing at the same time in
the uterus, are fertilized by two sperm. They are therefore sibs who
happen to be born at the same time and, on average, have half their
alleles in common. About 50 per cent of dizygotic twin pairs consist of
a boy and a girl, about a quarter consist of two boys and about a
quarter consist of two girls. Even when the twins are of the same sex,
they often look quite different from each other, although this is not
invariably the case. Monozygotic or identical twins, on the other hand,
are born after a single zygote (fertilized egg) splits in two and both
halves develop separately in the uterus. These twins are genetically
identical and are always the same sex, although they may still be
differentially affected by factors in the inter-uterine environment.*
The simplest method of exploiting these differences in genetic
similarity is the family study. In this kind of research, cases of an
illness are traced within large families. If the illness is mostly
inherited, close relatives of an affected member should be more likely
to suffer from the illness than distant relatives. The second widely
used strategy is the twin study. If genes make a major contribution to
an illness, the probability that an identical twin of an affected
individual will also suffer from the illness should be very high and the
concordance rate for fraternal twins should be lower. Of course, twins
belonging to the same family may be raised similarly and this may also
affect concordance rates. To control for this possibility, geneticists
sometimes carry out adoption studies. For example, children of affected
parents who have been adopted away at birth and raised by normal
families can be compared with the adopted-away children of unaffected
parents. If genetic factors play a role in the aetiology of the illness,
the children of the affected parents should show higher rates of illness
than the children of the unaffected parents, even though both groups
have been raised apart from their biological families. An alternative
adoption study strategy starts with the adoptees but follows the same
logic. In this case, the researcher attempts to

trace the biological parents of adoptees who have become ill, in order
to compare them with the biological parents of adoptees who show no
evidence of psychiatric illness. It is fair to say that each of these
strategies has proved to be fraught with difficulties. For example, the
poor reliability of psychiatric diagnoses means that there must be some
uncertainty about the diagnoses assigned by genetic researchers. (This
problem was most evident in a famous series of adoption studies carried
out in Denmark by Seymour Kety and his colleagues, who used such a broad
definition of 'schizophrenia' that almost anyone who was slightly
eccentric was regarded as mentally ill.21 Inevitably, some commentators
have dismissed the results from these studies as almost worthless,
although they are still cited in textbooks of psychiatry.)22
Surprisingly, it can also be difficult to decide whether twins are
identical or fraternal without genetic testing, which has only become
available in recent years. When the individuals who are examined in a
genetic study are relatively young, geneticists make mathematical
corrections to their data to allow for the possibility that some
unaffected individuals will become ill later in life (in effect, they
guess how many of the well individuals will become ill as they get
older). Confusingly, there are also several ways of estimating
concordance in twin studies, some of which give higher values than
others. The commonsense approach is the pairwise method. For a group of
twins in which at least one member of each pair is affected, the
pairwise concordance rate is the percentage of pairs in which both are
affected. For example, if in three out of ten twin pairs both are
affected, but in the remaining seven only one is affected, the pairwise
concordance rate is 3/10 or 30 per cent. The less commonsensical
probandwise method gives higher values and is therefore preferred by
geneticists. This is calculated as the proportion of twins who have the
illness who have an affected twin. In the above example, six twins have
an affected twin (i.e. both members of each concordant pair are counted
as having a twin who is also ill) whereas only seven do not, leading to
a concordance rate of 6/13 or 46 per cent (an increase in concordance of
more than a half).\* A further difficulty with twin studies is that twin
status itself is associated with slightly abnormal development. Twins
(whether fraternal or identical) have a higher risk of congenital
difficulties and, on average, reach developmental milestones slightly
later than singletons.23 It is also possible that they are treated
differently from singletons by their parents, who will certainly face
more than the usual difficulties when struggling to provide them with
adequate attention. Whether these subtle influences might, in extreme
circumstances, culminate in a higher risk of psychosis remains unclear.
In an analysis of twin data from schizophrenia studies, Steven Rose,
Leon Kamin and Richard Lewontin (distinguished neuroscientist,
psychologist and geneticist, respectively) calculated that concordance
rates for fraternal twins were significantly greater than those for
non-twin sibs, an observation that clearly points to the adverse effect
of being a twin.24 However, attempts to find out whether twins have an
increased liability to psychosis compared to the general population have
reported inconsistent results.25 Given these problems, it is remarkable
that genetic researchers have been almost blind to obvious environmental
influences on the people they have studied. The case of the Genain
quadruplets, four genetically identical women believed to be suffering
from schizophrenia, provides an astonishing example of this kind of
myopia. American psychologist David Rosenthal and his colleagues
estimated that the probability that identical quadruplets would be
affected by the illness was one per one and a half billion births.26 The
pseudonyms given to the quadruplets to maintain their anonymity give
some indication of where the researchers were coming from. Genain was
derived from the Greek for 'dreadful gene' and the first names selected
for the unfortunate women, Nora, Iris, Myra and Hester, when written in
their birth order, spelt out the initials of the US National Institute
for Mental Health. Despite his obvious bias, Rosenthal's publications
provide compelling reasons for questioning his exclusively genetic
account of their difficulties. First, there were considerable
differences in the psychiatric problems experienced by the women. Myra,
who had married, suffered from much milder symptoms than the others, and
preferred minimal contact with the investigators. Follow-up studies
carried out in 1981 when the quadruplets were 51 years old27 and in 1996
when they were 6628 showed that Myra and Iris performed much better than
Nora and Hester on a range of psychological tests, with Myra's
performance falling mostly in the normal range. Moreover, Myra and Iris
showed much less deterioration than Nora and Hester when their
medication was stopped.

More importantly, there was considerable evidence that the quadruplets
had suffered unfortunate experiences during childhood, which may have
contributed to their difficulties as adults. Their father, who often
drank excessively, was described as unstable and paranoid. It is likely
that he sexually abused some of his daughters. The investigators report
that 'He chose Nora as his favourite, at times fondling her breasts and
being intrusive when she was in the bathroom.' A less than ideal family
environment can also be inferred from the following observations: Iris
and Hester engaged in mutual masturbation and the parents, horrified,
agreed with an attending physician to have both girls circumcised and
their hands tied to their beds for thirty nights. Nora and Myra were not
allowed to visit their sisters and 'couldn't understand the whole
situation'. Three of the girls completed high school; Hester did not.
Her parents kept her at home in her senior year and she cried a great
deal.29 Rosenthal and his colleagues never seriously considered that
these kinds of experiences might have contributed to the women's
problems. Nor did they consider the impact of the study on the women's
lives. Visiting them at home for several days every six months or so,
the researchers would take the three co-operating Genains out to dinners
and lunches, and talk with them about their current circumstances,
activities and problems, creating a powerful incentive for the women to
describe their experiences in a way that was consistent with the
researchers' expectations. In the light of the limitations of much of
the genetic research, it is impossible at present to reach definitive
conclusions about the contribution of heredity to madness. However, even
the hardiest sceptic must concede it unlikely that genes play no role
whatsoever. In a review of twin study evidence, American psychiatrist E.
F. Torrey estimated the pairwise concordance rate for monozygotic twins
to be 28 per cent in the case of schizophrenia, and 6 per cent for
fraternal twins. For bipolar disorder it was estimated at 56 per cent
for identical twins and 14 per cent for fraternal twins.30 Although
these figures indicate that genes play a more substantial role in
bipolar disorder than in schizophrenia, they should not lead us to
suppose that there is a simple causal arrow pointing from genes to
mental illness. Assuming that these figures are correct, about half of
those who inherit genes for bipolar disorder do not become ill, and only
one in seven of those closely related to an affected person are also
affected. On similar reasoning, only about a quarter of those who
inherit genes for schizophrenia actually become schizophrenic, and the
risk to close relatives of schizophrenia patients is only one in
seventeen. These figures therefore provide very strong evidence that
non-genetic factors influence the development of mental illness. The
implications of genetic research for Kraepelin's paradigm have been
examined by British psychiatrist Tim Crow31 and by American psychiatrist
Michael Taylor.32 Although the findings from family studies have not
always been consistent, Crow and Taylor were able to point to studies in
which the observed risk of a diagnosis of affective disorder in the
relatives of schizophrenia patients was greater than chance,33 or in
which there was an increased risk of a diagnosis of schizophrenia in the
relatives of bipolar patients.34 Crow has also noted that many of the
studies which appear to show that schizophrenia and manic depression
breed true have been compromised by what he has termed 'the fallacy of
the excluded middle' -- researchers' tendency to exclude or ignore
individuals whose symptoms do not fit the classic pictures of
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. In studies that have included
patients with mixed states, their close relatives have been found to be
at increased risk for both schizophrenia and affective disorders. Angst
and Scharfetter, for example, have analysed data from the families of
patients suffering from unipolar depression, bipolar disorder,
schizoaffective illness with predominantly affective symptoms,
schizoaffective illness with predominantly schizophrenic symptoms, and
'pure' schizophrenia. The proportion of first-degree relatives who were
found to suffer from affective disorders or schizophrenia varied
systematically across this spectrum. The more 'schizophrenic' the
patient, the more likely it was that their relatives would suffer from
schizophrenia. The more 'mood disordered' the patient, the more likely
it was that their relatives would suffer from mood disorder (see Table
4.1).35 Crow has interpreted these findings as suggesting that
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder lie at two ends of a spectrum of
psychosis. Table 4.1 Data from Angst and Scharfetter (1990) showing the
risk that first-degree relatives of psychotic patients will meet
criteria for schizophrenia or affective disorder (from T. Crow, 'The
failure of the binary concept and the psychosis gene', in A. Kerr and H.
McClelland (eds.) (1991) Concepts of Mental Disorder: A Continuing
Debate. London: Gaskell).

Patients are grouped into five diagnostic categories reflecting the
extent to which they suffered from mainly affective symptoms, mainly
schizophrenia symptoms, or a mixture of symptoms. The last row shows the
ratio of relatives who meet the criteria for schizophrenia vs affective
disorder. Ratios less than 1 indicate that most ill relatives meet the
criteria for affective disorder whereas ratios greater than 1 indicate
that most meet the criteria for schizophrenia. Diagnosis of patients
Unipolar depression No. patients

Bipolar disorder

Schizoaffective (predominantly affective)

Schizoaffective (predominantly schizophrenic)

Schizophrenia

of

58

31

34

35

105

No. of relatives with schizophrenia

10

4

19

18

31

No. of relatives with affective disorder

24

6

14

4

5

Ratio of schizophrenic to affective relatives (agecorrected)

0.30

0.47

0.92

2.99

5.05

Twin studies have also undermined the Kraepelinian distinction between
schizophrenia and manic depression. Several cases of twins have been
reported in which one appears to suffer from schizophrenia and the other
seems to suffer from an affective illness.36 In a study of schizophrenia
conducted by British psychiatrists Ann Farmer and Peter McGuffin in
collaboration with US psychologist Irvine Gottesman, seven out of
twenty-four identical twin pairs had one member diagnosed as suffering
from schizophrenia and the other diagnosed as suffering from a mood
disorder according to DSM-III criteria. Of the remaining seventeen
pairs, six were concordant for schizophrenia whereas, for the other
eleven, only one member of each pair suffered from schizophrenia. Farmer
and her colleagues attribute these findings to deficiencies of the
DSM-III definition of schizophrenia, but they obviously point to a close
relationship between schizophrenia and affective disorder.37

Better than Astrology? From the point of view of the clinician, one of
the most important functions of a diagnosis is prediction. When a doctor
interprets your chest pain as evidence of angina, you know that she is
predicting a different future for you than if she had interpreted your
pain as evidence of indigestion. Similarly, if Kraepelin was correct, a
diagnosis of schizophrenia should predict a more unremitting course of
illness than a diagnosis of manic depression. In practice, this claim
has proved difficult to test. One reason for this is that the course and
outcomes of psychiatric disorders are hard to quantify. American
psychiatrists John Strauss and William Carpenter have noted that outcome
can be measured across several domains that are only loosely correlated.
Whereas clinical outcome is determined by assessing the persistence of
symptoms, occupational outcome is defined according to how well the
individual maintains a steady job, and social outcome reflects the
individual's ability to maintain an adequate network of social
relationships.38

In their studies of schizophrenia patients, Strauss and Carpenter came
across patients whose functioning could not be classified as simply good
or poor, but varied across these three domains. For example, one woman
they interviewed was very delusional but was successfully taking care of
her child and holding down a job. Her clinical outcome was therefore
poor, but her occupational and social outcomes were excellent. Another,
whose symptoms had almost disappeared, had not worked for two years, had
lost touch with most of her friends, and spent most of her days sitting
in a darkened room.39 Similar dissociations between different kinds of
outcomes have been observed in bipolar patients.40 Despite these
difficulties, three consistent findings have emerged from outcome
studies. The first is that the course of psychosis is very
unpredictable. For example, the time between the mood episodes
experienced by bipolar patients may be as short as several weeks or as
long as many years.41 Some patients experience episodes of depression
followed by mania followed by normal functioning, others experience
mania followed by depression and eventually remission, whereas the
majority follow no particular discernible sequence of episodes.42
However, underneath this variability a pattern can be perceived. Towards
the end of his life, Kraepelin's own data led him to believe that the
average time between bipolar episodes decreased as the number of
episodes increased. This finding has been replicated by more recent
investigators (see Figure 4.1), leading some biological psychiatrists to
suppose that each episode leaves the brain more sensitive to future
episodes, a process sometimes described as 'kindling'.43 Similar
findings have been obtained in studies of schizophrenia patients, who
have sometimes been followed up for decades. For example, in a classic
study, Luc Ciompi, a Swiss psychiatrist, observed the fate of a group of
patients followed up for more than thirty years. The majority spent less
than one tenth of this time as inpatients but a quarter spent more than
twenty years in hospital. Some patients suffered a sudden breakdown
followed by complete recovery. Others had many episodes of illness that
began abruptly. Still others experienced a slow onset of illness and, if
periods of remission occurred, recovery would be only partial. Some
remained ill continuously.44 A similar study carried out by Manfred
Bleuler, the son of Eugen, yielded almost identical results.45
Reflecting on the heterogeneity of the outcomes they observed, both
Ciompi and the younger Bleuler were moved to reject the idea that
schizophrenia is a simple brain disease. This conclusion is particularly
striking in the case of Bleuler, given his relationship to the man who
coined the term 'schizophrenia'. Figure 4.1 Average cycle length in
bipolar (BP) patients from four studies (from F. K. Goodwin and K. R.
Jamison (1990) Manic-Depressive Illness. Oxford: Oxford University
Press). Note that Kraepelin's data included unipolar (UP) patients.

A second conclusion that can be drawn from research data on the course
of psychosis is that outcome is enormously variable between individuals
with the same diagnosis. For example, although Kraepelin held that
schizophrenia patients inevitably remain ill for the majority of their
lives, the long-term studies of Luc Ciompi and

Manfred Bleuler both revealed that this was the case for only a minority
of patients (see Figure 4.2). About a third of patients completely
recovered over the long term, the remaining patients having intermediate
outcomes. Extreme variability has also been observed in the outcome of
patients diagnosed as suffering from bipolar disorder. Kraepelin, it
will be recalled, believed that manic depression was a relatively benign
illness. Indeed, he estimated that the majority of his manic-depressive
patients (many of whom would be diagnosed as suffering from unipolar
depression by modern standards) experienced only one episode. Modern
studies, by comparison, indicate that a much broader range of outcomes
is experienced by bipolar patients.46 For example, in a thirty-five-year
follow-up of patients who had been diagnosed as suffering from mania on
first admission to hospital, American psychiatrist Michael Tsuang and
his colleagues found that 64 per cent had recovered completely, whereas
22 per cent remained seriously ill.47 This outcome was better, on
average, than the outcome for a group of patients diagnosed as suffering
from schizophrenia, but not strikingly so.

Figure 4.2 Bleuler and Ciompi data on long-term outcome of schizophrenia
(redrawn from J. Zubin, J. Magaziner and S. R. Steinhauer (1983) 'The
metamorphosis of Schizophrenia', Psychological Medicine, 13: 551--71).

Tsuang's study leads to the third general conclusion that can be drawn
from the data on the long-term course of psychiatric disorders. Despite
the unpredictable course and extremely variable outcome of psychotic
illnesses, patients who receive a diagnosis of manic depression have a
better outcome on average than patients who receive a diagnosis of
schizophrenia. This finding has been reported in many studies, including
a five-year follow-up of the first-admission patients recruited to the
World Health Organization's International Pilot Study of
Schizophrenia.48 At first sight, this difference seems to be strong
evidence in favour of Kraepelin's distinction between the two main
categories of psychosis. However, as British psychiatrist Tim Crow has
pointed out, this conclusion is based on the error of reasoning that he
has described as 'the fallacy of the excluded middle', namely the
tendency to focus on 'textbook' patients who appear to be clearly
schizophrenic or clearly manic-depressive, while ignoring the large
number of patients who have both types of symptoms.49 The effects of
controlling for this fallacy were explored in an important study
conducted by Robert Kendell and Ian Brockington.50 They argued that, if
schizophrenia and manic depression are separate entities, we should see
a clear 'gap' or discontinuity between the outcomes associated with one
disorder and the outcomes associated with the other. On the other hand,
if schizophrenia and manic depression are variants of the same disorder,
outcome might well be affected by the exact mix of symptoms experienced
by the patient. On this latter view, schizoaffective patients should
have an average outcome that lies somewhere in between those observed
for patients suffering from 'pure' schizophrenia and those suffering
from bipolar disorder.

Kendell and Brockington studied the progress of a large number of
patients who had been classified into ten groups along a continuum of
symptomatology ranging from mostly manic-depressive, through mixed, to
mostly schizophrenic. Outcome was measured after two years using six
different methods, and the findings are shown in Figure 4.3. There is no
evidence of a sharp discontinuity of outcomes according to any of the
measures. On the contrary, the average outcomes seem to form a gradient
that depends on the extent to which patients are suffering from
schizophrenia or affective symptoms. At the beginning of this chapter I
suggested that astrological predictions provide a fool's-gold standard
against which to evaluate the predictions achieved by psychiatric
diagnoses. We are now in a position to apply this standard. While
diagnoses clearly are superior to star signs, this superiority is not
striking and is only evident when large groups are studied. When the
focus is on the individual, the clinician Patients are distributed into
ten groups along the horizontal axes according to the extent to which
they suffered mainly schizophrenia symptoms, a mixture of schizophrenia
and affective symptoms, or mainly affective symptoms. There are six
different measures of outcome on the vertical axes: overall pattern of
illness (ranging from recovery to deterioration); occupational record
(based on work records); social outcome (based on the quality of social
relations); two measures of symptoms (one grading the symptoms on a
spectrum from schizophrenia to affective symptoms, the other indicating
the overall severity of schizophrenia symptoms alone) and finally a
composite or global measure. Note that worse outcomes are associated
with schizophrenia symptoms. However, note also that there is no clear
evidence of separate groups of schizophrenia and mood-disorder patients.

Figure 4.3 Relationships between symptoms and outcome in patients with
psychosis, from R. E. Kendell and I. F. Brockington (1980) 'The
identification of disease entities and the relationship between
schizophrenic and affective psychoses', British Journal of Psychiatry,
137: 324--31.

wanting to predict what will happen to her patients in the years ahead
would do almost as well by resorting to horoscopes.

The Specificity of Psychiatric Drugs Diagnoses should allow the
clinician to predict not only the course and long-term outcome of a
disorder, but also what kind of treatment is likely to be effective. For
example, different drugs should be effective for different conditions.
Oddly, with the exception of one study, this important clinical property
of psychiatric diagnoses has not

been systematically investigated. This omission is remarkable, as drugs
have been the mainstay of psychiatric treatment for at least fifty
years, and were widely used even in Kraepelin's time. Today, four main
types of medication are available to psychiatrists. The less severe
psychiatric disorders are usually treated with anxiolytics (the
benzodiazapines such as Valium and Librium, normally used to treat
anxiety but sometimes useful in the treatment of mild depression) or
anti-depressants (mainly tricyclic drugs such as imipramine and the new
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors such as Prozac, usually
employed in the treatment of depression but also effective in the
treatment of anxiety). Although the development of these drugs is
certainly of historical interest, I will say no more about them in this
book.51Anti-psychotic (also called neuroleptic) medications (for
example, phenothiazines such as chlorpromazine -- also known as
Largactil\*) are the most commonly prescribed drugs for schizophrenia
patients. Patients with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, on the other
hand, are usually offered various mood-stabilizing medications (for
example, lithium carbonate or carbamazapine). Readers without a
background in medicine or pharmacology may assume that the development
of new drugs usually follows from advances in our understanding of the
biological bases of disease. For example, it might be expected that some
breakthrough in understanding the biochemistry of the brain would lead
to the identification of abnormalities in the brains of schizophrenia
patients, and from there to the design of novel drugs. In fact, progress
in psychopharmacology has nearly always been in the opposite direction
-- the accidental discovery of an apparently effective drug has led to
speculation about its mode of action, and from there to research on the
biological origins of mental illness. In the fifty years before the
discovery of chlorpromazine, described by historian of psychiatry Edward
Shorter as 'the first drug that worked',52 there had been few or no
genuine advances in the drug treatment of mental illness. Writing in
1899, Kraepelin had listed the drugs available to him as narcotics (for
example, opium and morphine), soporifics (for example, chloral hydrate),
chloroform, ether, ethyl bromide, bromides, amyl nitrate and
digitalis.53 Many of these compounds were still in use at the outbreak
of the Second World War. The effects of chlorpromazine (later known by
the trade name Largactil) were first observed by a French naval surgeon
named Henri Laborit, who was something of an eccentric. According to the
obituary published in the Guardian newspaper when Laborit died in 1995,
'The world has just lost the chance of awarding an Oscar, a Pulitzer and
a Nobel Prize to the same person.'54 Many years after achieving fame for
his pharmacological discovery, he appeared in Alain Renais' film Mon
Oncle d'Amerique, which won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes film festival.
He also won several literary awards for his best-selling books on
popular science, and campaigned for the abolition of the Paris -- Dakar
rally because, 'In our world, competition is disgusting, a most stupid
triviality.' As a consequence of his war experience, Laborit developed
an interest in physical shock, a condition that had many manifestations
(low temperature, faint pulse and low blood pressure, accompanied by
apathy and anxiety), and that affected his patients' ability to recover
from surgery. Believing that this condition resulted from an excessively
strong biological emergency reaction involving the chemicals adrenaline,
acetylcholine and histamine, Laborit began experimenting with various
compounds that were known to have inhibitory effects on these
substances. As luck would have it, at this time the Rhône-Poulenc
pharmaceutical company was synthesizing novel anti-histamine compounds,
some of which were made available to Laborit. In 1951, aged 37, Laborit
was transferred from a marine hospital in Tunisia to the Val-de-Grâce
military hospital in Paris, where he continued his experiments. One of
the compounds sent to him by Rhône-Poulenc was labelled 4560 RP, and had
already been identified as having useful sedative effects. Finding that
the drug lessened the anxiety felt by his patients prior to surgery but
left them with a curious disinterest in their surroundings, Laborit
wondered about its potential value in psychiatry. Perhaps disturbed
psychiatric patients would benefit from this kind of psychic
indifference. After disastrously testing its tolerability on a volunteer
psychiatrist at a nearby hospital (immediately after receiving an
intravenous injection of 4560 RP she stood up to go to the toilet and
fainted) he finally managed to persuade three colleagues at Val-de-Grâce
to try the drug on a manic patient. The results were impressive. Within
a few weeks the patient was much calmer and able to lead a relatively
normal life.

In 1952, Laborit's experiments came to the attention of Jean Delay, who
worked at the Ste-Anne mental hospital in Paris, and who was one of the
best-known French psychiatrists of the day. Delay asked for samples of
4560 RP from Rhône-Poulenc and, together with his colleague Pierre
Deniker, conducted the first clinical trial of the new medicine with
psychotic patients. Delay and Deniker were able to report the positive
results of their experiment just three months later at a meeting of the
Société Médico-Psychologique. Their subsequent publications prompted
further successful trials elsewhere. By the mid-1950s, the new drug --
by now known as chlorpromazine -- had become the treatment of choice for
schizophrenia, and was in use throughout the developed world. Other
similar compounds were rapidly tested, mainly because other
pharmaceutical companies wanted to profit from this therapeutic
breakthrough, so that by the early 1960s a range of anti-psychotic drugs
was available to practising psychiatrists. Curiously, the
mood-stabilizing effects of lithium carbonate, the most widely used drug
in the long-term treatment of mania, were also discovered accidentally
by a relative outsider, and at almost exactly the same time that Laborit
began his experiments with synthetic anti-histamines. John Cade, the
medical superintendent of the Repatriation Mental Hospital in Bundoora,
Australia, wanted to test his theory that mania was caused by an
endogenous toxin, and began injecting guinea pigs with urine from his
manic patients. Although these ill-thoughtout experiments inevitably
ended in the death of the guinea pigs, Cade proceeded to devise a series
of studies to investigate the effects of the various chemical
constituents of urine. He first used lithium as a solvent for uric acid
and then, on impulse, tried injecting lithium alone. Observing that the
guinea pigs became lethargic and resistant to startle, Cade injected
himself with lithium compounds to discover his ability to tolerate them,
and rapidly progressed to a small-scale trial in which the drug was
administered to patients diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia,
mania and depression. His results, which showed that lithium calmed
schizophrenia patients but had even more dramatic therapeutic effects on
those suffering from mania, were published in the Medical Journal of
Australia in 1949, where they lay almost unnoticed for years. Despite
the success of a more carefully conducted study undertaken by Mogens
Schou in Denmark, published in 1952, the first trials of lithium
carbonate in North America were not conducted until the 1960s, and the
drug was only licensed for use in the USA in 1970. Although a licence
was granted earlier in Great Britain, the drug's impact was similarly
negligible at first. Edward Shorter has suggested that these delays
partly reflected a lack of enthusiasm by drug companies, who were
reluctant to support a compound that was abundant in nature, and
therefore difficult to turn into profit. In the half century since the
discovery of the therapeutic effects of chlorpromazine and lithium, the
idea that these drugs are diagnostically specific has driven a
prodigious volume of biochemical research. This has been especially true
for the neuroleptics; analysis of their biological effects led rapidly
to the hypothesis that schizophrenia was caused by a disorder of those
parts of the brain that contain the neurotransmitter substance dopamine.
At one time, this hypothesis was so widely held that it almost acquired
the status of an established truth, which only a raving heretic would
question. (When I gave a talk about the concept of schizophrenia at
Sheffield University only a few years ago, a neurobiologist in the
audience angrily challenged me to draw a circuit diagram of the pathways
in the brain that utilized dopamine.) I will discuss this theory in more
detail in a later chapter; for the moment I am only concerned with one
of the principal assumptions behind this kind of research -- that the
therapeutic effects of neuroleptics and lithium are specific to the two
groups of patients who normally receive them. Clearly, evidence of
treatment specificity would be strong evidence that schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder are separate and distinct conditions. Of course, the
only way of adequately testing the specificity of psychiatric drugs is
by randomly assigning them to patients regardless of diagnosis. To my
knowledge, only one adequate experiment of this sort has ever been
conducted. It was carried out by Eve Johnstone, Tim Crow and their
colleagues at the Northwick Park Hospital in Middlesex, England, and
their findings were reported in the medical journal the Lancet in
1988.55 One hundred and twenty psychotic patients were carefully
assessed for delusions, hallucinations and abnormal mood before being
randomly assigned to different drug treatments. Some received pimozide
(a neuroleptic) alone, some received lithium carbonate alone, and others
received either both drugs in combination or neither. The study was a
double-bind trial, which is to say that neither the patients nor the
assessing psychiatrists were aware which treatments the patients were
assigned. This was achieved by giving all patients two drugs, one or
both of which were sometimes placebos (inert substances). At the end of
three weeks, it was found that pimozide had an effect on hallucinations
and delusions, regardless of the patients' DSM-III diagnoses. Lithium
carbonate similarly had a

specific effect on elevated mood; although its non-specificity for
diagnosis was less clear-cut than was the case for pimozide, this was
because nearly all the patients who exhibited elevated mood were
diagnosed as manic. Drug response, it seemed, was specific to particular
symptoms, but not to particular diagnoses. Biological psychiatrists who
were aware of the history of their calling should not have been
astonished by these findings. Evidence that the effects of neuroleptic
drugs were diagnostically non-specific was available from the very
beginning of modern psychopharmacology. Although most clinical trials of
neuroleptics have been carried out with schizophrenia patients, the
first successful trial -- that carried out by Delay and Deniker in 1952
-- was conducted on patients suffering from mania.

Categories or Dimensions? In this chapter I have drawn on a wide range
of research. None of the findings we have considered supports
Kraepelin's diagnostic system. Studies of patients' symptoms, of the
role of genes, of the course and outcome of illnesses over time, and of
the response of symptoms to treatment, all point to similarities between
schizophrenia and bipolar patients, rather than to differences. Clearly
people who suffer from psychiatric problems vary in their experiences.
The taxonomists have attempted to accommodate this fact by dividing the
geography of psychological distress into separate territories, but their
efforts have been neither successful nor consistent. In the face of
these difficulties, psychiatrists and psychologists have occasionally
suggested alternatives to Kraepelin's system. Some, like Adolf Meyer,
have argued that we should give up the idea of classifying people like
plants. Others have argued that there is but one type of psychosis, or
einheitspsychose, an idea that was championed by Kraepelin's rival
Hoche.56 This approach is currently favoured by Tim Crow,57 among
others. Still others, mostly psychologists, have advocated the
development of dimensional systems of classification, in which an
individual is regarded as suffering more or less from different kinds of
disorder.58 (This suggestion is given some credence by the editors of
DSM-IV. However, as they note, the present lack of consensus about the
best way of constructing a dimensional classification means that a
workable system may be a long way off.)59 A recent study by Jim van Os
and his colleagues provides some empirical support for this approach.
Using his sample of over 700 psychotic patients, van Os assessed the
power of categories (DSM-III-R diagnoses) and symptom dimensions to
predict illness course, employment history, suicidal behaviour, the
patients' perceived quality of life, and a number of other variables.
For nearly all of these, the dimensions were more powerful predictors
than the categories.60 None of these strategies has received support
from the majority of clinicians, perhaps because they have found it
difficult to see how these alternatives would work in practice.
OceanofPDF.com

5 The Boundaries of Madness Madness need not be regarded as an illness.
Why shouldn't it be seen as a sudden -- more or less sudden -- change of
character? Ludwig Wittgenstein1 In 1799 a German bookseller named Nicola
read a paper to the Royal Society of Berlin, in which he described a
series of hallucinations that he had experienced some nine years
earlier.2 They had been provoked by a period of stress, and he first
became aware of them when he saw the figure of someone he knew to be
dead. The figure, which was unobservable to his wife, disappeared after
a few minutes but reappeared later in the day. Over the following months
other hallucinatory figures came and went and sometimes spoke to Nicola,
who became proficient at differentiating them from living people.
Anticipating modern debates about the nature of psychosis, he claimed
that his story demonstrated that hallucinations could be experienced by
the sane. Kraepelin's paradigm, articulated almost 100 years after
Nicola's paper, assumed a non-arbitrary division between sanity and
madness, an assumption that was explicitly embraced by the designers of
DSM-III (see proposition 4 of Gerald Klerman's neoKraepelinian
manifesto, given in Table 3.3, p. 59). According to Kraepelin, people
either suffer from mental illness or they do not, and we are not free to
choose whether to regard some kind of unusual behaviour as evidence of
madness or mere eccentricity. This attitude was also evident in the
theories of most of the other giants of psychiatry whose work we have
considered. For Karl Jaspers, the psychiatrist's inability to form an
empathetic appreciation of a patient's experiences was a sure sign of
the patient's madness. For Kurt Schneider, the observation of certain
behaviours and experiences (the first-rank symptoms) carried a similar
implication. Only Eugen Bleuler was more flexible, conceiving of a
continuum that ran from normality to the extreme experiences of people
suffering from psychosis.

In the last chapter I examined Kraepelin's division of the psychoses
into various types. In this chapter and the next, I will focus on this
more fundamental division between madness and sanity. In particular, I
will address the suggestion (succinctly expressed in the above quotation
from the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein) that psychosis should be seen
as just part and parcel of human variation, rather than as an illness.
This claim, in its strongest form, suggests that the attribution of
mental illness, either to individuals or to particular types of
behaviour, is arbitrary rather than scientific, and that psychotic
people are eccentrics who are misunderstood and victimized by society.

How Common are Psychotic Experiences? Let us begin by considering
whether Nicola's experiences were extraordinary or whether, on the
contrary, ordinary people experience psychotic symptoms more commonly
than is usually supposed. According to the Kraepelinian model, symptoms
should be confined to those who are severely ill. Of course, we can
accept that mentally ill people sometimes fail to receive appropriate
treatment and consequently are left undetected in the community.
However, this should happen only rarely. Evidence that large numbers of
otherwise well-adjusted people report psychotic experiences on
questioning would therefore further undermine the Kraepelinian paradigm.

Hallucinations The first systematic study of hallucinations in ordinary
people was conducted in Britain at the end of the nineteenth century by
the Society for Psychical Research.3 The Society assumed that their
findings would have implications for the understanding of apparently
supernatural phenomena. A large team of interviewers questioned over
14,000 men and women. Although no attempt was made to obtain a truly
random sample, anyone suffering from obvious signs of mental or physical
illness was excluded. Of

those questioned, nearly 8 per cent of men and 12 per cent of women
reported at least one vivid hallucinatory experience, the most common
being a vision of a living person who was not present at the time.
Hallucinations with a religious or supernatural content were also
reported, and auditory hallucinations were recorded less often than
visual hallucinations. Fifty years later, the Society attempted to check
these findings by conducting a much less extensive survey, obtaining
very similar results.4 Modern surveys have continued to provide evidence
that hallucinations are experienced by people who appear to be otherwise
normal, who do not regard themselves as mentally ill, and who have not
felt the need to seek psychiatric treatment. For example, in the United
States, psychologists Thomas Posey and Mary Losch5 questioned 375
college students and found that 39 per cent had heard a voice speaking
their thoughts aloud -- a firstrank symptom of schizophrenia according
to Kurt Schneider. Perhaps even more surprisingly, 5 per cent reported
holding conversations with their hallucinations. Subsequent surveys of
students in Britain (carried out by myself and others)6 and in the
United States (carried out by Tim Barrett and his colleagues)7 have
obtained comparable results. Of course, college students are hardly
representative of the population as a whole, so it may be wrong to
generalize from student samples. However, this limitation does not apply
to the most comprehensive survey of hallucinations in the general
population so far conducted, which was reported in 1991 by American
psychiatrist Allen Tien.8 Tien's data were collected as part of the
Epidemiological Catchment Area (ECA) Study, the large US population
survey of psychiatric symptoms described in the previous chapter.
Although the definition of hallucinations used by Tien was taken from
DSM-III-R, his findings were remarkably similar to those obtained almost
a century earlier by the Society for Psychical Research. He estimated
that the proportion of the 18,000 ECA participants who had experienced
hallucinations at some time in their lives was between 11 and 13 per
cent.\* Hallucinations were reported approximately twice as often by
women as by men. Tien noted only two differences between his findings
and the much earlier findings from Britain. First, the Society for
Psychical

Research reported that people between 20 and 29 years of age were most
likely to experience hallucinations, whereas the ECA data suggested that
hallucinations occur across the age spectrum but most often in the
elderly. Second, visual hallucinations were recorded less often in the
ECA survey in comparison with the Society's data.\* Two subsequent
studies have provided broad support for Tien's findings. Jim van Os and
his colleagues conducted psychiatric interviews with over 7000 people
randomly selected from the general population of Holland.9 When abnormal
experiences secondary to drug-taking or physical illness were excluded,
1.7 per cent were found to have experienced 'true' hallucinations, but a
further 6.2 per cent had experienced hallucinations that were judged not
clinically relevant because they were not associated with distress.
Comparable results were obtained in a survey of 761 residents of
Dunedin, New Zealand, recently reported by Richie Poulton and others.10
To appreciate the significance of these findings it may help to compare
them with the available epidemiological data on schizophrenia. Recent
estimates suggest that, in most countries, fewer than 1 per cent of the
general population receive a diagnosis of schizophrenia at some point in
their lives.11 It now appears that about ten times as many people have
experienced hallucinations.

Delusional beliefs There has been much less research on the prevalence
of delusional beliefs, a symptom usually attributed either to
schizophrenia, manic depression or paranoia. This is probably because
researchers have recognized that distinguishing between delusions and
beliefs that are just bizarre or unusual is an inherently uncertain
enterprise. A Gallup poll of 1236 American adults revealed that
approximately one quarter believed in ghosts.12 A similar proportion
reported telepathic experiences, about one in ten claimed to have been
in the presence of a ghost, and about one in seven thought they had seen
a UFO. In a similar interview study of 502 people from the general
population of Winnipeg, Canada, it was found that over 15

per cent claimed to have experienced telepathy and that nearly 18 per
cent reported experiencing dreams that predicted future events. In this
study, belief in the paranormal was associated with various indices of
psychiatric problems, including Schneider's first-rank symptoms.13
However, other researchers have observed that those reporting paranormal
experiences often experience high levels of subjective well-being.14
Psychiatrists have sometimes suggested that spiritual experiences should
be regarded as evidence of mental illness15 (an idea that has been
supported by the government of the People's Republic of China, where
members of the Falun Gong religious movement have recently been
subjected to compulsory psychiatric treatment).16 Although this argument
cannot be taken seriously by anyone capable of respecting religious
sentiments shared by a large proportion of the world's population, this
does not mean that we should not consider similarities between religious
beliefs and the delusional beliefs of patients. That these similarities
can be marked is evident from a study reported by Mike Jackson, a
psychologist at the University College Bangor in Wales, and Bill
Fulford, an Oxford-based psychiatrist and philosopher.17 Jackson and
Fulford carried out a detailed study of three people whose experiences
were recorded by the Alistair Hardy Research Centre at Oxford
University, which investigates religious experiences. All three reported
beliefs that met standard psychiatric definitions of delusions (two also
experienced auditory hallucinations). For example, 'Simon', a 40-yearold
man, was raised as a Baptist and enjoyed a successful career until he
fell into a legal dispute with his colleagues. After praying for
guidance late at night, he noticed that wax from a candle had dripped on
to his Bible, obscuring certain words. Interpreting this event as a
message from God, he realized that he was 'The living son of David...
also a relative of Ishmael, and... captain of the guard of Israel'.
British psychiatrist Glen Roberts conducted a study comparing deluded
patients, patients who had recovered from delusions, trainee Anglican
priests (chosen because of their presumed religious convictions) and
ordinary people, finding that both the currently deluded patients and
the trainee priests, but not the recovered patients or the ordinary
people, expressed an extremely strong need to find meaning in their
lives.18 In a

more recent study, Emmanuelle Peters and her colleagues at the Institute
of Psychiatry in London compared psychotic inpatients and ordinary
people to members of new religious movements (Druids and members of the
Hare Krishna religion). Although the members of the new religious
movements were not 'ill' in the sense of wanting or appearing to need
treatment, the two groups could not be distinguished on a measure of
delusional beliefs.19 A similar controversy has concerned the
relationship between psychosis and beliefs about visits to Earth by
extraterrestrials. In the United States in recent years, a surprising
number of people have reported being kidnapped by aliens. Typically,
'abductees' describe being taken from their beds at night. Later they
find themselves in a UFO, being inspected by aliens (usually described
as 'greys' -- small humanoid creatures with thin faces and slanting
eyes). They are forced to lie helpless as their bodies are probed and
penetrated by alien devices, presumably as part of some kind of
interplanetary zoology experiment. Eventually, they are returned to
their beds unharmed. Estimates of the number of people in the USA who
have had 'abduction experiences' have been as high as 3.7 million.20 One
prominent psychiatrist has concluded that they are honest accounts of
real events,21 provoking harsh criticism from his colleagues. Some
features of abduction accounts are strikingly reminiscent of the
passivity delusions included in Schneider's list of first-rank symptoms,
but whether these kinds of experiences are associated with
psychopathology remains a matter of dispute.22 Although an American
study failed to find evidence of psychopathology in abductees,23 a
recent British study found that belief in UFOs was associated with high
scores on questionnaire measures of psychotic thinking.24 It is only
very recently that attempts have been made to assess the prevalence in
the general population of delusional beliefs defined by psychiatric
criteria. In the recent survey of more than 7000 Dutch people conducted
by Jim van Os and his colleagues, 3.3 per cent of the sample were found
to have 'true' delusions and 8.7 per cent had delusions that were not
clinically relevant (that is, which were not associated with distress
and did not require treatment).25 Higher estimates were obtained in
Poulton's developmental study of the residents of Dunedin, New Zealand,
in which

20.1 per cent of the sample were recorded as having delusions by the end
point of the study, and 12.6 per cent were judged to be paranoid.26 I am
aware of only one study in which an attempt has been made to assess the
prevalence of different kinds of delusions. In June 1996, thirty-one
family doctors in the Aquitaine region of southwest France asked over
1000 patients attending their clinics to complete a questionnaire
measuring twenty-one commonly reported delusional beliefs. Only 11.5 per
cent of those approached had attended their doctor because of
psychiatric problems. The most common delusional ideas reported were
that people were not who they seemed to be (69.3 per cent of those with
no history of psychiatric disorder); that the individual had experienced
telepathic communication (46.9 per cent); that seemingly innocuous
events had double meanings (42.2 per cent); that the individual was
being persecuted in some way (25.5 per cent); and that occult forces
were at work (23.4 per cent).27

Language and communication disorders Incoherent speech has often been
regarded as an important symptom of psychosis. As we saw in Chapter 2,
Bleuler believed that this kind of speech reflected the loosening of
associations that he held to be a fundamental feature of schizophrenia.
The American psychiatrist Nancy Andreasen has developed a formal method
of assessing psychotic speech that has been extensively used in recent
research. Anticipating our more detailed discussion of this symptom in a
later chapter, for present purposes we need only note that her method
requires investigators to score segments of speech for twenty different
kinds of abnormality. In a validation study, Andreasen reported ratings
of abnormal speech from schizophrenia patients, bipolar patients,
patients suffering from unipolar depression and ordinary people. The
most surprising discovery was that incoherent speech was more often
observed in manic patients than in schizophrenia patients (further
evidence that the distinction between these diagnoses is not
meaningful). Andreasen also observed that incoherence was, to a lesser
degree, a feature of the speech of some depressed patients and even of
some of the normal people she examined.28 This finding raises the
possibility that incoherent speech,

like other symptoms of psychosis, is more frequently observed in
nonpsychotic individuals than has previously been supposed. This
inference receives some support from an unusual study conducted by David
Weeks, a clinical psychologist based in Edinburgh, Scotland. Weeks
conducted an investigation of self-styled eccentrics (people who
believed that their manner and behaviour made them different from
ordinary folk) who responded to advertisements he placed in
newspapers.29 Many of those who volunteered to participate had very odd
attitudes and behaviour. For example, Norma, a woman who lived in
Connecticut, played in a kazoo band, wore a fireman's outfit in the
winter, and held parties in the summer in which she served only canned
food and dressed as a member of the British royal family. She believed
that it was immoral to throw anything away and had to buy an abandoned
opera house to hold all of her possessions. Al, another member of Weeks'
sample, rode around his hometown in Virginia on a device that was half
bicycle and half rocking horse, behind which he towed a milk crate
mounted on a golf cart. Weeks used Andreasen's scale to analyse recorded
speech samples collected from his eccentrics. As might be expected of a
group that had been so loosely defined, the quality of their speech was
highly variable. Over half of the eccentrics showed no evidence of
speech disorder whatsoever, whereas others showed evidence of severe
communication difficulties. The following is an example: I have since
resolved to actually Sherlock Holmes a manuscript, anticipatory, of many
practicing psychiatry, this conjectural profession, none to date have
concentrated their probes into the mind's cognitive faculties, which...
I suspect... is... as it were, a high-octane, rather than the typically
average petrol... that circumstances, IQ and health, is responsible for
neurosis. Is it a key to the wonderful fulfilment of this gift of life?
Whiter light needs darker shadow. The greyest gap in psychiatry is that
it must accept creative individuals are left to stew in their own
portentous juices to work out their eccentricity unaided.30

Weeks was careful not to claim that his eccentrics were psychotic.
Indeed, in the case of two categories of abnormal speech -- derailment
(a pattern of speech in which ideas seem to slip off one track on to
another, obliquely related track) and loss of goal (failure to follow a
chain of thought to its logical conclusion) -- the eccentrics showed
less evidence of abnormality than ordinary people. However, for most of
the other types of speech disorder, and particularly for pressure of
speech (rapid talking that is difficult to interrupt), tangentiality
(responding to questions in an oblique or irrelevant manner), and
circumstantiality (speech that is delayed in reaching its goal because
of the intrusion of many tenuously related ideas), the eccentrics showed
more evidence of abnormality than ordinary people. Of course, just as
some kinds of peculiar beliefs may not be related to delusions, so too
some kinds of abnormal speech should not be regarded as forms of
language and communication disorder. For example, glossolalia, the
speaking in unknown tongues practised by some Christian sects, has
sometimes been described as similar to the speech of schizophrenia
patients,31 but is, in fact, linguistically quite different32 and,
unlike the disordered speech of patients, is usually brought on wilfully
in specific religious settings.33 So far as I am aware, only one study
has reported a population estimate for psychotic speech. In Poulton's
study of people in Dunedin, the speech of the participants was rated by
a social worker as they arrived to be assessed, and 17.9 per cent of the
sample were rated as having disorganized speech.34

Hypomania Mood swings, like the other symptoms we have considered,
appear to be much more commonly experienced than would be anticipated on
the basis of Kraepelin's paradigm. For example, American psychologist
Ronald Depue and his colleagues have estimated from questionnaire
studies that 6 per cent of college students show evidence of abnormal
variations in mood.35

In the Zurich canton of Switzerland, a team led by psychiatrist Jules
Angst interviewed a representative sample of the general population and
estimated that 4 per cent had experienced mild episodes of mania (known
as hypomania).36 In a later study, in which the sample was followed up
over a fourteen-year period, 5.5 per cent had experienced an episode
meeting the DSM-IV criteria for hypomania and a further 11.3 per cent
had experienced 'subdiagnostic' hypomanic symptoms.37 Reviewing similar
investigations conducted in several different countries, Hagop Akiskal,
a psychiatrist at the University of California at San Diego, concluded
that, 'Softer bipolar expressions are at least 4--6 times more common
than the usual prevalence of 1 per cent given for classic
manicdepressive illness.'38

From Sanity to Madness It seems that there is some truth in Bleuler's
view that the differences between sanity and madness are matters of
degree. In the 1920s, Ernst Kretschmer, a professor of psychiatry at the
University of Tübingen, elaborated Bleuler's theory, arguing that both
schizophrenia and manic depression were related to variations in normal
personality.39 According to Kretschmer, there is a type of
'schizothymic' personality characterized by a combination of coldness
and hypersensitivity. Similarly, he argued that there is a 'cyclothymic'
personality type that resembles manic depression, in which the
individual is prone to extreme moods. Kretschmer believed that these
personality types, and the clinical states related to them, were
associated with particular bodily constitutions. The schizophrenia
patient, on his view, was most likely to be of asthenic build, that is,
frail with a narrow physique. The manic-depressive patient, on the other
hand, was most likely to have the pyknic build, being middle in height,
and rounded, with a tendency towards fat around the trunk. (Although
some early studies reported data consistent with Kretschmer's theory,40
so far as I am aware, these relationships between psychopathology and
physical stature have never been verified by modern research.)

The concept of schizotypy Unfortunately, Kretschmer's ideas had no
immediate impact on psychiatric research (although they did influence
some psychologists studying normal variations in personality)41 and it
was nearly half a century before the hypothesized continuum between
sanity and madness was investigated properly. Modern studies in this
area were stimulated by the ideas of American psychologist Paul Meehl,
expressed in a 1962 speech he made as president of the American
Psychological Association.42 Focusing on schizophrenia, Meehl argued
that inconsistent findings from genetic research could be accounted for
by supposing that individuals inherit a vulnerability to the disorder
rather than the disorder itself. He proposed the term 'schizotaxia' to
describe this predisposition, and suggested that it might lead the
individual to experience 'cognitive slippage' (his term for the
loosening of associations) and 'anhedonia' (an inability to experience
pleasure). Meehl argued that the majority of people who suffered from
schizotaxia would not develop full-blown schizophrenia, but would
instead have schizotypal personality characteristics -- for example
eccentric beliefs and magical thinking. Such people would only become
schizophrenic if exposed to some kind of stress. Meehl's arguments later
gained some support from the adoption studies carried out in Denmark by
Seymour Kety, David Rosenthal and their colleagues (see pp. 77--8 for a
brief discussion of these investigations). In these studies very little
evidence of full-blown psychotic illness was observed in the biological
relatives of adoptees who had been diagnosed as suffering from
schizophrenia, a finding which, at first sight, seemed to undermine the
genetic theory of schizophrenia. However, Kety and Rosenthal argued that
many of these biological relatives showed eccentric personality
characteristics, for example unusual beliefs about the supernatural,
constricted emotions, suspiciousness and social anxiety. Assuming that
such people were suffering from a subclinical variant of schizophrenia,
they proposed the new diagnostic category of 'schizophrenia spectrum
disorder' in order to describe these characteristics.43

The work of Kety, Rosenthal and their colleagues preceded the
publication of DSM-III. Partly influenced by their observations, the
authors of the manual decided to include a multi-axial system in which
information in addition to diagnoses would be classified. Whereas
clinicians were invited to describe their patients' psychiatric
illnesses using axis 1, axis 2 was to be used to classify disorders of
personality. These were defined as 'enduring patterns of perceiving,
relating to, and thinking about the environment and oneself' and were
considered to be distinct from illnesses because they were present
throughout adulthood, whereas the illnesses were episodic. The
definitions of the axis-2 disorders were drawn from various sources,
including psychoanalysts and theories of normal personality. After some
debate, eleven were included. Among these were criteria for 'schizotypal
personality disorder' devised by Robert Spitzer on the basis of Kety and
Rosenthal's concept of 'schizophrenia spectrum disorder'. Spitzer also
constructed a definition of 'borderline personality disorder' from
earlier formulations suggested by psychoanalytic authors. This term was
used to describe a type of personality characterized by extreme
emotional instability, severe problems of self-esteem, self-destructive
behaviours and intense and unstable relationships with others.44 The
confusing name 'borderline' was used because some psychoanalysts had
theorized that such people lay on the borderline between psychosis and
neurosis. However, it was assumed that borderline patients would not
show active psychotic symptoms. Axis 2 of DSM-III and its successors
attempted to accommodate dimensions of disorder within a categorial
system. However, as might be expected of such an attempt, the division
of abnormal personalities into separate categories proved problematic
from the outset. Research showed that the reliability of these
categories was very low (one study found an average kappa value of
0.41)45 and the authors of DSM-III were forced to acknowledge that many
patients would meet the criteria for more than one type of personality
disorder.

A psychological approach to psychosis-proneness Meehl's ideas prompted
psychologists to search for personality 'markers' or indicators of
schizotaxia in the hope that these could be used to detect people at
risk of schizophrenic breakdowns. As it was believed that the features
of schizotaxia were quite subtle, many investigators believed they might
be detected by examining unusual responses to conventional personality
questionnaires. A common research strategy involved asking the mentally
well (but presumably schizotaxic) relatives of schizophrenia patients to
complete standard personality tests. Unfortunately, this line of
research led nowhere and had been all but abandoned by the end of the
1970s.46 At about this time it became obvious to some psychologists that
a better way of approaching this problem might be to question people
directly about psychotic experiences. In the United States, Loren and
Jean Chapman at the University of Wisconsin devised a series of
questionnaires for this purpose, each of which focused on a different
symptom. Their early questionnaires measured physical and social
anhedonia (items included 'I have had very little desire to buy new
kinds of foods', and 'It's fun to sing with other people', to be marked
as either 'true' or 'false') and perceptual aberrations ('Occasionally I
have felt as if my body did not exist'). Later questionnaires measured
magical thinking ('Some people can make me aware of them just by
thinking about me') and hypomania ('I am so good at controlling others
that it sometimes scares me').47 In Britain, at the Department of
Experimental Psychology at Oxford University, Gordon Claridge took a
slightly different approach, and devised a single questionnaire based on
Robert Spitzer's DSM-III definition of schizotypal personality
disorder.48 These questionnaires have been followed by many others, so
that scales of schizotypy or psychosis-proneness, if not quite a dime a
dozen, have now become commonplace instruments of psychological
research. Gordon Claridge has recognized that the apparent continuum
from sanity to madness, confirmed by studies that have employed these
questionnaires, necessitates a revision of the Kraepelinian model of
psychosis.49 However,

he does not believe that it is necessary to abandon a biomedical model
of madness altogether. He has pointed out that there are widely
recognized physical diseases that are extremes of normal variation. An
example is hypertension, an abnormal elevation of blood pressure, which
leads to an increased risk of strokes and heart attacks. Blood pressures
are distributed normally\* in the population. Some people have very low
pressure, some have very high pressure, but the majority of the
population lies somewhere in between these two extremes. The cut-off
point between low and high blood pressure is arbitrary, and is
determined pragmatically by doctors, who balance the need to identify
those most at risk of vascular disease with the hazards of unnecessarily
treating a large proportion of the population. Nonetheless, as high
blood pressure has disastrous (and sometimes fatal) consequences, few
people would doubt that it is a cause for medical concern. On this
analogy, psychosis might be thought of as the extreme end of a normally
distributed spectrum of personality traits on which we impose an
arbitrary cut-off point to separate those who are mentally ill from
those who are not. Claridge's approach is slightly more complex than
this, in that he assumes that there is a discontinuity between madness
and sanity, which, using the blood pressure analogy, might be thought of
as equivalent to a stroke. He argues that a person who has psychotic
traits may lead a normal life, much as a person with high blood pressure
can lead a normal life, unless some kind of adverse environmental event
precipitates a breakdown. Claridge suggests that there are many
different kinds of events that might lead to such a crisis, including
both psychological and physical traumas (see Figure 5.1). This model is
similar to Meehl's, and assumes that individuals differ in their
vulnerability to mental illness, so that a relatively minor life event
can precipitate a breakdown in someone who is especially at risk,
whereas a major crisis is required to precipitate a breakdown in someone
who is less vulnerable. There is insufficient space here to review the
very large volume of research that has been conducted with questionnaire
measures of psychosisproneness. However, two general findings are worth
noting. First, there is some evidence that scores on these
questionnaires predict future psychotic

breakdown, although not with the kind of precision that would be useful
to clinicians. In a study carried out by Loren and Jean Chapman, several
hundred Wisconsin students were tested on a battery of schizotypy
questionnaires and were then divided into high scoring and normally
scoring groups. After ten years, fourteen of the high scorers and only
one of the low scorers had been admitted to hospital with a psychotic
illness.50 While this finding would not justify the mass testing of
young adults in the hope of preventing mental illness, it does suggest
that there is a real link between schizotypal personality
characteristics and outright madness, as supposed by Meehl, Claridge and
the Chapmans. Second, the same kinds of arguments that have been made
about the continuum between normal personality and schizophrenia have
also been made about mood disorders. Hagop Akiskal of the University of
California at San Diego has suggested that many patients treated by
psychiatrists or psychologists for 'borderline personality disorder' in
fact suffer from subclinical bipolar disorder.51 This type of
personality, it will be recalled, has been characterized in terms of
extreme emotional reactions, unstable self-esteem, self-destructive
behaviour and intense Figure 5.1 Claridge's model showing the
relationship between schizotypal personality and schizophrenia, and
showing the parallel with systemic diseases such as hypertension (from
G. S. Claridge (1990) 'Can a disease model of schizophrenia survive?',
in R. P. Bentall (ed.), Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London:
Routledge). Note the familiar bell-shaped normal distributions for both
blood pressure and schizotypal traits. and unstable relationships with
others. In addition to the obvious clinical similarities between
prototypically bipolar and borderline patients, Akiskal was able to
point to evidence of high levels of mood disorder in the close relatives
of borderline patients.

Given the evidence against Kraepelin's division between dementia praecox
and manic depression, which we considered in the previous chapter, it
would obviously be interesting to know whether borderline mood states
overlap with measures of psychosis-proneness derived from the concept of
schizophrenia. Two lines of research suggest that they do. First, in a
study by Robert Spitzer, psychiatrists were asked to evaluate their
patients on the proposed DSM-III definitions of schizotypal and
borderline personality disorder. It was found that about half the
patients who met the criteria for one of the diagnoses also met the
criteria for the other.52 The second line of evidence concerns the
clustering of psychotic traits in normal individuals. With Peter Slade
and Gordon Claridge, I conducted one of the earliest studies in this
area. We gave 180 students a range of personality questionnaires,
fourteen of which had been designed to measure psychosis-proneness. (The
questionnaires included those designed by the Chapmans and by Claridge,
along with various others.) Factor analysis of the questionnaire scores
revealed that they fell into four separate groups. The first included
scales measuring perceptual abnormalities and bizarre

ideas, and seemed to correspond (roughly) to delusions and
hallucinations, or the positive symptoms of psychosis. The second group
included the anhedonia scales together with a measure of introversion,
and might be thought to correspond (again roughly) to the negative
symptoms of psychosis. A third group seemed to involve the subjective
experience of anxiety and cognitive disorganization, and the final group
appeared to measure self-reported anti-social behaviour.53 The first
three of these dimensions corresponded reasonably well with the results
from factor analytic studies of schizophrenia symptoms, which we
considered in the previous chapter. Although it would be risky to base a
theory entirely on the questionnaire responses of a relatively small
number of British university students, these findings have now been
repeated by other investigators who have carried out studies with much
larger and more representative samples.54 (Indeed, we eventually
replicated our original findings with a sample of 1095 people drawn from
various walks of life.)55 The findings also seem to have some
cross-cultural validity, as a study of over 1200 people living in
Mauritius has shown that this pattern of scores on schizotypy measures
seems to be unaffected by culture, gender or religious affiliation.56 In
general, these studies have found that hypomanic traits (presumably
related to mania) correlate very highly with odd beliefs and perceptual
aberrations (traditionally thought of as a characteristic of
schizophrenia). This finding suggests that schizophrenia and bipolar
personality characteristics overlap, and therefore further undermines
Kraepelin's assumption that there are two separate types of psychosis.

Madness, Creativity and Evolution In her biography of
Nobel-prize-winning mathematician John Nash Jr, Sylvia Nasar describes
the following encounter: It was late on a weekday afternoon in the
spring of 1959, and, though it was only May, uncomfortably warm. Nash
was slumped in an armchair in one corner of the hospital lounge,
carelessly dressed in a nylon shirt that

hung limply over his unbelted trousers. His powerful frame was slack as
a rag doll's, his finely moulded features expressionless. He had been
staring dully at a spot immediately in front of the left foot of Harvard
professor George Mackey, hardly moving except to brush his long dark
hair away from his forehead in a fitful, repetitive motion. His visitor
sat upright, oppressed by the silence, acutely conscious that the doors
to the room were locked. Mackey finally could contain himself no longer.
His voice was slightly querulous, but he strained to be gentle. 'How
could you,' began Mackey, 'how could you, a mathematician, a man devoted
to reason and logical proof... how could you believe that
extraterrestrials are sending you messages? How could you believe that
you are being recruited by aliens from outer space to save the world?
How could you?' Nash looked up at last and fixed Mackey with an
unblinking stare as cool and dispassionate of that of any bird or snake.
'Because,' Nash said slowly in his soft, reasonable southern drawl, as
if talking to himself, 'the ideas I had about supernatural beings came
to me the same way that my mathematical ideas did. So I took them
seriously.'57 Some authors have argued that the discovery of a continuum
(or several continua) linking psychosis and normal functioning may help
to explain a feature of madness that has puzzled evolutionary thinkers,
namely its persistence within populations over many generations. On the
face of it, madness has grim implications for survival and reproduction.
People suffering from severe psychotic symptoms often find it difficult
to work, are relatively poor, are often socially isolated, and face a
high risk of early death from suicide.58 Not surprisingly, research has
shown that they enjoy less reproductive success (that is, they have
fewer children on average) than their fellow human beings.59 A paper
co-authored by the evolutionary biologists Julian Huxley and Ernst Mayr
and psychiatrists Humphrey Osmond and Abram Hoffer, published in Nature
in 1964, first pointed out that genes causing vulnerability to psychosis
should be selected out over successive generations unless these social
and reproductive disadvantages are balanced by advantages. They
suggested that some kind of physiological benefit to

non-affected relatives, for example enhanced resistance to infection,
might compensate for the selective disadvantage of lower survival and
reduced fertility experienced by the severely ill.60 However, over
thirty years later there is still no evidence to support this theory,
and more recent researchers have argued that the benefits associated
with psychosis lie in the social rather than the physical domain.
Various kinds of social benefits have been postulated. For example, it
has been suggested that genes for paranoia encourage a healthy
defensiveness in threatening environments,61 or that schizophrenia genes
cause just the right degree of social strife to facilitate the splitting
of overlarge groups in primitive societies.62 Most of these hypotheses
are evolutionary 'just so' stories of little merit, and the only
substantial research exploring the positive consequences of madness has
focused on creativity. The idea that madness and creative genius are
related predates modern psychiatry, and can certainly be traced back to
Aristotle.63 The evolutionary arguments of Huxley and others have given
new life to this idea, provoking several lines of investigation. Some
researchers have conducted biographical surveys of historically
important people in the hope of finding evidence of high rates of
psychiatric disorder. Table 5.1 gives a list of historical figures
thought to suffer from serious mental illness, compiled from various
sources by the American psychologist Dean Simonton.64 The problems faced
by studies of this sort should not be underestimated. It is difficult to
decide who should be included in this kind of survey, and even more
difficult to make inferences about mental health from biographical data.
Inevitably, psychiatric symptoms are inaccurately attributed to some
people, and others who were clearly mentally ill are overlooked.
(Simonton's table misses out two of my own favourite examples of
disturbed genius, the mathematicians Kurt Gödel and John Nash. Gödel
suffered from paranoid delusions and died from malnutrition after
refusing to eat.65 As we have already seen, Nash, a Nobel prize-winner
and creator of a mathematical theory of rational behaviour, spent much
of his life in psychiatric hospitals, Table 5.1 Eminent persons with
supposed mental illness (adapted from D. K. Simonton (1994) Greatness:
Who Makes History and Why. New York: Guilford).

Schizophrenia Scientists: T. Brahe, Cantor, Copernicus, Descartes,
Faraday, W. R. Hamilton, Kepler, Lagrange, Linnaeus, Newton, Pascal,
Semmelweiss, Weierstrass, H. Wells Thinkers: Kant, Nietzsche, Swedenborg
Writers: Baudelaire, Lewis Carroll, Hawthorne, Hölderlin, S. Johnson,
Pound, Rimbaud, Strindberg, Swift Artists: Bosch, Cellini, Dürer, Goya,
El Greco, Kandinsky, Leonardo da Vinci, Rembrandt, Toulouse-Lautrec.
Composers: Donizetti, MacDowell, F. Mendelssohn, RimskyKorsakov,
Saint-Saëns Others: de Sade, Goebbels, Herod the Great, Joan of Arc,
Nero, Nijinsky, Skaha Affective disorders (depression or bipolar
disorder) Scientists: Boltwood, Boltzmann, Carothers, C. Darwin, L. de
Forest, J. F. W. Herschel, Julian Huxley, T. H. Huxley, Jung, Kammerer,
J. R. von Mayer, V. Meyer, H. J. Müller, J. P. Müller, B. V. Schmidt, J.
B. Watson Thinkers: W. James, J. S. Mill, Rousseau, Sabbatai Z'vi,
Schopenhauer Writers: Balzac, Barrie, Berryman, Blake, Boswell, V. W.
Brooks, Byron, Chatterton, J. Clare, Coleridge, William Collins, Conrad,
Cowper, H. Crane, Dickens, T. Dreiser, R. Fergusson, F. S. Fitzgerald,
Frost, Goethe, G. Greene, Hemingway, Jarrell, Kafka, C. Lamb, J. London,
R. Lowell, de Maupassant, E. O'Neill, Plath, Poe, Quroga, Roethke, D. G.
Rossetti, Saroyan, Schiller, Sexton, P. B. Shelley, C. Smart, T. Tasso,
V. Woolf

Artists: Michelangelo, Modigliani, Pollock, Raphael, Rothko, R. Soyer,
Van Gogh Composers: Berlioz, Chopin, Elgar, Gershwin, Handel, Mahler,
Rachmaninoff, Rossini, R. Schumann, Scriabin, Smetana, Tchaikovsky, Wolf
Others: C. Borgia, Clive, O. Cromwell, A. Davis, J. Garland Note:
Because almost all of these diagnoses are not based on objective
clinical assessments, most are highly tentative. believing that he was
receiving messages from extraterrestrials.)66 These problems
notwithstanding, the most carefully conducted biographical surveys have
consistently pointed to unusual levels of psychiatric disturbance in
creative and influential people.67 Other investigators have attempted to
avoid the uncertainties of historical research by studying living
people. For example, Nancy Andreasen interviewed a group of creative
writers living in Iowa, and found abnormally high levels of mood
disorder in both the writers and their relatives.68 American
psychologist Kay Redfield Jamison similarly interviewed a group of
eminent British writers and artists (chosen on the basis of having won
at least one top award in their field) and also found high levels of
mood disturbance. Although very few in Jamison's sample had been treated
for bipolar disorder (most having been treated for depression) many
described creative episodes in which they had experienced mood and
energy changes consistent with hypomania.69 If psychosis and creativity
have common genetic roots, the relatives of mentally ill patients should
show evidence of unusual creativity. This prediction was tested in a
study conducted in Iceland by psychiatrist John Karlsson, who
investigated the occupations of the relatives of schizophrenia patients
and found evidence of high levels of creativity.70 In a more recent
study carried out in Denmark by Ruth Richards and her colleagues,
manicdepressive patients and their relatives were interviewed about
their lives, and their responses were evaluated using a standard measure
of lifetime

creative achievement. The patients and their relatives scored higher
than a mentally well control group.71 The account I have given by no
means exhausts the ways in which the relationship between psychosis and
creativity has been explored.72 Suffice it to say that, overall, the
research is surprisingly consistent, and the long-held association
between madness and creativity seems to be a real one. One unresolved
issue concerns whether creativity is related to any particular type of
psychosis. Writers such as Nancy Andreasen and Kay Jamison have favoured
a link between creativity and mania whereas others, notably John
Karlsson, have argued for a link with schizophrenia. This question was
addressed directly by Gordon Claridge, who studied in depth ten authors
who had written at length about their mental troubles. The writers were
Margery Kempe, Thomas Hoccleve, Christopher Smart, William Cowper, John
Clare, John Ruskin, Arthur Benson, Virginia Woolf, Antonia White and
Sylvia Plath. When their self-reported symptoms were coded using the
OPCRIT computer diagnostic program, many diagnoses fell in the
schizophrenia spectrum, but some diagnoses of bipolar disorder were also
made. Interestingly, several of the writers received both types of
diagnosis, depending on the precise criteria employed. For example,
William Cowper was diagnosed as suffering from depression according to
Taylor and Abrams' criteria, bipolar disorder according to DSM-III and
DSM-III-R, schizoaffective disorder according to the RDC, and
schizophrenia according to five less widely used diagnostic systems.73
Once again, it seems, we are confronted with the limitations of
Kraepelin's distinction between dementia praecox and manic depression.

A Matter of Perspective? Everywhere we look, it seems that the
boundaries between sanity and madness are indistinct and permeable.
Contrary to the neoKraepelinian assumption that a clear line can be
drawn between mental illness and normal functioning, it seems reasonable
to assume, as a general principle, that abnormal behaviours and
experiences exist on continua with normal

behaviours and experiences. This principle of continuity might be
formally stated as follows: Abnormal behaviours and experiences are
related to normal behaviours and experiences by continua of frequency
(the same behaviours and experiences occur less frequently in
non-psychiatric populations), severity (less severe forms of the
behaviours and experiences can be identified in non-psychiatric
populations), and phenomenology (non-clinical analogues of the
behaviours and experiences can be identified as part of normal life).
Some of the evidence we have considered poses problems even for
sophisticated accounts of madness. For example, Gordon Claridge's
revised biomedical model -- in which madness is regarded as the
dysfunctional manifestation of an extreme variant of normal personality
-- seems threatened by the apparent association between madness and
genius. It might be argued that these observations undermine any
approach that automatically assumes madness to be a medical condition.
Challenges to the medical approach to madness have a long history.
Freud, for example, although a doctor by training, came to believe that
medicine provides a poor framework for either understanding or treating
mental disorders, and defended the right of 'lay analysts' to practise
psychotherapy.74 Popular concerns about the value of the medical
approach reached something of a crescendo during the 1960s and 1970s. At
this time, those who opposed conventional psychiatry (mainly because
they regarded it as dehumanizing) often styled themselves as
'anti-psychiatrists'. Some historians of psychiatry have argued that the
neoKraepelinians emerged as a group partly in reaction to the
anti-psychiatry movement.75 Certainly, it can be no accident that
anti-psychiatry was a popular intellectual position at the same time
that Robert Spitzer and his colleagues were fashioning DSM-III. Many of
those who proposed anti-psychiatric arguments were psychiatrists
themselves. In Britain, R. D. Laing became one of the most celebrated
contributors to the anti-psychiatry debate following the publication of
his books The Divided Self and The Self and Others.76 These built on
Laing's training in psychoanalysis and his experiences with a group

of Scottish psychiatrists who had argued that schizophrenia patients
should be treated with psychotherapy. Laing's main claim was that
psychotic symptoms are meaningful and therefore cannot be understood as
medical phenomena. In his later books, Sanity, Madness and the Family
and The Politics of Experience, he suggested, first, that schizophrenia
patients were driven insane by persecutory family systems and, later,
that madness could be seen as a creative, mystical experience.77
Although these ideas were passionately expressed and resonated well with
the Zeitgeist (for me, reading Laing as an undergraduate psychology
student who had not long escaped from the grip of parental authority was
an almost intoxicating experience) it is probably fair to say that their
expression was often muddled and inconsistent. This was partly because
Laing flirted with various poorly thought out, New Age ideas, and partly
because his own creative powers were unable to survive his almost
legendary predilection for alcohol.78 This is a pity because his early
work revealed an uncanny empathy with psychotic patients, and appeared
to offer intriguing insights into the psychology of their experiences.
Other influential critics of conventional psychiatry have put forward
different arguments against the medical approach to psychosis. In the
United States, for example, the Hungarian-born psychiatrist Thomas Szasz
(who has been highly critical of Laing, and who denies that he is an
antipsychiatrist) has claimed that schizophrenia cannot be an illness,
because no evidence of pathology has ever been found in the brains of
psychotic patients. Indeed, he has gone as far as to assert that mental
illness is a myth.79 We will examine these arguments (which I will
ultimately reject, although in a way that will offer little comfort to
the neoKraepelinians) in a later chapter. For the moment, we need only
note that the research on the continuum or continua between psychosis
and normal functioning suggests a startling conclusion that is in some
ways consistent with Laing's loosely expressed philosophy. Perhaps the
line between sanity and madness must be drawn relative to the place at
which we stand. Perhaps it is possible to be, at the same time, mad when
viewed from one perspective and sane when viewed from another.
OceanofPDF.com

6 Them and Us\* Father, Mother, and Me, Sister and Auntie say All the
people like us are We, And everyone else is They, And They live over the
sea, While We live over the way, But -- would you believe it? -- They
look upon We As only a sort of They. Rudyard Kipling1 During my career,
I have met mental health experts in many different parts of the world.
Perhaps the most unusual meeting of this kind that I have so far
experienced took place in a small village, high in the hills above the
town of Mbarara in southern Uganda. I had travelled to the country in
support of a British Council-sponsored link between my own university
and the Psychology Department at Makarere University in Kampala, where
plans were afoot to establish a clinical psychology training course. The
trip southwards from the capital had been arranged by Joanna Teuton, a
British clinical psychologist who was researching Ugandan attitudes
towards psychosis for her Ph.D., and who thought it might be useful for
me to see how mental health services were organized in remote areas. On
our arrival in Mbarara, we had met up with Marjolein van Duyl, a young
Dutch psychiatrist, who ran a clinic in the small medical school that
had recently been established by the Ugandan government. Accompanied by
a couple of local nurses, the three of us left the town in a pick-up
truck and, after venturing along a dirt track for about three quarters
of an hour, arrived at a small cluster of brick buildings, surrounded by
a huge expanse of open grassland. At the sound of our engine, people
began to filter out of doorways into the sunlight. Disembarking, we made

our way along a small footpath into a field where the healers were
gathering. There were about fifteen in total, men and women, young and
old, some standing, some squatting on two old benches that had been
dragged in to the sharply defined shade of a solitary tree. Some of
those present, Marjolein explained, were traditional birth attendants,
some were spiritual healers, some specialized in diseases of the gut and
others in diseases of the mind. 'Hello-how-are-you-I-am-well-thank-you',
spoken almost as one word, seemed to be the customary Ugandan greeting
even among those who did not speak English and, as each of the
traditional healers found it necessary to greet each of the visitors, it
was some time before we were all settled. The discussions that took
place over the following hour were facilitated by one of the nurses, who
proved to be a gifted translator. It was not the first time the healers
had met Marjolein, who had worked hard to build a good relationship
between them and the medical school. By fostering a climate of mutual
respect, Marjolein hoped to help the healers give front-line medical
care, while she provided European-style psychiatric treatment to those
who failed to benefit from the traditional methods. We began by
exploring the healers' ideas about psychiatric problems. The most severe
disorder that they recognized, called irraro in Runyankole (the local
language), made people aggressive and violent. People who suffered from
this disorder typically threw stones, ran about naked and refused to eat
food. Addiction to alcohol was also seen as a serious problem.
Surprisingly, the healers regarded hallucinations and delusions as much
less worrying. As the afternoon wore on, we shuffled around to stay in
the shade and discussed treatment methods. Some of those who specialized
in psychiatric problems said that they would use herbs, grown especially
for the purpose. Others said that they would use spiritual methods. For
example, when asked how he would treat a patient who was suffering from
voices, one man said that he would summon his spirits and ask them to
speak with the spirits who were tormenting the afflicted person.
Throughout the discussions, the healers responded politely to the
questions that Joanna and I put to them. The healers also asked
questions

about the kinds of treatment that would be offered to emotionally
distressed people in Britain. I found myself trying to explain my role
to an audience that had never before encountered a psychologist and
began by attempting to outline, in simple terms, how I might set about
helping a patient who suffered from auditory halucinations. The healers
listened thoughtfully. They did not seem to find my ideas ridiculous, or
necessarily incompatible with their own. In their efforts to compare the
two approaches, they asked intelligent questions about the effectiveness
of my techniques. Although the conversation was conducted via a
translator, and despite the unusual circumstances, it seemed fairly
typical of the kinds of discussions that take place whenever clinicians
gather to discuss their cases. Is Madness Universal? In the middle of
the nineteenth century, Samuel Butler, the rebellious son of an English
rector, left his homeland to rear sheep in New Zealand. At the time,
large areas of that country were still unmapped. Butler's experiences
gave him a distant perspective on his own society, which he
affectionately mocked in his utopian fiction Erewhon (Nowhere), which
was published in 1872.2. In the novel, he described a civilization in an
undiscovered corner of the world, chanced upon by an explorer, where
many of the values of Victorian society were inverted. Attitudes towards
crime and health were prominent among the topsy-turvy features of
Erewhonian culture. In Erewhon, ill health was considered a crime and
was severely punished, whereas immoral behaviour was regarded as a cause
for pity and professional treatment. Butler's satire raises an important
question about the nature of mental health and illness: Are psychiatric
disorders universal phenomena, or are they culturally determined? This
question needs some unpacking. Horacio Fabrega, Professor of Psychiatry
and Anthropology at the University of Pittsburgh, has argued that all
cultures, past and present, have recognized human behavioural breakdowns
-- anomalous behaviours that are sustained and judged negatively, and
which are regarded as disruptive to organized

social life.3 However, this does not mean that madness, as defined
within the Kraepelinian paradigm, is a universal phenomenon. Perhaps
different societies single out different kinds of behaviours and
experiences as evidence of madness? We must therefore divide our
question about the universality of psychiatric disorders into two
separate questions. First, do psychotic experiences and behaviours, as
defined by neoKraepelinian criteria, appear everywhere we look? Second,
do different cultures draw the boundaries between sanity and madness in
the same or in different places? My encounter with the traditional
healers illustrates some of the difficulties involved in answering these
questions. It seemed to me that irraro did not obviously correspond to
any category of illness recognized by psychiatrists from the developed
world, but it was possible that closer study of the disorder would have
shown me to be mistaken. John Orley, a psychiatrist who spent some time
with the Baganda (the largest tribe in Uganda), documented, in addition
to this kind of madness (known as eddalu to the Bagandans), other
locally recognized disorders, some of which, like obusiru (foolishness),
are regarded as diseases of the head whereas others, for example emmeme
etyemuka (fright), are regarded as diseases of the heart. Some, such as
ensimbu (fits), seem to correspond very closely to Western medical
concepts (in this case, epilepsy) whereas others, for example emmeme
egwa (a general weakening of the body and failure to eat), do not.4 In
practice, cross-cultural studies of madness have been pursued by two
different groups of researchers, who have started out with different
assumptions. Psychiatrists, for the most part, have tried to use Western
medical concepts to explain the behaviour of people in developing
countries. Orley, for example, argued that many cases of eddalu are in
fact people suffering from schizophrenia. Social anthropologists, in
contrast, have been interested in exploring concepts of normality and
abnormality in different cultures.\* Are Psychotic Symptoms Found in All
Societies?

As we have already seen, Kraepelin was one of the first people to
investigate whether psychotic symptoms could be found in non-Western
cultures. Although he concluded that both dementia praecox and manic
depression occurred in Java, he qualified this observation by suggesting
that delusions and hallucinations were less common among the Javanese
than among Europeans, and that states of mania and depression in the Far
East seemed to be milder and more fleeting. Speculating about the likely
causes of these differences, he argued that: It is, of course, an open
question whether the underlying processes there are basically the same
as those which produce similar clinical pictures in our hospitalsat
home. Perhaps it will be possible to settle the matter by anatomical
studies, but from the clinical point of view, based on a comparison
between the phenomena of disease which I found there and those with
which I was familiar at home, the overall similarity far outweighed the
deviant features... The relative absence of delusions among the Javanese
might be related to the lower stage of intellectual development
attained, and the rarity of auditory hallucinations might reflect the
fact that speech counts far less than it does with us and that thoughts
tend to be governed more by sensory images.5 Studies conducted by
anthropologists and doctors working for colonial administrations during
the first half of the twentieth century reported low rates of psychosis
in non-Western countries, leading some observers to doubt whether
schizophrenia could occur in societies that were close to a 'state of
nature'. C. G. Seligman, for example, in a report published in 1929,
commented of the people of Papua New Guinea: 'There is no evidence of
the occurrence of mental derangement, other than brief outbursts of
maniacal excitement, among natives who have not been associated with
White Civilisation.'6 Foremost among those who elaborated on this theme
was John Carothers, a young physician who, in 1938, was appointed senior
medical officer in charge of Mathari Mental Hospital in Nairobi,
following the dismissal of James Cobb from the same position.7 (Cobb,
who unlike Carothers, had received a formal training in psychiatry, had
scandalized Nairobi society by his drinking, his open homosexuality and
his bizarre

attachment to two pet lion cubs, with whom he was rumoured to have
enjoyed sexual relations.) Believing his appointment to be a temporary
one, and mindful of his lack of experience in psychiatry, Carothers was
at first reluctant to record any scientific observations about his
patients. However, after working alongside a group of British army
psychiatrists who passed through Kenya during the Second World War, and
following a short period of training in London afterwards, he began to
see parallels between European schizophrenia patients and ordinary
African citizens. Both seemed self-absorbed, morally lazy, preferred to
live in a world of fantasy and projected their own qualities and
emotions on to the world around them. Because 'the step from the
primitive attitude to schizophrenia is but a short and easy one', he
believed that ordinary Africans would remain psychologically healthy in
the simple and unstructured environment of the rural village but that,
on coming into contact with European rule in the urban centres, ran the
risk of becoming psychotic. Such was Carothers' reputation that, in
1952, he was commissioned by the World Health Organization to write a
report on the African mind, and, in 1954, by the British government to
write a psychological analysis of the Mau Mau rebellion. The former, in
which he attributed the African personality to poorly developed frontal
lobes, was surprisingly well received by anthropologists. The latter
attempted to pathologize the motives of a revolutionary movement and
failed to mention the land disputes that had triggered the insurrection.
Looking back from our vantage point at the beginning of the twenty-first
century, it is easy to see that Carothers' ideas were taken seriously
because they were consistent with the assumed inferiority of Africans,
rather than because of the quality of his research. Not surprisingly, a
rather different picture became apparent when the first systematic
cross-cultural research on psychosis was conducted several decades
later. The new cross-cultural psychiatry

This new picture emerged from a series of investigations sponsored by
the World Health Organization. In the International Pilot Study of
Schizophrenia8 and the subsequent International Follow-up Study of
Schizophrenia,9 patients in nine countries were examined and were
assigned diagnoses according to local and Schneiderian criteria. It was
these studies that confirmed that psychiatrists in the United States and
the Soviet Union had very broad conceptions of schizophrenia in
comparison with psychiatrists from the other participating countries.
This aside, the main finding was that disorders recognizable to Western
psychiatrists as 'schizophrenia' could be found throughout the world, an
observation that was widely interpreted by the psychiatric community as
evidence that schizophrenia is a tangible phenomenon that exists
independently of the observer. However, as American psychiatrist and
anthropologist Arthur Kleinman pointed out, the strategy employed by the
WHO investigators was almost bound to filter out cross-cultural
differences in psychopathology.10 Indeed, the researchers' conclusion
that schizophrenia is similar the world over was inevitable, as only
patients meeting Western criteria for schizophrenia were included in the
cross-cultural comparisons. This criticism applies with even greater
force to the more recent WHO study of the Determinants of Outcome of
Severe Mental Disorders (DOSMD).11 The researchers who undertook this
ambitious project reached the remarkable (and much trumpeted) conclusion
that the incidence rate of schizophrenia (the proportion of the
population that succumbs to the disease in a given period) does not vary
across the world. They therefore inferred that there must be a uniformly
distributed liability to schizophrenia and that 'This liability must
have a genetic basis.' The logic of this argument is baffling. As
British psychologist Richard Marshall once remarked before his untimely
death, market capitalism is the dominant worldwide economic system but
few people believe that there are uniformly distributed genes for
capitalism. On the other hand, many diseases of known genetic origin do
vary in incidence across the world. (Sickle-cell anaemia, to take but
one example, is an inherited blood disorder

that is common in African people, or people of African descent, but
which rarely affects other ethnic groups.) In fact, the DOSMD data did
not demonstrate that incidence rates for schizophrenia are culturally
invariant, as the researchers claimed. The team of over 100
investigators, led by Professors Norman Sartorius and Assen Jablensky,
studied people experiencing their first psychotic breakdown at twelve
sites (Aarhus in Denmark, Agra and Chandigarh in India, Cali in
Columbia, Dublin in Ireland, Honolulu and Rochester in the USA, Ibadan
in Nigeria, Moscow in Russia, Nagasaki in Japan, Nottingham in the UK
and Prague in the former Czechoslovakia). To be included in the study,
an individual had to be experiencing at least one psychotic symptom, or
showing at least two kinds of abnormal behaviour suggestive of
psychosis. The researchers made great efforts to find people who were
psychotic but who had sought help from non-medical agencies or
traditional healers, in this way hoping to catch all new cases who
failed to contact local medical services. Whether this strategy was
successful is debatable. Occasional 'leakage' investigations, in which
local informants were asked whether they knew of any psychotic people
who had slipped through the net, failed to reveal many previously
unidentified cases. However, the evidence we considered in the last
chapter suggests that many people experience psychotic symptoms
cheerfully and in silence. Certainly, it is difficult to be sure that
all new cases have been detected without interviewing a random sample of
the population. In the end, incidence rates were only calculated for
seven sites for which adequate data were available, with the Chandigarh
site divided into urban and rural subsites. Of course, a further
difficulty faced by researchers conducting this kind of study is the
choice between the many different definitions of schizophrenia. Rates
for both a broad and narrow (Schneiderian) definition of schizophrenia
were therefore reported. Not surprisingly, there was considerably more
variation in the rates for the broad definition than for the narrow
definition (see Figure 6.1). Even for the narrow definition, however,
the annual incidence rate reported for Nottingham (1.4 cases aged
between 15 and 54 years per 10,000

population) was twice that for Aarhus (0.7 cases). It seems amazing that
such a large difference was not considered important by the researchers,
but this was because the statistical calculations they carried out on
their data suggested that this difference could be due to chance factors
(for example, random variations in the numbers of new cases occurring at
each site). However, given the relatively small numbers of Schneiderian
patients, it seems likely that the study was not large enough to detect
reliably even quite big differences between the numbers at each site.12
In fact, statistically significant differences between the sites were
observed for the broad definition and, as Kleinman has noted: Figure 6.1
Incidence rates at seven different sites for two different definitions
of schizophrenia detected in the DOSMD study (from A. Jablensky, N.
Sartorius, G. Ernberg, M. Anker, A. Korten, J. E. Cooper, R. Day and A.
Bertelsen (1992) 'Schizophrenia: manifestations, incidence and course in
different cultures', Psychological Medicine, Supplement 20: 1-97). Dark
columns show data for a broad definition of schizophrenia (S, P or O
categories according to the CATEGO system of computerized diagnoses) and
light columns show data for a narrow Schneiderian definition (CATEGO
S+).

The 'broad' sample from the anthropological perspective is the valid
one, since it includes all first-contact cases of psychosis meeting the
inclusion and exclusion criteria. The 'restricted' sample is a
'constructed' sample, since it places a template on the heterogeneous
population sample and stamps out a homogeneous group of clinical cases.
The restricted sample

demonstrates to be sure that a core schizophrenic syndrome can be
discovered amongst first-contact cases in widely different cultures.
This is an important finding, but it is not evidence of a uniform
pattern of incidence.13 Other cross-cultural investigators, weighing
data from a number of epidemiological studies, have usually concluded
that schizophrenia-like psychoses are less common in non-Western
societies than in the developed world, and continue to debate the
possible causes of these apparent differences.14 For example, New
Zealand anthropologist John Allen has recently proposed that
schizophrenia occurs less often in non-Western societies because life is
more stressful in those societies than in the industrialized nations.15
(On this view, life close to a state of nature is not so idyllic after
all.) Like Paul Meehl, Allen accepts that schizophrenia is a
stress-related disorder, but notes that episodes of psychotic illness
are associated with reduced reproductive fitness. Therefore, he argues,
precipitation of an increased number of schizophrenia episodes in the
past will have resulted in a gradual weeding out of schizophrenia genes
throughout the undeveloped world, leading to fewer episodes in the
present. Ingenious though this argument is, it is, of course, an
evolutionary just-so story, and difficult to test scientifically.
Incidence rates of psychosis within one country: the British
AfroCaribbeans When attempting to make sense of the inconsistent results
that have emerged from comparisons between countries it is easy to
forget that many modern industrialized nations contain multiracial
populations. In fact, some of the clearest evidence of cross-cultural
differences in the incidence rates of psychosis has emerged from the
comparison of different ethnic groups in Britain. For many years it has
been known that black Afro-Caribbeans are overrepresented in British
psychiatric hospitals, and are especially likely to be diagnosed as
suffering from paranoid schizophrenia16 or mania.17 Not

surprisingly, the reasons for this over-representation have been the
subject of heated debate. One possible explanation might be that white
psychiatrists, ignorant of Afro-Caribbean culture, often misunderstand
the experiences of Afro-Caribbean people, and thereby misdiagnose many
as schizophrenic.18 To check for this possibility, researchers at the
Institute of Psychiatry in London invited a Jamaican psychiatrist, Fred
Hickling, to reevaluate their diagnoses of Afro-Caribbean patients.\*
Although there was poor agreement between Hickling's diagnoses of
schizophrenia and those made by the white British psychiatrists, the
overall rate at which Hickling and the British psychiatrists diagnosed
schizophrenia in the patients did not differ much.19 Therefore, it seems
unlikely that the high rates of psychosis in British Afro-Caribbeans can
entirely be accounted for by misdiagnoses made by culturally insensitive
white clinicians. Another possibility is that Afro-Caribbean people
express distress in a culturally idiosyncratic way that often culminates
in violence, leading to especially prompt intervention by psychiatric
services. It is certainly true that Afro-Caribbean people are more
likely to be compulsorily admitted to psychiatric hospitals in the UK
than other ethnic groups.20 However, as early as 1988, Glyn Harrison and
his colleagues found a higher than expected rate of psychosis in a
community sample of Afro-Caribbeans living in Nottingham, assessed using
standardized criteria.21 This finding has been replicated several times,
notably by psychiatrists Dinesh Bhugra, Julian Leff and their colleagues
in London.22 Studies conducted in the Caribbean have found lower
incidence rates for psychosis in Trinidad23 and Barbados24 than in the
British Afro-Caribbean community. Therefore, the Afro-Caribbean
population as a whole does not appear to be especially vulnerable to
psychosis, and a racially specific genetic sensitivity to madness can be
ruled out. More intriguingly, several studies in Britain have found that
the excess rates of psychosis are most evident in the children of
Afro-Caribbeans who have moved to Britain, rather than in the generation
that migrated.25 In a later chapter, we will see that this
over-representation of psychosis in the British Afro-Caribbean community
has provided important clues about

environmental determinants of madness. For the present, however, we can
note that this finding convincingly establishes that the incidence of
psychosis is not identical in all ethnic groups in all regions of the
world. Cross-cultural differences in the outcome of psychosis
Ironically, although the DOSMD study obscured differences in incidence
rates, it succeeded in its main purpose, which was to confirm a
suspicion that cross-cultural differences exist in the course and
outcome of psychosis. This suspicion arose in earlier research, in
particular the five-year follow-up of patients recruited to the
International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia.26 In that study, it was
reported that 27 per cent of patients in the developing nations
experienced only one psychotic episode, followed by complete recovery,
compared to only 7 per cent of patients from industrialized nations. Nor
was this difference in outcome confined to symptoms; 65 per cent of
patients in the developing countries compared to 56 per cent of patients
in the industrialized countries were judged to have no or only mild
social impairment at the end of the followup period. Arthur Kleinman
described these observations as 'arguably the single most important
finding of cultural differences in cross-cultural research on mental
illness'.27 The DOSMD data broadly replicated these observations. In the
two-year follow-up data from the study, 37 per cent of patients from the
developing countries suffered one episode, followed by complete
recovery, compared to only 16 per cent of patients from the developed
world. Nearly 16 per cent of patients in the developing countries showed
impaired social functioning throughout the follow-up period, whereas the
corresponding figure for the developed countries was nearly 42 per cent.
Despite the undoubted limitations of the WHO programme of cross-cultural
research, the evidence that madness is more benign outside the
industrialized world is quite compelling. On the basis of these
findings, Ezra Susser and Joseph Wanderling of Columbia University in
New York proposed the term nonaffective acute remitting psychosis (NARP)
to describe a clinical picture in which there is a rapid onset of
symptoms followed by complete recovery.

True to the spirit of the DSM, they argued that it should be considered
a diagnostic entity distinct from schizophrenia. They calculated the
incidence of this type of clinical presentation to be ten times greater
in the developing world than in industrialized nations.28 Unfortunately,
as critics of the WHO studies have pointed out, the researchers who
designed the studies defined culture simply in terms of geography, and
almost completely neglected to measure cultural factors that might be
responsible for the observed differences.29 The reasons people who
experience psychosis in the developing world do so much better than
those in the West must therefore remain a matter of speculation. It has
been pointed out that developing societies have many positive
characteristics in comparison with developed countries.30 These include
families who are more supportive and less critical; greater
opportunities for employment; less competitiveness and impersonality in
the workplace; and lower levels of stigma associated with psychiatric
disorder. In later chapters we will encounter evidence that some of
these factors really do help to determine the long-term prospects of
psychiatric patients. Cross-cultural differences in symptoms So far, we
have seen that there is evidence of cross-cultural differences in both
the incidence and outcome of psychosis. However, all the studies we have
so far considered have taken the Kraepelinian paradigm for granted.
Further evidence of cross-cultural differences comes to light when we
consider symptoms, rather than broad and scientifically questionable
diagnostic concepts such as 'schizophrenia'. For example, the DOSMD
researchers found that visual hallucinations were much more frequently
reported in the developing than in the developed countries. This
observation received little attention compared with the researchers'
more contentious claims about incidence rates, but has been repeated by
other investigators.31 Studies of delusions also point to cross-cultural
and historical differences. For example, although the most common type
of delusion reported by modern patients is persecutory,32 patients
admitted to US hospitals during

the Great Depression of the 1930s more commonly suffered from delusions
of wealth and special powers.33 To these observations must be added the
so-called culture-bound syndromes -- disorders that are apparently
restricted to particular societies.34 Examples include koro (an illness
suffered by Chinese people, usually males, who believe that their sexual
organs are shrinking), latah (experienced by Indonesians, who develop an
exaggerated startle response, which includes shouting rude words and
mimicking the behaviour of those nearby) and witiko psychosis (a rare
disorder in which Algonquian-speaking Indians of Canada believe
themselves to be possessed by vampires). Western psychiatrists have
sometimes attempted to account for these syndromes by arguing that the
form of mental disorder remains constant across cultures but that the
content varies, so that the culture-bound syndromes are locally shaped
expressions of disorders that are universal (for example, witiko
psychosis might be seen as an unusual variant of schizophrenia).35 When
doing so, they have typically ignored culture-specific factors that have
shaped the observed behaviour (for example, there is evidence that latah
evolved as a way of mimicking the unintelligible demands of European
colonialists).36 A further problem with this approach is that it assumes
that Western psychiatry somehow 'knows best', and has discovered an
accurate taxonomy of abnormal behaviours that can be applied without
difficulty to non-Western cultures. The research we have reviewed in
previous chapters suggests that this kind of psychiatric imperialism has
no merit. Given the paucity of evidence supporting the Kraepelinian
paradigm, it is not obvious why we should regard it as superior to that
of the Baganda. Are Psychotic Experiences Normal in Some Cultures?
Extract from my field diary: Dorze, Southern Ethiopia, Sunday 24 viii 69
Saturday morning old Filate came to see me in a state of great
excitement: 'Three times I came to see you, and you weren't there!'

'I was away in Konso.' 'I know. I was angry. I was glad. Do you want to
do something?' 'What?' 'Keep quiet! If you do it, God will be pleased,
the Government will be pleased. So?' 'Well, if it is a good thing and I
can do it, I shall do it.' 'I have talked to no one about it: will you
kill it?' 'Kill? Kill what?' 'Its heart is made of gold, it has one horn
on the nape of its neck. It is golden all over. It does not live far,
two days' walk at most. If you kill it, you will become a great man!'
And so on... It turns out Filate wants me to kill a dragon. He is to
come back this afternoon with someone who has seen it, and they will
tell me more... Dan Sperber37 We must now turn to the second of our two
questions. Because different cultures embrace starkly different
taxonomies of mental disorder, there is clearly a possibility that the
boundaries drawn between madness and normal functioning vary with
geography. It just might be possible to be mad in one culture but at the
same time sane in another. Roland Littlewood, one of the few British
psychiatrists with an interest in anthropology, has lamented that the
most common question he is asked by his medical colleagues is, 'Is this
a delusion?'38 Certainly, as the above excerpt from anthropologist Dan
Sperber's field diary demonstrates, the apparently irrational beliefs of
other cultures present a challenge to those who seek a clear dividing
line between normal and abnormal beliefs. What, for example, is the
psychiatrist to make of the Fataleka of the Solomon Islands, who
maintain that the Earth occupies the fifth of nine parallel strata, that
reflections are in stratum three, flutes are in stratum four, crocodiles
are in stratum seven, and stratum eight is empty? In a thoughtful
discussion of these kinds of beliefs, Sperber has noted that they can
sometimes be understood as proto-scientific theories.39 For example, the
West African notion that the mind is the meeting place of multiple souls
is

similar to Freud's theory of psychoanalysis. At other times the beliefs
seem to be metaphors. The assertion by Bororo males that they are red
macaws can be understood when it is known that red macaws are taken as
pets by Bororo women, who play a dominant role in Bororo society.
Sperber goes on to argue that much of the remaining puzzlement
experienced by Westerners when encountering the beliefs of other
cultures can be resolved by recognizing that often they are not literal
statements of observed facts. When people are asked about these kinds of
beliefs, they often justify them in terms of tradition or knowledge
passed to them by others, much as a modern-day Christian might justify
belief in the resurrection by referring to the Bible. Unfortunately,
this analysis does not help us very much. In later chapters, we will see
that processes similar to those described by Sperber can be seen at work
in the beliefs of many Western psychiatric patients. Some delusions,
like West African beliefs about the mind, seem to be patients' rational
attempts to explain their experiences. Others, like the Bororo males'
identification with red macaws, may be metaphors. (As I write this
passage, I am reminded of a young black man I once saw who had been
raised by white adoptive parents and who claimed that he was an
abandoned visitor from another planet who would one day be rescued by a
flying saucer.) Others do not seem to be statements of fact at all, as
witnessed by patients' failure to behave accordingly (for example, the
patient who asserts that his food is poisoned but who can easily be
encouraged to eat it).40 The standard psychiatric response to this
conundrum is to rule the beliefs of other cultures non-delusional by
definition. For example, the definition of delusions given in DSM-IV
notes that 'The belief is not one ordinarily accepted by other members
of the person's culture or subculture.'41 Others, for example Roland
Littlewood and Maurice Lipsedge, have argued that there is a spectrum of
beliefs running from widely held religious convictions, through the
beliefs of obscure sects, to individual psychotic delusions.42 Both of
these moves seem to make the answer to the question, 'Is this a
delusion?' a matter of consensus. (If enough people locally share

the belief it is not a delusion.) Although they have been proposed in
order to allow psychiatrists to distinguish between 'true' delusions and
unusual but culturally determined beliefs, they seem to let cultural
relativism in by the back door. The evidence on cultural variations in
the acceptability of hallucinations is more clear-cut. Anthropologist
Erika Bourguignon found that hallucinations played a role in the ritual
practices of 62 per cent of the 488 societies for which she was able to
obtain adequate data. For example, Mohawk Indian hunters are forbidden
to eat their own game, and are visited by spirits if they do so.43
American psychologist Ihsan Al-Issa has suggested that cross-cultural
differences in hallucinatory experiences reflect culturally embedded
beliefs about the boundaries between imagination and reality, so that
experiences that would be regarded as imaginary in one culture are
regarded as real in another.44 Failure to appreciate the cultural
context may prevent clinicians from responding appropriately to the
distress experienced by their patients. An example of this kind of
mistake has been reported by Scott McDonald and Chester Oden, two
clinical psychologists practising in Hawaii, who have described their
misdirected efforts to help two men who suffered from hallucinations of
dead relatives. They later discovered that this kind of experience,
known as aumakua, is quite common among Hawaiians of Polynesian
ancestry, and usually occurs when someone has violated a cultural taboo.
Instructing their patients to make amends for their transgressions was
sufficient to bring the hallucinations to an end.45 Some social
scientists have suggested that experiences that would be regarded as
psychotic in the West are afforded a normal status in the activities of
traditional healers and shamans (holy people who experience altered
states of consciousness).46 For example, Robert Edgerton has discussed
the work of Abedi, in Tanzania:47

Abedi's specialization in mental illness began during his apprenticeship
when he first hallucinated ('hearing voices of people I could not see')
and ran in terror to hide in the bush. He was discovered and returned to
his father's care, but lay ('completely out of my senses') for two weeks
before being cured. The cause was diagnosed as witchcraft and since the
cure, Abedi has never been sick again. The experience initiated Abedi's
interest in mental illness, and the subsequent mental disorders of his
sister and his wife reinforced it. At different times, both women became
violently psychotic, but Abedi cured them both. These two cures not only
heightened Abedi's interest in psychiatric phenomena, but they led to
his reputation as a skillful psychiatrist. Similarly, of ten Ugandan
traditional healers interviewed in depth by Joanna Teuton as part of her
Ph.D. research, two had clearly been inspired to take up their vocations
by psychotic episodes. For example, a woman from the Luganda tribe said
that she had become a healer after a difficult period during which she
had heard voices and entertained paranoid beliefs, experiences that she
described with great lucidity. Nor is this phenomenon restricted to the
developing world. Historical figures from the West who might justifiably
be regarded as shamans because their claims to religious leadership were
associated with psychotic experiences include Francis of Assisi, Joan of
Arc, John Bunyan and Ann Lee (the founder of the Shaker Movement in the
United States), all of whom experienced hallucinations. Even today, some
citizens from the developed world are able to pursue shamanistic careers
on the basis of such experiences, as the following case-vignette from
Holland demonstrates: A 42-year-old divorcee, mother of two children,
who has a private practice as a psychic healer, has heard voices for as
long as she can remember. She hears the voices via her ears. The voices
are located both inside and outside her head. One voice began in
childhood and is still present, but she also hears other voices. The
initial voice talks to her in the second person. She communicates with
this voice, consulting it for the benefit of her clients.

Her voices also talk amongst themselves. Although her voices are not
actual voices she has heard in daily life, she is not afraid of them and
does not feel restricted by them. Rather, she feels that they are
protective: they give her advice, comfort and care. She considers her
voices as protective ghosts. She also regularly experiences visual,
tactile, and olfactory hallucinations.48 Anthropologists have often
rejected the suggestion that many healers and shamans are psychotic,
perhaps because this idea seems to devalue the contribution that they
make to their own cultures.49 They have argued that the healer's role
requires a degree of organization that would be difficult to achieve by
someone suffering from a full-blown psychotic illness, that most
societies clearly distinguish between shamanistic states and behaviour
believed to be evidence of madness, and that the experiences of shamans
and Western schizophrenia patients are not so similar on close
examination. American anthropologist Jane Murphy of Harvard University
studied local psychiatric concepts in a village of Yupik-speaking
Eskimos on an island in the Bering Sea, and among Yorubas living in
rural Nigeria.50 The languages of both cultures included words for
madness. Among the Eskimos, nuthkavihak refers to a sickness of the soul
or spirit in which sufferers talk to themselves, and scream at people
who do not exist. Among the Yoruba, were refers to a condition involving
hearing voices, laughing at nothing in particular, picking up leaves for
no purpose, throwing off clothes and defecating in public. Another
American anthropologist, Richard Noll, compared reports of altered
states of consciousness, mainly collected from Native American shamans,
with the description of schizophrenia in DSM-III.51 He argued that, 'By
far the most important distinction between shamanic states and
schizophrenia is that the shaman voluntarily enters and leaves his
altered states of consciousness while the schizophrenic is the helpless
victim of his.' Moreover, according to Noll: The phenomenology of
schizophrenia contained in DSM-III... indicates clearly that the
shamanic state of consciousness... cannot be mistaken for schizophrenic
states if the current diagnostic criteria of the latter are

assumed to be reliable and the experiential descriptions of the former
are accurate. But, of course, as we have seen in previous chapters, the
current diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia are not reliable, and give
a biased picture of psychosis. As the majority of people in Western
societies who experience psychotic states never come into contact with
psychiatric services, many must be capable of the degree of organization
necessary to be a healer. Perhaps the dispute about the relationship
between psychosis and shamanism approaches our question about the
boundaries of madness in the wrong way. Rather than ask whether
psychotic experiences can be valued in some circumstances, we should
step backwards and ask why certain types of behaviour and experience are
singled out as evidence of insanity. As Horacio Fabrega points out,
human behavioural breakdowns are nearly always recognized when
individuals are unable to participate and function in social life.52 The
apparent consensus between different cultures about madness therefore
concerns behaviours and experiences that are associated with an
inability to cope with the demands of living. There seems to be an equal
lack of consensus about how to describe similar behaviours and
experiences when the individual is nonetheless able to lead a fruitful
life and get along with others. According to the Kraepelinian paradigm
embraced by psychiatrists in the developed world, such people are
nonetheless psychotic or schizophrenic. Other cultures, in contrast,
allow such people to find valued roles that prevent them from being
dismissed as crazy. Moving the boundaries of madness Fortunately, we do
not have to rely on cross-cultural studies for evidence that the
boundaries of madness are culturally determined. Disputes about the
positioning of these boundaries have been fought between Western
psychiatrists since the earliest days of their profession.

Not many people today would take seriously a suggestion by Dr Samuel
Cartwright, published in the New Orleans Medical and Surgical Journal of
1851, that dreapetomania (an uncontrollable urge to run away observed in
American Negro slaves) should be regarded as a medical disorder.53 More
recently, the psychological problems of combat veterans have been
variously described as evidence of low moral fibre, nostalgia,
shell-shock, battle fatigue, brainwashing or posttraumatic stress
disorder (the currently favoured diagnosis) in response to changing
attitudes towards warfare.54 Psychiatric theories about minority sexual
preferences have shifted even more dramatically. Homosexuality was
listed as a psychiatric disorder in DSM-II but was removed from the
diagnostic manual following a referendum of members of the American
Psychiatric Association in 1974.55 Although it might be thought that the
psychoses involve such a clear break from reality, and such obvious
disability, that they would be immune from similar attempts to redraw
the boundaries of psychiatric disorder, a recent experiment in Holland
has shown that this is not the case. Maastricht, a charming city of
cobbled streets surrounded by thirteenthcentury battlements, was
catapulted into the limelight in 1992, when it hosted the signing of the
European treaty that now bears its name. In addition to being a venue
favoured by European bureaucrats, it is home to the University of
Limburg where, until his recent retirement, Marius Romme was a professor
of social psychiatry. A tall, white-haired and gentle man, Romme
developed his unusual approach to helping people suffering from
hallucinations after attempting to treat a 30-year-old female patient
whose 'voices' gave her orders, forbade her from doing things, and
dominated her life.56 Severely distressed, she had been diagnosed as
suffering from schizophrenia. Neuroleptic drugs had no impacton the
voices, but marginally reduced her anxiety. A course of psychotherapy
was similarly ineffective. Her attitude towards her hallucinations was
unexpectedly transformed, however, by a chance encounter with a book
written by an American psychologist, Julian Jaynes.57

The book (something of a cult classic in psychology) is called The
Origins of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind, and has
a strikingly original thesis. Jaynes proposes that self-reflective
consciousness is a recently evolved faculty of the human mind that did
not exist in Ancient Greece. According to Jaynes, because the Greeks
lacked a concept of 'I', or the self-as-agent, the things they said to
themselves when engaged in verbal thought were experienced as being said
by gods (which is why they had so many gods).58 Jaynes noted the
similarity between the Ancient Greeks' experiences, and the experiences
of modern-day schizophrenia patients, and it was this aspect of the book
that had such a dramatic impact on Marius Romme's patient. Embracing the
view that hearing voices was an entirely normal experience for the
Ancient Greeks, she no longer saw her own experiences as pathological.
Romme and his patient appeared on a popular Dutch television programme
and invited viewers who had experienced voices to write to them.
Approximately one third of the 450 people who responded said they had
little difficulty coping with their voices. As might be expected from
the epidemiological evidence that we considered earlier, many had never
received psychiatric treatment. When those who had avoided becoming
patients were compared with those who had not, the two groups appeared
to be remarkably similar. The main difference was that the non-patients
saw themselves as stronger than their voices, whereas the patients saw
themselves as weaker.59 Working with his partner Sondra Escher, a
journalist, Romme has organized a national network for Dutch people who
hear voices. This provides a forum in which they can meet to discuss
their experiences and share ideas. The organization, known as Resonance,
encourages people to accept their voices as part of normal human
variation rather than as manifestations of disease, and encourages
independence from psychiatric services whenever this seems possible.

This startling and quite deliberate attempt to move the boundaries of
madness demonstrates that even the experiences normally attributed to
schizophrenia do not have to be considered pathological. It may be true
that hallucinations and delusions are found throughout the world, but
whether or not these experiences are seen as evidence of illness appears
to vary according to local customs and beliefs. The NeoKraepelinian
Paradigm as a Cultural System Not surprisingly, anthropologically minded
psychiatrists often objected to the picture of psychiatric disorders
embodied in early editions of the DSM, not necessarily because they
perceived its classification system to be invalid, but because it barely
acknowledged the influence of cultural factors on mental health. In
response to these kinds of criticisms, the US National Institute of
Mental Health set up a task force to develop proposals for including
cultural information in DSM-IV.60 As a consequence, the fourth edition
of the manual contains notes on how culture can influence the expression
of psychiatric disorders, and an appendix listing some culture-bound
syndromes reported in developing countries. However, many of the
recommendations made by the task force were not incorporated.61 There is
very little discussion of the way in which differing social norms can
influence the experience and interpretation of symptoms, and the
inclusion of culture-bound syndromes in an appendix appeared to give
them a marginal status within the system as a whole. The task force's
suggestion that two diagnoses widely used in the West, anorexia nervosa
and chronic fatigue syndrome, should be described as culture-bound was
not taken up. However, even if the editors of DSM-IV had followed the
advice of the task force to the letter, it is not obvious that they
would have produced a manual that would be entirely satisfactory from an
anthropological perspective. Indeed, the evidence that we have
considered in this chapter suggests a radical reappraisal of the entire
DSM enterprise. We can now see that this enterprise is, itself,
culture-bound. It represents the efforts of

members of one particular culture to make sense of human behavioural
breakdowns. In an insightful analysis of the relationship between
medicine and culture, Arthur Kleinman has argued that medical concepts
are always embedded within a cultural system, so that theories of
disease (maladaptions or malfunctionings of biological or psychological
processes) and illness (the individual's experience of disease) can
never be separated from the cultural background.62 On Kleinman's view,
the health care systems of different cultures serve functions that are
common to all. They enable individuals to communicate about their
experiences; they sanction certain types of behaviour (for example,
staying away from work when ill); they guide the choice of health care
interventions; and they influence health care practices per se (for
example the use of herbs, manufactured drugs or psychotherapy). Kleinman
points out that the explanatory models that are used to account for
disease and illness often vary between different social groups occupying
the same location at the same point in time. In African countries, for
example, discrepancies often arise between the explanatory models of
ordinary people, traditional healers and a professional elite trained in
Western medicine. Kleinman believes that these discrepancies may be
impediments to the provision of adequate health care in the poorest
regions of the world. In his opinion, Westerntrained doctors must
therefore attempt to work with indigenous concepts of disease and
illness in order to achieve mutually respectful and effective
relationships with their patients. Kleinman's research has focused on
explanatory models of psychiatric disorder that are indigenous to China
and the Far East. For example, as we shall see later, he has shown that
Chinese concepts of mood disorder differ markedly from Western concepts,
placing less emphasis on psychological symptoms such as low self-esteem
and more emphasis on physical symptoms such as fatigue. Because of this
focus, it is all too easy to assume that Kleinman's analysis applies
only to non-Western cultures. However,

the analysis is just as relevant to the European and North American
context as it is to Africa or the Far East. The Kraepelinian paradigm,
like the diagnostic system of the Baganda, is a product of a particular
social and historical context (the period of German expansionism in the
late nineteenth century) and has been moulded into its latest
incarnation, DSM-IV, by North American psychiatrists imbued with the
values of a powerful scientific and industrialized economy. (Leafing
through DSM-IV, it is hard not to feel that the hand of Henry Ford has
helped to shape it.)

Towards a Post-Kraepelinian Psychiatry This chapter concludes the first
part of this book, in which I have tried to show the limitations of the
Kraepelinian approach to explaining and understanding psychiatric
problems. I am sure that social constructionists or extreme cultural
relativists, who regard 'reality' as nothing more than an invention of
the dominant culture, will particularly welcome the conclusions I have
reached in the last few pages. According to this kind of reasoning, a
scientific account of madness could never be constructed because there
are no facts, free of social interpretation, on which to build a
theory.63 My own view is that this kind of nihilism is self-defeating.
All scientific theories, even those in the physical sciences, are
developed in a particular cultural context. Although the context may
help to explain the persistence of a theory in the face of apparently
falsifying evidence, the fact that a theory arises from a particular
context is not sufficient to condemn it. Theories and paradigms must be
accepted, modified or rejected on the basis of evidence. Indeed, if we
swallow the postmodernist dogma that any theory is as valid as any
other, and thereby reject the assumption that standards of scientific
evidence lead to the tangible advance of knowledge, it is difficult to
see why the arguments I have so far marshalled against the Kraepelinian
approach should carry any weight. The main purpose of criticizing
outdated theories is not to abandon theories altogether but to replace
them with theories that are more useful and more scientific.

The persistence of Kraepelin's paradigm in the face of such overwhelming
negative evidence reflects the difficulty of finding an alternative. It
is one thing to criticize a theoretical system and quite another to
offer something in its place. Despite various proposals for an
alternative system (by making diagnoses more sensitive to cross-cultural
distinctions, by classifying patients using dimensions rather than
categories, by lumping together the psychoses under an einheitspsychose
concept) none has been enthusiastically embraced by large numbers of
clinicians or researchers, mainly because practical versions of these
systems have yet to be devised. Although we cannot entirely exclude the
possibility that a future Linnaeus of psychiatry will achieve what
others have so far been unable to accomplish, I am sceptical whether any
new system will succeed where Kraepelin's has failed. In the remaining
chapters of this book, I will therefore describe a more radical
alternative. The fundamental principle guiding this approach can be
simply stated as follows: We should abandon psychiatric diagnoses
altogether and instead try to explain and understand the actual
experiences and behaviours of psychotic people. By such experiences and
behaviours I mean the kinds of things that psychiatrists describe as
symptoms, but which might be better labelled complaints, such as
hallucinations, delusions and disordered speech. I will argue that, once
these complaints have been explained, there is no ghostly disease
remaining that also requires an explanation. Complaints are all there
is. An advantage of this approach is that it does not require us to draw
a clear dividing line between madness and sanity. Indeed, when
constructing explanations of complaints it is not necessary to assume
that they are always pathological. By 'complaint', I just mean any class
of behaviour or experience that is singled out as sometimes troublesome
and therefore worthy of our attention. The approach I am advocating has
been given various names, none of which is entirely satisfactory. It is
most commonly labelled the symptom-

orientated approach; although I will occasionally use this name in the
following chapters, I feel uncomfortable with it because of the medical
connotations of the word 'symptom'. The term cognitive neuropsychiatry
has been suggested by British psychologist Haydn Ellis to describe the
attempt to understand psychiatric symptoms using the theories and
techniques of cognitive and neuropsychology64 (we will see what these
are in later chapters). Although there is now a journal of this name,
and although brains clearly play an important role in unusual behaviours
and experiences, I think that the prefixes cognitive and neuro presume
too much. If the new approach needs a label (and perhaps it does not)
then postKraepelinian psychiatry is perhaps as good as any. Manifestos
are probably best left to political parties, but Gerald Klerman's
attempt write one for the neoKraepelinian movement65 has tempted me into
constructing one for my fellow post-Kraepelinians. The manifesto (which
is given in Table 6.1, and which matches Klerman's almost point by
point) tries to accommodate the lessons we have learnt in the past few
chapters, and anticipates some ideas that I will introduce later on. It
is designed to stimulate debate, and perhaps should not be taken too
seriously.

An initial objection that I must overcome The fundamental idea that I am
advocating in this book -- studying complaints and abandoning
psychiatric diagnoses -- is hardly new. It was anticipated in the ideas
of Adolf Meyer but, to my knowledge, was first clearly articulated by
the British psychologist Donald Bannister in the late 1960s.66 When I
first began to investigate hallucinations and delusions in the
mid-1980s, many of my colleagues still seemed to feel that this approach
was slightly batty. Recently, however, an increasing number of
psychologists and psychiatrists in Europe and North America have begun
studying complaints, and this kind of research has been in danger of
becoming absorbed into the mainstream of psychiatry. One indication that
an idea has arrived is the emergence

Table 6.1 A post-Kraepelinian manifesto. 1. The understanding and
treatment of psychiatric problems must be approached from multiple
perspectives, including those of the neurosciences, psychology,
sociology and anthropology. None of these approaches alone provides a
sufficient framework, or has precedence over the other. (Psychiatry is
not just a branch of medicine, except in the trivial sense that laws in
many countries allow only medical practitioners to call themselves
psychiatrists.) 2. Psychiatric practice should use modern scientific
methodologies and be based on scientific knowledge. 3. Psychiatric
practice involves the treatment of people who are distressed by
psychological complaints, or who are having difficulty coping with the
demands of everyday life. In some circumstances, experiences such as
hallucinations, unconventional beliefs, or thinking that appears bizarre
to others, occur in people who are not distressed, and who are
functioning well. Such people should not be encouraged to seek
psychiatric treatment. 4. There is no clear boundary between mental
health and mental illness. Psychological complaints exist on continua
with normal behaviours and experiences. Where we draw the line between
sanity and madness is a matter of opinion. 5. There are no discrete
mental illnesses. Categorial diagnoses fail to capture adequately the
nature of psychological complaints for either research or clinical
purposes. 6. There is no inseparable gulf between the psychological and
the biological. Adequate theories of psychological complaints must show
how psychological and biological accounts are interrelated. (An
exclusive focus on biological determinants of psychological complaints
is bad science and leads to treatments that fail to meet the needs of
psychiatric patients.) 7. Research into psychological complaints must
start from a detailed

description of those complaints. Such descriptions should be reliable
and valid. 8. Efforts should be made to understand the psychological
mechanisms underlying psychological complaints. Specification of those
mechanisms is likely to lead to an understanding of the aetiological
role of both social and biological factors. 9. Psychological complaints
must be understood as endpoints of developmental pathways, which are
determined by complex interactions between endogenous and environmental
processes. of a thoughtful critical response. As I was completing the
first draft of this chapter, an article criticizing symptom-orientated
research appeared in the British Journal of Psychiatry. Ramin Mojtabai
and Ronald Rieder, two psychiatrists working at the College of
Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University in New York, make three
general points.67 Their first concerns reliability -- they argue that
clinicians and researchers often show less agreement when deciding
whether a patient has a particular symptom than when deciding whether a
patient fits a particular diagnosis. Second, they argue that genetic
studies show that the heritability of symptoms is less than the
heritability of diagnoses (in other words, clearer genetic effects are
found when patients are selected according to diagnoses rather than
according to symptoms). Finally, they argue that studies of symptoms
have revealed nothing about the aetiology of psychiatric disorders. The
second and third of these arguments will be addressed in later chapters.
However, it is important to deal with the question of reliability here
because, if Mojtabai and Rieder are correct, this objection would be
fatal to my argument. Obviously, an approach focusing on complaints will
get no where if we cannot decide who is experiencing which complaint.
Mojtabai and Rieder present data from three American studies in which
the reliability of symptoms yielded average kappa values of 0.62, 0.40
and 0.49. At face value, these results are certainly disappointing.
Fortunately, they almost certainly underestimate what can be achieved,
even with

conventional psychiatric interview schedules. A recent study using the
Positive and Negative Syndromes Schedule, a widely used interview-based
method for rating the severity of psychotic disorders, showed that the
reliability of symptom ratings improves when clinicians are given
appropriate training. After five sessions of training, kappa exceeded
0.90 for seventeen out of thirty symptoms, and exceeded 0.70 for all but
one.68 When instruments especially designed to measure specific
complaints have been evaluated, high levels of inter-rater reliability
have consistently been achieved. At the Mental Health Research Institute
of Victoria, in Melbourne, Australia, a group led by Professor David
Copolov has developed an interview schedule for assessing unusual
perceptions, particularly hallucinations; a study showed that kappa
values for each of the subscales (measuring different aspects of
hallucinations, for example physical and emotional characteristics of
hallucinated voices) varied between 0.81 and 0.98.69 In Britain, a
somewhat simpler interview-based scale for rating features of
hallucinations and delusions has been developed by Gill Haddock, a
clinical psychologist based at the University of Manchester. In field
trials, this instrument has been shown to yield levels of inter-rater
reliability for its various subscales that reach a minimum of 0.79.70
Several instruments are available to measure the thought, language and
communication disorders of psychotic patients, for example Nancy
Andreasen's Thought, Language and Communication Scale71 and Nancy
Docherty's Communication Disturbance Index,72 both of which have been
shown to have acceptable levels of reliability. Mojtabai and Rieder's
pessimism about the measurement of complaints seems to reflect a biased
reading of the evidence. No doubt many readers will be as sceptical
about focusing on complaints as Mojtabai and Rieder, although perhaps
for different reasons. In the following parts of this book I will
therefore lay out the framework of postKraepelinian psychiatry in some
detail, describing research on depression, paranoia, mania, hall
ucinations and disordered speech. I will then explore the implications
of this research for aetiological theories of psychosis. In this way, I
will attempt to demonstrate that the approach that I am

advocating leads to a richer understanding of the nature and origins of
psychiatric disorder than has been possible within the Kraepelinian
paradigm. OceanofPDF.com

Part Two A Better Picture of the Soul 7 The Significance of Biology We
are not interested in the fact that the brain has the consistency of
cold porridge. Alan Turing1 In the first part of this book I have
offered a damning portrait of Kraepelinian psychiatry. By examining the
taxonomic assumptions that have underpinned modern theories of
psychosis, I have argued that the conventional approach to understanding
madness is deeply flawed. This is the reason why there has been so
little progress in the treatment of psychiatric disorders since the time
of Kraepelin. Most researchers and clinicians have been stuck at the end
of the blind alley into which he led us over a century ago. It is now
time for me to make good my earlier promise that I would demonstrate a
workable alternative to the Kraepelinian system. In the remaining parts
of this book, I will therefore show how psychological theories can be
used to explain many of the strange behaviours and experiences
('symptoms') encountered both inside and outside the psychiatric clinic.
As I have already stated, my approach will be to examine each of these
behaviours and experiences in turn. I will therefore make no attempt to
explain schizophrenia, manic depression or any of the other myths of
twentieth-century medicine. Instead, I will show how psychological
research can cast light on phenomena such as

hall ucinatory voices, depressed mood, delusional beliefs, manic
episodes and incoherent speech. Before we start, however, we should do
some ground work. In earlier chapters I have argued that psychotic
behaviours and experiences lie on continua with normal behaviours and
experiences. One implication of this argument is that the processes that
govern ordinary mental life may well play an important role in
psychosis. Indeed, it seems very unlikely that we will be able to
develop a useful account of madness unless we first have an adequate
understanding of human nature. The purpose of the next few chapters is
to provide the framework for such an understanding. Unfortunately, there
is not space with in these pages to give the reader a comprehensive
review of what is known about human psychology, a field that is in any
case changing daily. However, what I can do is focus on a small number
of topics that have important implications for the way in which we
attempt to explain madness. In the process, I will demonstrate how some
of the theories of schizophrenia and manic depression proposed by
neoKraepelinians have often failed, not only because they have been
based on an unworkable system of classification, but also because they
have accepted, as self-evident, assumptions about the human mind that
are in fact erroneous. The general theme that I want to address is that
the brain, the mind and human emotions cannot be understood in isolation
from their social context. We will begin by considering what many regard
to be the most fundamental question in psychology: the relationships
between brain, behaviour and experience. This topic is important because
any coherent account of psychosis must accommodate both the findings
from neurobiological research and the results of psychological
investigations. That this is not a trivial problem is attested to by the
fact that most researchers who have studied psychiatric disorders have
treated these two types of explanation as irreconcilable.

The Interminable Debate

From the very beginnings of their calling, many psychiatrists have
assumed that biological explanations of psychosis should somehow take
precedence over psychological accounts. For example, when Wilhelm
Griesinger founded the Archives for Psychiatry and Nervous Disease in
1867, he penned an opening editorial, which stated that: Psychiatry has
undergone a transformation in its relation to the rest of medicine. This
transformation rests principally on the realization that patients with
so-called 'mental illnesses' are really individuals with illnesses of
the nerves and brain.2 Nearly a century later, in their famous account
of Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry, published in 1963, psychiatrists
Richard Hunter and Ida MacAlpine argued that: 'The lesson of the history
of psychiatry is that progress is inevitable and irrevocable from
psychology to neurology, from mind to brain, never the other way
round.'3 Similarly, in the 1975 edition of an influential British
textbook of psychiatry, the following remarks can be found: It would be
absurd to maintain that psychology can be to psychiatry what physiology
is to medicine, not only because the claim would be exaggerated, but
also because it implies that psychiatry and medicine are mere
cousin-sciences... The primary concern of the psychiatrist is the morbid
mental states; and however much is known about the psychology of the
normal individual, in the pathological field new laws will be found to
operate.4 More recently, Samuel Guze, a prominent neoKraepelinian, has
simply stated that: 'There can be no such thing as a psychiatry that is
too biological.'5 It is clear, therefore, that psychiatrists' recent
preoccupation with biological determinants of psychosis, emphasized in
proposition 6 of Gerald Klerman's manifesto (see Table 3.3, p. 59), was
the culmination of a historical trend within the profession.

A curious parallel exists between these assertions and the arguments put
forward by some prominent anti-psychiatrists. Both groups, it seems,
have assumed that the criterion for disease is some kind of pathology in
the brain, and that disputes about the boundaries of madness can
therefore be solved by reference to biological data. However, whereas
the biological psychiatrists have assumed that neuropathology will
inevitably be found in patients (if it has not been found already), the
anti-psychiatrists have assumed that it is non-existent. Thomas Szasz,
perhaps America's most controversial critic of psychiatry, is best known
for taking this position. Born in Budapest in 1920, Szasz qualified as a
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst in the United States and has been
Professor of Psychiatry at the State University of New York, Syracuse,
since 1956. He first stated his now infamous position in a 1960 paper
entitled 'The myth of mental illness',\* which was published in the
American Psychologist, the professional journal of the American
Psychological Association.6 This has been followed by a long series of
articles and books that have addressed the same theme in different ways.
In contrast to those of Ronald Laing, Szasz's ideas appear to have been
little influenced by his clinical experience; he offers few insights
into the nature of psychosis. Rather, his arguments have been directed
against the logic and ethics of biological psychiatry. Because Szasz's
opponents have often misunderstood these arguments, it is worth
examining them in detail. The argument outlined in 'The myth of mental
illness' falls into two parts. Szasz's first and most important claim is
that the concept of mental illness is incoherent. His starting point is
the work of the nineteenth-century physiologist Rudolf Virchow, who
defined illness in terms of the presence of a lesion in the body.
According to this definition, if mental illness is truly illness, it
should be associated with some kind of physical pathology, which is most
likely to be located in the brain. So far, Szasz's position is entirely
consistent with that of the neoKraepelinians. However, Szasz further
notes that, in modern times, disorders of the brain are usually
considered to be the province of neurology and therefore that the
defining feature of a mental illness is the absence of physical
pathology. For this reason, he claims, mental illness cannot be illness
in any real sense of the word 'illness'. On

Szasz's view, talk of mental illness is self-contradictory, in much the
same way that describing someone as a 'married bachelor' or a
'meat-eating vegetarian' would be self-contradictory. Szasz's second
claim concerns the role that the concept of 'mental illness' plays in
industrialized societies. Following his argument that this concept is
incoherent, Szasz is moved to ask why it has been so readily accepted by
mental health professionals and the general public. He argues that a
diagnosis of mental illness allows a kind of moral sleight-of-hand,
apparently justifying the control of individuals who are a nuisance to
others but who are not law-breakers. Once diagnosed as 'mentally ill',
such individuals can be coerced into undergoing 'treatment' so that they
will conform more fully to the social norms. On this view,
psychiatrists, psychologists and psychiatric nurses belong to a kind of
police force that controls and limits the amount of deviance within
society. This second part of Szasz's argument has often been erroneously
identified with the political left. In fact, Szasz's views build on a
tradition of right-wing libertarianism that is familiar to North
Americans but which often seems alien to Europeans. Szasz believes that
the state should have a minimal role in regulating the conduct of
individuals. He therefore argues that recreational drugs should be
legalized,7 and that the right to commit suicide should be respected.8
At the same time, he opposes the use of the insanity defence in court
cases, because 'Excusing a person of responsibility for an otherwise
criminal act on the basis of inability to form conscious intent is an
act of legal mercy masquerading as an act of medical science.'9 Although
he has objected to compulsory psychiatric treatment, he has stated that
he has no objection to psychiatry between consenting adults.10 Not
surprisingly, Szasz's ideas have earned him the opprobrium of many of
his colleagues. Five years after the publication of 'The myth of mental
illness', Frederick Glaser wrote in the American Journal of Psychiatry:
'The question will inevitably be raised whether sanctions of some form
ought to be taken against Dr Szasz, not only because of the content of
his views but because of the manner in which he presents them.'11

Some saw Szasz's arguments as part of a wider anti-establishment
conspiracy. Commenting on the anti-psychiatry movement in general,
British psychiatrist Sir Martin Roth (co-author of the 1975 textbook
that sought to distance psychiatry from psychology) suggested that: The
anti-medical critique of psychiatry represents one approach within a
wider movement which has assumed international proportions and adopts a
critical or derogatory stance towards psychiatry's methods, aims and
social role; it is anti-medical, anti-therapeutic, anti-institutional
and anti-scientific, either by expressed aims or implicitly through the
dogmatic, hortatory, diffuse and inconsistent character of its
utterances.12 Of course, these objections are very emotional and tell us
little about the merits of Szasz's position, which deserves a more
dispassionate analysis. Scientific evidence that madness is associated
with neuropathology should be problematic for Szasz and other critics of
the Kraepelinian paradigm but comforting to neoKraepelinians. Few of
Szasz's early opponents rose to this obvious challenge, perhaps because
biological research into madness was still in its infancy at the time
that 'The myth of mental illness' was written. In the four decades
since, however, there have been substantial advances in the technologies
available to biological researchers and there can be no doubt that these
have provided encouragement to those who have continued to see
psychiatry as a branch of physical medicine. It will be helpful to take
a look at some of these developments, not only to facilitate our
evaluation of the merits of the contrasting positions taken by Szasz and
the neoKraepelinians, but also so that we can form an opinion about the
achievements of biological psychiatry. Before commencing this task I
should point out that the following review is not intended to be
comprehensive. Studies of brain biology have become so complex that it
would be difficult to encompass them within a single book, let alone a
single chapter. In the present context we must therefore focus more on
the implications of biological investigations of psychosis

than on the details of individual studies. In particular, what we need
to establish is whether studies that point to apparent abnormalities in
the brains of psychotic patients leave any room for theories of madness
that have a more psychological flavour.

Psychotic Brains Although it has long been known that the brain is the
organ responsible for thought and feeling, its anatomy and physiology
only began to be properly appreciated in the nineteenth century, largely
as a result of the efforts of the early biological psychiatrists. Their
work revealed that the brain consists of billions of small nerve cells,
known as neurones, which are connected together into circuits of almost
unimaginable complexity. These are surrounded by an even larger number
of glial cells, which have metabolic functions, and which help to
determine the overall structure of the brain. At the time of these major
advances in neuroscience, it was widely believed that electrical
impulses were responsible for the transmission of information within the
brain, a belief that had been fostered by Galvani, Volta and others in
the eighteenth century, who had shown that nerves could be stimulated by
electricity. The invention of the electroencephalogram (EEG) by the
German psychiatrist Hans Berger in the 1920s allowed the first
recordings of electrical activity from electrodes placed on the human
scalp, which appeared to confirm this hypothesis. Our current
understanding that the transmission of information within the neurone is
electrical, but that neurones communicate by means of chemicals, known
as neurotransmitters, is there-fore surprisingly recent. Although Otto
Loewi and Henry Dale received the Nobel Prize for medicine in 1936 for
their demonstration that the peripheral nervous system utilizes
noradrenaline and acetylcholine,13 the idea that neurotransmitters
played an important role in the central nervous system only became
widely accepted in the 1960s.14 At the moment, neuroscience is again a
rapidly expanding field of inquiry, and many different methods of
investigation are currently being employed.

In what follows I will restrict myself to the three approaches that have
been pursued most vigorously by modern biological psychiatrists: studies
of the gross anatomical structure of the brain, investigations of
activity in different brain regions, and finally examination of the
brain's biochemical composition. I will also focus mainly on studies of
schizophrenia patients, as other diagnostic groups within the psychotic
spectrum have been much less intensively investigated.

The anatomy of madness Perhaps the most obvious way of searching for a
biological substrate of madness is to look at the brains of mad people.
Kraepelin advocated postmortem studies for this purpose, and encouraged
his colleague Alois Alzheimer to pursue this line of research. Although
he accepted Alzheimer's conclusion that the brains of dead psychotic
patients looked more or less normal, this did not stop him from
asserting that, in dementia praecox, 'Partial damage to, or destruction
of, cells of the cerebral cortex must probably occur, which may be
compensated for in some cases, but which mostly brings in its wake a
singular, permanent impairment of the inner life.'15 Since Kraepelin's
time, post-mortem studies have been pursued with sporadic enthusiasm but
without consistent results. This is no doubt partly because, as we have
seen, schizophrenia is an incoherent concept, so that patients who
receive the diagnosis are likely to have acquired their symptoms as a
consequence of a number of distinct aetiological processes, but also
because of the methodological difficulties encountered in this kind of
work. The brains studied, which are usually taken from the bodies of
elderly patients, may not represent psychotic brains in general, and may
have been damaged by whatever factors were responsible for the patients'
deaths. Following death, decay progressively alters brain tissue and
these changes become more marked with time. Add in the difficulty of
finding comparable brains from ordinary people who died at the same age
of similar causes, and which have been stored after death for a similar
period under

identical conditions, and it is easy to see why repeatable findings have
been elusive.16 Interestingly enough, the observation that has been most
often replicated is a negative one. At any stage in life after the end
of the second trimester of foetal development, neuronal damage (for
example, as a consequence of infection or injury) leads to a
proliferation of glial cells, accompanied by a rise in associated
enzymes and proteins -- a process known as gliosis. Most studies that
have looked for gliosis in the brains of patients have failed to find
it,17 suggesting that damage to the brain after birth is unlikely to
play an important role in psychosis. This inference, which is not
uncritically accepted by all neuropathologists who agree with the basic
observation,18 has in turn led to the suggestion that some kind of
foetal brain damage prior to the end of the second trimester may be
responsible (a proposal we will consider in detail in a later chapter).
A more promising approach is to study the brains of living patients.
Early methods of imaging the living nervous system followed from
Röntgen's discovery of X-rays in 1895.19 These included angiography (in
which an Xray-opaque medium is injected into the cerebral arteries),
which was developed in the 1930s by the Portuguese neurosurgeon (and one
time foreign minister) Egas Moniz. Moniz's invention was an important
medical breakthrough, because it allowed neurosurgeons to locate
cerebral tumours with precision for the first time. The same cannot be
said of his more famous invention, the prefrontal leucotomy operation
given to thousands of unfortunate schizophrenia patients, for which he
was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1949. (In one of the more ironical twists
in the history of psychiatry, Moniz was shot dead by a disgruntled
leucotomy patient in 1955.) Godfrey Hounsfield, a British engineer whose
work for Electrical and Musical Industries (EMI) Ltd heralded the modern
era of brain imaging, was a more deserving recipient of the Prize. In
1970, Hounsfield introduced computed tomography (CT) scanning, which
allowed X-ray information taken from different angles to be integrated
into a single image depicting a slice through the body. Although this
was a revolutionary step forward, the achievements of CT scanning have
recently been surpassed by even more

advanced technologies, which make similar use of computers to construct
complex images. Perhaps the most important of these is magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), which uses strong magnetic fields to provoke a
discharge of radio waves from the body, and which is better than CT at
imaging the soft tissues of the brain. MRI scans now generate
breathtakingly beautiful threedimensional pictures of the brain that can
be rotated and inspected from different angles. Studies employing these
structural imaging technologies have reported a variety of abnormalities
in the brains of psychotic patients, including enlargement of the sulci
(crevices in the folded tissue of the cortex), focal lesions in
different cortical areas, and atypical asymmetries of the cerebral
hemispheres. Most researchers, however, have focused their attention on
the fluid-filled ventricles in the centre of the brain, perhaps because
these were the only anatomical structures that were adequately revealed
by early CT scans (see Figures 7.1 and 7.2). The earliest CT study of
psychotic patients was carried out by Eve Johnstone, Tim Crow and their
colleagues at Northwick Park Hospital, near London, who used the first
scanner to become available in Britain.20 They reported that a small
group of chronically ill schizophrenia patients had significantly larger
lateral ventricles than a comparison group of ordinary people. Later
studies conducted in several different countries appeared to replicate
this finding, implying that schizophrenia patients suffer from some kind
of loss of volume in the cerebral cortex.21 As some of these findings
were obtained from patients who had only recently become ill and who had
not been treated with medication,22 some researchers have inferred that
brain disease is present at the very beginnings of psychosis. In the
light of the inconsistent neuropathological evidence, it has also been
argued that this loss of volume reflects a reduction in the size of
neurones and the interconnections between them, rather than a loss of
neurones per se.23

Figure 7.1 The cerebral ventricles (reproduced from K. W. Walsh (1978)
Neuropsychology: A Clinical Approach. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone).
Figure 7.2 CT scans showing the cerebral ventricles in a healthy
individual, left, and a patient with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, right
(reproduced from N. C. Andreasen (2001) Brave New Brain: Conquering
Mental Illness in the Era of the Genome. Oxford: Oxford University
Press).

On closer inspection, however, the CT and structural MRI data are more
ambiguous. In all studies, substantial variations in ventricular size
have been observed in both patients and ordinary people. Moreover, some
studies have failed to find evidence of significant ventricular
enlargement, presumably because people who receive the diagnosis of
schizophrenia

form a heterogeneous group.24 However, enlarged ventricles have been
recorded in studies of bipolar patients and patients suffering from
unipolar (simple) depression, although, again, findings have varied
substantially from study to study.25 When mood disorder patients and
schizophrenia patients have been compared, little evidence of difference
has been found.26 It is therefore unlikely that ventricular enlargement
(even if we can be sure that it is present in some patients) is uniquely
associated with schizophrenia. Some of the inconsistencies in the data
probably reflect problems that are unique to this kind of research. For
all the precision of CT and MRI, it can be difficult to calculate the
exact volume of the cerebral ventricles. A further and perhaps more
fundamental obstacle is the difficulty of finding appropriately matched
non-psychotic people who are willing to be scanned. In 1986 two Canadian
researchers, Geoffrey Smith and William Iacano, highlighted this problem
by reanalysing the results from twenty-one studies then available,
splitting them into those studies that had found differences between
schizophrenia patients and controls and those that had not.27 The
average ventricular size of the patients in the two sets of studies was
about the same, but the control participants in the studies that did
report a difference had smaller ventricles than the control participants
in the studies that did not. It seemed that those studies that reported
abnormally large ventricles in schizophrenia patients did so because
they recruited controls (often patients attending hospital for
neurological tests whose brain scans were judged to be normal) who had
ventricles that were unusually small! Not surprisingly, later studies,
using larger samples and more carefully matched controls, have found
more modest differences between patients and ordinary people.28 The
importance of recruiting adequately matched controls is underscored by
studies which have shown that ventricular volume is affected by factors
such as sex, age, head size, educational achievement, social class,
ethnicity, alcohol consumption, water retention and even pregnancy.29 As
some of these sources of variation can change with time, it should not
be surprising that ventricular volume can vary between one occasion and
another. A recent study found that some psychotic patients who at first
appeared to

have large ventricles showed a reduction of ventricular volume to within
normal limits when scans were repeated at a later date.30 By offering an
unapologetically sceptical account of the research on ventricular
enlargement, I do not mean to imply that structural imaging studies are
always uninformative. As investigations have become progressively more
sophisticated, subtler differences between the brains of psychotic
patients and ordinary people have been reported.31 However, even if
these findings -- or any other observations of atypical brain structure
-- prove to be replicable, we should be cautious when making inferences
about the aetiology of psychosis. Psychological changes are always
accompanied by changes in the brain. Each new skill, or piece of
information that we learn, is accompanied by the creation of new neural
circuits that make new patterns of behaviour possible.32 These changes
reflect the endless interaction between ourselves and the physical and
social environment in which we live. Put crudely, our brains are
constantly being rewired in response to our experiences. This process
can result in anatomical changes that are large enough to be detected by
a scanner. For example, several studies have shown that the volume of
the hippocampus (an area of the brain that plays an important role in
memory) is reduced in people who experience post-traumatic stress
following warfare or sexual assault.33 Other studies have shown that the
corpus callosum and other anatomical structures are reduced in volume in
children who have been victims of sexual or emotional abuse.34
Experience can also cause brain structures to increase in size. As I was
completing this chapter, a research group at the Institute of Neurology
in London published the results of a study of London taxi drivers. They
reported that the posterior hippocampus becomes enlarged as taxi drivers
struggle to acquire a detailed knowledge of the geography of London.35
Plainly, these findings do not imply that post-traumatic stress can be
adequately understood as a disorder of the brain. It is better thought
of as a psychological reaction to adverse events that manifests itself,
at the biological level, as changes in brain structure. Perhaps some of
the structural abnormalities observed in the brains of psychotic
patients are

similarly products of unfortunate experiences. (It is not difficult to
believe, for example, that the richness of the early social environment
affects cortical volume and thereby the size of the cerebral ventricles,
a hypothesis that would be consistent with the lack of gliosis observed
in neuropathological studies, and the suggestion that the loss of volume
observed in some patients reflects changes in the synaptic connections
between neurones rather than in their number.) Only research that
focuses specifically on aetiological factors (which we will consider
later in the book) can establish whether this is the case, or whether
the abnormally shaped brains of psychotic patients are evidence of some
kind of early biological insult.

The glimmer of enlightenment The second type of biological investigation
that we will consider involves measuring brain activity in the hope of
discovering which regions are involved in different psychological
functions. Surprisingly, perhaps, studies of this kind considerably
predate the development of the new neuroimaging technologies. For
example, Anglo Mosso, a nineteenthcentury Italian physiologist, was able
to observe blood pulsations in a peasant who had suffered damage to an
area of the skull lying over the frontal lobes.36 Mosso asked his
subject to perform mental calculations, observed an increase in the
pulsations, and concluded that this was probably caused by increased
blood flow to this region of the brain. Hans Berger's invention of the
electroencephalogram at the beginning of the last century enabled
regional brain activity to be quantified for the first time. Recall that
neurones create electrical potentials, which are involved in the
transmission of information within the cell. The synchrony or asynchrony
of this activity in many cells results in gross electrical potentials
that can be detected on the scalp. It is possible to use these
potentials to gain some general indication of changes in activity in the
underlying regions of the cerebral cortex. Often the results of these
investigations are fairly uninformative. (When I worked in a high
security hospital after qualifying as a clinical psychologist in the
mid-1980s, EEGs were routinely taken from

patients. The reports made by the electroencephalographer usually made
vague reference to 'possible' and 'non-specific' abnormalities and were
almost always useless for clinical purposes.) However, under
wellcontrolled experimental conditions, EEGs can reveal quite specific
information about brain functioning. One approach is to measure the
evoked potentials that are detected in different brain regions when a
stimulus is presented many times over. By averaging across the many
presentations, it is possible to remove random noise from the EEG
record, and thereby obtain a recording of the specific neural response
evoked by the stimulus. Functional imaging has been revolutionized by
more recent developments in scanning technology. Two methods now widely
used by researchers are positron emission tomography (PET)37 and
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).38 In the case of PET, the
volunteer is injected with a radioactive substance (for example, glucose
that has been 'radio-labelled'), which is drawn to those parts of the
brain that use most energy. From there, the substance emits positrons,
which almost immediately decay into two photons travelling in opposite
directions. These are detected by a scanner surrounding the skull, which
consists of a large number of crystals that scintillate when struck by
the photons. By detecting which pairs of crystals scintillate together,
the scanner is able to 'see' where the photons originated from, thereby
identifying those brain regions to which the substance has been drawn.
Although very precise, PET has several disadvantages. Because the
radioactive isotopes employed by PET have very short halflives, they
have to be created on-site using expensive equipment. Also, of course,
there are health hazards associated with introducing radioactive
substances into the body, however short-lived. The more recently
developed fMRI approach, which capitalizes on the relationship between
blood flow and brain activity first described by Mosso, is less
hazardous than PET. As in structural MRI, a strong magnetic field is
used to stimulate molecules in the body. However, fMRI makes use of the
fact that oxygenated blood, which surges to different parts of the brain
as they become active, responds with a stronger MRI signal than
deoxygenated blood. It is therefore possible to use this
blood-oxygen-leveldependent (BOLD) response to detect those brain
regions that are most

active at any point in time. In practice, the process of experimentation
is rather similar to that for PET. Typically, a volunteer is asked to
lie in a scanner and to perform a series of tasks in response to various
cues and instructions. Outside the scanner, the researchers watch a
video monitor and see an image of the volunteer's brain, which is
coloured to indicate which regions are most active. PET and fMRI are
such dazzling technologies that it is easy to regard them as a kind of
magic. A person thinks and regions of her brain begin to glow. In fact,
the successful conduct of this kind of experiment requires considerable
forethought. Tasks must be chosen to reflect the kinds of psychological
functions that are of special interest. Moreover, the brain activity
measured when the volunteer performs the task must be compared with the
activity observed when the brain is doing something else. (The choice of
the 'off-task' can dramatically affect the observations made when the
volunteer performs the 'on-task'. The best kind of off-task is identical
to the on-task except that the psychological function of interest is not
involved.) In short, the success of functional imaging studies usually
depends on having a reasonable understanding of the psychological
processes that are being imaged. In the absence of such an
understanding, functional neuroimaging research is somewhat reminiscent
of the nineteenth-century pseudoscience of phrenology, which tried to
locate mental functions in different regions of the brain by mapping
bumps on the scalp. Psychiatrists and psychologists have attempted to
use these technologies to test theories about the role of abnormal brain
activity in psychosis. One line of research has been driven by the
observation that the left and right sides of the normal brain have
different functions. This phenomenon, known as cerebral lateralization,
was known to neurologists in the nineteenth century, and was
enthusiastically researched by neuropsychologists throughout the 1970s
and 1980s. (Roger Sperry, the only psychologist to receive the Nobel
Prize for medicine, was responsible for many of the most important
studies of lateralization carried out during this period.) Looking
downwards from above the brain, the two cerebral hemispheres stand out
as the most prominent anatomical structures. In most

people, the left hemisphere is said to be dominant because language
functions are located there (damage to the right side of the brain
usually results in much less language impairment than damage to the
left) and because most people are right-handed (each hemisphere controls
the hand on the opposite side, so right-handedness implies left
dominance). In 1969, a Canadian psychiatrist, Pierre Flor-Henry,
suggested that epileptic patients who had schizophrenia symptoms usually
had left hemisphere or bilateral damage to their brains, whereas those
that had mood disorder usually had damage to the right. This led him to
argue that cerebral lateralization might be abnormal in psychotic
patients.39 The idea that atypical lateralization is implicated in
psychosis is still favoured by some researchers. However, there is now a
plethora of theories about how this leads to symptoms. Some have argued
that dominance may be less marked or even reversed in psychotic people,
so that the functions of the hemispheres are less clearly differentiated
than in ordinary people. One version of this hypothesis suggests that
schizophrenia patients hear voices when the left hemisphere detects
speech emanating from the normally silent right.40 Another theory
suggests that it is not the relative dominance of the hemispheres that
is important, but the way in which they are connected and work together.
Perhaps the boldest account of the relationship between lateralization
and psychosis has been proposed by Tim Crow, who argues that
schizophrenia is a price paid by humanity for the gift of language.41
According to Crow, the genes that are responsible for determining
language specialization by one hemisphere (usually the left) are also
responsible for schizophrenia. (Crow takes the much disputed WHO claim
that the incidence of schizophrenia is constant across the world, which
we considered in Chapter 6, to support his view that it is 'a disease
(perhaps the disease) of humanity',42 and that the genetic mutation that
leads to psychosis is as old as humanity itself.) One observation that
seems to be consistent with the abnormal lateralization hypothesis is a
high rate of mixed-handedness in schizophrenia patients compared to
ordinary people.43 Also consistent with Crow's particular version of the
theory is recent structural scanning study data indicating that the
slight anatomical differences between the

hemispheres seen in ordinary people are absent in some schizophrenia
patients.44 However, studies using EEG have yielded complex findings
that do not lead to any simple interpretation, so that, in the words of
Raquel Gur of the University of Pennsylvania, 'One may vacillate...
between being overwhelmed by the amount of data that have converged on
the issue of laterality in schizophrenia and feeling some exasperation
at the paucity of solid answers for questions that seem quite
rudimentary.'45 In an attempt to make sense of this evidence, including
the results of his own research conducted over several decades,
psychologist John Gruzelier of Imperial College London has suggested
that different kinds of abnormal lateralization are related to different
types of complaints.46 He has argued that active symptoms of psychosis
(by which he means over-activity, pressure of speech, mania and
paranoia) reflect the excessive dominance of the left-hemisphere
functions, and an under-activation of the right. He attributes symptoms
of social and emotional withdrawal, on the other hand, to the excessive
dominance of right-hemisphere functions and an underactivation of the
left hemisphere. Interestingly, Gruzelier's analysis of the evidence led
him to conclude that these abnormal patterns of activation are reduced
when patients' symptoms improve following drug treatment. Strangely,
studies of brain lateralization in psychosis have rarely been conducted
using the newer functional imaging techniques. These technologies have
been associated with a quite different theory of abnormal brain
function, known as the hypofrontality hypothesis. In a study published
in 1974, Swedish researchers David Ingvar and Goran Franzen used an
early version of PET to obtain crude measures of regional blood flow in
the brains of a small group of chronically ill schizophrenia patients.
Although the results from the patients were broadly normal, two
important observations were noted. First, there seemed to be reduced
blood flow to the anterior (front) portions of the brains of the
schizophrenia patients in comparison with the healthy controls
(hypofrontality). Second, the increase in blood flow to these regions
detected when the controls were asked to perform certain mental tasks
was not observed in the schizophrenia patients.47

The hypofrontality hypothesis has enjoyed mixed support since Ingvar and
Franzen's initial observations. In a recent review, Peter Liddle was
able to find thirty-five studies in which blood flow had been measured
while schizophrenia patients were resting, and found that hypofrontality
was reported in only a minority of these.48 However, Ingvar and
Franzen's report of attenuated activation when schizophrenia patients
engage in some kind of mental task has, to some extent, been supported
by later investigations. In an influential study by Daniel Weinberger
and his colleagues at the National Institute for Mental Health in
Washington, schizophrenia patients and normal controls were administered
a psychological test, known as the Wisconsin Card Sort. This test
requires participants to sort cards marked with complex shapes according
to a rule known by the tester. The tester gives feedback as the test
proceeds, allowing the participant gradually to formulate a hypothesis
about the unknown rule. Consequently, their performance gradually
improves. However, every so often, the tester changes the rule without
informing the participant. The ability to shift to the new rule in these
circumstances is thought to involve neural circuits located in the
frontal cortex, as patients with damage to this area lack this kind of
cognitive flexibility. Consistent with the hypofrontality hypothesis,
the schizophrenia patients in Weinberger's study performed poorly on the
Wisconsin test and, in comparison with ordinary people, showed less
increased activation of the frontal cortex as they attempted it.49 Other
researchers have since reported similar findings, but have also
demonstrated that hypofrontality is only present when patients are
acutely ill, and is absent (or at least much reduced) when patients have
recovered.50 It is not yet clear whether hypo frontality is restricted
to schizophrenia patients, as adequate investigations have yet to be
conducted with patients diagnosed as suffering from bipolar disorder.51
It would be foolish to underestimate the impact that functional
neuroimaging is having on our understanding of the brain. As these
technologies have become more routinely available, studies of abnormal
neuroactivations in psychiatric patients have become more fashionable.
Recent investigations have often focused on specific symptoms of
psychosis rather than poorly defined diagnostic categories, and are
therefore

consistent with the approach that I am advocating in this book.
(Although the main thrust of this book is psychological, in later
chapters I will describe some of these experiments.) However, once
again, caution is required when attempting to infer the causes of
psychosis from the results of these experiments. Most importantly -- and
this may seem an elementary point -- the results of functional
neuroimaging studies depend on how the participants attempt the
prescribed psychological tasks. Abnormal activations in patients may
simply reflect the fact that they are not cooperating, are poorly
motivated, or are doing something else. In fact, as we will see in the
next chapter, psychiatric patients often are poorly motivated when
attempting psychological tests such as the Wisconsin Card Sort, and
their performance can sometimes be dramatically improved by providing
them with an incentive. Suspicion that this kind of problem can affect
neuroimaging research is fuelled by the observation that hypofrontal
patients sometimes show normal brain activations after a course of
appropriate training on the relevant psychological tests.52 As in the
case of structural abnormalities, abnormal brain activity may, in the
end, turn out to be a consequence of adverse experience rather than a
product of some kind of biological insult or malfunction. Evidence that
supports this supposition is available from studies of people who have
suffered from early trauma. It has been found, for example, that
survivors of sexual and emotional abuse show abnormal left-hemisphere
activity as measured by EEG, and reduced activation of the left
hemisphere compared to the right as measured by fMRI.53

The chemistry of madness We turn finally to the chemical processes that
underlie the changing neural activity detected in functional imaging
experiments. For readers who are not already familiar with the basic
facts of neurotransmission, the following is a brief summary (and see
Figure 7.3).

We have already seen that neurones influence other neurones by means of
chemicals known as neurotransmitters. These are secreted across the
special junctions where one neurone meets another, known as synapses. At
the receiving end of each synapse there are structures, known as
receptors, which are proteins to which the neurotransmitter binds.
Complex biochemical processes are then involved in the 'reuptake' of the
neurotransmitter from the synaptic gap. When a post-synaptic neurone is
stimulated by a neurotransmitter in this way, an electrical potential is
created within the cell. These potentials, summating from several
firings of a pre-synaptic neurone or of a number of pre-synaptic
neurones, determine whether the post-synaptic neurone fires in turn,
releasing neurotransmitters where it synapses with other neurones
further along the circuit. It is the combined action of large numbers of
neurones, working together in this way, which allows the brain to
process input from the environment, integrate information, and command
co-ordinated behaviour. Different brain circuits use different
neurotransmitters. The most intensively researched are acetylcholine,
gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA), glycine, serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine), noradrenaline and dopamine. However, a large
number of peptides may also function as neurotransmitters (a recent
textbook of biological psychiatry54 lists twentynine candidate
substances). Until only a few years ago, it was thought that each
neurone used only one type of neurotransmitter. However, it now appears
that some neurones use both a classical neurotransmitter and a peptide.
To complicate matters further, there are also a number of different
kinds of receptors for each neurotransmitter. For example, in the case
of dopamine, five main types are known, which, by convention, are
labelled D1 to D2. Figure 7.3 The structure and function of the dopamine
synapse (reproduced from R. W. Heinrichs (2001) In Search of Madness:
Schizophrenia and Neuroscience. Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Dopamine is synthesized from tyrosine and stored in vesicles. When
released into the synapse, it binds with receptors on the post-synaptic
membrane. Monoamine oxidase breaks dopamine down to yield homovanillic
acid. Dopamine is also taken back into the pre-synaptic cell. Drugs such
as amphetamine and cocaine release and prevent the uptake of dopamine.
Anti-psychotic drugs such as haloperidol and chlorpromazine occupy
post-synaptic receptors and thereby block dopamine occupancy.

The biochemical approach to psychosis attempts to explain how
dysfunctional neurotransmission can lead to symptoms. Theories of this
kind have usually been stimulated by the accidental discovery of drugs
that either mimic psychosis or ameliorate patients' symptoms. For
example, in 1938 the Swiss chemist Albert Hoffman first synthesized the
powerful hallucinogen, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). At the time he
was exploring the therapeutic properties of compounds derived from
naturally occurring ergot in the hope that these would prove useful for
controlling muscle spasms during pregnancy. Animal tests indicated that
LSD had no unusual behavioural effects, and there the matter might have
rested had Hoffman not accidentally inhaled a dose of the drug (it is
active in microgram quantities) some years later. He described his
experiences afterwards as follows: In the afternoon of 16th April,
1943... I was seized by a peculiar sensation of vertigo and
restlessness. Objects, as well as the shapes of my associates in the
laboratory, appeared to undergo optical changes. I was unable to
concentrate on my work. In a dreamlike state I left for home, where an
irresistible urge to lie down overcame me. I drew the curtains and
immediately fell into a peculiar state similar to drunkenness,
characterized

by exaggerated imagination. With my eyes closed, fantastic pictures of
extraordinary plasticity and intensive colour seemed to surge towards
me. After two hours this state gradually wore off.55 Not surprisingly,
this discovery encouraged some researchers to argue that schizophrenia
might be caused by some kind of endogenous (self-created) hallucinogenic
substance.56 In 1962, a dramatic breakthrough was reported which seemed
to support this theory. Researchers saw a 'pink spot' (which was later
found to be the chemical 3, 4-dimethoxyphenylethylamine) when the urine
of schizophrenia patients was allowed to diffuse on chromatography
(blotting) paper. The spot was absent when the procedure was repeated
with urine from ordinary people.57 Unfortunately, it later turned out
that the spot was of dietary origin and could be found in the urine of
anyone who ate institutional food. Following the discovery that LSD
interferes with the neurotransmitter serotonin, some neurochemists
embarked on a search for abnormalities in the relevant neural pathways
of schizophrenia patients.58 However, this approach rapidly fell out of
favour for two main reasons. First, as will be discussed in detail in a
later chapter, the experiences induced by hallucinogenic drugs are quite
dissimilar to those reported by psychotic patients.59 Second, and more
importantly, the serotonin hypothesis was displaced in the minds of most
scientists by an alternative theory, which seemed to promise a simple
and complete biological account of madness. This theory was, of course,
the famous dopamine hypothesis, which was stimulated by Laborit's
accidental discovery of the anti-psychotic properties of chlorpromazine.
Arvid Carlsson, a pharmacologist at the University of Lund in Sweden,
first discovered the neurotransmitter function of dopamine in 1957. Soon
afterwards, with his colleague Margit Lindqvist, Carlsson obtained
evidence from animal studies that chlorpromazine and haloperidol
(another neuroleptic) occupied dopamine receptors, blocking them from
being stimulated by dopamine.60 Subsequent experiments by the
pharmacologist Paul Jannsen and others confirmed that the potency of the
various neuroleptic drugs that had, by that time, become available,
correlated with

their capacity to do this.61 The more readily they occupied the
receptors, the lower the dose required to produce an anti-psychotic
effect. This discovery led a number of researchers to conclude that
schizophrenia must be caused by some kind of abnormality in the dopamine
system. A parallel observation that seemed to support this hypothesis
concerned the effects of abusing the stimulant drug amphetamine. Early
reports that this sometimes led to a psychotic reaction were confirmed
in 1958 when a British psychiatrist, Philip Connell, published a
monograph describing forty-two patients who had become ill in this way.
Usually, the patients became paranoid and experienced visual
hallucinations, but these symptoms typically remitted within a few days
of discontinuing the drug.62 Connell's observations were later supported
by the results of a remarkable series of experiments conducted in the
United States by Burt Angrist and Samuel Gershon, in which normal
volunteers were persuaded to take large hourly doses of amphetamine. The
effects of this procedure were sometimes dramatic. For example, a
volunteer: who had taken 465 mg of amphetamine over 22¾ hr abruptly
experienced a florid paranoid psychosis. Before the experiment he had
made a 'deal' with the attendant on the ward, to whom he owed several
dollars. As he became psychotic, he 'heard' a gang coming on the ward to
kill him (sent by the attendant). His paranoid feelings included the
experimenter who he assumed had 'set up' the 'trap'. He was at times
quite hostile. Explanations that his feelings were amphetamine-induced
were rejected with sardonic mock agreement... He had visual
hallucinations of gangsters, of doors opening and closing in the
shadows, and visual illusions, in which papers on the bulletin board
'turned into' 'a gangster in a white coat'.63 As it was known that
amphetamine causes a functional excess of dopamine in the brain, the
irresistible conclusion was that over-activity of the dopamine system
causes psychosis whereas dampening down the system by blocking dopamine
receptors makes psychotic patients better. This theory not only neatly
explained the benefits of neuroleptics, but also some of their negative
effects as well. Parkinson's disease, characterized by

stiffness, tremor and other movement disorders, is caused by a depletion
of the brain's supply of dopamine. Neuroleptics often cause Parkinsonian
symptoms as side effects, which is precisely what should be expected if
they act by dampening the dopamine system. Conversely, the drugs used to
treat Parkinson's disease (for example, levo-dopa, which is metabolized
into dopamine after crossing the blood--brain barrier) sometimes cause
hallucinations and delusions in people who have previously had no
experience of psychosis. Unfortunately, time has not been particularly
kind to the dopamine hypothesis. As we saw in Chapter 4, one problem is
that the theory has rested on a false premise -- the specificity of
neuroleptics for schizophrenia. For this reason, Carlsson has recently
acknowledged that the theory should be renamed 'the dopamine hypothesis
of psychosis'.64 Unfortunately, other deficiencies of the theory are
much less easily overcome. Whereas blockade of the dopamine receptors is
usually achieved within an hour or so of taking a single dose, patients
normally have to take their medication for several weeks before
experiencing any benefit.65 More embarrassing for the theory is the fact
that some psychotic patients fail to obtain any benefit at all, even
after many months of treatment.66 In the 1980s it became possible to use
PET scans to estimate the extent to which receptor blockade is achieved
in individual patients. This was accomplished by detecting photon
emissions from patients who had been injected with a neuroleptic that
had been 'radio-labelled' (made radioactive). Studies using this
technique established that receptor blockade is as complete in
nonresponding patients as in responding patients.67 To make matters even
more complicated, a number of atypical neuroleptic compounds have since
been discovered and, although effective at reducing symptoms, these
drugs do not seem to have the same affinity for dopamine receptors as
the older, more established compounds.68 Taken together, these findings
add up to compelling evidence that dopamine receptor blockade is not a
sufficient condition for bringing about a reduction in psychotic
symptoms. An even greater problem for the theory is researchers' failure
to demonstrate direct evidence of dopamine abnormalities in the brains
of

patients, despite several decades of hard labour. According to the most
obvious interpretation of the theory, schizophrenia should be associated
with an excess of dopamine. Some investigators have attempted to test
this prediction by measuring dopamine levels in the brain at post
mortem, but the results have been inconsistent. Others have therefore
attempted to measure homovanillic acid (HVA, a metabolite or breakdown
product of dopamine) in the cerebrospinal fluid of living patients.
These levels should be high if there is excessive dopamine in the brain.
However, the majority of studies that have addressed this issue have
reported no difference between schizophrenia patients and ordinary
people.69 A second interpretation of the dopamine hypothesis, which
follows logically from the failure of the first, suggests that psychosis
is associated with an excess of dopamine receptors. Although early
postmortem studies seemed to support this version of the theory, it
later transpired that increased receptor density could be the
consequence of consuming neuroleptics for many years. (Animal studies
have confirmed that the brain responds to prolonged neuroleptic
treatment by sprouting more receptors.)70 This objection led to an
experiment which British psychiatrist Peter McKenna has(wrongly, in my
view) described as, 'arguably the most important... in the history of
psychiatry'71 -- the attempt to measure the density of dopamine
receptors in living patients who have never received drug treatment.
This was first achieved in 1986 by a group of researchers at Johns
Hopkins University in the USA, who used PET to assess ten drug-naive
patients after they had been injected with a radio-labelled neuroleptic
in sufficient dose to ensure complete dopamine receptor occupancy.72
Their announcement that DA2 receptor density was elevated in the
patients appeared to herald a major breakthrough in the search for the
biological origins of mental illness, but within months this was
followed by a report from another group who were unable to obtain the
same result.73 Several years later, the Johns Hopkins University group
announced that they had found increased DA2 receptor density in bipolar
disorder patients who were suffering from psychotic symptoms.74

More recent research has far from clarified these findings. For example,
in a longitudinal investigation, a group of researchers in Finland
administered PET scans at intervals of between six and twenty-four
months to four schizophrenia patients who had never taken neuroleptic
drugs. Two patients who were highly psychotic at the outset showed a
considerable reduction in their symptoms between scans. One showed a
corresponding 24.7 per cent decrease in the density of his DA2
receptors, whereas the other showed an increase in receptor density of
13.5 per cent. The remaining two patients experienced only very modest
changes in their symptoms, but one showed a 56 per cent reduction in DA2
receptor density, while the other showed a 24.6 per cent increase.75 As
the dopamine hypothesis has unravelled, investigators have studied the
role of other neurotransmitters in psychosis, although with equally
inconclusive results.76 It is therefore difficult to escape the
conclusion that biochemical research into psychiatric disorders has
failed to live up to its initial promise. Of course, we should not
therefore infer that this type of research is doomed to failure. Anyone
who has ever visited a pub knows that changes in the chemistry of the
brain can bring about dramatic changes in behaviour and experience.
However, even if biochemical peculiarities can be found in psychiatric
patients, they may tell us very little about the origins of psychosis.77
Consider the results of two recent studies. In the first, researchers at
the Department of Psychiatry at Columbia University used functional
imaging techniques to record the brain's biochemical reaction to a dose
of amphetamine. They reported that the consequent increase in dopamine
synthesis was excessive in schizophrenia patients who were currently
ill. However, the responses of patients who were currently well were
quite normal.78 This finding suggests that, although dopamine
abnormalities may be associated with the generation of symptoms, they
may not be of primary aetiological significance. In the second,
researchers at the Ralf H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Centre in
Charleston, USA, measured dopamine beta-hydroxylase (an enzyme that
converts dopamine to noradrenaline) in the plasma of patients suffering
from post-traumatic stress. Higher levels of the enzyme were found in a
subgroup of the patients who were suffering from psychotic symptoms.79
This finding suggests that, when dopamine abnormalities are present in
psychotic patients, they may be part of the brain's response to
emotional trauma.

The Limits of Biology We embarked on this review of biological studies
of madness in order to answer two questions. First, we wanted to
establish whether the discovery of brain abnormalities in mad people
precludes a psychological analysis of their problems. Second, we wanted
to evaluate the competing claims about the disease status of psychosis
made by the neoKraepelinians and Thomas Szasz (recall that both presume
that this issue hangs on whether or not neuropathology can be
demonstrated in patients). A sceptic might attempt to address both of
these questions by asserting that the presence of biological
abnormalities in psychosis remains unproven (the position taken by
Szasz). But to make this claim is to doubt too much. Whereas many of the
biological hypotheses that we have considered appear to be unsupported
by data, it does appear that the brains of psychotic patients are
(perhaps subtly) different from the brains of ordinary people. The most
compelling evidence is that obtained from structural imaging. Whereas
early studies clearly exaggerated the extent to which the cerebral
ventricles of patients are enlarged in comparison with those of ordinary
people, the less dramatic differences found in recent and more carefully
conducted investigations cannot be dismissed so easily. In order to
address the first of our two questions, therefore, we need to think more
carefully about the implication of these observations. Many biological
psychiatrists have argued for a crude form of biological reductionism in
which it is assumed that brain abnormalities reflect aetiological
processes that are unconnected to the social environment. However, this
assumption is plainly false, because, as we have also seen, brain
abnormalities alone provide few clues about aetiology. Because our
brains are affected by our experiences, peculiarities in the size of its
anatomical components, in neuroactivations when we perform particular
tasks, or in the biochemical transactions between neurones, can be as
readily attributed to the impact of the environment as to causative
biological factors such as early brain damage, viruses or endogenous
neurotoxins. (This is not to say that brain damage, viruses or
endogenous neurotoxins

play no role in psychosis, but that other kinds of evidence -- which I
will discuss in later chapters -- will be required to demonstrate that
they do.) Curiously, this limitation of brain research was better
understood by Emil Kraepelin than by many contemporary psychologists and
psychiatrists. It was for this reason that Kraepelin regarded aetiology
and pathological anatomy as providing, in principle at least,
independent methods of classifying patients. The problem here seems to
be a persisting naivety about the relationship between the biological
and the psychological, which has deep roots within our culture. Its
origins predate Descartes, who, three and a half centuries ago,
articulated the philosophical doctrine of dualism, which holds that the
mind and brain are different kinds of substances, the former
non-material and the latter physical. This idea is so entrenched in our
language and our folk psychology that, even today, many people find it
difficult to think in any other way. It is this prejudice that has led
both biological researchers and anti-psychiatrists to assume that the
processes underlying abnormal behaviour must be attributed either to
biology or to psychology. The remedy for this confusion is, of course, a
better understanding of relationships between the brain, mental events
such as thoughts and feelings, and the social and physical environment.
Clearly, it will not be possible to provide a completely satisfactory
account of these relationships in a few paragraphs. (The problem of
consciousness is particularly intractable, and continues to test the
best minds in the business.) For present purposes, it is sufficient to
note that most attempts to solve this problem assume that statements
about brain biology and statements about mental processes represent
different levels of descriptions of the same phenomena -- in other
words, that the mind and the brain are one. One implication of this
unity is that we are likely to make more progress in understanding the
biology of psychosis if we first attempt to understand the psychology.
Once we know how the environment influences patients' complaints, and
the mental processes that underlie them, we will be in a much better
position to make sense of the data obtained from biological
investigations.

Szasz's error Some of the implications of the foregoing account of the
relationship between the mind and brain may not be apparent until we
consider psychotic phenomena in detail later. However, an immediate
implication is that we should not accept the terms on which
psychiatrists and antipsychiatrists have debated the disease status of
psychosis. The more carefully we examine the scientific evidence, the
more difficult it is to decide which brain abnormalities are really
'pathological'. What are we to make of increases in ventricular volume
that may be the consequence of adverse life experiences? Or of dopamine
abnormalities that come and go, and which are only present when an
individual experiences hallucinations or delusional fears? Or of either
of these abnormalities when we know that people experiencing voices or
strange beliefs often suffer no detriment to their quality of life?
These difficulties are resolved when were cognize that the distinction
between the pathological and the non-pathological inevitably involves
some kind of implicit reference to human values. As the British
philosopher Peter Sedgwick pointed out two decades ago,80 it is not
enough that a physical characteristic is shown to be statistically
unusual in order for it to be regarded as pathological; it must also be
perceived as undesirable, or at least to have consequences that are
perceived as undesirable.\* If this is not obvious in the case of
physical disease it is because there is almost universal agreement that
the consequences of particular kinds of biological abnormality are
disagreeable. The pain ful death that can follow a rapid swelling of the
appendix is bad by anyone's standards. (If, instead, the only
consequence of appendicitis was a doubling of the patient's IQ, it might
be regarded differently.) In the field of psychiatry, by contrast, the
role of values in determining diagnostic judgements is made obvious by
diverse opinions about the relevant behaviours and experiences, which
might be attributed to illness, regarded as evidence of harmless
eccentricity or creative energy, or described as spiritual phenomena.

The implications of this analysis of the nature of diagnoses have
recently been worked out in more detail by Bill Fulford, a British
psychiatrist who is also a professional philosopher.81 Fulford has
suggested that, far from threatening the scientific status of
psychiatry, acknowledging the role that values play in psychiatric
judgements would help to make psychiatric diagnoses more reliable and
scientifically valid. He argues that the descriptive and evaluative
components of each diagnosis should be explicitly separated out, so
that, for example, a diagnosis of schizophrenia would require not only
that the patient experiences certain symptoms, but also that the
symptoms are experienced as distressing or unwanted. Such a step would
make it clear that it is impossible to create a value-free theory of
mental illness as hoped for by the neoKraepelinians, and would obviously
go some way towards solving some of the cross-cultural disagreements
about psychiatric disorders that we encountered in the last chapter. It
follows from this argument that Thomas Szasz is correct in asserting
that psychiatric diagnoses inevitably involve a degree of value
judgement, but mistaken in assuming that this is a feature of diagnosis
that is unique to psychiatry. It is perhaps ironic that Szasz accuses
mental health professionals of using the concepts of 'disease' and
'illness' to justify coercive practices, when the right of patients to
refuse unwanted treatments is widely recognized by practitioners of
physical medicine.82

The future of biological psychiatry Some years ago, I was invited to
speak at a Dutch symposium about controversies in psychiatric research.
My talk was followed by a presentation by a highly respected Spanish
neurologist who responded angrily to my attack on the Kraepelinian
paradigm. 'Some people may say that schizophrenia is a myth, but we know
that it is brain disease,' she exclaimed. She did not quite strike the
table with her fists, but everything else about her demeanour suggested
that she found my analysis offensive. She then proceeded to talk about
her own structural neuroimaging studies, as if these settled the matter
for all time.

Biological findings about madness have often been greeted by a dramatic
suspension of the critical faculties of both researchers and bystanders.
(In recent years, my enjoyment of the Sunday newspapers has often been
impaired by articles claiming that biologists have at last found the
cause of one psychiatric disorder or another.) New discoveries are
announced triumphantly, but with the passage of time are often found to
be either unreplicable or to be consequences of some aspect of
psychiatric treatment (for example, drug therapy or a hospital diet). Of
course, part of the problem is that investigators continue to labour
within the framework of the Kraepelinian paradigm. As neoKraepelinian
diagnoses group together individuals who have very little in common, it
is no wonder that biological research has yielded inconsistent and
confusing data. However, just as important is researchers' unreflective
hunger for the rewards and plaudits that go with genuine scientific
progress. It is as if they are mesmerized by the scent of the Nobel
Prize that will be given to the person who finally finds the real cause
of schizophrenia. It would obviously be wrong to extrapolate from these
criticisms to the conclusion that brain research is fundamentally
misguided. The unravelling of the mysteries of the central nervous
system remains one of the most challenging and exciting tasks for
science in the twenty-first century. Almost certainly, this effort will
eventually lead to dramatic improvements in the quality of human life
and perhaps revolutionize the way that we think about ourselves as
sentient beings. For this reason, it is especially disappointing that so
many biological psychiatrists have approached this quest in a naive way.
In order to fulfil the promissory notes now routinely handed out by
neuroscientists in their scientific papers and public statements, future
investigators will surely have to engage with other disciplines, and
abandon the assumption that discoveries about the brain somehow obviate
the need to understand individuals from a social or psychological
perspective. OceanofPDF.com

8 Mental Life and Human Nature The human being is the best picture of
the human soul. Ludwig Wittgenstein1 In the last chapter I established
that research into the neurobiology of madness leaves ample room for
psychological analysis. In this chapter I will develop this argument
further by examining the long tradition of psychological research into
psychosis that has been conducted from within the Kraepelinian paradigm.
I will not deny that this research has led to useful discoveries.
However, I will try to show that the insights that have been gained have
been limited, not only by a misleading approach to diagnosis, but also
by a failure to recognize the social origins of human mental life.

Psychological Research from the Kraepelinian Perspective It has been
known for many years that psychotic patients perform badly on most
psychological measures. This much was understood by Kraepelin, who
pioneered the use of psychological tests in psychiatric settings. A vast
number of tests have since been devised for administration to
psychiatric patients, the majority of this work being carried out with
patients diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia. (For reasons that
are unclear to me, much less research has been carried out with patients
with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder.) However, a number of problems
have to be resolved before the data from these kinds of investigations
can be interpreted properly. An obvious difficulty is that test
performance can be affected by factors that have very little to do with
patients' symptoms. As early as the 1930s, psychologist David Shakow at
the Worcester State Hospital in

Massachusetts showed that the performance of schizophrenia patients on a
range of psychological measures varied according to their co-operation,
motivation and interest, so that, under optimum conditions, their scores
sometimes equalled those of ordinary people.2 This effect of motivation
on performance has recently become obvious in a number of experiments
using the Wisconsin Card Sort Task (WCST), the measure of frontal lobe
function briefly introduced in the last chapter. The WCST is one of a
wide range of neuropsychological tests devised by psychologists to
enable the detection of damage to particular regions of the brain.\* As
we have already seen, the WCST has been used to test the hypothesis that
the frontal lobes of schizophrenia patients are under-active, especially
in response to environmental demands. Consistent with this hypothesis,
numerous studies have shown that schizophrenia patients typically
perform poorly on the test.3 There have also been reports that patients
diagnosed as suffering from manic depression find the task difficult,
although these have been less consistent.4 However, studies by Alan
Bellack and his colleagues in Maryland, by Michael Foster Green and his
colleagues in California, and more recently by Heidi Nisbet and her
colleagues in New Zealand,5 have shown that the scores of psychotic
patients on the WCST can be improved by paying them for performing well,
or by simply giving them feedback on their performance. Clearly,
therefore, the poor performance of patients on this test must be
explained, at least in part, by motivational problems. The effects of
medication on psychological test performance must also be considered.
American psychologists Herbert Spohn and Milton Strauss have shown that
these effects vary according to the type of medication prescribed and
the type of tests administered.6 For example, the anti-cholinergic drugs
used to control some of the side effects of neuroleptic medication
adversely affect memory. On the other hand, there is consistent evidence
that performance on tests of attention usually improves following the
administration of neuroleptic drugs to acutely ill patients. In order to
control for these effects, investigators sometimes try to administer
tests to patients while they are free of drugs. However, this is often
hard to achieve, as doctors usually give their patients medication at
the earliest signs of illness.

A further problem is that psychotic patients have performed poorly on
just about every test that anyone has ever administered to them. For
this reason, it is sometimes impossible to decide whether poor
performance reflects specific psychological processes that are affected
in the patient, general intellectual deficits, or the more general
effects of demoralization and institutionalization. There is no simple
solution to this problem. One approach is to administer several tests,
in order to show that performance is more abnormal in some than others.
For example, if the difference between patients and controls is greater
on a test of perception than on a test of memory, this can be considered
evidence that perception is specifically affected. Many years ago, Loren
and Jean Chapman of the University of Wisconsin pointed out that this
strategy is only reliable when the tests are equally difficult for
normal individuals.7 To see why this is the case, imagine the
consequences of administering a test (say a simple measure of general
knowledge) that was so easy that almost everyone would do well on it.
Such a test would fail to discriminate between patients and controls.
The same would be true of a very difficult test (say a questionnaire
measuring knowledge of the mathematical principles underlying quantum
mechanics), which both patients and ordinary people would fail. In
general, tests are most sensitive to differences between patients and
control groups when they are designed so that normal individuals of
average intelligence will make errors on 50 per cent of opportunities.
Returning now to our hypothetical experiment in which patients and
controls are administered a test of perception and a test of memory,
imagine what would happen if the perception test was moderately
difficult but the memory test was either very hard or very easy. Under
these conditions, the patients would appear to be specifically
handicapped on the measure of perception but not on the measure of
memory. However, this result would be entirely an artefact of the
relative difficulty of the tests. This problem is most severe when tests
are designed to measure gross deficits in cognitive ability.8 A deficit
is said to be present when there is a general failure in an individual's
mental processes. We will see, for example, that there is evidence that
psychotic patients often have difficulty attending to things that are
happening, irrespective of what those things are. It is often assumed
that deficits are the product of some kind of general malfunction of the
central nervous system, although this is not always the

case, because, as we have seen, poor performance on general measures of
mental functioning may be caused by poor motivation. It is very
important to recognize that not all psychological abnormalities are
deficits. A cognitive bias is said to be present when someone
preferentially processes (attends to, remembers or thinks about) some
kinds of information as opposed to others. For example, we will see that
people who feel depressed generally remember positive life experiences
less easily than negative experiences. Their failure to recall good
events cannot be attributed to a deficit, or poor motivation, because
they can recall bad events exceptionally well. Because there is no
general malfunction of the nervous system, but rather a skew in the way
that the mind is orientated towards the world, biases are sometimes
assumed to be the products of adverse learning. For reasons that are not
obvious (at least to me), psychological studies of psychosis have, until
recently, focused almost entirely on deficits, whereas research on
non-psychotic conditions has usually measured biases. In later chapters,
we will see that both types of abnormality contribute to psychotic
symptoms.

Psychosis and attention In fact, although many different mental
processes have been assessed in psychotic patients, the most consistent
observations of deficits have been made using measures of attention,
which can be thought of as the ability to focus on and respond to some
stimuli in the environment in preference to others. Kraepelin provided
the following strikingly modern account of the process of attention, and
of the abnormal distractibility experienced by psychotic patients: The
content of consciousness of the child is hopelessly dependent upon its
chance environment; it only perceives the strongest stimuli, not taking
into account the inner connection of things, for it is lacking those
general

conceptions which also distinguish the less obtrusive perceptions as
essential links in the chain of experience. In the adult, on the other
hand, the process of perception is increasingly controlled by the
special inclinations which gradually develop from his personal life
experience. We exercise ourselves chiefly in taking notice of certain
impressions by a progressively increasing responsiveness of our
imagination to these impressions, so that even slight suggestions
suffice to meet with a vivid inner resonance. On the other hand, we
become accustomed to disregard everyday stimuli and to deny them any
influence whatsoever on the course of our psychic processes... The
slightest degree of increased distractibility can be observed as a
temporary phenomenon in the state of distraction as it occurs in
progressive fatigue. In spite of all efforts we are no longer able
methodologically to follow a series of coherent sensory impressions, but
realize again and again that we are diverted by other impressions or
ideas and that we can only grapple with the task in a fragmentary way.
This disorder is developed to a higher degree in chronic nervous
exhaustion, in the period of convalescence following severe mental or
physical diseases, to an even higher degree in acute exhaustion
psychoses strictly speaking moreover in mania, often also in paralysis
and dementia praecox. Here in many cases, an exclamation, a single word,
even the exhibition of an object suffices for immediately diverting the
direction of attention and suggesting quite complex conceptions.9
Interest in the attentional difficulties of psychotic patients was
renewed sixty-two years after Kraepelin's account, following the
publication of a study by Andrew McGhie and James Chapman, who were
working at the Royal Dundee Mental Hospital in Scotland.10 They
interviewed twenty-six schizophrenia patients who had recently become
ill, and found that the majority reported subjective cognitive
difficulties such as problems of attention, increased distractibility,
heightened sensory impressions, and awareness of processes and actions
that would normally be automatic. For example: 'My concentration is very
poor. I jump from one thing to another. If I am talking to someone they
only need to cross their legs or scratch their heads and I am distracted
and forget what I was saying.' And: 'I have to do

everything step by step, nothing is automatic now. Everything has to be
considered.' Chapman and McGhie later reported that schizophrenia
patients performed poorly on a variety of psychological measures
designed to assess attention. Although other researchers criticized
their methods,11 later studies broadly supported their conclusions. The
assessment of attentional processes is a complex and technical field,
and I will therefore limit the present discussion to the three most
widely used tests. In the first and simplest, the Digit Span with
Distraction Test (DSDT), the participant listens to recorded strings of
numbers, which he then repeats. Sometimes a second voice in the
background reads out distraction numbers, which the participant is
required to ignore. To ensure that the conditions are equally difficult
for ordinary people, the number of digits presented is greater in the
non-distraction than in the distraction condition. In the late 1970s,
American psychologists Thomas Oltmanns and John Neale studied the DSDT
performance of patients who were classified according to a loose
hospital diagnosis of schizophrenia and according to the Research
Diagnostic Criteria. When patients with the hospital diagnosis were
compared with those with other diagnoses, no differences were found.
However, when the patients who met the narrower RDC for schizophrenia
were compared with those who did not, they were found to perform
particularly badly in the distraction condition, indicating that
schizophrenia patients are unable to screen out stimuli that are
irrelevant to their current needs. Oltmanns and Neale studied the
symptom profiles of their patients and found that distractibility was
specifically associated with disordered speech.12 Their observations
have been replicated many times since, with various refinements.
American psychologist Mark Serper and his colleagues have recently shown
that performance on the DSDT usually improves when patients are given
anti-psychotic drugs, and that this improvement precedes and correlates
with later improvements in symptoms.13 A second measure that has been
widely used in studies of schizophrenia patients is the Continuous
Performance Test (CPT). The CPT measures sustained vigilance, a
phenomenon that first became of interest to psychologists during the
Second World War, when the Royal Air Force commissioned a series of
experiments to discover the optimal length of time

that a radar operator could function effectively when on anti-submarine
patrol.14 To a person tested on the CPT, the experience is a bit like
watching a radar display. Letters are briefly presented on a computer
screen, usually at the rate of one every second or so. The participant
has to press a button immediately after seeing particular targets, which
may be simple (e.g. the letter 'T') or complex (e.g. the letter 'X' but
only when it follows the letter 'T'). When ordinary people are
administered the test, their performance usually decreases over a
relatively short period of time as their attention fades. Many studies,
such as those conducted by Keith Nuechterlein and his colleagues at the
University of California at Los Angeles Clinical Research Center for the
Study of Schizophrenia, have shown that this performance decrement is
greater in psychotic patients than in normal people.15 By studying the
effects of varying some of the characteristics of the CPT, for example
the complexity of the target and how clearly it is presented on the
screen, Nuechterlein and his colleagues have been able to study more
precisely the attentional difficulties experienced by their patients.
For example, they observed that patients with predominantly negative
symptoms performed very poorly on 'high load' (difficult) versions of
the test.16 A third test which we will consider here measures the very
earliest processes involved in perception, and is best described in the
words of Michael Foster Green, who also works at the UCLA Clinical
Research Center: Imagine that you are seated in front of a screen and an
experimenter is presenting letters to you one at a time with a type of
projector. Although the duration of each letter is very brief (perhaps
10 msec.), you can easily identify each letter with perfect accuracy.
The experimenter pauses and tells you that he/she will continue to show
you letters at the same duration, but there will be one difference:
after you are shown each letter, the screen will go blank for a short
time and some crossed lines will appear where the letter had been. Your
job is only to report the letter and ignore the crossed lines. The task
probably sounds quite easy because you had no difficulty identifying the
letters before, and the duration of the letters will not change.
However, when the stimuli are presented, you might find that you can

seethe crossed lines, but no letter at all. This is the backward masking
effect.17 The backward masking effect occurs because visual information
is briefly held in a sensory store (sometimes called the iconic memory)
prior to being passed on to later brain centres for more detailed
processing. If the 'mask' of crossed lines is presented very soon after
the initial letter, it displaces the information about the letter from
the sensory store before it can be passed on. As the later processing is
required for us to be aware of the letter, we are unable to identify it.
By varying the interval between the presentation of the letters and the
mask until the letters can be seen, it is possible to measure the amount
of time the sensory store requires to pass on the letter for later
processing. In 1981, Dennis Saccuzzo and David Braff, two researchers at
the University of California at San Diego, showed that this interval was
longer for schizophrenia patients than for normal controls, indicating
that the speed with which the visual information was being passed on was
slower for the patients.18 It was later observed that unmedicated
patients' performance on the test improved after they had been given
anti-psychotic drugs.19 In this short space it has been difficult to do
justice to the large volume of research on the performance of psychotic
patients on attentional tests, and the attempts that have been made to
account for these findings. Of the many models of attentional
dysfunction that have been proposed I will mention just one, developed
over a number of years by Keith Nuechterlein and his colleagues at
UCLA.20 On the basis of a detailed theory of the processes involved in
normal attention, they have argued that the patterns of results observed
in their patients can best be explained in terms of two separate types
of abnormality. First, they argue that poor performance on the backward
masking task and on certain versions of the CPT (especially versions in
which the stimuli are blurred and difficult to identify) is caused by
deficits in the very earliest and most automatic stages of information
processing. Interestingly, these deficits seem to be present in patients
who are enjoying a remission of their

symptoms, and Nuechterlein and his colleagues therefore argue that the
deficits are enduring psychological characteristics that cause people to
be vulnerable to breakdown under times of stress. Second, they argue
that poor performance on other versions of the CPT (especially versions
in which complex targets are employed) and also on the DSDT is best
explained by an inability to use active memory to guide the selection of
information. When we try to focus on some types of stimuli to the
exclusion of others, we have to hold a representation of the target
stimuli in an active 'on-line' memory store (the same memory system that
you use when performing mental calculations). The content of this store
-- sometimes known as working memory -- therefore exerts control over
our voluntary attention. Nuechterlein and his colleagues argue that the
poor performance of patients on the complex versions of the CPT is
caused by a failure of this kind of control, probably caused by some
kind of deficit in the working memory system. As performance on the
complex versions of the CPT is usually worst during periods of active
illness, and usually improves during remission, Nuechterlein and his
colleagues argue that this type of deficit is directly involved in the
onset of symptoms. Impressive though this work has been, it suffers from
three important limitations. First, the reader will not be surprised
when I question the specificity of the findings. Although much less
effort has been made to study cognitive deficits in bipolar patients
than in patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, when those efforts
have been made, similarities between schizophrenia and bipolar patients
have been more apparent than differences. For example, bipolar patients
have been found to perform poorly on the DSDT,21 the backward masking
task,22 and on other measures of working memory and attention.23 Poor
performance on the CPT has been found, not only in bipolar patients24
but also in unipolar depressed patients who are experiencing psychotic
symptoms.25 Second, gross cognitive deficits appear to be only tenuously
linked to the behaviours and experiences that most people would regard
as prototypical of psychosis. In a recent review of the relevant
evidence, Michael Foster Green has pointed out that poor scores on most
deficit measures seem to be

unrelated to positive symptoms (see Figure 8.1)!26 Although most
patients perform poorly, little difference is observed between those
with hallucinations and delusions and those with other symptoms or--on
many tests--even between patients who are currently ill and those who
are in remission. In contrast, performance on neuropsychological and
cognitive deficit measures seems to be a much better predictor of
patients' social and occupational functioning. Patients with severe
deficits generally fare less well when living in the community, are poor
at dealing with social problems, and experience very great difficulty
when attempting to learn new skills. Green's response to this
paradoxical lack of association between positive symptoms and deficits
is surprising. Evoking Bleuler's distinction between primary and
secondary symptoms of schizophrenia, he has concluded that cognitive
deficits are the core of schizophrenia, and that positive symptoms are
peripheral features. To put this proposal another way, he has suggested
that we redraw the boundaries of the disorder to put deficits in the
centre, so that positive symptoms are no Figure 8.1 Relationship between
cognitive deficits, drug treatment, symptoms and social functioning
(functional outcome) according to Michael Foster Green and Keith
Nuechterlein ('Should schizophrenia be treated as a neurocognitive
disorder?', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25: 309--19, 1989). The strength of
causal relationships is indicated by the type of arrows shown.

longer attributed much importance. Of course, even if we were to accept
this proposal, it would still be necessary to identify those processes
that, in addition to cognitive deficits, are responsible for delusions
and

hallucinations. After all, it is usually these symptoms, however
peripheral, that drive patients and their families to seek psychiatric
help. A final limitation of the research we have reviewed concerns the
type of mental functions studied. Most psychologists have chosen to
focus on gross mental functions, especially perception and attention,
and have employed stimuli that have been essentially meaningless (for
example, strings of numbers in the DSDT, sequentially presented letters
in the CPT, and abstract patterns in the WSCT). Because they knew that
performance on psychological tests is influenced by the content of the
test materials, early test designers regarded meaning as a dangerous
complication. This was not an entirely senseless attitude, as the poor
performance of patients on attentional measures is presumably telling us
something quite important. However, it should be obvious that these
tests do not measure the kinds of tasks that the human mind performs in
ordinary life. We are likely to get a more complete picture of the
psychological mechanisms involved in psychosis if we focus not only on
raw deficits but also on those processes that are known to be important
in everyday functioning. In the remainder of this chapter, I will
briefly review some of these processes, particularly those which will
prove important when we come to look more closely at symptoms in later
chapters.

The Social Brain So far as the brain is concerned, any stimulus is not
the same as any other. Its operations are content-specific, which is to
say that the brain processes different kinds of information in different
ways. This preference for certain kinds of stimuli in contrast to others
is a requirement for intentionality (the 'aboutness' that connects the
contents of our thoughts to the external world) and underlies the
cognitive biases which, we will see in later chapters, play an important
role in symptoms. Recent studies have shown that the normal brain has
specialized to deal with one particular class of stimuli above all
others. These stimuli are the most complex and demanding objects in our
everyday environment, namely

other human beings. Unless you are a Nobel-prize-winning rocket
scientist, the problems that demand most of your attention, in all
likelihood, involve your relationships with others, a fact that is
reflected in popular culture, from songs and novels to films and
television soap operas. (The characters of Neighbours, Friends and
Coronation Street are constantly falling out with each other, making up,
finding new lovers or losing old ones. We almost never see them sweating
over some intractable problem at work, or struggling to complete their
tax returns.) The idea that the human mind has evolved to preferentially
process social information is sometimes called the social brain
hypothesis. Considerable evidence in its favour can be found in both the
biological and the psychological literature. Let us begin by considering
anatomical comparisons of human beings and other species. Compared with
other vertebrates, we have a disproportionately sized cerebral cortex.
Across the vertebrate species, brain volume increases on average as a
two-thirds power of body mass (in other words, in proportion to the
surface area of the body), reflecting the increased processing capacity
needed by big organisms with large numbers of sensory receptors and
muscle fibres.27 However, when this relationship is taken into account,
it is evident that some species have brains that are larger than would
be expected from their body size, a phenomenon known as encephalization.
The most encephalized species is, of course, ourselves, with other
primates following closely behind. The evolutionary pressures
responsible for encephalization remain a matter of some controversy.
Robin Dunbar, an evolutionary psychologist working at the University of
Liverpool, has suggested that group size made an important contribution
to this process. The members of each species relate to each other in
groups of characteristic size, and Dunbar has shown that this size
correlates reasonably well with encephalization. Larger groups,
according to this hypothesis, demand larger brains, and so our own
brains have evolved to cope with social systems that are more complex
than those of any other species. If Dunbar's theory is correct, the
majority of our brain's 'computing power' is dedicated to processing
social information.28 Leslie Brothers, a psychiatrist working at the
University of California in Los Angeles, has argued that
neurophysiological investigations provide a

second important strand of evidence about the social brain. In studies
carried out mainly on monkeys, Brothers and her colleagues have recorded
the responses of specific neurones following the presentation of
different kinds of stimuli. In these experiments, some neurones have
been found to be specifically responsive to social information. For
example, neurones have been identified which fire only when the animal
sees a hand, a face, eye movements or other bodies walking. These are
mostly located in the temporal lobes, in areas such as the
inferotemporal cortex and the amygdala. Brothers has suggested that
these structures function as an 'editor', which highlights social
information for preferential processing by other areas of the brain,
thereby determining which stimuli are personally signifi-cant.29
(Interestingly, other researchers have argued that the amygdala plays an
important role in emotion, a proposal that is consistent with Brothers'
theory, as emotional responses are most often elicited when we encounter
social problems.)30 A third source of evidence about the social brain
comes from psychological studies of ordinary human beings. If the human
brain has evolved to deal with social stimuli, we should find tasks that
employ these stimuli easier to perform than tasks that do not. There is
an abundance of evidence supporting this prediction (much of which was
collected before the social brain hypothesis was first proposed) but
there is only space enough in these pages to describe one example, taken
from the field of child psychology. In the 1950s, the famous Swiss child
psychologist Jean Piaget reported a series of studies that appeared to
demonstrate that young children are unable to 'decentre' their
imagination from their experience.31 In some of these studies, children
were shown a model of three mountains, and a doll was placed on one
corner of the model. When children below the age of 9 were asked to
choose a picture that showed how the mountains looked from the position
of the doll they almost always failed, the younger children typically
choosing a picture taken from their own perspective. At first sight,
this seems to be powerful evidence in favour of Piaget's account of the
cognitive limitations of young children. However, British child
psychologist Martin Hughes later carried out a similar study in which
much younger children seemed to perform better than Piaget's 7- and
8-year-olds. In this task, two toy policemen were placed on a table,
divided by two intersecting walls. When asked to place a third doll in a
position where it could not be

seen by either policeman, children were able to do this with 90 per cent
accuracy, implying that they could simultaneously think about the
perspectives of both policemen. Margaret Donaldson, a psychologist at
the University of Edinburgh, has accounted for this apparent discrepancy
with Piaget's work by pointing to the socially realistic nature of
Hughes's task.32 Young children know what it is like to be naughty and
to hide from adults. The motives and the intentions of the characters in
Hughes's task were therefore comprehensible to them. For this reason,
they were able to complete the task successfully, unlike the older
children confronted with the more abstract task devised by Piaget. A
final source of evidence about the social brain concerns the impairments
seen in some neuropsychological disorders. If the brain has evolved
specific mechanisms for dealing with social information, it would not be
surprising if some conditions turned out to be the consequence of the
loss of or inability to develop specific kinds of social reasoning.
Autism is a disorder that seems to reflect this kind of problem. The
main features of the condition, which usually become evident within the
first few years of life, are an inability to engage in imaginative play,
impaired development of language and a failure to form even rudimentary
relationships.33 In many cases, these difficulties are so severe that
the autistic person requires lifelong care. Although the causes of the
disorder are poorly understood, a high proportion of autistic children
have demonstrable brain damage, suggesting that some kind of disruption
of specific neural circuits may be implicated. Psychological research
conducted over the last two decades has suggested that the inability to
understand the mental states of other people may be a core feature of
autism, and that the symptoms that lead to its diagnosis may be a
consequence of this deficit.34 The ability to guess what people think,
and to anticipate what they might do (in other words, to use folk
psychology effectively), is a vital ingredient of normal social life. In
adulthood, it enables us to recognize our friends and enemies, and to
predict what will happen when we try to interact with them. When talking
to another person, it allows us to adjust our speech to match the
perceived needs of the listener. Children who acquire this ability are
often said to possess a theory

of mind\* (for this reason, psychologists sometimes speak of people
having ToM skills), a term which has been rightly described as 'a daft
expression because it \[misleadingly\] suggests that a child theorizes
about the nature of feelings, wishes, beliefs, intentions, and so on'.35
It might be more correct to say that we can 'mentalize'. Mentalizing or
ToM skills are usually assessed by means of tests in which the
individual is required to infer that someone else holds a false belief
about the world. A simple example used with children is the so-called
'Sally--Ann' test in which a story is enacted with two dolls, Sally and
Ann, who are shown with two boxes, one of which contains an object. In
the story, Sally leaves the room, and Ann switches the object from one
box to the other. The child who is being tested is then asked to say in
which box Sally looks for the object when she returns. In order to
answer this question correctly it is, of course, necessary to understand
that Sally's belief about the world when she returns is at variance with
reality. Ordinary children begin to pass this kind of test during their
fourth year of life (although they may show evidence of more rudimentary
mentalizing skills -- for example, the ability to direct the gaze of
others, or to distinguish between pretend and reality -- as young as 2
years of age).36 In autistic children, the development of mentalizing
skills is severely delayed, and perhaps permanently impaired, even
though they may perform normally on other types of tests.37 It is
possible to draw two important conclusions from these findings. First,
the terrible consequences of the autistic person's inability to
understand the minds of others demonstrates how important social
cognition is in everyday life. Second, the fact that many autistic
children score relatively normally on conventional IQ tests suggests
that at least one type of social cognition may be relatively independent
of the kind of gross cognitive abilities usually measured by
psychologists investigating psychosis.

Uniquely Human Many psychologists have proposed that the human mind's
specific ability to deal with social information reflects the evolution
of specific mental

modules dedicated to this purpose. On this view, there may be, for
example, brain modules dedicated to recognizing faces, detecting the
emotional states of other people, guessing their intentions, and
predicting what they will do. This view is taken by many researchers
studying autism, mainly because of the striking evidence that ToM skills
can be severely impaired in individuals of average or above average
intelligence.38 In fact, evidence that the mind is organized in this way
is far from clear cut. The American philosopher Jerry Fodor has
suggested several criteria that might be used to identify modular
information-processing systems. He has argued, for example, that they
are unconscious, respond quickly and in an obligatory fashion
(predetermined inputs lead to predetermined outputs), develop in a
characteristic sequence in the child, are neurologically localized (that
is, implemented by dedicated neural circuits), and deal with only
specific types of information.39 However, many of these characteristics
are true of acquired skills that have been practised to the point of
becoming automatic. For example, champion chess players often choose
moves intuitively, without being aware of the mental processes that
guide their decisions. As the ability to master chess no doubt depends
on the individual's level of cognitive development, it is likely that
children learning chess from an early age will develop their skills in a
characteristic sequence. Moreover, functional neuroimaging studies have
shown that specific areas of the brain 'light up' as grand masters
progress through a game.40 Despite these observations, it obviously
would be a mistake to assume that the human brain has evolved a
chess-playing module. A more serious problem for extreme versions of
modularism concerns the relationship between genes and brain circuits.41
Presumably, the modular architecture of the brain is determined
genetically. However, as I completed this chapter, the latest estimate
of the number of genes in the human genome (calculated as the Human
Genome Project came towards an end) was 30,000, whereas there may be up
to 100,000,000,000,000 synapses in the human brain. For this reason, it
is simply not plausible that neural circuits are precisely predetermined
by the genetic code. Of course, this argument does not imply that there
can be nothing module-like in the human brain -- modules may develop
without the precise genetic

specification of specific circuits. However, it does suggest that the
development of the neural circuits responsible for social cognition,
whether or not they are ultimately organized into discrete modules, must
depend on complex interactions between the developing individual and the
environment. In later chapters of this book, we will see that this
observation has some important implications for our understanding of the
origins of psychosis. Perhaps the human faculty that has the best claim
to being modularized is language. As we have already seen, there is
extensive evidence that specific regions of the brain are involved in
generating and understanding speech. Moreover, the fact that language is
a species-specific ability strongly suggests that the development of
this ability is genetically controlled.42 Even so, the environment also
plays an obvious role. Children grow up to speak the language they hear
from their care-givers rather than the language of their ancestors.
Children who are not exposed to the speech of others as their brains
develop grow up to be, tragically, severely linguistically and
intellectually disabled in later life.43 The ability to speak has a
profound effect on all other aspects of the human mind, and therefore
must be considered when we attempt to understand the role of cognition
in psychosis. When thinking about the function language plays in human
life, it is only natural to regard it as a means by which information is
passed from one individual to another. Psychologists who have speculated
about the origins of language have usually assumed that the advantages
thereby conferred provided the major selection pressure for language
evolution.44 For example, it has been argued that language evolved
because it enabled our ancestors to cope with the complex relationships
entailed by our membership of large social groups.45 Another, not
incompatible suggestion is that our rapid specialization for language
was fuelled by some kind of evolutionary arms race.46 The apelike
ancestor who can say to another something like, 'Hide behind that rock
over there, jump out with your stick and attack the intruder as he
passes by!' is clearly going to have better survival prospects than one
who lacks this skill. However, even this simple example suggests that
language also

has an intellectual function. By framing problems in a verbal form we
can organize our ideas, and plan what we are going to do. When I was
young, it was commonly said that talking to oneself was the first sign
of madness, but a case can be made for asserting the opposite. I think
all readers will be aware of the internal dialogue that runs through the
mind from the moment of waking until sleep resumes. Talking to
ourselves, we debate events, plan actions, issue chastisements to
ourselves when things go wrong and exclaim inwardly with delight when
things go well. While it is certainly not the case that the stream of
consciousness is entirely verbal, for much of the time our thoughts are
dominated by words. The intellectual function of language was recognized
in the early years of the twentieth century by the Russian physiologist
and psychologist Ivan Pavlov. Pavlov argued that this use of words has
conferred on human beings mental powers that separate us from other
species. Because we can think in words, we are to some extent free from
being controlled by the simple conditioning processes that dominate the
behaviour of non-human animals.\* Building on this idea, his student Lev
Vygotsky studied the way in which communicative speech is transformed
into verbal thought. Unfortunately, because he died of tuberculosis at
the age of 37 in 1934, and because Stalin suppressed his work,
Vygotsky's observations did not become known to Western child
psychologists until the early 1960s. In his now famous book Thought and
Language,47 Vygotsky summarized the relationship between language and
thought at different stages of child development as follows: 1) In
their... development, thought and speech have different roots. 2) In the
speech development of the child, we can certainly establish a
preintellectual stage, and in his thought development, a prelinguistic
stage. 3) Up to a certain point in time, the two different lines grow
independently of each other. 4) At a certain point these lines meet,
whereupon thought becomes verbal and speech rational.

Vygotsky studied the different ways that children make use of language,
in order to discover the psychological processes involved in this
merging of the lines of thought and speech. He observed that the growing
child first learns to produce and understand speech in the context of
his relationship with caregivers. During this stage, the child and adult
are constantly issuing instructions or asking questions of each other so
that, for the child, the whole process of speaking becomes bound up with
attempts by the two parties to control each other's actions. Later,
towards the end of the second year of life, children discover that they
can instruct themselves by speaking aloud about what they are doing.
(This is often preceded by a period in which they ask questions of their
parents and then immediately answer for themselves.)48 At this stage,
children spend a lot of time talking to themselves out loud (a
phenomenon known as private speech) and language becomes a powerful
mechanism for self-regulation. Finally, at about the age of 4 years,
social and private speech become differentiated from each other.
Children of this age learn the neat trick of talking silently to
themselves, resulting in inner speech that is inaudible and undetectable
to others. During the 1920s, Jean Piaget disagreed with this account
because he was reluctant to believe that the private speech of
2-year-olds had an intellectual function. Piaget believed that young
children talk out loud when on their own because they are too egocentric
to realize that no one is listening to them.49 However, observational
studies of children have consistently supported Vygotsky's contention
that the young child who talks when on his own is communicating
effectively with the person who really matters -- himself.50 Moreover,
recent studies by American developmental psychologist Laura Berk have
confirmed that children who can use private speech effectively when
learning new skills acquire those skills most quickly.51 By adulthood,
inner speech has lost many of the characteristics of social speech, and
become a highly condensed form of silent verbal activity. When using
inner speech, we rarely have to state the subject of our thoughts,
because it is already known to us. Elements of speech that allow
propositions to be linked meaningfully together so that they appear
coherent to the listener (known to linguists as cohesive ties) become
redundant. At

the same time, inner words expand their symbolic function and develop
multiple and complex associations. Although the measurement of this kind
of thinking is fraught with difficulty,52 studies in which immediate
recollections of inner speech have been compared with the full
expression of the same thoughts have suggested that one minute of inner
speech can equal up to 4000 words of overt speech.53 As we spend much of
our time talking about ourselves to ourselves, inner speech is an
important vehicle of self-awareness.54 It tends to be evoked in social
situations that are personally challenging or emotionally arousing. In
some circumstances during adult life, we may lazily forget the habit of
silent speech acquired during childhood, and speak out loud. This may
happen if we have a particularly demanding task to perform (I have been
intermittently mumbling to myself while writing this book), when we are
under stress, or when we think we are alone (anyone doubting this should
stand by a roadway intersection and watch unaccompanied drivers talking
to themselves as they wait for traffic lights to change). However, even
when we speak silently to ourselves, there is a neuromuscular echo of
the time in childhood when we could only speak aloud. Surprising though
it may seem, when we think in words, our lips and speech muscles are
active. The idea that activity in the speech muscles accompanies verbal
thought is almost as old as the idea of inner speech itself. The
American behaviourist J. B. Watson tried to measure this activity in the
1920s, but his efforts failed because he had inadequate equipment (he
experimented with comical devices that used wires and pulleys connected
to suction caps fastened on the lips). The invention shortly afterwards
of a device, known as an electromyogram (EMG), which directly measures
electrical activity in the muscles, soon led to the unequivocal
detection of subvocalization, as this silent activation of the speech
muscles is now called. In a typical electromyographic study, electrodes
are attached to the lips and larynx in order to measure electrical
currents in the muscles beneath the skin. Sometimes electrodes are also
attached to non-speech muscles (for example, the pectorals) in order to
ensure that any increase in muscle activity is limited to those involved
in speech. The participant in the experiment is then asked to perform
various mental tasks. Countless EMG

experiments conducted in the past fifty years or so have demonstrated
that subvocalization\* accompanies virtually any kind of mental process
that requires us to think in words.55 (Interestingly, both psychological
and EMG studies have shown that deaf people who have acquired sign
language use inner speech in the form of silent signs. As they think,
microcurrents are detectable in their finger muscles.)56 Not
surprisingly, in adults subvocalization is particularly evident when we
think about ourselves, or when we are ruminating about matters that are
emotionally important to us.57 As we have seen, it is precisely these
circumstances that most readily elicit inner speech.

The Brain and its Self I want to conclude this brief tour of the human
mind by considering a topic that, until recently, has been regarded as
more the province of philosophers than psychologists. Indeed, to any
hard-nosed biological scientists reading this book, 'the self' may still
seem a vague and almost metaphysical concept. However, we will see that
it can be subjected to scientific analysis. In a commendably concise
attempt to shed light on the nature of the self, the American social
psychologist Roy Baumeister has made the following observation:
Providing a satisfactory definition of the self has proven fiendishly
difficult. It is what you mean when you say 'I'. Most people use 'I' and
'self' many times each day, and so most people have a secure
understanding of what the self is -- but articulating that understanding
is not easy.58 It would be wrong, therefore, to regard the self as a
thing, as supposed by Cartesian dualists. It is instead a set of ideas,
pictures, or beliefs (or, to use a generic term, mental representations)
about who we are. Some of these representations are explicit and
available for contemplation, but others are

implicit and take the form of vague assumptions or 'schemas'. Like most
mental representations, the self has fluid boundaries and overlaps with
other kinds of thoughts and feelings, which is why it defies precise
definition. When we talk about or imagine ourselves, we can generate
verbal descriptions of our attributes, talents and deficiencies;
remember defining moments in our lives; consider how we match or fail to
match our moral, social and material aspirations; contemplate the
quality of our relationships; compare ourselves to other people; and
imagine how those other people see us. Each of these activities evokes
one or more aspects of the self but none encompasses the self in its
entirety. To borrow a metaphor from the philosopher Dan Dennett, the
self is the centre of narrative gravity, which, like the centre of
gravity of a physical body, cannot be isolated and touched, but around
which our memories, the stories we tell about ourselves, and the
decisions we make, all revolve.59 The pivotal role of the self in human
cognition is demonstrated by a deceptively simple phenomenon, known as
the self-reference effect. Our ability to remember information depends
on how we 'encode' information when we encounter it. For example, if we
look at a list of words, we can pay attention to whether they are
written in upper- or lower-case letters (feature encoding) or what the
words actually mean (semantic encoding). In general, we will tend to
recall more of the information if we pay attention to its meaning.
However, it seems that people are most likely to recall information
later if they encode it according to its relevance to the self.60 For
example, if we are asked to fill in a questionnaire about our own
personality characteristics, and we are then given a surprise memory
test of the items on the questionnaire, we will tend to remember the
questions we answered 'yes' to. The brain, it seems, prioritizes the
processing of information that is perceived to be important to the self.
Because we do not arrive in the world knowing who we are and how we are
different from other people, it is pretty obvious that there must be a
developmental story to tell about the self. Some child psychologists
have traced its origins to the first few weeks of life, when the infant
initially learns to distinguish between himself and his caregiver during
'protoconversational' exchanges that precede the emergence of
language.61 Once

we can speak, we acquire increasingly elaborate descriptions of the
self, some of which we learn from what we are told about ourselves by
significant others, and some of which we tell ourselves as we
contemplate our triumphs and disasters. Alongside these descriptions, we
accumulate memories of what has happened to us and the things that we
have done. This stored reservoir of knowledge about the self is the
bedrock from which all other aspects of the self are derived. It allows
us to define our individual identity ('I am a slightly overweight family
man with a good sense of humour'); our membership of groups of
like-minded people ('I belong to the tribe of clinical psychologists');
claim our rights ('I want my medical colleagues to acknowledge the
wisdom of my views about madness'); plan our future achievements ('I
have the skills and motivation to write a book'); and acknowledge our
limitations ('... but not to climb Mount Everest'). Inevitably, when
constructing a self, the child internalizes historically and culturally
determined values. It is therefore possible that the self as known to
people of the past may have been quite different from the self as known
to people living in the modern world. Roy Baumeister has argued that for
medieval Europeans, the self was relatively transparent, and was equated
with visible manifestations and actions. As life on earth was, at that
time, believed to be a preamble to eternal bliss, there was no need to
search for self-fulfilment.62 In modern Western societies, in contrast,
the self is often viewed as a hidden territory that can only be known
with difficulty, but which must be explored (perhaps with the technical
assistance of a psychotherapist) if its special talents are to be
fostered and self-actualization achieved. Although anthropological
studies suggest that people across the globe today share a common
preoccupation with the self,63 even modern human beings may think about
the self in diverse ways. American psychologists Hazel Markus and
Shinobu Kitayama have noted important differences between the way in
which the self is construed in individualist societies such as North
America, in which people tend to define themselves and evaluate their
self-worth in terms of their achievements, and collectivist societies
such as Japan, in which individuals tend to define their identity in
terms of harmonious relationships with other people.64 In the former,
people

tend to describe themselves in terms of traits and the self is largely
contextfree whereas, in the latter, people tend to describe themselves
by reference to particular social relationships or situations (for
example, 'I care for my sister'). Given that the self plays such a
pivotal role in human life, it would not be surprising if thinking about
ourselves were to involve the activation of specific neuroanatomical
structures. Of course, we should avoid the error made by Descartes, who
decided that the pineal gland was the communication gateway that linked
the brain to the soul. It would be foolish to assume that the self has a
specific physical embodiment of this sort. Nonetheless, when we
contemplate ourselves in any of the ways that I have described above, we
are clearly doing something 'brainy'. In recent experiments, Professor
Tony David and his colleagues at the Institute of Psychiatry in London
have tried to determine whether particular regions of the brain are
involved in self-recognition. They used computer techniques to blend
photographs of ordinary people with photographs of strangers, creating a
series of pictures running from 'other' to 'self' in twenty-one steps.
The participants were then shown the pictures while lying in an fMRI
scanner, and were asked to say at which point they believed that the
pictures were of themselves. All of the pictures activated the posterior
fusiform gyrus, a region of the brain known to play a role in the
recognition of faces. More interestingly, when the participants
recognized a face as 'me' neuroactivations were detected in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, an area of the brain known to play a
role in complex semantic judgements.65

The Social Nature of Psychosis The reader may be forgiven for thinking
that much of the material covered in this chapter has been something of
a digression from our main business of explaining madness. As we have
covered quite a lot of ground, the reader might also be feeling a little
breathless. I would like to finish off by attempting to draw from this
diverse material a few simple but important implications.

The findings we have considered in the last few pages paint a picture of
the mind--brain that is dramatically different from that assumed by many
psychologists investigating psychosis. Most of these researchers have
been heavily influenced by the computer metaphor, which sees the brain
as a machine that processes information in much the same way that a food
processor processes food -- without much regard to its meaning or
significance for the individual. On the contrary, we have seen that the
mind--brain is very unlike a typical computer. Indeed, the things that
it does well (for example, recognizing faces, speculating about why
other people act in the way that they do) are precisely those things
that a typical computer does badly, whereas the things that most
computers do well (for example, discovering the square-root of 5876.9)
are things that the average human mind finds daunting. The mind--brain
is a biologically evolved but flexible cognitive system, which adapts to
its environment by learning from other mind--brains (notably its
caregivers), and which prioritizes its current activities according to
both short-term and long-term goals. To summarize these properties in a
single statement that is as profound as it is blindingly obvious: the
mind--brain is a living system. This picture is entirely consistent with
an important conclusion that we arrived at towards the end of Chapter 7.
Remember that, in that chapter, we found strong evidence that the brain
is (literally) shaped by experience. The anatomical structures that form
subcomponents of the adult central nervous system change in size
according to the demands placed on them by events. The structure and
function of the adult brain are not simply products of some pre-ordained
genetic program (although genes must have an influence) but are the
results of a complex series of interactions between the individual and
the social environment. It follows that psychiatric theories that
consider the brain in isolation from the social world are unlikely to
lead to a proper understanding of the origins of psychosis. The
neoKraepelinian project of an exclusively biological psychiatry has been
doomed to failure from the outset. The failure of researchers working
within the Kraepelinian framework to consider psychological mechanisms
that are important in ordinary life has

had at least two unfortunate consequences. First, a huge explanatory gap
remains between observations of gross cognitive deficits in patients and
an understanding of their symptoms. It is simply not obvious how
attentional impairments, no matter how real, can lead to hallucinations,
paranoid ideas or incoherent speech. Second, as we will see in a later
chapter, the findings from studies of gross deficits have had few
implications for treatment. Indeed, they have reinforced the
neoKraepelinian prejudice that schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are
nothing more than brain diseases, and so impeded the development of
treatments that address patients' psychological and social needs. By
trying to give a more realistic account of the human mind than that
assumed by the neoKraepelinians, I have attempted to provide the
conceptual tools with which we will later fashion a more adequate
account of madness. To elaborate too much on this point at this stage
would be premature. However, even without considering specific
complaints in detail, it is not very difficult to see the relevance of
the topics we have discussed in the preceding pages. It is perhaps most
obvious that there must be a close relationship between language and
psychosis. The three psychotic complaints that have been most
intensively investigated -- delusions, auditory hallucinations and
communication disorder -- manifest themselves as forms of speech.
(Although we may question Tim Crow's speculative theory that psychosis
is genetically associated with cerebral lateralization, there must
surely be some truth in his assertion that language and madness are
inextricably linked.)66 It may be less apparent that madness is
inherently social in a broader sense. Of course, social cognitive
deficits affect patients' ability to negotiate the social world.
(American psychologists David Penn, Patrick Corrigan and others have
shown that the social competence of patients is better predicted by
their performance on measures of social cognition than by their
performance on tests of general deficits.)67 However, there is also good
reason to suppose that abnormal social cognition is directly implicated
in the behaviours and experiences that are the most obvious
manifestations of madness.

Invariably, psychotic complaints reflect concerns about the self, or
relationships with other people. Psychotically depressed people, for
example, often believe that they are inadequate, or guilty of imaginary
misdeeds. Manic patients, in contrast, often feel that they are superior
to others, and are capable of achievements that will amaze the world.
The delusional beliefs usually attributed to schizophrenia are
particularly redolent with social themes. Patients rarely profess
bizarre ideas about animals or inanimate objects. Instead they believe
that they are being persecuted by imaginary conspiracies, that they have
been denied recognition for inventing the helicopter or the pop-up
toaster, that they are loved by pop stars or by their doctors, or that
their partners are conducting numerous affairs despite compelling
evidence to the contrary. Although some patients experience pleasant
hallucinations, many report that their voices comment adversely on their
actions, or goad them to perform acts that will harm themselves or
frighten others. Michael Musalek, a psychiatrist at the University of
Vienna, has suggested that psychotic symptoms therefore reflect the core
existential dilemmas experienced by ordinary people.68 To put this
observation another way, the unusual beliefs and experiences of
psychiatric patients all seem to reflect preoccupations about the
position of the self in the social universe. OceanofPDF.com

9 Madness and Emotion Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the
passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and
obey them. David Hume1 Emotions play a pivotal role in human nature. On
the one hand they colour the moments when we feel most human -- falling
in love, witnessing birth or death, achieving our ambitions or accepting
humiliation and defeat. On the other hand, because we share them with
other species, they ground us in the biological world. Yet, curiously,
they are not usually considered to be important features of some of the
extreme forms of mental suffering that are the focus of this book. In
this chapter, I wish to redress this neglect and argue that psychotic
symptoms are above all emotional phenomena. This argument will entail an
examination of what we know about the psychology of emotions, which will
prepare the way for our more detailed examination of individual
psychotic complaints in later chapters. Some readers may be surprised by
this approach. When most psychologists and psychiatrists think about
extreme emotions, they usually focus on the spectrum of neurotic
disorders, perhaps because non-psychotic depressions and anxieties are
among the most common symptoms reported by patients visiting general
physicians.2 When research has been carried out into the role of
negative emotion in psychosis, much of it has adhered to the
Kraepelinian paradigm, and has therefore focused on patients with a
diagnosis of bipolar disorder rather than schizophrenia. This is
unfortunate because emotion probably plays as important a role in the
experiences of schizophrenia patients as it does in the lives of
patients diagnosed as suffering from manic depression. Some studies have
shown that as many as 65 per cent of schizophrenia patients complain of
being depressed.3 Others have observed comparable levels of anxiety.4
Canadian psychiatrists Ross Norman and Ashok Malla measured both
depression and anxiety in a large group of schizophrenia patients and
found that the two emotions were highly correlated. High levels of both

emotions were associated with delusions and hallucinations but,
surprisingly, not with negative symptoms such as apathy or social
withdrawal.5 Other studies have shown that negative emotions are
prominent in the early stages of psychotic breakdown, often preceding
the emergence of positive symptoms. American psychiatrists Marvin Herz
and Charles Melville interviewed the relatives of schizophrenia patients
in order to discover prodromal symptoms that typically occur before a
full-blown episode. Depression was reported in 76 per cent of cases, and
anxiety in 86 per cent.6 A similar study conducted in Britain by
clinical psychologist Max Birchwood and his colleagues at All Saints
Hospital in Birmingham found that depression was reported in 57 per cent
of cases, and anxiety in 62 per cent.7 Further evidence that emotion
plays an important role in schizophrenia symptoms has recently been
gathered by American clinical psychologist Nancy Docherty of Kent State
University in Ohio. Docherty has pointed out that many (although perhaps
not all) schizophrenia patients find that their symptoms worsen when
they are emotionally stressed. Positive symptoms (hallucinations and
delusions) and also symptoms of cognitive disorganization (psychotic
speech) are particularly affected in this way. Negative symptoms, on the
other hand, appear to be relatively unaffected.8 Taken together, these
observations have two important implications. First, the presence of
negative mood in so many schizophrenia patients, especially those
suffering from positive symptoms, is yet further evidence that the
Kraepelinian distinction between schizophrenia and the mood disorders is
misleading. Second, because negative emotions are usually present before
a recurrence of hallucinations or delusions, it seems unlikely that they
are mere consequences or by-products of psychosis.

So, What is an Emotion? Surprisingly, although the problems treated by
psychiatrists are often called 'emotional disorders', most textbooks of
psychiatry have nothing to say about the nature of emotions. As British
psychologists Mick Power and Tim Dalgleish have recently commented:

A worrying truth about the psychology of emotion literature is that the
majority of theories of normal, everyday emotions make little or no
reference to emotional disorder. Similarly, there are a host of theories
of emotional disorder, which are only loosely anchored, if indeed they
are anchored at all, to theories of emotional order.9

Two assumptions It is in fact quite difficult to distinguish between
emotions and other feelings such as pain or hunger, or other types of
mental contents such as attitudes and beliefs. Textbooks of psychology
routinely observe that emotions have affective (feeling), cognitive
(thoughts and beliefs) and behavioural components, which should alert us
to the possibility that the ordinary language word 'emotion' does not
refer to a single process. Two other assumptions about emotion commonly
held by psychologists are worth noting before proceeding further. First,
many psychologists have assumed that emotions involve some kind of
evaluation or appraisal of events. We tend to be happy when we know that
we are loved by someone special or when we believe that we have achieved
something important, sad when we have lost someone or suffered a setback
to our ambitions, and anxious when we anticipate that something
unpleasant will happen in the future. During the 1980s, a protracted
debate about the role of appraisals in emotion was conducted between two
American psychologists, Robert Zajonc and Richard Lazarus. Zajonc argued
that feelings are the primary component of emotion, and that emotional
reactions can occur without a conscious appraisal of the environment.
(An obvious example would be our sudden reaction when we catch a brief
glimpse of a large object moving dangerously towards us.)10 Lazarus, on
the other hand, argued that cognitive processes are primary, and that
emotions are always triggered by the belief that something positive or
negative has happened or is about to happen. According to Lazarus, each
emotion therefore has a specific meaning or 'core relational theme' --
an offence against the individual in the case of anger, or the
experience of irrevocable loss in the case of sadness.11 To some extent
this dispute was more semantic than substantial -- not all cognitive
processes are conscious and some kind of rapid appraisal of the
environment is presumably

involved even when we automatically throw ourselves out of the path of
an approaching car. Mick Power and Tim Dalgleish have noted that, when
emotional responses are triggered automatically, this is often because
the appraisal process has taken place at some point in the past. For
example, a man whose memories of childhood are shrouded with fear may
immediately feel frightened on hearing his elderly father's raised
voice. In this case, the sound of the father's voice automatically
elicits fear because it has previously been appraised as signalling
danger. They also note that emotions often involve cycles of appraisal,
rather than a single appraisal event. The experience of anger when
insulted by a friend may lead to reflections about the relationship,
modulating further encounters with the friend, and thereby leading to
further appraisals. A second, widely held assumption about emotions is
that their behavioural manifestations have along evolutionary history,
and serve important functions in our lives. Not surprisingly, people who
are suffering from anxiety or depression often find this a difficult
proposition to accept. However, it is obvious that at least some
emotional states help us to respond effectively in emergencies. When we
see the car moving towards us, the rush of adrenalin prepares us to make
the physical effort that will save our lives and, when we feel anxious,
we can brace ourselves for the calamities to come. It is less obvious
that emotions have important cognitive benefits. We usually have to
juggle many competing goals in life. Our emotions enable us to
prioritize our mental resources rapidly in order to face the changing
demands of our environment, so that we can focus on those goals that are
most immediately pressing.12 The decisions we make in these
circumstances are often influenced, not by a labour-intensive analysis
of the likely outcomes of different actions, but by a much quicker
anticipation of the emotional consequences of each choice. (People
selecting between risky options choose the option that they think will
lead them to feel better.)13 Mr Spock, the character in the science
fiction television series Star Trek who hails from the planet Vulcan and
who, in the absence of emotion, can only reason logically, would be
mentally paralysed when faced with many everyday dilemmas.14 Of course,
extremely negative emotions do not appear particularly adaptive.
However, the neural mechanisms responsible for emotional behaviour

presumably evolved a long time in the past. Therefore, although the
situations that typically elicit emotions -- 'fighting, falling in love,
escaping predators, confronting sexual infidelity, and so on'15-- have
occurred innumerable times in evolutionary history, the most appropriate
way of responding to these challenges today may differ from the ways
that were most adaptive in the past. British psychologist Paul Gilbert
has argued, for example, that many of the behaviours associated with
depression (particularly reduced aggression to more dominant individuals
and increased anger towards more submissive persons), although
apparently maladaptive in a modern context, allowed our ancestors to
adapt following a loss of rank in a simple hierarchical society.16

The two faces of emotion In practice, psychological research on emotions
has focused on two quite separate phenomena. Many ethologists and social
psychologists, following Charles Darwin, have focused on the expression
of emotions, particularly on the face. These investigators have
sometimes argued that emotional expressions are special forms of
communication that are universal, and therefore probably inherited.17
Other researchers, particularly clinical psychologists, have been more
concerned with subjectively experienced emotions as revealed by
firstperson reports such as 'I feel depressed', 'I feel anxious', or 'I
feel ashamed.' It is easy to assume that there is a special relationship
between these two types of phenomena, that each facial expression is
associated with a particular subjective feeling. Consistent with this
assumption, there is obviously some degree of correspondence between
feelings and expressions -- when we feel depressed we are more likely to
frown than to smile. However, we should not therefore leap to the
further assumption that expressions and subjective experiences are
different manifestations of a single underlying process, that there is a
discrete number of basic emotions that are reflected on our faces and in
our minds. The idea of basic emotions seems so natural and self-evident
that it has dominated research on normal emotions, and also on the
abnormal emotions encountered in psychiatric practice. It has
particularly influenced research on facial expressions. In an important
series of studies, Paul Ekman and his colleagues at the University of
California in San Francisco have collected evidence that common
expressions of anger, fear, enjoyment, sadness, disgust

and possibly surprise are recognized in diverse societies of the
world.18 However, not all psychologists have accepted this evidence
uncritically. Canadian researcher James Russell has carefully
scrutinized the work of Ekman and others, and has noted that most
studies have employed forced-choice procedures in which informants are
shown photographs of faces and are then asked to select from a list of
possible emotions. Russell has argued that these procedures minimize
disagreements and that there is less agreement when more open-ended
procedures are used.19 Even when forced-choice procedures have been
employed, differences between cultures are greater than Ekman has
supposed. (For example, Japanese and American informants generally agree
that certain expressions are best described as happiness, sadness and
surprise, but show less agreement when asked to describe expressions
corresponding to North American notions of anger, disgust or fear.)

Subjective emotions In the case of subjective experience, the idea of
basic emotions is closely related to the idea that we discover our
emotions by a process of introspection. According to this theory (and,
no matter how natural and self-evident it may appear, it is a theory),
when I say that I feel depressed something happens along the following
lines. First, I notice some kind of internal state or sensation; second,
I recognize that inner state or sensation as the feeling of
'depression'; and, third, I report it to anyone who is likely to be
interested. Some elements of this theory are uncontentious. For example,
there is nothing wrong with the idea that we are influenced by events
occurring inside our bodies. Writing in 1948, the influential American
behaviourist B. F. Skinner observed that: The response 'My tooth aches'
is partly under the control of a state of affairs to which the speaker
alone is able to react, since no one else can establish the required
connection with the tooth in question. There is nothing mysterious or
metaphysical about this; the simple fact is that each speaker possesses
a small but important world of private stimuli.20

Some psychologists have suggested that this private world is the source
of our emotional experiences. For example, in his celebrated two-volume
Principles of Psychology published in 1890, the American psychologist
and philosopher William James argued that: Bodily changes follow
directly the perception of the exciting fact, and our feeling of the
same changes as they occur is the emotion. Common sense says... we meet
a bear are frightened and run... The hypothesis here to be defended says
that the order of the sequence is incorrect, that the one mental state
is not immediately induced by the other \[the perception of the bear\],
that the bodily manifestations must first be interposed between them,
and that the more rational statement is we feel... afraid because we
tremble.21 Recent versions of this theory have implicated various types
of internal stimuli in subjective emotions, including arousal of the
autonomic nervous system,22 feedback from motor responses involved in
facial and bodily expressions,23 and even changes in brain blood
temperature resulting from the disruption of vascular flow by facial
muscle movements.24 Overall, there is quite convincing evidence that
each of these processes does have some influence.25 For example, if
people are persuaded to adopt particular expressions, their feelings
tend to be affected in predictable ways. However, as long ago as 1927,
the American physiologist Walter Cannon pointed out that bodily
sensations are too diffuse to account for the rich variety of emotional
experiences reported by ordinary people. More importantly, even if it
was to transpire, following further physiological studies, that the
range of internal stimuli is sufficiently varied, the problem of how
people can learn to notice and report these stimuli as emotional states
represents an insuperable obstacle to James's theory. In order to see
the power of this criticism, we must consider how individuals come to
possess a vocabulary of feelings and internal states. This question was
considered by the Austrian-British philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, and
was famously debated in his posthumously published book Philosophical
Investigations, which first appeared in 1953.26 However, Wittgenstein's
analysis was anticipated in a less well-known paper published by B. F.
Skinner in 1945.27 Although written in the terse jargon beloved by
American behaviourists of the period, Skinner's account is much simpler
than Wittgenstein's, and so it is his version of the argument that I
will outline here.

Having established that we each possess an internal world of stimuli to
which we have exclusive access (no one else can feel our toothache),
Skinner points out that the way we learn to label those stimuli is far
from obvious. The problem is that speaking is a social process in which
the appropriate use of words depends on rules and conventions that we
learn from other people.\* These conventions can only be discovered in
the context of the right kind of relationship between the person who is
learning to speak and what Skinner describes as the wider 'verbal
community'. To take a simple example, learning object names like 'cow'
or 'dog' presents no particular problem as both the learner and the
verbal community have access to the stimuli that prompt these names
(cows and dogs). I can correct you if you call a dog a cow, and my
failure to respond appropriately to your request to 'pat the cow' may
alert you to the fact that you have used the wrong name. However, these
possibilities are absent in the case of internal stimuli. I cannot point
to a particular profile of physiological states inside you, no matter
how complex, and teach you to call it 'depression'. Nor am I in a
position to disagree with you should you label a physiological state as
'depression' on the grounds that I would call the very same state
'anxiety'. Nonetheless, we plainly do talk about internal states and
Skinner discusses a number of indirect ways by which we can acquire the
necessary vocabulary. Any publicly observable event that regularly
accompanies a private stimulus may be exploited by the verbal community
in much the same way that a sighted person might use visual cues when
teaching a blind person to name objects. For example, a child's protest,
'That hurts', may be responded to appropriately if it occurs following a
fall resulting in a grazed knee. Similarly, the verbal community may
encourage statements that are made together with particular types of
non-verbal behaviour (groaning and clutching the jaw in the case of
'toothache', smiling and related gestures in the case of 'happiness').
Nor must we assume that some kind of overt reinforcement is required for
these kinds of learning to occur -- children have many opportunities to
observe in others associations between particular types of emotional
statements and the relevant public stimuli. Some times we are able to
learn terms that appear to describe internal states because those states
occasionally occur in a public form. For example, the word 'murderous'
may be used to describe an emotional state that typically

accompanies murderous behaviour. Other emotion words, for example
'agitated' or 'ebullient', began their life referring to public events
but have been extended to the psychological domain by a process of
analogy. Recently, the British psychologist Graham Richards devoted an
entire book to this phenomenon, and the following is just one of the
many examples that he cites: Fire-control terms have proved especially
useful for the encoding of what we now term arousal states, and
constitute an extension of the temperature-based PL \[psychological
language\] (hot, cold, tepid, frigid, lukewarm, icy). They include the
following: to blaze up, to burn, to be burnt up/out/into one's memory,
to burn one's fingers, to dampen down, to douse, dying embers (e.g. 'her
smile rekindled the dying embers of passion'), fiery, flaming, to fan
the flames, to flare up, to fuel, to ignite (e.g. 'his words ignited the
passions of the crowd'), inflammatory, to kindle, to light (e.g. 'I just
want to light a flame in your heart'), to rake over the ashes, red hot,
to rekindle, scorched, searing (e.g. especially in the phrase
heart-searing), singed, to smoulder/smouldering, to spark off, to stoke
up.28 The word 'depression' began its life in just this way. Until the
early years of the nineteenth century, doctors labelled negative
emotional states as 'melancholia', 'neurasthenia' or 'moppishness' (the
last term being reserved for the uneducated classes). 'Depression' was
first used in physical medicine to describe a reduction in cadiovascular
function and was afterwards adopted by early psychiatrists to indicate
emotional states that were considered to be the opposite of
excitation.29 During the early years of the twentieth century the term
intruded into the language of ordinary people, so that we now think of
'depression' as a natural label for how we feel during times of loss.
This account suggests the possibility that different cultures will
describe subjective emotions differently. Collating the evidence that
addresses this question, James Russell has demonstrated that societies
vary dramatically in the range of words they allocate to emotional
states.30 For example, the English language contains over 2000 emotion
words, whereas most languages contain fewer than 200. Emotional states
that appear quite fundamental from the perspective of an English speaker
are not always mirrored in the lives and languages of other cultures. In
some African languages, the same word covers what in English would be
described as anger and sadness whereas the

Gidjingali aborigines of Australia do not discriminate between fear and
shame. Prototypical emotions that have a central place in Western
concepts of psychopathology appear to be entirely absent in some
cultures. For example, there is no word equivalent to depression in many
non-Western cultures and no word equivalent to anxiety among Eskimos or
Yorubas. Even when emotion concepts do appear to translate from one
language to another the relevant words in the two cultures may not be
precisely equivalent in meaning. A number of studies have been carried
out in which the Japanese equivalents of the English words 'anxiety' and
'depression' have been identified by the process of back-translation
(translating the English words into Japanese and then checking that
independent translators translate them back to their original English
expressions). However, further studies of the meanings of these words
(for example by asking people for other words they associate with them)
have revealed substantial differences in the way that they are used in
the two cultures. Cultures even appear to differ in where they draw the
line between emotional and non-emotional internal states. For example,
the Japanese word 'jodo' has been translated as the equivalent of the
English word emotion, but includes states that translate as considerate,
motivated, lucky and calculating. To take another example cited by
Russell, the Chewong of Malaysia, who are apparently limited to only
seven words that clearly translate as emotion states, group together
both thoughts and feelings, locating them in the liver. Of course, one
possible way of interpreting these findings would be to assume that
Japanese and Chewong informants are simply wrong about their emotional
states. However, in pursuing this argument, we would be making the
chauvinistic assumption that the structure of the human mind is uniquely
and accurately reflected in the vocabulary of English.

The dimensional structure of subjective emotion Despite the different
ways in which cultures describe internal states, it is possible that a
considerable degree of cross-cultural consistency exists when emotions
are considered within a dimensional framework. The idea here is that,
underlying the diverse ways in which different cultures describe their
emotions,

there may be a relatively small number of emotional dimensions that are
universal. Various statistical methods have been used in an attempt to
discover such dimensions, the most common being multidimensional scaling
in which informants are asked to rate the similarity of various emotion
words. The informants' ratings are then analysed using a complex
mathematical procedure, which tries to account for the ratings in terms
of a minimum number of dimensions. (This approach is similar to the
technique of factor analysis, which I briefly described in Chapter 4.)
This type of research has consistently shown that ratings of emotions
can be plotted as a circular pattern or circumplex in a two-dimensional
space. This structure has been found not only using words but also using
photographs of facial expressions, and with people from such varying
places in the world as North America, Greece, Spain, Vietnam, Hong Kong
and Haiti. The two dimensions that define this space have in turn have
been interpreted in different ways by different researchers. Russell has
taken what might seem to be the commonsense view, and has suggested that
the two dimensions are, first, pleasantness versus unpleasantness and,
second, the degree to which the individual is physiologically aroused.
On this view, pleasure is the opposite of dysphoria (negative
emotion).31 In contrast, American psychologists David Watson and Auke
Tellegren have argued that the same structure is better described in
terms of two independent dimensions of positive and negative affect,
which are revealed by rotating Russell's model through 45 degrees32 (see
Figure 9.1). Figure 9.1 The two emotional circumplexes (adapted from B.
Parkinson, P. Totterdell, R. B. Briner and S. Reynolds (1996) Changing
Moods: The Psychology of Mood and Mood Regulation. Harlow: Longman).
Russell's model, on the left, proposes two dimensions of affect --
positive vs negative and arousal vs sleepiness. Rotating this model
through 45°, we arrive at Watson and Tellegren's model of independent
positive (PA) and negative affects (NA), which is on the right.

These systems are clearly inter-translatable (for example, a state of
high positive affect according to Watson and Tellegren corresponds with
a state of high arousal and high pleasure according to Russell). The
debate about which system is preferable is there fore quite technical
and, to some commentators, the differences between them are largely
arbitrary. However, to my mind at least, Watson and Tellegren's system
has several compelling advantages. Least importantly, Watson and
Tellegren have argued that the majority of emotion words in most
languages describe the regions of the circumplex that they have
characterized as high positive affect and high negative affect.
Therefore, they argue, these two types of subjective emotion are the
most salient, and the most psychologically real, to most people in the
world. More importantly, Watson and Tellegren's model of positive and
negative affect clearly maps on to two fundamental psychological
processes that are common to all animal species, and which govern much
of our behaviour. Reinforcement (or reward in ordinary language) refers
to the process by which behaviours tend to be repeated if they lead to
stimuli that have positive consequences for the individual. Stimuli of
this sort are known as reinforcers. The most basic reinforcers satisfy
biological drives such as hunger and the need for sex. Not surprisingly,
organisms (whether human or non-human) tend to approach reinforcing
stimuli, and the accompanying emotion experienced by

human beings is positive affect. Punishment, in contrast, refers to the
process by which organisms (whether human or non-human) tend to desist
from actions that lead to negative consequences, such as painful
stimuli. The emotion we experience when encountering such stimuli is
negative affect. The neurophysiological systems responsible for these
two processes are beyond the scope of this book; suffice it to say that
there has been an impressive accumulation of evidence indicating that
distinctive brain mechanisms are responsible for these processes and
hence, presumably, for the two types of emotion.33 An important
implication of Watson and Tellegren's model is that, contrary to folk
wisdom, positive and negative emotions can occur independently of each
other. This claim has sometimes been regarded as controversial, partly
because, in most circumstances, positive and negative affect are
negatively correlated.34 (Stimuli that evoke positive affect tend not to
evoke negative affect and vice versa, so that they often appear to lie
at opposite ends of a single dimension of emotion.) However, even in
ordinary life the two types of emotion sometimes occur together -- for
example during periods of transition between one phase of life and
another, such as when starting at college or when moving to a new job.35
In a later chapter we will see that this model helps to make sense of
the experiences of manic patients, who often experience positive and
negative affect simultaneously. It should be emphasized that nothing in
this dimensional account of emotion detracts from the fact that we are
able to use a sophisticated emotional vocabulary. Presumably, our choice
of emotion words when experiencing positive or negative affect is
influenced by additional information that is available at the time. This
information may include some of the physiological cues we considered
earlier (for example, the butterfly sensation in our stomach that we
associate with fear), our knowledge of our recent history (we are
unlikely to feel ashamed unless we know that we have transgressed a
moral code or caused insult to others), together with various
environmental stimuli (for example, the behaviour of other people who
are present).

The emotional circumplex and abnormal mood

As I noted at the beginning of this chapter, most psychiatrists and
clinical psychologists have uncritically accepted the theory of basic
emotions as reflected in the English language. For example, the neuroses
have traditionally been divided into depression and anxiety disorders in
much the same way that ordinary English distinguishes between being
depressed and being anxious. In the past few years, this classification
of the neuroses has been challenged by a number of researchers in
Britain and the United States who have used arguments similar to those I
employed in Chapter 4 when criticizing the neoKraepelinian account of
the psychoses.36 For example, patients rarely experience depression or
anxiety alone, and clinical studies using questionnaire37 and interview
measures38 have consistently found that these symptoms are highly
correlated. Moreover, when patients have been studied over long periods
of time, mood symptoms often shift so that what seems to be mainly
depression at the outset may later appear to be an anxiety disorder or
vice versa.39 Not surprisingly, as we have seen, parallel observations
have been made by researchers interested in the moods experienced by
schizophrenia patients. Although some researchers have focused on
depression and others on anxiety, high levels of both emotions are
usually reported during psychotic episodes and also during the prodromal
phase that precedes them. David Watson and his colleague Lee Anna Clark
have argued that these problems of classifying abnormal mood can be
explained by locating them on the emotional circumplex.40 All negative
emotions, they have argued, involve strong negative affect or dysphoria.
Feelings of anxiety typically also involve physical tension (the body's
natural preparation for fight or flight in the face of an emergency).
Depression, on the other hand, usually involves not only the presence of
negative affect, but also the absence of positive affect. Psychiatric
patients who have been administered questionnaires designed to measure
these different components of emotion have been found to score as the
theory predicts.41

Do Some Psychotic Patients Lack Emotions? Although the experiences of
patients diagnosed as suffering from bipolar disorder provide the most
obvious point of contact between madness and theories of normal emotion,
I will focus in the remaining parts of this chapter on symptoms more
usually attributed to schizophrenia. The apparent absence of

emotions sometimes observed in patients with this diagnosis presents an
obvious but hopefully not insuperable difficulty for my claim that
emotion plays a central role in psychosis. Schizophrenia patients'
apparent lack of emotional expression is sometimes described as flat
affect or affective blunting. However, patients sometimes complain of a
lack of subjective pleasure, known as anhedonia. These symptoms are
usually included in the broader class of negative symptoms that emerges
from factor-analytic studies such as those we considered in the first
part of this book. The appearance of these symptoms in the same factor
suggests that they occur together in real life, so that someone who
complains of anhedonia is also likely to show flat affect, and vice
versa. However, they are separable phenomena nonetheless. The Scale for
Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS), a widely used symptom-rating
scale devised by American psychiatrist Nancy Andreasen,42 describes the
following features of flat affect: unchanging facial expression ('the
patient's face appears wooden, mechanical, frozen'); decreased
spontaneous movements; paucity of expressive gestures ('the patient does
not use his body as an aid in expressing his ideas'); poor eye-contact;
affective non-responsivity ('failure to smile or laugh when prompted')
and lack of vocal inflections ('speech has a monotonic quality, and
important words are not emphasized through changes in pitch or volume').
All of these descriptors concern the expression of emotion. In contrast,
the same scale describes anhedonia-asociality as comprising a lack of
recreational interests and activities; a loss of sexual interest and
activity; an inability to feel intimacy and closeness; and impoverished
relationships with friends and peers. This description emphasizes the
failure to obtain subjective pleasure from relationships, a phenomenon
that is sometimes called social anhedonia to differentiate it from the
inability to experience physical pleasure, known as physical anhedonia.
Psychologists Loren and Jean Chapman of the University of Wisconsin have
devised questionnaires for measuring these types of anhedonia separately
in both patients and ordinary people and have shown that they are
usually highly correlated.43 It is also important to note that flat
affect and anhedonia do not exhaust the negative symptoms commonly
attributed to schizophrenia patients. For example, other negative
symptoms listed in the SANS manual include alogia

(impoverished thinking); apathy; and attentional deficits. With the
exception of the last of these, which we considered in the previous
chapter, these symptoms have been the subject of almost no psychological
research, and so I will say almost nothing more about them in the
present context.

The status of negative symptoms Before proceeding to consider flat
affect and anhedonia in detail, it is worth briefly considering the
status of the negative symptoms in general. Different psychiatrists have
emphasized the negative features of psychosis to varying degrees. For
example, Kraepelin's account of dementia praecox clearly emphasizes the
intellectual and emotional deficits he observed in his patients, whereas
Schneider placed much more emphasis on what we now regard as positive
symptoms. Modern theories of negative symptoms, which, in the absence of
a substantial volume of psychological research, have sometimes tended to
be rather speculative, have turned on two controversies. First, some
psychologists and psychiatrists have debated whether negative symptoms
are products of some kind of underlying intrinsic (in medical terms,
morbid) process and, second, others have debated whether they can be
distinguished from depression. These debates are not entirely
unconnected as, clearly, if negative symptoms are just an unusual
variant of depression they are less mysterious than they might otherwise
appear. The problem of whether negative symptoms are caused by some kind
of process intrinsic to the individual is raised by the suspicion that
they may be environmentally determined or iatrogenic (doctor-caused)
conditions. Until recently, patients commonly spent many years
languishing in large hospitals where they received very little
stimulation. Not surprisingly, many patients treated in this way fell
into a state of learned helplessness, in which they lacked the skills to
interact with others or the motivation to look after themselves. In the
1970s, British social psychiatrist John Wing, working with the
sociologist George Brown, observed that providing institutionalized
patients with appropriate support and stimulation could bring about a
reduction in what we now call negative symptoms, although they cautioned
that over-stimulating patients might cause an exacerbation of their
delusions and hallucinations.44

More recently, some authors have made comparisons between the fate of
institutionalized patients and other marginalized or victimized
individuals such as the long-term unemployed or the victims of
concentration camps.45 Psychiatrist and anthropologist Richard Warner,
based at the University of Colorado, has examined historical records to
show that recovery rates in psychotic patients are lower in periods of
poor economic opportunity such as the Great Depression of the 1930s, so
this comparison may not be entirely farfetched.46 However, not all
studies have found an association between institutionalization and
negative symptoms. Eve Johnstone, Tim Crow and others failed to find
differences in negative symptoms between patients living in the
community and those who had experienced long-term hospitalization.47
Whereas evidence on the relationship between negative symptoms and an
adverse environment is inconsistent, the evidence that negative symptoms
can be exacerbated by the medications administered to patients is
clear-cut. Although biological psychiatrists have been slow to recognize
the negative psychological impact of their treatment methods, a
neuroleptic-induced deficit syndrome (NIDS), characterized by emotional
blunting and reduced motivation, has been well documented. It is often
difficult to distinguish between this syndrome and negative symptoms
that are not drug-induced.48 As neuroleptics are also known to make some
patients depressed, side effects of medication may also contribute to
the difficulty in distinguishing between negative symptoms and
depression. In a study conducted by psychologist Martin Harrow and his
colleagues at the University of Illinois, schizophrenia patients were
studied for a period of five years. Patients who were taking
neuroleptics, in comparison with those who were not, were more likely to
experience both depression and anhedonia during the follow-up period,
even when initial levels of symptomatology were taken into account.49
Other researchers have concluded that negative symptoms, while
overlapping with depression, cannot simply be explained by negative
mood. In the study by Ross Norman and Ashok Malla described earlier,
depression was more closely associated with positive than negative
symptoms.50 In another study, carried out by psychiatrist Steven Hirsch
and others in London, in which a group of schizophrenia patients who
were currently depressed was compared with a group that was not
currently depressed, no difference was found in the SANS scores of the
two groups.51 If these findings seem inconsistent with those reported by
Martin Harrow and his colleagues it is perhaps because they have

not been interpreted in the context of a well-thought-out theory of
emotion. As we will see later, when researchers have focused
specifically on patients' emotional responses, a clearer picture of the
mechanisms responsible for some negative symptoms has begun to emerge.
The discovery that some of the cognitive deficits found in schizophrenia
patients are specifically associated with negative symptoms might seem
to be consistent with the notion that they are intrinsic characteristics
of the individual. In the last chapter we saw, for example, that
negative symptom patients perform particularly poorly on high-load
versions of the Continuous Performance Test. However, as we have also
seen, test performance may not be a reliable indicator of an intrinsic
morbid process. Indeed, there is nothing implausible about the idea that
cognitive deficits arise from an impoverished environment. (Remember
David Shakow's observation that the performance of schizophrenia
patients on psychological tests could match that of ordinary people if
they received an appropriate level of support and encouragement.) Better
evidence that negative symptoms are more than just an adverse reaction
to an unsupportive environment is the finding that they are sometimes
present during the earliest stages of psychosis, especially in those
patients whose premorbid functioning (as reflected by occupational or
school reports) is poor.52 This observation suggests, first, that there
is a continuum between poor social functioning and negative symptoms
and, second, that whatever mechanisms are responsible for negative
symptoms may be present before the onset (and treatment) of full-blown
psychosis. In an attempt to resolve the debate about the intrinsic
nature of negative symptoms, psychiatrist William Carpenter and his
colleagues at the University of Maryland have proposed that only a
proportion of patients suffer from what they describe as a core deficit
syndrome.53 They have argued that the symptoms that define the deficit
syndrome are enduring features of the patient that are not caused by
extrinsic factors such as depression or demoralization. The six symptoms
which they believe often meet these requirements are: restricted emotion
as evidenced by facial expression, gestures and vocal inflection;
diminished subjective emotional range; poverty of speech; curbing of
interests; a diminished sense of purpose; and diminished social drive.
However, the crucial feature of their definition is the exclusion of
possible causes such as anxiety, depression or drug side effects, which
they argue can be achieved with a high degree of reliability if
information about the long-term course of an

illness can be obtained from a suitable informant, for example a close
relative of the patient.54 Although this approach is surely an important
advance on previous attempts to make sense of negative symptoms, it
suffers from disadvantages that we have already encountered in other
categorial classification schemes. First, the division of patients into
those with or without the deficit syndrome does not allow for the
possibility that patients suffer from deficit symptoms by degrees (that
is, that deficit symptoms, like other symptoms we have considered, may
lie on a continuum with normal functioning). Second, the approach does
not help us understand the role of psychological processes in negative
symptoms. It is possible that these problems can be avoided by focusing
on particular symptoms with out trying to prejudge, for the moment,
their causes.

Flat affect The danger of equating outward expression with the
subjective experience of emotion was vividly illustrated by a remarkable
paper written by Jean Bouricius, a retired social worker and mother of a
32-year-old schizophrenia patient.55 Suspicious that objective ratings
of psycho-pathology failed to capture adequately her son's experiences,
she asked five professionals (two doctors, two social workers and a
psychologist) who knew him well to assess his symptoms using the SANS.
All five returned moderately high ratings, especially for affective
blunting. However, Ms Bouricius was able to show that her son's diary
notes for the same period were rich with emotional material. For
example, he described a visit to his doctor in the following manner:
Went to see my doctor but couldn't talk. Kept saying, 'I don't know,' to
his questions. Started crying. Felt pity and love for Rhoda \[a friend\]
because she has fear, because she has to take medication, because she is
a mental patient like me, because I want to marry her, but I think I
never can. I started saying that I had lost my memory. Then I got up and
left. And a few days later: Rhoda asked me if I were spoiled and I
angrily said no, but I feel hurt, as if I was born for a purpose I hide
from, covering myself with warm blankets. Go to

hell, World! I cannot die in peace and safety. I cannot face the
slightest breath of real life or death or ugliness. But I hurt for being
such a coward. I was always a coward -- socially, physically, mentally,
sexually, emotionally. If I go insane, am I brave? I will, because then,
and only then, I am brave, not a coward. I hate all people. They compete
and want stimulation. I hate them all, all. None loves, none cares, none
understands or ever will understand. I am dead, dead -- very, very
limited, afraid and hurt. Go to hell, World! The relationship between
flat affect and patients' subjective experience of emotion has been more
formally investigated in a number of studies which have broadly
supported Ms Bouricius' observations. Howard Berenbaum and Tom Oltmanns
showed emotionally blunted schizophrenia patients, nonblunted
schizophrenia patients, depressed patients and ordinary people film
clips that had been selected for their ability to elicit emotional
reactions. The participants were asked to report the extent to which
they felt happy or disgusted by the content of each clip. As expected,
the blunted patients were rated as less expressive than the normal
controls when watching both positive and negative clips. They were also
less expressive than the non-blunted schizophrenia patients, but only
when watching the positive clips. However, when the participants'
subjective ratings of their emotions were examined, the blunted patients
did not differ from those of any of the control groups.56 Ann Kring,
Sandra Kerr, David Smith and John Neale of the State University of New
York at Stoney Brook carried out a very similar experiment, but studied
patients who were drug-free in order to exclude the confounding effects
of neuroleptic medication. Using a questionnaire designed to measure
positive and negative affect as defined by Watson and Tellegren's
circumplex model, they also found that their schizophrenia patients
experienced just as much positive and negative emotion as ordinary
people, despite being less emotionally expressive.57 More recently, a
group of researchers at the University of Maastricht in Holland have
taken the study of patients' subjective emotions out of the laboratory
and into everyday life by using a technique known as experience
sampling, in which a small electronic device is used to prompt patients
to fill in simple diaries at random points in the day; in this study,
schizophrenia patients as a whole were found to experience more intense
and variable negative emotion than healthy controls, and emotionally
blunted patients did not differ from patients who were not showing
evidence of flat affect.58

The overall picture that emerges from these studies is of normal
subjective emotion in schizophrenia patients. Flat affect, therefore,
appears to reflect a difficulty of expressing rather than feeling
emotions. Consistent with this hypothesis, Cecile Sison, Murray Alpert
and others at the New York University Medical Center have observed that
patients with flat affect show more hesitations in their speech, and
less activity in their facial muscles (as measured by electromyography),
than schizophrenic patients without flat affect, or depressed
patients.59 It remains unclear why some psychotic patients experience
this difficulty. In a study reported by Meredith Mayer, Murray Alpert
and their colleagues it was found that flat affect was associated with
severe side effects of neuroleptic medication, length of
hospitalization, and poor performance on neuropsychological tests
designed to assess the functioning of the right half of the cerebral
cortex.60 As the right cerebral hemisphere is believed to be involved in
the regulation of emotional expression, this last finding might seem
unsurprising. Unfortunately, later researchers, using more sophisticated
right hemisphere tests, have not been able to replicate these results.61
Intriguingly, whether or not flat affect is associated with poor
functioning of particular brain regions, it may most accurately be
described as a problem of social communication. Heiner Ellgring, a
psychologist at the University of Würzburg in Germany, studied the
facial expressions of schizophrenia patients as they watched
emotion-provoking films and, like the American researchers, found that
they were under-expressive. However, she found that the patients showed
reduced activity specifically in those muscles of the upper face that
are normally active when we are talking to other people (for example,
when we raise our eyebrows in response to a juicy piece of gossip). In
another study, she calculated the rate at which facial expressions
occurred while speaking and when not engaged in conversation. Ordinary
people are most expressive when talking to others. However, in the case
of the schizophrenia patients studied by Ellgring, no differences were
observed in the rates at which expressions were generated while speaking
and not speaking. Ellgring argues that these findings show that, in
schizophrenia patients, facial expressions have become dissociated from
their communicative function. Clearly, this could be caused by some kind
of damage to the social brain. Equally, it is possible that the long

periods of social isolation often experienced by schizophrenia patients
might cause them to lose the skill of expressing their emotions to other
people.62

Anhedonia Like affective blunting, the inability to experience pleasure
has long been regarded as an important feature of schizophrenia. In the
mid-1950s, the Hungarian-born psychoanalyst Sandor Rado, who had joined
the great European exodus of intellectuals to America in the years
preceding the Second World War, argued that anhedonia was not merely a
symptom of the disorder, but a core deficit that led to loss of
motivation, a vulnerability to irrational fears, an incoherent sense of
self, and an inability to form adequate relationships.63 This idea was
developed further in Paul Meehl's speculative 1962 paper on the
relationship between schizophrenia and personality.64 Meehl suggested
that anhedonia might be a primary cause of the disorder, present before
the onset of illness, and responsible for patients' social isolation and
aberrant interpersonal behaviour. One problem with this idea is that
anhedonia is not restricted to schizophrenia patients. Martin Harrow and
his colleagues in Chicago interviewed psychiatric patients about their
experiences of joy and pleasure, and found that, although anhedonia was
most often reported by schizophrenia patients, it was also frequently
reported by patients with other diag-noses.65 Similarly, Joanna Katsanis
and colleagues at the University of Minnesota studied patients who were
experiencing their first episode of psychosis, and found that high
levels of anhedonia were reported, not only by those diagnosed as
suffering from schizophrenia, but also by patients diagnosed as
suffering from schizoaffective disorder, depression or bipolar
disorder.66 This last observation may seem particularly surprising, as
bipolar patients are said to experience both extreme positive and
negative emotions. For this reason, American psychologists Jack
Blanchard, Alan Bellack and Kim Mueser examined levels of anhedonia in
schizophrenia and bipolar patients more carefully. They found that high
levels of anhedonia were reported by depressed bipolar patients but not
by those who had recently suffered from an episode of mania. Therefore,
whereas anhedonia may be a stable or trait-like characteristic of some
schizophrenia patients, it appears to vary with time in patients with a
bipolar diagnosis.67 Consistent with this hypothesis, Katsanis and her
colleagues found that anhedonia correlated with premorbid social
functioning

in schizophrenia patients (those who functioned poorly prior to illness
showed high levels of anhedonia when ill) but not in patients with other
diagnoses.68 These findings tell us very little about the emotional life
of anhedonic patients. Again, the circumplex model of emotion provides a
useful framework. In a recent study, Blanchard, Mueser and Bellack
measured physical and social anhedonia, as well as positive and negative
affect, in schizophrenia patients and normal controls. As expected, the
schizophrenia patients reported higher levels of anhedonia and lower
levels of positive emotion in comparison to the controls. However, they
also reported high levels of negative emotion and social anxiety. These
differences remained when the participants were retested three months
later. When the anhedonia scores of the schizophrenia patients were
examined, it was found that they were negatively correlated with
positive emotion. Social anhedonia scores, but not physical anhedonia
scores, were positively correlated with negative emotion. It therefore
appears that anhedonic patients suffer not only from a deficiency of
positive emotion, but also from a surfeit of negative emotion.69

Disorders of affect-logic Negative symptoms are among the least
researched facets of psychosis. As we will see in later chapters, much
more effort has been directed towards understanding the psychological
mechanisms involved in more flamboyant symptoms, such as delusions,
hallucinations and unusual forms of speech. Perhaps because they have
been ignored, negative symptoms have appeared all the more mysterious,
or have simply been dismissed as reflecting the impoverished output of a
wounded brain. However, we have seen that, when some of these symptoms
are examined in the context of what is known about normal emotions, the
picture of a type of madness in which the individual is aloof or
indifferent to the social world is revealed as largely myth. The
negative symptoms become more understandable, if as yet not completely
explained. The misleading view that negative symptoms reflect a lack of
emotion has underpinned the assumption that schizophrenia is an
intellectual disorder whereas manic depression is a disorder of affect.

Objecting to this assumption, the Swiss psychiatrist Luc Ciompi has
suggested70 that all psychotic illnesses are disorders of affect-logic,
a term which he uses to highlight the inseparable relationship between
cognition and emotion.\* In the next part of this book, in which we
consider the most commonly reported symptoms of psychosis, we will see
that this principle holds for delusions, mania, hallucinations and
disordered speech. The term affect-logic is not an entirely satisfactory
translation of an appropriated German neologism meaning, simultaneously,
'the logic of affectivity' and 'the affectivity of logic'. It points to
the central conceptual basis of the model, which postulates that in all
normal and most pathological mental functions, emotions and cognitions
-- or affective and cognitive functions, feeling and thinking,
affectivity and logic -- are inseperably connected and interact in
regular but not yet sufficiently well understood ways. Ciompi's theory
is a complex blend of Piagetian developmental psychology, biological
studies of emotion and non-linear dynamics. There is clearly
considerable overlap between his approach and the approach taken in this
book. The main difference is that Ciompi has paid less attention to the
psychological processes involved in specific symptoms. OceanofPDF.com

Part Three Some Madnesses Explained 10 Depression and the Pathology of
Self O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of
infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams. Shakespeare, Hamlet
I can vividly remember beginning the first draft of this chapter on a
cold February morning in 1999. My wife Aisling sat nearby on a sofa,
cuddling our children, Keeva and Fintan, who had been born a few weeks
earlier. Although they were breast-fed in the daytime, at night we gave
them bottles so that we could share the burden imposed by their arrival.
The night before, we had fed them at two o'clock and again at half past
four. On the second of these occasions, I had stared at Keeva while in
the semi-psychotic state that lies at the boundary between wakefulness
and dreaming, and it had occurred to me that she might really be an
angel. It would not have surprised me if, at that moment, fluffy wings
had unfurled from behind her back. In many ways, the period immediately
following the birth of the twins was extremely stressful. Aisling and I
survived on vanishingly small amounts of sleep. Naturally, my academic
productivity was affected (later, I calculated that the year 2000 saw my
lowest number of publications since the mid-1980s). Yet, I was probably
as contented as I have ever been. My life had not always been so happy.
The years that followed my twenty-ninth birthday were especially
difficult. Looking ahead a year or two earlier, the omens had seemed
good. In short order, I had married my first wife, obtained my doctorate
in experimental psychology, qualified as a clinical psychologist, and
secured my first job in the National Health Service. And yet, in the few
years that followed, my father died in a road accident, my brother
committed suicide, and I walked out of my marriage in favour of an old
girlfriend who immediately disowned me. When I

struggled to make sense of these events, they seemed to be inexplicably
connected, as if fruits of some kind of curse. Leaving my small house in
Chester, I found myself homeless. For almost twelve months I lived from
a suitcase and drifted between friends. At my worst during the year of
1986, I probably met the DSM-IV criteria for major depression. However,
I cannot remember a point at which I thought of myself as 'ill' or a
specific moment when I seemed to have become 'better'. Instead, my
feelings seemed appropriate to the dismal sequence of events that had
befallen me. I saw myself drinking from a well of emotion that I shared
with others suffering similar difficulties, a common reservoir of misery
which is part of my species' collective experience. Many of us, when
confronted by these kinds of events, pick ourselves up and struggle
onwards. In my own case, I was helped by a good psychotherapist, to whom
I was referred by a colleague who could see that I was not coping.
Although it is not usually included among the symptoms of psychosis,
there are several good reasons for beginning our detailed examination of
psychotic phenomena with depression. First, as American psychologists
David Rosenhan and Martin Seligman have observed, depression is 'the
common cold of mental illness'.1 The very familiarity of negative mood
will make it more understandable to most readers than some of the other
symptoms that we will encounter later. Second, depression is very
commonly experienced by schizophrenia patients, both during acute
episodes and also during the prodromal phase that precedes the
appearance of positive symptoms. Third, it is also an important facet of
manic depression as described by Klaus Leonhard, who observed that mania
rarely occurs in its absence. Moreover, unipolar depression can, in its
own right, become psychotic, which is to say that it can be accompanied
by other psychotic symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations. And
finally, many of the concepts that we will explore when attempting to
explain depression will serve us well in later chapters, when we attempt
to get to grips with other types of symptoms. Before we can begin, we
must first address a complication. I have thus far talked about
'depression' as if what I mean by this term is self-evident. Indeed,
most of us accept the idea of depression as if it can be easily
differentiated from other types of unpleasant feelings. However, as we
saw in the last chapter, the landscape of emotion is not so easily
charted. To take my own experiences fifteen years ago, I suffered not
only deep feelings of dysphoria, but I also had a very low opinion of
myself and felt very pessimistic about the future. I had difficulty
sleeping, and would ruminate in the dark hours about how other people
saw my change of circumstances. During the daytime I felt tired and
lacking in energy. So preoccupied was I with my

own difficulties that my capacity to empathize with my patients was
severely blunted. (With the benefit of hindsight I can now see that I
should have given up clinical work for the duration.) People diagnosed
as depressed often have experiences such as these, but suffer them to
varying degrees. At its worst, the pessimism associated with depression
can be so severe that the person does not believe that there is any
point to getting up, and may languish in bed for days on end. Other
symptoms are also commonly reported. The first depressed patient I was
asked to treat when I was a trainee clinical psychologist was a recently
divorced and lonely middle-aged woman whom I will call Clare.\*
Consistent with my own experience, she felt severely demoralized and
made gloomy predictions about what would happen to her in the years
ahead. However, in contrast to many patients who complain of anhedonia,
her interest in food and sex were heightened, making the lack of a
partner even more difficult to bear. In common with many other patients,
she felt very tense. However, less commonly, she found that she could
relieve her tension by taking a knife and making shallow cuts across her
breasts and arms. In psychotic depression, the content of the
accompanying symptoms is usually congruent with the patient's mood, so
that hallucinations make derogatory remarks, and the patient feels
guilty of improbable crimes, or becomes convinced that he is doomed to
some kind of horrific fate. George, an extremely successful engineer,
could survive with equanimity the stresses of his demanding job, but
became severely dysphoric after travelling abroad (a fact that did not
deter him from taking his family on regular foreign holidays). During
these episodes, which sometimes lasted for several months, he would
develop the delusion that his employers were about to sack him and
reclaim his salary from the preceding years (in fact, they were
amazingly tolerant of his long absences). He also believed that he had
somehow mislaid the very substantial savings that he had accumulated,
and that his family were about to be evicted from their home and would
eventually starve. Efforts to reassure him, for example by showing him
his bank statements and building society accounts, were all to no avail.
For weeks, he would avoid brushing his teeth, in order to 'conserve
energy', and would spend his time sitting around his house in his
pyjamas, remaining as motionless as possible. Investigators studying
cross-cultural differences in depression have noted that cognitive
symptoms -- especially guilt and low self-esteem -- are less evident in
developing countries than in the West. In contrast, patients in
developing countries tend to complain more of somatic symptoms, such as
fatigue, loss of weight, or headaches and dizziness. Not surprisingly,
beliefs about the nature and causes of

these symptoms also vary between cultures. In a vivid example of this
kind of difference, Arthur Kleinman has described the case of Mrs Lin, a
28-year-old primary school teacher he met at Hunan Medical College in
south central China in 1980:2 Mrs Lin, who has suffered from chronic
head-aches for the past six years, is telling me about her other
symptoms: dizziness, tiredness, easy fatigue, weakness, and a ringing
sound in her ears. She has been under the treatment of doctors in the
internal medicine clinic... for more than half a year with increasing
symptoms. They have referred her to the psychiatric clinic, though
against her objections, with the diagnosis of neurasthenia. Gently,
sensing a deep disquiet behind the tight lips and mask-like squint, I
ask Mrs Lin if she feels depressed. 'Yes, I am unhappy,' she replies.
'My life has been difficult,' she adds quickly as a justification. At
this point Mrs Lin looks away. Her thin lips tremble. The brave mask
dissolves into tears. For several minutes she continues sobbing; the
deep inhalations reverberate as a low wail. Further inquiry revealed
that Mrs Lin's parents had been killed during the Cultural Revolution. A
teenager at the time, she and her four siblings had been dispersed to
different rural areas. She had difficulty adapting to her new
environment, which was much harsher than the city in which she had been
raised. During the following years, she felt cold and hungry and had
only one friend. She later learned that one of her sisters had committed
suicide and that her brother had been paralysed in a tractor accident.
Unable to pass the entrance exam to her chosen university, she agreed to
an arranged marriage. Her husband and mother-in-law later subjected her
to physical and psychological abuse following the stillbirth of a nearly
full-term foetus. Kleinman remarks: For a North American psychiatrist,
Mrs Lin meets the official diagnostic criteria for a major depressive
disorder. The Chinese psychiatrists who interviewed her with me did not
agree with this diagnosis. They did not deny that she was depressed, but
they regarded the depression as a manifestation of neurasthenia, and Mrs
Lin shared this viewpoint. Neurasthenia -- a syndrome of exhaustion,
weakness, and diffuse bodily complaints believed to be caused by
inadequate physical energy in the central nervous system -- is an
official diagnosis in China; but it is not a diagnosis in the American
Psychiatric Association's latest nosology. Kleinman's view is that
Western depression and Chinese neurasthenia are the same condition,
which is expressed in different ways in response to local cultural
influences. Chinese neurasthenia is therefore somatized depression.
However, as

Richard Shweder of the University of Chicago has pointed out, we might
just as well describe North American depression as emotionalized
neurasthenia.3 The solution to this cross-cultural conundrum is to
recognize that Western depression and Chinese neurasthenia are different
but overlapping clusters of symptoms. There is no need to think of an
underlying disease entity that is the 'middle man', or to give primacy
to one diagnosis or the other.4 Given this degree of variation -- both
within and between cultures -- between people who are all said to suffer
from the same condition, it is not surprising that some psychologists
and psychiatrists have suggested that the concept of depression has
outlived its usefulness.5 As I agree with this conclusion, writing this
chapter has presented me with a series of dilemmas. First, although I
would like to focus specifically on dysphoric mood, I am hampered by the
fact that nearly all the relevant research has been conducted on
individuals from developed countries who are described as depressed
rather than dysphoric. To some extent I will be able to get around this
problem by making the dangerous assumption that negative mood is the
common symptom experienced by these individuals. Unfortunately, there is
not much that I can do about the cultural biases inherent in the
research (although I will speculate a little about cross-cultural
differences wherever this seems appropriate). Second, most of the
published research on depression has been carried out either with
ordinary people (typically university students) who are temporarily
distressed, or with patients who are diagnosed as suffering from
non-psychotic depression. Fortunately, there are good reasons to believe
that the findings obtained can be generalized to psychotic patients.
When experiments have been carried out both on ordinary people and on
psychiatric patients, comparable results have usually been obtained. In
the case of patients who are diagnosed as suffering from unipolar
depression, the main difference between those who are psychotic and
those who are not (other than the presence of hallucinations and
delusions) seems to be the severity of their negative mood, those
patients who are most dysphoric being most likely to experience
delusions and hallucinations.6 When bipolar depression has been compared
with unipolar depression, the results again reassure us that we are not
dealing with fundamentally different phenomena.7 There is one final
caveat I must offer before proceeding with my account of the psychology
of depression. As the term 'depression' applies to a loosely connected
group of symptoms, of which dysphoria is the most obvious, it is
unlikely the experiences of every depressed patient can be explained in
the same way. We should therefore expect to find that depressive
symptoms are influenced by a network of interacting psychological
mechanisms, which play more or less decisive roles in

different individuals. It follows that there may be several different
pathways to depression. In this chapter, I will attempt to identify two
such pathways (there may well be others), taking the reader step by step
through the evidence that is relevant to each.

From Appraisal to Distress Anyone who has failed to avoid the ordinary
tragedies of life will recognize that many events can provoke a
dysphoric mood -- the death of a loved one, the collapse of a
relationship, humiliation in the eyes of one's peers, or the failure to
achieve a cherished ambition. However, it is equally obvious that
individuals react to these experiences in different ways. Some shrug
them off after a few days of emotional discomfort while others plummet
into an extended period of despair. These differences reflect the role
of appraisals in modulating emotional reactions. A relatively positive
interpretation of the death of a loved one ('He had a good innings; he
was loved by his family until the end; at least he is no longer
suffering') is likely to lead to better emotional adjustment to the loss
than a negative appraisal ('He never had a chance to fulfil his
potential; I did not love him as much as I should have; he died a
painful and lonely death'). Of course, appraisals are partly determined
by the facts of the situation -- a loved one might really have died a
lonely and painful death -- but, in most situations, there is usually
some degree of freedom in the kind of interpretation that can be
offered. There have been many attempts to define the kinds of appraisals
that lead to dysphoria, but most have assumed that they involve some
kind of pessimistic interpretation of events. Psychiatrist Aaron Beck of
the University of Pennsylvania (who is best known for his pioneering
efforts to develop effective psychological treatments for psychiatric
patients) has observed that the thinking of depressed people is
dominated by a negative view of the self, the world and the future. Beck
refers to this cluster of attitudes as 'the negative cognitive triad'.
According to Beck, automatic or unbidden thoughts that reflect these
themes are the immediate precursors of dysphoric mood.8 These thoughts
are presumably part of the stream of inner speech, which, we saw in
Chapter 7, tends to be evoked whenever we are emotionally aroused.
Although Beck's theory has enormously influenced clinical practice, most
research on the appraisals of depressed patients has focused on a
slightly different but not incompatible theory developed by American
psychologists Martin Seligman, Lyn Abramson, Lauren Alloy and various
collaborators. In a landmark paper, Abramson

and Seligman, together with British psychologist John Teasdale, noted
that we usually experience negative emotions when we are exposed to
unpleasant events that are beyond our control.9 However, they argued
that full-blown depression only develops when we hold certain beliefs
about the causes of those events.\* The theory developed by Seligman and
his colleagues built on an observation, made some years earlier by the
social psychologist Fritz Heider, that human beings act for much of the
time like intuitive scientists.10 As we navigate our way through the
challenges of everyday life, we usually attempt to find explanations for
noteworthy events, particularly those that involve other people. An
unpleasant disagreement with a friend might be attributed to some
characteristic of the friend ('She's bad tempered and argumentative'),
the situation ('We've both been under stress lately'), oneself ('It's
because I offended her when we met last week'), or some combination of
these causes. In the jargon of social psychology, these kinds of causal
statements (made to other people or to ourselves while thinking) are
known as attributions (because they involve us attributing events to
particular causes). So readily do we generate attributions that they
might be thought of as one of the defining characteristics of our
species -- Seligman and his colleagues have estimated that most people
make at least one causal statement (a sentence including or implying the
word 'because') in every few hundred words of ordinary speech.11 To
understand how attributions are involved in the experience of negative
mood, imagine that you have failed an exam. (Young readers will not find
this too difficult. Readers who are as old as myself may have to think
back a few years.) You might explain your performance in a number of
ways. For example, you might say to yourself: 'It's because I didn't
work hard enough', 'I had bad luck', or 'The examination was unfair.'
According to Abramson, Seligman and Teasdale, your failure will only
lead to lasting distress if you attribute it to a cause that is
internal, global and stable. An internal cause is something to do with
you, whereas its opposite, an external cause, is something to do with
other people or circumstances. A global cause is something that will
affect all areas of your life, as opposed to a specific cause, which
will have an effect only on specific kinds of events. A stable cause is
something you cannot change and which will be present in the future,
whereas an unstable cause is something that is only likely to have an
impact at this particular point in time. According to Abramson, Seligman
and Teasdale's recipe for depression, if you fail an exam the best way
of ensuring enduring misery is to say or think to yourself, 'It's
because I'm stupid.' This attribution is internal (it locates the fault
within yourself), global (it will adversely affect not only your
performance in this exam but also your

performance in others and, ultimately, your ability to earn a good
living) and stable (there is not much you can do about being stupid; if
you are stupid today the chances are that you will be stupid in the
future). If you make any other kind of attribution you may still be
miserable, but your misery will be short-lived. The attributional theory
of depression is a type of stress-vulnerability model. According to
Seligman, we each have an individual attributional style that remains
relatively fixed throughout our adult lives. Individuals with a
pessimistic style (those who usually explain negative events in terms of
causes that are internal, global and stable) may go for many years
without experiencing depression. It is only when they encounter a severe
negative event, and explain it pessimistically, that they become
markedly dysphoric. Unfortunately, the measurement of attributional
style has not been devoid of problems. With Christopher Petersen at the
University of Michigan, Seligman developed a questionnaire for this
purpose, known as the Attributional Style Questionnaire (ASQ, see Table
10.1). People completing the ASQ are asked to imagine a range of
positive and negative events and are asked to write down their most
likely cause. It is assumed that the kinds of attributions people make
about these hypothetical scenarios are indicative of the kinds of
attributions they make in everyday life. After writing down each cause,
they are Table 10.1 An item from the Attributional Style Questionnaire
(C. Peterson, A. Semmel, C. von Bayer, L. Abramson, G. I. Metalsky and
M. E. P. Seligman (1982) 'The Attributional Style Questionnaire',
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 3: 287--300).

You meet a friend who acts hostilely toward you. 1. Write down one
possible cause of this event
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
2. Is the cause of your friend acting hostilely toward you due to
something about you or something about other people or circumstances?
Totally due to other people or circumstances 1234567 (circle one number)

Totally due to me

3. In the future, when interacting with friends, will this cause again
be present? Will never again be present

Will always present

be

1234567 (circle one number) 4. Is the cause something that just
influences interacting with friends or does it also influence other
areas of your life? Influences just this particular area

Influences all situations in my life

1234567 (circle one number) asked to rate it on seven-point scales of
internality--externality, globalness-- specificity and
stability--instability. These characteristics of attributions are
therefore viewed as dimensions rather than categories. Although widely
used in research, the ASQ suffers from a number of shortcomings,12 some
of which we will consider when we think about delusions in a later
chapter. For this reason a number of alternative approaches have been
proposed. One strategy involves using judges to score attributions
recorded from samples of everyday speech (a technique that Seligman
calls the Content Analysis of Verbal Explanations, or CAVEing). Seligman
and his colleagues have imaginatively employed this strategy to analyse
patients' mood changes during psychotherapy (less pessimistic
attributions precede positive changes in mood),13 voter-preferences in
elections (Americans, it seems, prefer to elect presidential candidates
who make optimistic election speeches)14 and even political
decision-making (optimistic shifts in Lyndon Johnson's press statements
preceded bold decisions in the Vietnam War).15 Does attributional style
predict future dysphoria in the way suggested by Seligman? It has turned
out to be surprisingly difficult to answer this question. To begin with,
there can be no doubt that depressed patients make excessively internal,
global and stable attributions for negative events as predicted by the
Abramson,

Seligman and Teasdale theory. As early as 1986, psychologist Paul Sweeny
and his colleagues at Indiana University were able to summarize the
results of no less than 106 studies, most of which provided evidence
that was consistent with the theory.16 Subsequent research has mostly
replicated these findings.17 Although most of these studies have
involved non-psychotic people, with Helen Lyon and Mike Startup at the
University College of Wales in Bangor I have looked at the attributions
of patients diagnosed as suffering from bipolar disorder.18 The scores
of four participants, shown in Figure 10.1, illustrate some general
points about attributional style. The panel on the left of the figure
shows internality scores. High scores indicate that attributions are
relatively internal (self-blaming) and low scores indicate that they are
relatively external (blame is attributed to others or to circumstances).
Average scores are given separately for hypothetical positive events
(for example, being awarded a pay rise) and negative events (for
example, going on a date that turns out badly). Note, first, that the
scores of ordinary individuals (people without psychiatric problems) who
took part in the study are not exactly fair-minded. Although the reader
might expect that we tend to blame ourselves equally for positive and
negative events, in fact we usually take more credit for things that
turn out well than for things that turn out badly (if I fail an exam
it's probably because I've been handicapped by various problems beyond
my control; if I pass it's because I am a genius). This attributional
distortion, which social psychologists call the selfserving bias, and
which has been documented Figure 10.1 Internality, stability and
globalness data for bipolar-manic, bipolar-depressed and normal
participants (from Lyon et al., 1999).

in numerous experiments,19 was accurately described by William
Shakespeare in King Lear nearly four centuries ago:

This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are sick in
fortune, -- often the surfeit of our own behaviour, -- we make guilty of
our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as if we were villains
by necessity, fools by heavenly compulsion. The stability and globalness
data, shown in the right two panels, provide further evidence of a lack
of fair-mindedness in ordinary people. Positive events are attributed to
causes that are more stable and global than negative events. In order to
maintain our mental health, it seems, we have to make unrealistically
optimistic appraisals about the likelihood that good things will happen
in the future and about our power to bring such events about.\*20
Although I will discuss mania in detail in the next chapter, it is
interesting to note that those suffering from this condition showed a
robust self-serving bias, just like the normal controls. They were also,
like the controls, optimistic in attributing positive but not negative
events to stable and global factors. In contrast, the depressed patients
blamed themselves more for negative than for positive events. As in
previous studies of unipolar patients, the bipolar-depressed patients
also believed that factors responsible for negative events were likely
to be more enduring, and to affect more areas of their lives, than the
factors responsible for positive events. Similar findings have been
obtained from patients with other psychiatric diagnoses involving high
levels of dysphoria, particularly anxiety disorders.21 As might be
expected in the light of the circumplex model of emotion, the
pessimistic style is therefore associated with negative mood, rather
than any specific diagnosis. So far, so good for Abramson, Seligman and
Teasdale's theory. However, it has proved more difficult to find
evidence that a pessimistic attributional style precedes the development
of dysphoria. Most researchers who have attempted to show that this is
the case have begun by identifying people who have a high probability of
experiencing some kind of disappointment or failure (for example
students who are about to take an exam) or a stressful life event (for
example, women who are about to give birth). Although some studies have
found that a pessimistic attributional style predicts a bad emotional
response to adverse events,22 others have produced either negative or
equivocal results.23 Clearer evidence has emerged from a different kind
of prospective study, which has recently been reported by Lauren Alloy,
Lyn Abramson and their colleagues at Temple and Wisconsin Universities
in the USA.24 In this study, known as the Temple--Wisconsin Cognitive
Vulnerability to Depression (CVD) Project, the

researchers attempted to identify students who were apparently
psychologically well but vulnerable to abnormal mood. Over 5000 students
were assessed using a measure of attributional style, together with a
measure of abnormal attitudes towards the self which we will consider in
detail later in the chapter. From this sample, 173 students were
identified who showed strong evidence of a pessimistic cognitive style,
but who were not currently dysphoric. These students, together with a
matched group who were not thought to be vulnerable to mood disorder,
were followed up every six weeks for two years and then every four
months for a further three years. The main finding from the first two
years of the project was that the vulnerable students were much more
likely to experience severe dysphoric episodes than the control students
(17 per cent versus 1 per cent for major depression as defined by DSM
criteria and 39 per cent versus 6 per cent for minor depressive
symptoms). Although these findings may seem inconsistent with the
results obtained from the earlier prospective studies, this impression
is probably inaccurate. The students in the high-risk group of the
Temple-- Wisconsin Project represented under 4 per cent of the total
sample -- a very highly selected, and probably very highly vulnerable
group. It is not surprising that much weaker effects were detected in
the earlier studies carried out with unselected participants. In this
context it is important to note that the selection policy adopted in the
Temple-- Wisconsin Project was not only one of its strengths, but also a
weakness. Although the project appears to confirm that a pessimistic
attributional style can precede depression, the high-risk students who
were identified were probably not representative of dysphoric people in
general. If negative mood is indeed the common cold of psychiatry, it is
a fair bet that the majority of those who become dysphoric do not fall
into this high-risk group.\* Overall, therefore, there is some evidence
that attributional style can predict future negative mood, as
illustrated in Figure 10.2. How Figure 10.2 Relationships between
negative events, attributional style and dysphoria.

ever, we are not therefore entitled to conclude that attributional style
is the sole, or even most important, psychological characteristic
implicated in mood disorders. Nor should we rush to accept a simple
stress-vulnerability model of dysphoria of the kind proposed by
Seligman. Those who have debated the causal status of attributions have
often assumed that attributional style is either a trait (an enduring
personality characteristic) or a state (a transient phenomenon, perhaps
a symptom of negative mood). As we will see shortly, the truth may be
more complex than this.

The Self Worth Living with A pessimistic appraisal of events probably
has an impact on mood for several reasons. Aaron Beck, it will be
recalled, suggested that people who feel depressed harbour negative
thoughts about themselves, the world and the future. Lyn Abramson has
focused on the last element in this negative cognitive triad, arguing
that excessively stable and global attributions for negative events lead
to a sense of hopelessness -- a pervasive conviction that life cannot
get better which in turn saps the individual's motivation to cope with
adversity.25 It is certainly true that many depressed people experience
a profound sense of hopelessness about the future, and the greater this
sense of hopelessness the greater the likelihood that they will attempt
suicide.26 (Hopelessness has also been found to be a strong predictor of
suicidal tendencies in schizophrenia patients.)27 However, at least as
important must be the impact of pessimistic attributions on the first
element in Beck's triad: the individual's view of the self. In studies
by Howard Tennen and his colleagues at the University of Connecticut, it
was found that a pessimistic attributional style predicted low
self-esteem better than it predicted scores on a more general measure of
depressive symptoms.28 More recently, David Romney of the University of
Calgary used a complex statistical technique known as path analysis to
explore specific relations between attributional style, self-esteem and
depressive symptoms. He found that the attributional dimensions of
internality, stability and globalness did not affect depressive symptoms
directly, but that each had an impact on self-esteem, which in turn had
a strong impact on depression.29 On this evidence, then, pessimistic
appraisals of events lead to problems of self-esteem, which in turn lead
to negative mood.

How appraisals influence the self

In Chapter 8 we saw that the self is a dynamic, multifaceted phenomenon
that is unlikely to be adequately captured by a single dimension varying
between the extremes of grandiosity and self-loathing. Indeed, as
British psychiatrist Philip Robson has lamented, self-esteem is 'an idea
rather than an entity and the term signifies different things to
different people'.30 One problem is that it is not immediately obvious
how we go about making global assessments of our self-worth. For
example, it seems likely that positive self-esteem (the sum of all the
good things an individual thinks about himself) and negative self-esteem
(the sum of all the bad things that the individual thinks about himself)
are not necessarily opposites -- it is as easy to imagine that someone
holds both extreme positive and negative opinions about herself as it is
to imagine that someone holds exclusively positive or negative opinions,
and, indeed, these types of beliefs can be measured separately.31
Although most ordinary people seem to hold beliefs about the self that
are so predominantly positive that any objective assessment would deem
them unrealistic, people who score low on self-esteem questionnaires
rarely harbour exclusively negative opinions but, rather, tend to
believe a mixture of positive and negative things about themselves.32
The specific beliefs about the self that we are immediately aware of
have been described as the actual self. The depressed patient's tendency
to include more negative attributes in this description than ordinary
people can be easily demonstrated by means of questionnaires, but it has
also been shown using the selfreference effect (the general tendency to
recall information that is directly relevant to the self), which I
described in Chapter 8. When given a list of trait words that are either
negative (for example, 'stupid', 'unloved', 'weak') or positive
('successful', 'dynamic', 'confident'), and asked to say whether they
are self-descriptive, unipolar depressed patients not only endorse more
negative words as true of themselves in comparison with ordinary people,
but later recall more of the negative words if given a surprise memory
test.33 Helen Lyon, Mike Startup and I recently found exactly the same
result with bipolar patients who were currently depressed.34 Of course,
beliefs about the self are not always present in our minds. For much of
the time, we direct our thoughts towards other things. Moreover, it
appears that some people's beliefs about themselves are more subject to
change than others. When social psychologist Michael Kernis of the
University of Georgia asked ordinary people to record their current
feelings about themselves at random intervals over an extended period
(usually about a week) he found that self-esteem remained relatively
stable in some people whereas, in others, it fluctuated dramatically.35
Surprisingly, stability of self-esteem seems to be relatively
independent of average level of selfesteem (that is, some people with
unstable self-esteem have high self-esteem on most days whereas others
have low self-esteem on most days). Kernis found that

individuals with unstable self-esteem are more vulnerable to feelings of
depression than individuals with stable self-esteem. He also found that
individuals with unstable but typically high self-esteem are especially
likely to react angrily to negative information about themselves.
Beliefs about the self change over time because they have to be provoked
into consciousness ('activated' or 'primed' in the language of cognitive
psychology) before they can affect us. This is why appraisals have such
a powerful effect on mood -- because they determine whether or not the
events we experience activate positive or negative representations from
our reservoir of stored knowledge and beliefs about ourselves. Not
surprisingly, stability of self-esteem seems to be, at least in part,
determined by the extent to which people make extreme appraisals for
everyday events; individuals who make more extreme appraisals tend to
have very unstable self-esteem.36 However, our beliefs about ourselves
are also dependent on the information about ourselves that we have
acquired and stored away earlier in our lives. The more negative
information about ourselves we have stored in our longterm memory, the
more vulnerable we will be to experiencing negative thoughts and ideas
about ourselves. Conversely, if we have learned only positive things
about ourselves, it is unlikely that even the most challenging of
experiences will persuade us to think about ourselves in a very
self-critical way. If this account is correct, individuals who are
depressed should have an abnormal tendency to recall negative
information about themselves. This kind of memory bias has long been
recognized by clinicians, for example Aaron Beck,37 who have observed
that unipolar depressed patients organize their memories in a
'depressogenic fashion'. In an early empirical study, G. W. Lloyd and W.
A. Lishman at the Institute of Psychiatry in London asked depressed
people and non-depressed people to think of either a pleasant or an
unpleasant memory when they heard a series of cue words, and to signal
to the researchers when suitable memories came to mind. They found that
depressed patients tended to recall negative events more rapidly than
positive events, but that this was not the case for non-depressed
controls.38 This finding has been replicated many times. For example,
John Teas-dale and Sarah Fogarty at Oxford University experimentally
induced negative moods in normal volunteers by asking them to read
depressing statements and found that they were slower to recall positive
events as a consequence.39

Standards and discrepancies

Even if the account of the self I have so far given seems half
plausible, a moment's reflection will reveal that it must be incomplete.
Although we have assumed that the discovery of undesirable aspects of
the self will provoke feelings of distress, we have not explained how
individuals know that particular attributes are undesirable. After all,
it is quite possible to imagine a person who knows that he is vicious
and heartless, but who believes that these characteristics are valuable,
or at least acceptable (the Nazis deliberately cultivated this kind of
self-image, and hence were able to commit atrocities against civilians
while remaining emotionally unscathed).40 We therefore need to consider
not only the actual self, but also the internal standards against which
the self is evaluated.\* American social psychologist E. Tory Higgins of
New York University has pointed out that most of us can describe how we
think we would like to be (the ideal self) and how we think we ought to
be (the ought self).41 According to Higgins, these selfstandards help us
to define our goals in life and are sources of two different types of
motivation -- the striving for desired outcomes in the case of the ideal
self and the avoidance of undesired outcomes in the case of the ought
self.† To further complicate matters, Higgins also points out that we
can consider the self from different perspectives. For example, I can
imagine how my mother thinks I actually am (the 'mother-actual self'),
how she would like me to be (the 'mother-ideal self') and how she thinks
I ought to be (the 'mother-ought self'). (Of course, I cannot read my
mother's mind to find out what she really thinks about me, but have to
guess on the basis of the quality of our relationship.) In principle,
there are as many perspectives on the self as there are people whose
opinions we can imagine. You can get a snapshot portrait of your actual
self by simply writing down the first ten words that come to mind when
thinking about 'myself as I actually am'. Similarly, a snapshot of the
ideal self can be recorded on paper by writing down ten words that come
to mind when you think of 'myself as I would like to be'. Next try
'myself as I ought to be', 'how my mother/father thinks I am', 'how my
mother/father would like me to be' and so on. When carrying out this
exercise, you will probably notice that many of the descriptions are
very similar. However, you might also notice that some are different.
For example, you might list the word 'industrious' when describing your
ideal self and its antonym, 'lazy', when thinking about your actual
self. Higgins refers to these kinds of differences as selfdiscrepancies,
and has argued that it is our awareness of them that provokes negative
mood. A substantial body of research supports this idea. Tim Strauman of
the University of Wisconsin has shown that ordinary people when
depressed, as well as psychiatric

patients with a diagnosis of unipolar depression, report a large number
of actual-- ideal discrepancies.42 Socially anxious people, on the other
hand, typically report substantial discrepancies between the actual self
and the ought self. Not surprisingly, given the substantial overlap
between depression and anxiety symptoms, most researchers have reported
a strong correlation between the two types of discrepancy, leading some
to question whether they are qualitatively distinct.43 Strauman and
Higgins have also shown that strong negative feelings can be provoked by
making people think about self-discrepancies they have revealed at an
earlier time.44 Not only does this lead to negative mood, but it also
produces quite profound behavioural and physiological effects. For
example, when people contemplate actual--ideal discrepancies, their
speech becomes momentarily more sluggish, there is a change in the
electrical conductivity of the skin (known as an 'electrodermal
response' and caused by sweating, indicating that the autonomic nervous
system is firing up in anticipation of stress) and, most dramatically of
all, the efficiency of the immune system (responsible for protecting the
individual from infection) is temporarily reduced. Until recently, no
attempt had been made to explore psychotic disorders from the
perspective of Higgins's theory. However, in a recent study Peter
Kinderman, Kerry Manson and I measured self-discrepancies in patients
who had received a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, and who were divided
into three groups -- patients who were currently depressed, those who
were currently manic and those whose symptoms were in remission.
(Patients in this last group had experienced both depressive and manic
episodes in the past but were currently well.) Also participating was a
group of ordinary people for comparison purposes. As expected, we found
that the bipolardepressed patients, like previously studied unipolar
patients, reported considerable discrepancies between their actual
selves and their ideal and ought selves. Currently manic patients, on
the other hand, reported even fewer discrepancies between their actual
selves and their self-standards than either the healthy controls or the
patients in remission.45

The quality of ideals Obviously, the more exacting our self-standards,
the more likely it is that we will experience self-discrepancies. Aaron
Beck has argued that many of the problems experienced by depressed
patients can be attributed to their abnormally perfectionistic
standards, which place them at constant risk of experiencing failure. On
Beck's view, such standards may lurk as barely articulated 'schemas', of
which

we are hardly aware until we are reminded that we have failed to meet
them.46 Sticking to the terminology we have adopted so far in this
chapter, we can say that failure experiences have the potential to
activate these schemas, so that they become available in consciousness
as representations of the ideal self and the ought self. To test this
idea, many researchers have used the Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale
(DAS), a questionnaire that asks people to consider the extent to which
they agree with statements such as 'I should be able to please
everybody' and 'My value as a person depends greatly on what other
people think of me.'47 Patients suffering from depression consistently
score highly on this and similar measures. Although many patients who
recover from episodes of depression score normally on the DAS,48 there
is also evidence that dysfunctional self-standards predict later
episodes of mood disorder. In a study carried out by J. Mark Williams
and his colleagues, it was observed that recovered patients who still
scored highly on the scale were especially likely to relapse.49 More
recently, in the Temple--Wisconsin Cognitive Vulnerability to Depression
Project, the DAS was used together with the Attributional Style
Questionnaire to select individuals who were later proven to be at very
high risk of depression.50 Beck has suggested that self-standards can be
divided into two main types, reflecting different fundamental needs.
Sociotropy refers to a strong need for care and approval from others,
whereas autonomy refers to a need for independence and
goal-attainment.51 This idea that some people judge their self-worth in
terms of the quality of their relationships, whereas others associate
self-worth with freedom of choice and the achievement of goals,
represents common ground between cognitive theorists such as Beck and
some psychologists working from a neoFreudian perspective.52 According
to Beck, sensitivity to different life stressors should reflect these
different personality characteristics. Individuals high in sociotropy
should feel especially miserable when rejected by others, whereas
individuals high in autonomy should feel doubt, self-criticism and
despondency when failing to live up to their goals and expectations. In
general, researchers have found that individuals who are high in
sociotropy are especially likely to become dysphoric when faced with
interpersonally threatening events. However, the evidence for a specific
vulnerability to failure experiences in individuals scoring high on
autonomy has been more equivocal.53

The Attribution Self-Representation Cycle

The psychological structure of the self -- the way in which different
kinds of selfrepresentation interact with each other -- is the subject
of enduring controversy, so the attempt I have made here to integrate
the various findings may be disputed by some of my colleagues. It is, of
course, possible that not only the content but also the structure of the
self varies across cultures. Perhaps cultural differences help to
explain why low self-esteem is less apparent in depressed patients from
developing countries than in patients from the West. These doubts
notwithstanding, we can take home two simple conclusions from the
evidence reviewed thus far. First, most people who are prone to
depression (including people diagnosed as suffering from bipolar
disorder) evaluate negative events with excessive pessimism. Second, in
perhaps the majority of cases, it is the belief that the self is wanting
that finally triggers negative mood. This belief, in turn, arises partly
because the individual at risk of depression holds unrealistic
standards. Building these observations on top of our previous findings
(and including the pathway from life events to dysphoria via
hopelessness proposed by Lyn Abramson) we arrive at the model of
depression illustrated in Figure 10.3. This model leaves one important
question unanswered. Although we have assumed that the pathway from life
experiences to dysphoria is mediated by attributions, we have not
explained where attributions come from. Strangely, most researchers
working on attributional models of psychopathology have neglected this
problem. Because attributional style has been assumed to be a stable
trait, the mechanisms Figure 10.3 An elaborated model of dysphoria,
showing the contributions of a pessimistic attributional style and
dysfunctional self-standards. The pathway to dysphoria mediated by
hopelessness, proposed by Abramson, is also sketched in.

involved in generating causal inferences have been almost completely
ignored. We can begin by acknowledging that most events include
attributional signposts. More than thirty years ago, the American social
psychologist Harold Kelley argued that information about the consistency
(has it happened before?) and distinctiveness (does it only happen in
particular circumstances?) of events, together with consensus
information (does the event affect only me or everyone else?), may be
particularly important in influencing causal judgements.54 For example,
an apparently random assault experienced by a civilian during warfare
may be attributed to causes external to himself because he knows that
attacks have been happening for some time (high

consistency), occur only when enemy troops are present (high
distinctiveness) and are experienced by many other civilians (high
consensus). However, even such well signposted events allow some freedom
in the kind of attribution generated. Consider the following attempt by
a Jewish concentration camp survivor to explain the death of his older
brother during the final days of the Second World War: My brother died
in my arms from dysentery. He faded away to nothing. A man who was a
giant died a skeleton. I held him in my arms when he died. There was
just nothing I could do. When I think about it, I sometimes blame
myself. He did so much to keep me alive. I feel that had he saved some
of that energy for himself he would have had a better chance to
survive.55 In this moving example, an internal attribution is made
despite apparently overwhelming evidence that the cause should be
allocated elsewhere (his German tormentors), presumably because the
speaker's judgement is also influenced by his beliefs about himself
(that he was not strong enough). In this way, beliefs about the self
form an additional source of information when individuals attempt to
determine the causal locus of an event. To take a more trivial example,
if an individual already believes himself to be stupid, his failure to
pass an exam will almost certainly be attributed internally, because
there is an available self-representation that 'fits' the event. Hence,
people who score low on global self-esteem measures typically make
internal attributions for negative events56 whereas those with high
self-esteem tend to make internal attributions for their successes.57
Readers who have followed this argument may be puzzled that I am now
claiming that beliefs about the self influence attributions, whereas,
only a few paragraphs ago, I was arguing that attributions affect
beliefs about the self. Before resolving this gallinovular\* problem,
however, I want to consider two predictions that follow from my account
of the way in which attributions are generated. The first concerns the
time it takes to think of the likely cause of an event. If we assume
that this process involves some kind of mental search that terminates
when an appropriate explanation is found, and if we assume that the
first step in this process involves searching current beliefs about the
self, it follows that ordinary people who believe good things about
themselves will more quickly generate attributions for positive events
than for negative events (because they will more quickly find some thing
good about themselves than something bad). On the other hand, people
with psychiatric disorders who harbour negative beliefs about themselves
should not show this bias, which may even be reversed if their negative
beliefs about themselves outweigh their positive beliefs. This was the
rationale for an experiment I carried out with Peter Kinderman and Kim
Bowen-Jones in which we asked ordinary people, depressed

patients and paranoid patients to read aloud descriptions of
hypothetical events before saying what they thought their likely causes
would be.58 This method enabled us to measure precisely the interval
between the time the participants finished reading each scenario and the
time they began to generate an attribution (see Figure 10.4). As
expected, the ordinary people more quickly generated internal
attributions for positive events than for negative events. The depressed
patients, on the other hand, just as quickly generated internal
attributions for negative events as for positive events, which is
consistent with the idea that they harbour a mixture of positive and
negative beliefs about themselves. (I will discuss paranoia in detail in
a later chapter; suffice it to say for the moment that the data obtained
from this experiment are consistent with the hypothesis that patients
who are paranoid, like depressed patients, hold more negative beliefs
about themselves than ordinary people.) The second prediction involves
the effects of making people believe bad things about themselves. This
can be temporarily achieved in a variety of ways, but one fairly
reliable method involves creating a Figure 10.4 Response times needed to
make internal attributions for positive and negative events by paranoid,
depressed and normal participants (from Bentall, Kinderman and
Bowen-Jones, 1999).

contrived failure experience.\* If beliefs about the self influence
attributions, people should make more pessimistic attributions about
negative events as a consequence. In fact, this effect has been
demonstrated by Stanford University psychologist Joseph Forgas in a
series of experiments with ordinary people,59 and more recently by Sue
Kaney and myself in a study that also included depressed and paranoid
patients.60 In our version of the experiment, we asked our participants
to make attributions for hypothetical negative events before and after
they completed an anagram task, which included a mixture of some
questions that could be solved (for example, IEPNCL, which can be solved
as PENCIL) and some that could not be solved (for example, LSIDTL). The
impact of this experience is shown in Figure

10.5. At the outset, the depressed patients made more internal
attributions for hypothetical negative events than the ordinary people
who acted as controls. The paranoid patients, on the other hand, made
more external attributions, a phenomenon that we will discuss in detail
later. However, both psychiatric groups made more internal attributions
following the contrived failure experience than beforehand, presumably
because this experience activated negative self-schemas, which in turn
influenced Figure 10.5 Normal, depressed and paranoid individuals'
internality scores for hypothetical negative events before and after
completing the insoluble anagrams task (from Bentall and Kaney, in
submission).

their subsequent attributions. In this study, no change was seen in the
attributional responses of the healthy controls, undoubtedly because
they were less readily influenced by the failure experience than the two
psychiatric groups. However, Forgas was able to produce a pessimistic
shift in the attributions of ordinary people, presumably because they
used a more potent contrived failure experience. I will have more to say
about the psychological mechanisms involved in generating causal
explanations when I discuss the role of attributions in paranoid
beliefs. For the moment, I want to point out an important implication of
what we have discovered. It seems that attributions not only influence
self-representations, but that changes in self-representations affect
future attributions. The two processes are cyclically coupled in an
attribution-self-representation cycle, so changes in either inevitably
lead to changes in the other. As a consequence, an individual's
psychological response to a negative experience is likely to produce,
not only an immediate change in mood, but also longer-term changes that
may affect the way in which she appraises negative experiences in the
future. Indeed, this cycle, shown in Figure 10.6, appears to have all
the hallmarks of a dynamic and non-linear system, in which the various
components (beliefs about the

self, attributions) are likely to fluctuate, perhaps dramatically and
unpredictably, over time. If this account of the processes involved in
generating attributions is Figure 10.6 The
attribution-self-representation cycle (highlighted).

correct, fluctuations in attributional responses and beliefs about the
self should be observable in real life. In fact, we have already seen
that this is so. Remember that, in studies in which attributions were
extracted from recorded speech, it was discovered that Lyndon Johnson's
decisions during the Vietnam War were predicted by his current
attributional style,61 and that changes in attributions during
psychotherapy predicted changesinmood.62 The implication of these
findings is that (in the case of American presidents and psychotherapy
patients, at least) attributional biases change detectably over time.
Similarly, we have also seen that, even in ordinary people,
self-representations (at least as reflected by global self-esteem
measures) sometimes fluctuate quite dramatically.63 The theory of the
attribution--self-representation cycle helps us to understand better two
observations noted earlier in this chapter. First, recall that most
people take greater credit for success than failure. The self-serving
bias seems to be one of a number of self-enhancing strategies that most
of us employ in our everyday lives.64 (Another concerns the kinds of
attributes we value most highly. People usually value those attributes
on which they know themselves to excel. On the other hand, attributes
that we do not possess are usually dismissed as relatively unimportant
-- overweight businessmen are rarely distressed by their inability to
run marathons.) Ordinary people, it seems, actively strive to hold good
opinions about themselves. These strategies -- which all involve
self-serving appraisals -- act as homeostatic mechanisms that maintain
positive beliefs about the self in all but the most challenging
conditions. Not surprisingly, research has shown that we tend to resort
to these strategies when we feel that we are under threat,65 when
pressures to maintain self-esteem are particularly intense,66 and when
we are in the presence of other people who are relatively unknown to us
and about whose opinions we are

uncertain.67 Without self-serving appraisals, negative events would
always lead to more negative beliefs about the self, and these negative
beliefs would lead to more negative appraisals in the future--ultimately
culminating in a horrible spiral of increasing dysphoria. Of course,
this is exactly what seems to happen in people who are vulnerable to
depression. Their pessimistic appraisals of negative events lead to
negative beliefs about the self, which increase the probability that
they will make further pessimistic appraisals in the future. They have
no psychological defences. Hence, when suffering the slings and arrows
of outrageous fortune, their self-esteem goes into free-fall. This
effect helps us to understand an unresolved problem about the role of
attributions in depression. Remember that the evidence that a
pessimistic attributional style always precedes depression is rather
weak. On the one hand, the results from the Temple--Wisconsin Cognitive
Vulnerability to Depression Project demonstrated fairly clearly that a
pessimistic attributional style confers vulnerability to future
dysphoria. On the other hand, many longitudinal studies have revealed at
best equivocal evidence that a pessimistic style precedes the onset of
low mood in the majority of people who become depressed. The account I
have just given of the attribution--self-representation cycle neatly
accommodates these apparently contradictory findings. As negative
experiences will tend to increase the magnitude of a vulnerable
individual's pessimism, highly pessimistic attributions need not be
present at the onset of the descent into depression -- it is sufficient
that the individual's self-serving bias is not quite strong enough to
counter the damage to self-esteem inflicted by a distressing life event.

It's Not What You Feel, it's the Way that You Feel it At this point I
would like to introduce a final set of concepts that will help us
understand the link between appraisals and negative mood, and which will
be useful when we come to examine other symptoms later on. So far, I
have focused almost exclusively on psychological processes that seem to
play a role in the onset of dysphoria. However, processes that maintain
a dysphoric state may be just as important as processes that create a
negative mood in the first place. Most of us become depressed
occasionally; factors that determine the rapidity with which we bounce
back may separate those of us who react to adversity with extreme
distress from those of us who do not.

This insight leads to two simple ideas that we will encounter so often
in later chapters that, together, they may well constitute a fundamental
principle of psychopathology. First, people who are experiencing
psychological distress are rarely passive victims of their emotional
turmoil; rather, they usually make active attempts to cope with it.
Second, whereas some of these attempts may successfully ameliorate
distress, other coping strategies may have the unfortunate effect of
increasing the likelihood that the distress will persist. Stating these
ideas formally as the reaction--maintenance principle: People do not
react passively to distressing behaviours and experiences; the way in
which they react plays a role in determining the duration and nature of
these behaviours and experiences. It is probable that there are many
different ways in which we can respond to the experience of negative
mood. However, two particularly important coping strategies have been
identified by psychologist Susan Nolen-Hoeksema of the University of
Michigan.68 Some people, it seems, respond by ruminating; that is, by
engaging in thoughts and behaviours that focus the individual's mind on
their distress. People with this style of coping spend much of their
time thinking about how badly they feel and pondering such questions as,
'Why am I in such a mess?' and 'Will I ever feel better?' Others,
however, distract themselves by focusing their attention away from their
unhappiness and its causes and on to pleasant or neutral stimuli that
are engaging enough to prevent their thoughts returning to the source of
their distress. For example, they may throw themselves into their work,
or seek out pleasant social activities. Like all good research
psychologists, Nolen-Hoeksema has developed her own assessment tool, the
Response Styles Questionnaire (RSQ), which measures the tendency to use
these strategies. (Early versions of the questionnaire also measured two
other strategies -- the tendency to engage in active problem solving and
the tendency to rush into dangerous activities such as reckless driving
or the taking of illicit drugs. These subscales were abandoned, the
former because it correlated highly with distraction strategies and the
latter because--surprisingly -- itcorrelated highly with rumination.
However, other researchers, unconnected to NolenHoeksema, have since
shown that depressed patients, whether diagnosed as unipolar or bipolar,
perform poorly on measures of problem-solving ability.)69 That
ruminative coping leads to prolonged periods of depression was
demonstrated by Nolen-Hoeksema first in simple experiments in which
depressed mood was induced in ordinary people by asking them to read
depressing stories while listening to sad music. The participants were
then instructed either to ruminate or to engage in distracting
activities. Those who ruminated experienced longer and deeper periods of

dysphoria. In these experiments, it was also shown that dysphoric
participants who ruminated, compared to those who distracted, recalled
more negative memories about their lives,70 would interpret ambiguous
situations more negatively, were more pessimistic about the future, and
were less able to propose effective solutions to interpersonal
problems.71 In other words, rumination seemed to exacerbate processes
which, we have already seen, are thought to be important determinants of
dysphoric mood. A unique opportunity to test the impact of the
ruminating and distracting strategies was presented by the Loma Prieta
earthquake, which hit the San Francisco Bay area on 17 October 1989,
with a force measuring 7.1 on the Richter scale. Sixty-two people were
killed in the disaster, nearly 4000 were injured, and 12,000 people were
left homeless. Horrific pictures were played on news programmes over the
next few days, most notably of the upper deck of a two-deck highway in
Oakland, which had collapsed on to the lower deck, killing the occupants
of cars travelling below. By chance, Nolen-Hoeksema had administered the
RSQ to a class of Stanford University students just two weeks earlier.72
She had also interviewed the students to determine whether they were
experiencing symptoms of depression. Administering follow-up measures at
ten days and at seven weeks after the earthquake, she found that those
students who had been most exposed to danger, and who reported
ruminating about the earthquake, were more likely to feel depressed
afterwards. More importantly, she found that those students who were
already depressed or suffering from stress symptoms, and who also
reported a ruminative coping style on the RSQ, were especially likely to
report depressive symptoms. These findings have been confirmed in a more
recent prospective study conducted under less dramatic circumstances by
Nancy Just and Lauren Alloy, who found that reports of a ruminative
response style in non-depressed college students predicted their later
experience of dysphoric episodes over an eighteen-month follow-up
period.73 Nor have these kinds of observations been confined to samples
of college students: Nolen-Hoeksema showed that a ruminative coping
style predicted longer and more severe periods of depressed mood in gay
men whose partners had died of AIDS,74 and in the family members of
recently deceased cancer victims.75 Overall, the weight of evidence
about the impact of coping styles collected by Nolen-Hoeksema and her
colleagues is impressive. However, two important questions remain to be
answered. First, given the objections to the idea of basic emotions that
I raised in the last chapter, it might be expected that rumination will
affect a wide range of negative emotional states. This seems to be the
case: NolenHoeksema has recently shown that rumination can prolong
episodes of anger76 and

also episodes of anxiety.77 Second, although the negative impact of
rumination has been well demonstrated, the effects of distraction remain
relatively unexplored. We will return to this question in a later
chapter.

Rhythms and Blues: from Fatigue to Depression One obvious problem with
the account I have so far given of the pathway from negative events to
negative mood is that not everyone who is said to be depressed
experiences negative beliefs about the self; indeed, we have seen that
such beliefs may be relatively uncommon in some regions of the world. It
is therefore time for me to make good my earlier promise to describe a
second pathway that leads from negative experiences to the cluster of
loosely related symptoms that we call 'depression'. In the process, I
will attempt to explain how somatic symptoms such as loss of appetite
might fit into the general framework I have constructed. We will begin
by briefly plunging into an area of research that, on first sight,
appears to be completely unconnected to everything that we have
discussed so far. At the same time as psychologically orientated
investigators have attempted to understand the psychological processes
involved in extreme forms of negative emotion, biologically orientated
investigators with an interest in depression have pursued their own
research agendas, most of which are too complex to describe in any
detail here. A few of these avenues have directly paralleled the
research we have already considered. For example, Richard Davidson at
the University of Wisconsin has attempted to measure the way in which
different emotional states reflect interactions between cortical areas
of the brain and deeper brain structures in the limbic system.78
Davidson's studies raise a range of issues that lie beyond the scope of
this book. However, it is interesting to note that, in an experiment
carried out in collaboration with Lyn Abramson, he found that ordinary
people with an optimistic attributional style showed increased neural
activation in the left frontal cortex.79 Depressed people with a
pessimistic style, on the other hand, showed greater activation in the
right frontal cortex. Interestingly, these relationships seemed to be
specific to attributional style; no such asymmetrical associations were
found between dysfunctional attitudes towards the self and neural
activity. If nothing else, these observations remind us that an adequate
approach to psychopathology will eventually have to integrate
psychological and biological findings within a single framework. Other
biological investigations have focused specifically on processes that
may be responsible for some of the somatic symptoms reported by
depressed patients. A

particularly interesting although relatively neglected line of
investigation concerns the effects of disrupting the biological rhythms
that regulate our patterns of sleeping and waking. These circadian
rhythms are reflected in subtle bodily changes (for example, changes in
biochemistry and core body temperature) that occur throughout the day.
Left to their own devices, they tend to become progressively longer, so
that most people confined to a land without clocks or daylight would
eventually settle down to a cycle of about twenty-five hours. (Readers
who have experienced unemployment or other kinds of prolonged periods of
inactivity may have noticed this effect, finding that they go to bed
slightly later every day and that they get up progressively later in the
morning.) However, our rhythms are usually kept in synchrony with the
Earth's rotation by activities that expose us to regular stimuli, such
as alarm clocks, journeys to work and meals. These stimuli are known as
Zeitgebers (a German term that means clock-setting stimuli). By way of
an analogy, the reader might like to think of a person who is forced to
keep time with a slow running watch, but who, at certain times of the
day, is able to obtain information about the correct time. On each of
these occasions, she moves her watch forward, thereby ensuring that it
is always accurate within certain limits. When first encountered, this
system of circadian rhythms and Zeitgebers seems strangely maladaptive
-- it is not immediately obvious why we have not simply evolved internal
time keeping devices that are more in tune with the rhythms of our
planet. However, the system seems less maladaptive when we consider
that, at most latitudes, human beings need to change their routines
according to the seasons. It turns out that the circadian system has
just the right degree of flexibility required to enable this to happen.
Now let us consider what happens if we are unable to access Zeitgebers,
or if our exposure to them becomes somehow irregular, so that our
circadian rhythms become markedly desynchronized with the cycle of light
and darkness. Many readers who have travelled abroad will have
experienced this as the unpleasant but happily temporary phenomenon of
jet lag. The symptoms of jet lag include fatigue and listlessness,
disturbed sleep, loss of interest in food, and all too noticeable
cognitive effects such as difficulty remembering, concentrating and
finding words. These symptoms are, of course, caused by our circadian
rhythms being out of synchrony with the place that we have travelled to,
and resolve as they shift to the new cycle of activity that we impose on
them. (Typically, jet lag is especially bad when we travel from west to
east. This is because our naturally slow-running internal clock has
greater difficulty adapting to the earlier waking which this kind of
journey necessitates, compared to the later waking to which we have to
adapt when travelling in the opposite direction.)

David Healy, a psychiatrist at the University of Wales College of
Medicine, has noted that stressful life events often lead to a
disruption of routine. He has argued that, if this disruption is severe
enough, the consequence can be a form of chronic circadian dysrhythmia,
in which our biological rhythms are persistently out of synchrony with
the demands of daily living. It is as if the patient develops permanent
jet lag.80 This proposal goes a considerable way towards explaining
those symptoms of depression -- for example, sleep disturbance, fatigue,
loss of interest in simple pleasures, and subjective cognitive
difficulties -- that are difficult to explain in terms of the
psychological processes that we have considered earlier. Interestingly,
as Healy himself notes, these are precisely the symptoms that are most
prominent in non-Western descriptions of depression.81 Healy's
suggestion is that circadian dysrythmia is the primary cause of
depression, and that the psychological changes that we have considered
earlier are consequence so fit. He argues that people who experience
persistent fatigue and the kinds of subtle cognitive deficits that
follow from disrupted sleep will often fail to cope adequately with the
demands of their work and social relationships, and will begin to blame
themselves for these shortcomings. According to Healy, once the
individual has made internal attributions for these negative
experiences, all the other cognitive abnormalities that we have
considered will follow. Although this theory has not received the
attention that it deserves, observations that many depressed patients
suffer from sleep problems and have irregular rhythms of social
activity82 are clearly consistent with it.83 Nonetheless, we should be
suspicious of Healy's assertion that circadian dysrhythmia is always the
primary cause of depression. This proposal seems to assume that
depression is a single, coherent entity, and that it must be the product
of a single causal pathway. In fact, as we have seen, depression is a
term used to describe a range of symptoms, only some of which are easily
accounted for by Healy's hypothesis. In all likelihood, many dysphoric
episodes start with the pessimistic interpretation of negative events
and, if somatic symptoms are present, it is because patients respond to
their dysphoric mood by withdrawing from social life and abstaining from
the kinds of regular activities that would normally keep their circadian
rhythms synchronized. In other cases, a loss of routine may indeed be
primary, and loss of self-esteem may follow from the perception of
persistent failure. (The example I gave earlier of George, the dysphoric
engineer, fits this kind of pathway well; recall that his episodes of
depression typically followed trips abroad, which presumably challenged
his circadian system.) Even in such cases, however, we probably need to
assume that some kind of cognitive vulnerability, for example a
pessimistic

attributional style or dysfunctional attitude towards the self, is
present beforehand. Why else would people interpret their fatigue and
lethargy as evidence of their own inadequacy, rather than as a natural
consequence of stressful life events? In short, it seems reasonable to
assume that more than one pathway leads to the disturbances of cognition
and emotion that we lump together under the label of 'depression'. The
sequence of cognitive changes that follows a pessimistic appraisal of an
adverse life event constitutes one such pathway, the consequences of a
severe disruption to routine another. There may be others that I am not
aware of. Putting together what we have learned in this chapter into a
single flow diagram, we arrive at the model shown in Figure 10.7. In the
following chapters we will see that many of the processes described in
this diagram also contribute to other symptoms. Figure 10.7 The final
model of depression.

OceanofPDF.com

11 A Colourful Malady *As an experience, madness is terrific... Virginia
Woolf1 An Unquiet Mind,2 written by the American clinical psychologist
Kay Redfield Jamison, is probably one of the bravest books about madness
ever published. The daughter of a meteorologist working for the US air
force, Jamison suffered the frequent dislocations that are often the lot
of families of armed forces personnel. Although moody during childhood,
she first became manic during her senior year at high school, when she
experienced a period of intense excitement and disorientation that was
followed by weeks of depression and exhaustion. At the time, it did not
occur to her that she might be suffering from a psychiatric disorder.
Even years later, after qualifying as a clinical psychologist, and after
further episodes of disturbed mood, she was unwilling to believe that
she needed treatment. Her appointment to a position in the Department of
Psychiatry at the University of California in Los Angeles was a turning
point. Shortly afterwards, following a period during which she worked
furiously and without sleep, she began spending wildly. She bought
watches, unnecessary furniture, books and (for some reason) numerous
snakebite kits. Eventually she became 'ravingly psychotic', an
experience she described in the following way: One evening I stood in
the middle of my living room and looked out at a blood-red sunset
spreading out over the horizon of the Pacific. Suddenly, I felt a
strange sense of light at the back of my eyes and almost immediately saw
a huge black centrifuge* inside my head. I saw a tall figure in a
floorlength evening gown approach the centrifuge with a vase-sized glass
tube of blood in her hand. As the figure turned around I saw to my
horror that it was me and that there was blood all over my dress, cape
and long white gloves. I watched as the figure carefully put the tube of
blood into one of the holes in the centrifuge, closed the lid, and
pushed a button on the front of the machine. The centrifuge began to
whirl.

Then, horrifyingly, the image that previously had been inside my head
now was completely outside of it. I was paralysed with fright. The
spinning of the centrifuge and the clanking of the glass tube against
the metal became louder and louder, and then the machine splintered into
a thousand pieces. Blood was everywhere. It spattered against the
windowpanes, and the walls and paintings, and soaked down into the
carpets. I looked out towards the ocean and saw that the blood on the
window had merged with the sunset; I couldn't tell where one ended and
the other began. I screamed at the top of my lungs. I couldn't get away
from the sight of the blood and the echoes of the machine's clanking as
it whirled faster and faster. The main theme of An Unquiet Mind is
Jamison's struggle to come to terms with her diagnosis. As the story
unravels, she tells of her reluctance to accept the fallibility of her
own mind, and of the anxiety she felt when forced by circumstances to
reveal her condition to other people. The decision to write about her
experiences is portrayed as the culmination of a gradual and frightening
processes of 'coming out', facilitated at various points by sympathetic
colleagues, friends and lovers. Early in her career, she made use of her
experiences by presenting her own story at conferences as if she had
heard it from a patient. Only later, after finding a type of medication
that seemed to suit her, was she able to admit publicly that her life
had been punctuated by periods of madness so severe that they had
necessitated hospital treatment. Jamison's research has mostly focused
on the link between abnormal moods and creativity. (We considered some
of her findings in Chapter 5.) She is such a good example of the triumph
of ambition over adversity (and therefore an excellent role-model for
psychotic patients) that it will probably seem uncharitable to pass
judgement on her account. And yet, throughout An Unquiet Mind, Jamison
accepts the Kraepelinian paradigm uncritically. She hints at
difficulties in her own life (her father was prone to moods that became
so extreme that they eventually made him unemployable; her parents
divorced, as she did later; a lover died tragically) but, for reasons
that are easily inferred, she says very little about how these events
contributed to her psychosis. The 'illness' in An Unquiet Mind is an

invading army that imposes its will upon her. She endures its occupation
with dignity. It does not appear to be the product of her psychology, a
response to circumstances, or the outcome of a process of development.
This attitude is very common among psychologists and psychiatrists, who
regard mania as such an extreme phenomen on that it is assumed to be
impenetrable to psychological analysis. And yet, given that mania is
typically experienced by people who also have a history of depression,
it is reasonable to ask whether processes similar to those we have
considered in the last chapter could be implicated in manic episodes. To
begin to answer this question we must look more closely at what happens
in a manic episode.

A Paradoxical Condition Surprisingly, in her account of her illness, Kay
Jamison nowhere describes in detail what it is like to experience mania.
The closest she comes is her account of a terrifying hallucinatory
episode, which I have reproduced above. Perhaps mania is too frightening
to recall. Or more likely there is something about the manic state that
makes it almost impossible to portray in words. Although I have spent
many hours listening to recovered manic patients attempting to describe
their experiences, their accounts have often seemed curiously
incomplete. It is as if the break from normal functioning during an
episode is so severe that the mind, on returning to sanity, cannot
comprehend it. This amnesia may be explained by a phenomenon known as
statedependent memory. We are most likely to remember something if we
are in a similar state to that in which we learnt it. Howard Weingartner
and his colleagues at the US National Institute of Mental Health
demonstrated this effect in bipolar patients by asking them to learn
simple word lists when manic and when in remission, finding that they
were better able to recall the lists when in the same mood state.3 In a
case study that illustrates this effect more vividly than any
experiment, J. Mark Williams and H. R. Markar have described a patient
who hid several thousand pounds when manic.

Recovering, he could not remember where he had put the money. Some
months later, when manic again, he tried to hide something else and,
choosing the same place, found it.4 The difficulty experienced by
patients when attempting to recall mania is matched by the poor
descriptions offered in the classic literature of psychiatry. Even
modern researchers have harboured gross illusions about the manic state.
For example, the term 'bipolar disorder' gives the quite misleading
impression that mania lies at the opposite pole to depression on a
spectrum of emotion. Interestingly, some ancient physicians were more
acute observers than their modern counterparts. The second-century
physician Aretaeus, who lived in Cappadocia in Asia Minor, was probably
the first person to suggest that mania is an extreme end-state of
depression,5 a hypothesis that is consistent with much of the evidence
that we will consider shortly.

The symptoms of mania One of Kay Jamison's most remarkable achievements
is her encyclopaedic textbook Manic-Depressive Illness, which she
co-authored with American psychiatrist Frederick Goodwin.6 Within its
pages, Goodwin and Jamison gather together data on the emotions reported
by patients suffering from mania or its milder variant hypomania
(defined in DSM-IV as a period of 'abnormally and persistently elevated,
irritable or expansive mood' accompanied by at least three additional
symptoms such as inflated self-esteem, non-delusional grandiosity,
decreased need for sleep, flight of ideas, distractibility or 'excessive
involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high potential for
painful consequences'). Collating the data from fourteen studies
involving over 700 patients, they found that euphoria was reported by 71
per cent of the patients examined, a finding that at first seems
consistent with the bipolar concept. However, 72 per cent of patients
were described as depressed, and 80 per cent of patients were described
as irritable. Simple arithmetic reveals that some patients must be both
dysphoric and euphoric. The DSM system recognizes this phenomenon by
describing three types of bipolar episodes: depression, mania, and mixed

episodes in which both manic and depressive symptoms are evident.
However, the concept of a mixed episode remains controversial.7 Some
researchers have suggested that the apparent co-occurrence of depression
and euphoria in fact reflects ultra-rapid transitions between one mood
state and the other, so that patients are euphoric one moment and
depressed the next. Others have suggested that different moods
predominate as manic episodes unfold. Frederick Goodwin, for example,
has argued that most manic patients progress through three distinct
phases, with euphoria dominant only in the first, whereas depression,
panic and irritability dominate in the third and most severe stage (see
Figure 11.1).8 The paradox of co-existing euphoria and depression in
manic patients becomes less paradoxical when viewed from the perspective
of the circumplex model of emotions, described in Chapter 9 (pp. 215--
19). Recall that, according to this model, negative mood and positive
mood are independent dimensions of emotion. Therefore, although we would
expect these emotions to be negatively correlated for much of the time
(because events which make us feel bad tend not to make us feel good and
vice versa) there is nothing to stop both types of mood states occurring
together under exceptional circumstances. This explanation is consistent
with the results of a factor-analytic investigation of manic and mixed
episodes recently reported by Frederick Cassidy and his colleagues at
Duke University in North Carolina.9 Prior to their analysis, they
collected detailed information about the symptoms of more than 200
patients. They discovered that these symptoms fell into five separate
groups. Two of the factors were dysphoric mood and 'increased hedonic
function' (euphoric mood, increased humour and an increased interest in
sex), which were therefore shown to be independent of each other. The
remaining three factors were psychomotor pressure (racing thoughts,
rapid speech and increased activity), psychosis (mainly grandiose and
paranoid delusions) and irritability. One reason why the emotional
component of mania may have been so badly misunderstood is that it is
usually not an immediate source of concern

to other people. More often it is non-mood symptoms that draw attention
to the patient and precipitate an admission to hospital. Stage I

Stage II

Stage III

Mood

Lability of affect; euphoria predominates; irritability if demands not
satisfied

Increased dysphoria and depression, open hostility and anger

Clearly dysphoric; panicstricken; hopeless

Cognition

Expansivity, grandiosity, overconfidence; thoughts coherent but
occasionally tangential; sexual and religious preoccupation; racing
thoughts

Flight of ideas; disorganization of cognitive state; delusions

Incoherent, definite loosening of associations; bizarre and
idiosyncratic delusions; hallucinations in 1/3 of patients;
disorientation to time and place; occasoinal ideas of reference

Behavior

Increased psychomotor activity; increased initiation and rate of speech;
increased spending,

Continued increased psychomotor acceleration; increased pressured
speech; occasional

Frenzied and frequently bizarre psychomotor activity

smoking, telephone use

assaultive behavior

Adapted from Carlson and Goodwin, 1973 Figure 11.1 The three stages of
mania described by Carlson and Goodwin (1973), reproduced from F. K.
Goodwin and K. Jamison (1990), Manic-Depressive Illness, Oxford, Oxford
University Press.

The reckless activity that is common in manic episodes can provoke alarm
in friends and relatives, causing them to seek the advice of doctors and
psychiatrists. One of my patients drove his car at frightening speeds
down country lanes, convinced that he was invincible. The car rolled on
a corner and was damaged beyond repair but my patient walked away from
the accident unscathed, his conviction in his own indestructibility
reinforced by the experience. Not surprisingly, his more realistic
parents ensured he had an early appointment at a local psychiatric
clinic. Fortunately, life-threatening deeds of this sort are fairly
unusual. It is also rare for patients to act on their heightened sexual
feelings (experienced by 57 per cent of patients according to Goodwin
and Jamison). When they do, they more often expose themselves (29 per
cent) than make sexual advances towards other people. (A young man whom
I was interviewing for the first time disclosed that, during a recent
episode, he had run around a hospital ward wearing just one sock,
adding, 'And it wasn't on my foot!') More mundane activities that are
characteristic of mania or hypomania include excessive use of the
telephone (recovered patients often find that they have enormous phone
bills) and extravagant spending that is regretted later (Kay Jamison
once bought a large number of Penguin books, because she thought that
they would like to live together in a family). Goodwin and Jamison's
review of psychotic symptoms in manic patients reminds us that bipolar
symptoms overlap with those that are normally attributed to
schizophrenia. They estimate that about 15 per cent of patients
experience hallucinations, which are usually in the auditory modality.
Abnormal beliefs are more common, with grandiose delusions reported by
47 per cent of patients and paranoid delusions reported by 28 per cent.
Language and communication problems are also frequently observed.
Although most psychiatrists, following the example set by Bleuler, have
regarded incoherent speech as a symptom of schizophrenia, Nancy
Andreasen discovered that it is more often evident in patients with a
diagnosis of bipolar disorder,10 an observation that has been confirmed
by other researchers.

From this evidence, it is obvious that mania, like depression, is not a
symptom, but a complex group of symptoms (some of which are discussed in
other chapters of this book). Unfortunately, the very limited
psychological research that has so far been carried out with bipolar
patients (including my own) has tended to treat mania as a lump, so it
is not always clear which characteristics of manic episodes are
associated with the processes that have been investigated.

An insight from psychoanalysis? The earliest systematic contributions to
the psychology of mania were made by psychoanalysts. Of those who
studied the problem, the most important was Karl Abraham. Born in Bremen
in 1877, Abraham became Bleuler's assistant at the Burghölzli Hospital
in Zurich, where he fell under the influence of the Freudians, despite
developing a strong dislike for Jung. Until his premature death from
cancer in 1925, he was one of Freud's most loyal disciples. He was
described by Freud's biographer Ernest Jones as, 'Certainly the most
normal of the group. His distinguishing attributes were steadfastness,
common sense, shrewdness, and a perfect self-control.' However, Jones
qualified this observation by adding, 'One would scarcely use the term
"charm" in describing him; in fact, Freud sometimes told me he found him
"too Prussian".'11 In a paper published in 1911, Abraham argued that:
Viewed externally, the manic phase of the cyclical disturbances is the
complete opposite of the depressive one. A manic appears very cheerful
on the surface; and unless a deeper investigation is carried out by
psychoanalytic methods it might appear that the two phases are the
opposite of each other even as regards their content. Psychoanalysis
shows, however, that both phases are dominated by the same complexes,
and that it is only the patient's attitudes to these complexes that is
different. In the depressive state he allows himself to be weighed down
by his complex, and sees no other way out of his misery but death; in
the manic state he treats the complex with indifference.12

Abraham's proposal was that the underlying psychological processes in
mania are similar to those in depression, but that, in the manic state,
these processes are experienced as intolerable and are therefore denied.
This idea was later elaborated by Sandor Rado, the Hungarian-born
psychoanalyst whose ideas about anhedonia we considered earlier. Rado
argued that manic-depressive patients are highly narcissistic, and that
the manic defence is therefore motivated by an abnormal need for
approval by others.13 The manic-defence hypothesis has been neglected by
psychological researchers, mainly because of persisting doubts about the
scientific status of psychoanalysis. Because the early psychoanalysts
were unable to frame their theories in ways that could be tested
experimentally, and even refused to recognize the value of the
experimental method, many modern psychologists have assumed that their
ideas were not worth investigating.14 In doing so, they have forgotten
that the early psychoanalysts made perceptive observations about the
behaviour of their patients, and have failed to recognize that many of
their theories seem less bizarre when translated into ordinary language.
This is certainly true of the idea of defence, which simply implies that
we attempt to regulate our own emotions by avoiding thoughts that are
exceptionally distressing. Evidence in support of this idea is not
difficult too find, and we have already encountered some of it in the
previous chapter. In fact, there has been at least one attempt to
restate the manic-defence hypothesis in the language of modern
psychology. John Neale, working at the State University of New York in
the late 1980s, suggested that people who are vulnerable to manic
episodes suffer from unrealistic standards for success and unstable
self-esteem. According to Neale's account, when negative events
intensify the vulnerable person's underlying feelings of low
self-regard, he responds with a cascade of grandiose ideas, which
inhibit distressing thoughts about the self. These grandiose ideas in
turn rapidly spiral out of control, causing mood elevation and
eventually mania.15

Is There a Manic Defence?

Because so few data were available to him, Neale's reformulation of the
manic-defence hypothesis was necessarily vague. In fact, the hypothesis
can be expressed in various forms. A weak version implies that mania is
triggered by incipient negative mood, or perhaps the threat of negative
mood, and reflects patients' efforts to avoid negative emotion. A
stronger version would also imply that the manic state consists of an
underlying depression that is somehow masked by these efforts. (An
ultra-strong version, consistent with the claims of psychoanalysis,
would go still further, and suggest that these symptoms enable patients
to avoid awareness of their underlying depression altogether. However,
because of the considerable difficulties in establishing what patients
are really aware of -- as opposed to just ignoring -- I will leave this
issue to cleverer minds than mine.)

The remitted bipolar patient If episodes of mania are triggered by
incipient negative mood, it follows that remitted bipolar patients
should have many of the psychological characteristics of depressed
patients, and that the more they have these characteristics, the more
likely it is that they will become manic. At least one piece of evidence
seems, at first sight, inconsistent with these assumptions. When
patients are asked to recall their experiences of the prodromal phase of
the disorder, they usually report symptoms of excitement (for example,
reduced sleep, increased activity, excessive talkativeness, euphoria and
racing thoughts) rather than symptoms of depression.16 However, this
evidence is far from conclusive. As we have seen, patients often have
difficulty recalling their symptoms, and, in any case, we probably need
to look further backwards in time than the prodrome, which marks the
beginning of the manic state. Although it has often been assumed that
remitted patients suffer from no symptoms of any importance, and
function just as well as ordinary people, recent studies suggest that
this impression has arisen simply because they usually live their lives
beyond the sight of psychiatrists and clinical psychologists.
'Subclinical' depression, it seems, is the norm.17 Remitted

bipolar patients also appear to have many of the psychological
characteristics of depressed patients, even if they are sometimes
reluctant to reveal them. One of the earliest investigations to
demonstrate this was conducted by Ken Winters and John Neale, who argued
that, because patients would respond defensively, it would be misleading
to study the psychology of the remitted state using conventional
questionnaires.18 They therefore devised a non-obvious or implicit test
of attributional style, known as the Pragmatic Inference Task (PIT),
which is disguised as a memory test. People taking the test are asked to
listen to a series of brief stories such as the following: You decide to
open your own dry-cleaning shop in a small but growing town near the
border. Your shop will be the only one of its kind for miles around. In
the first year of business, the town's population doubles and your
business prospers. Your advertising campaign is a big success and
reactions from your customers indicate that the cleaning is of good
quality. Your gross sales exceed expectations. You wonder whether it
would be to your advantage to open a chain of shops, so you go to the
bank and apply for a loan. As you had hoped, the bank approves the loan.
After each story, the participant is asked to answer a number of
multiplechoice questions, some of which have clear right and wrong
answers. (For example: What kind of shop did you open? A: Hardware or B:
Drycleaning. The answer, obviously, is B.) However, one question after
each story asks listeners to recall which of two causes (one internal
and one external) was responsible for the good or bad outcome portrayed
(What is the reason for the success of your business? A: You are a
clever businessman or B: You have no competition). The stories are
carefully constructed so that neither answer is more obviously correct
than the other. Therefore, Winters and Neale argued, the answers chosen
will reflect the way that participants feel about themselves. Winters
and Neale found that, like unipolar depressed patients but unlike
ordinary people, remitted bipolar patients made internal (self-blaming)
attributions for negative events much more than for positive events.

Winters and Neale also measured a characteristic known as social
desirability.19 This slightly confusing term refers to the need to
present a positive image of the self to others. Questionnaires that
measure social desirability invite people to admit to undesirable but
common dispositions and behaviours (for example, gossiping about others,
playing sick to gain advantage). It is assumed that people who deny
these characteristics are so defensive that they are unable to admit to
even trivial shortcomings. Winters and Neale found that their remitted
bipolar patients scored much higher on this measure than ordinary
people. This study, published in 1985, was largely ignored by other
investigators. In the past few years, however, researchers have used
other measures to confirm Winters and Neale's general observation of
depressive processes in remitted patients. For example, Jan Scott and
her colleagues in Newcastle recently administered the Dysfunctional
Attitudes Scale (the measure of perfectionist self-standards that I
briefly described in the last chapter) and found that remitted patients,
like people suffering from depression, scored much more highly than
ordinary people.20 My earliest research with bipolar patients attempted
to detect underlying depressive processes in people who were vulnerable
to bipolar symptoms, and made use of an obscure psychological phenomenon
known as the Stroop effect. In 1935, a British psychologist, J. R.
Stroop, reported an experiment in which ordinary people were asked to
look at a series of colour words printed in incongruent ink colours (for
example, the word 'red' might be printed in blue, the word 'green' might
be printed in red, and so on). The people taking part in the experiment
were asked to name the ink colour of each word but to ignore the word
itself. Stroop observed that people find this task very difficult -- the
participants in his experiment were much slower at this kind of
colour-naming than when colour-naming words in congruent ink colours
(for example, 'green' printed in green) or meaningless strings of
letters (for example, 'XXXXX') written in different ink colours.21 The
precise mechanisms responsible for this effect are still debated.
However, it is safe to assume that people find it hard to suppress the
habit of reading the word itself, creating an internal competition
between reading and colour-naming. To anyone attempting the task, this

urge to do two things at once creates the weird subjective sensation
that the mind is filling with glue. The Stroop effect is useful to
clinical psychologists, because it occurs for any words that draw the
individual's attention. This is especially the case for words that have
some kind of emotional significance and which reflect a source of worry.
Depressed patients but not ordinary people are much slower to
colour-name depression-related words (for example, 'failure', 'sadness')
than emotionally neutral words ('diamond', 'collector').22 Similarly,
anorexic patients are slow to colour-name food words23 and anxious
patients are slow to colour-name anxiety-related words.24 Michelle
Thompson and I used the Stroop technique to test university students
whom we selected according to their scores on a hypo-mania
questionnaire. We gave the students a Stroop task with
depression-related words (for example, 'dread', 'rejected'),
euphoria-related words ('wonderful', 'glorious') and emotionally neutral
words ('pod', 'tendency'). As predicted, the hypomanic students showed
slowed colour-naming for the depression-related but not for the
euphoria-related words, suggesting that the former words were
emotionally troubling to them.25 Although this finding might seem to be
slightly counter-intuitive -- after all, the hypomanic students did not
show any evidence of depression -- it has since been replicated by Chris
French at the University of London, who started out by questioning some
aspects of our methodology, but who ended up obtaining almost identical
findings when using his own methods.26 In two more recent studies,
conducted in Manchester with my students Julie High field and Tom
Woodnut, we decided to investigate self-esteem in well-adjusted students
with hypomanic personality traits, and also in a group of remitted
bipolar patients.27 Aware of the evidence that self-esteem is often
highly unstable in people who are vulnerable to depression, we decided
to measure it daily in both groups and matched controls, using the diary
method devised by Michael Kernis.28 Participants completed a very simple
self-esteem questionnaire and also answered a series of questions twice
a day for a week about what had been happening to them. We compared each
of the target groups -- the hypomanic students and the

remitted patients -- to control groups matched with them for age, sex
and educational achievement and found that the self-esteem scores of
both the hypo-manic students and the remitted patients fluctuated more
markedly than the scores of these comparison groups. Interestingly,
although neither the hypomanic students nor the remitted patients scored
very highly on a measure of depression, their scores exceeded those of
their respective controls, and when we allowed for this difference
statistically, the differences in stability of self-esteem were no
longer evident. The unstable self-esteem of these groups therefore
seemed to reflect 'bubbling' subclinical depression. The manic-defence
hypothesis suggests not only that individuals vulnerable to mania should
experience incipient depressive symptoms, but also that the severity of
their depressive psychological processes will predict the likelihood
that they will become manic in the future. As yet, only one study has
properly addressed this prediction. Lauren Alloy and her colleagues
tried to extend the high-risk research strategy they have developed for
the study of depression to bipolar symptomatology. They used a
questionnaire followed by a psychiatric interview to screen 3000
students for a history of mood symptoms. This led them to identify 49
apparently bipolar students, most of whom were well when first assessed,
and a group of 97 students with an apparent history of unipolar
depression, most of whom were also well. After being tested on a range
of psychological measures, including attributional style, these groups,
together with a small control group, were reassessed one month later.
Unfortunately, because of the small numbers in the study, the
researchers did not report separate attributional style data for
currently depressed and currently manic participants. However, in both
the bipolar and unipolar group, there was evidence that a pessimistic
attributional style predicted an increase in depressive symptoms at the
follow-up assessment. More interestingly, in the bipolar group, a
pessimistic style also predicted an increase in manic symptoms.29
Whether self-esteem measures foretell the onset of mania is less
certain. Psychologist Sheri Johnson and her colleagues at the University
of Miami have reported a small study in which they found that low
self-esteem in

remitted patients predicted later depression but not mania.30 However,
Jan Scott and Marie Pope in Newcastle, in a similar study, recently
measured positive and negative self-esteem separately, finding that the
negative component predicted both future depression and future mania.31

The psychology of mania Very little psychological research has been
conducted with actively manic patients, almost certainly because of the
difficulty in getting them to sit still for long enough to complete a
set of tests. However, Helen Lyon, Mike Startup and I decided to repeat
my earlier Stroop experiment with bipolar patients who were attending
psychiatric clinics in North Wales.32 Consistent with my earlier
findings, we found slowed colour-naming for depression-related but not
euphoria-related words in both bipolar-depressed and bipolar-manic
patients (see Figure 11.2). Perhaps we should not have been surprised by
this finding. After all, as we saw earlier, euphoria is usually evident
only in the earliest stages of manic episodes, and dysphoria
predominates in the later stages. Stronger evidence for the
manic-defence hypothesis would require the demonstration that manic
patients show depressive-like responding on some measures (preferably
non-obvious or implicit measures, which might be relatively unaffected
by defensive processes) while, at the same time, responding in a way
that seems to be incompatible with depression on other measures
(preferably obvious or explicit measures, which would be expected to be
affected by defensive processes). In fact, this kind of evidence emerged
from the same study. In the last chapter, I described the performance of
bipolar patients on the Attributional Style Questionnaire (see Figure
10.1, p. 244), noting that patients suffering a manic episode appeared
to make fairly normal attributions, in contrast to depressed patients,
who made pessimistic (internal, global and stable) attributions for
negative events. Figure 11.3 shows the performance of the same patients
on Winters and Neale's Pragmatic Inference Task. Note that the
performance of the normal and depressed participants on the PIT was
concordant with their performance on the ASQ. The healthy controls
showed a self-serving bias on both measures

whereas the depressed patients showed a pessimistic bias, again on both
measures. In contrast, the performance of the manic patients seemed to
vary dramatically between the two tests. Whereas their performance on
the ASQ showed a normal self-serving bias, their attributions on the PIT
were highly pessimistic. In fact, on the implicit measure, little
difference can be seen between their scores and the scores of the
depressed patients. Figure 11.2 Stroop data reported for bipolar-manic,
bipolar-depressed and normal participants by Lyon et al. (1999). The
columns show interference indices (the extent to which the participants
were slowed when attempting to colour-name emotionally salient words,
calculated by subtracting the amount of time required to colour-name 50
emotionally neutral words from the time required to colour-name 50
salient words). This measure is shown for both depression-related (for
example, dread, rejected, suicide, depressing) and euphoria-related
words (for example, wonderful, glorious, joy, jubilant). Note that the
two clinical groups show substantial interference for depression-related
but not euphoria-related words.

Further evidence relevant to the manic-defence hypothesis can be
obtained by looking at measures of self-representation. In the last
chapter, I discussed a study of the self-discrepancies of bipolar
patients conducted by Kerry Manson, Peter Kinderman and myself, in which
we observed an abnormal lack of self--ideal discrepancies in manic
patients. This finding is consistent with their apparent grandiosity and
suggests that, on the surface at least, they harbour no doubts
whatsoever about their attributes and talents, a finding that has been
reported by other researchers using less complex measures of
self-esteem.33 Evidence of a less positive view of the self in mania
emerged from an additional measure included in the study that I carried
out with Helen Lyon and Mike Startup. We exploited the self-reference
effect, the tendency to

recall information that is specifically relevant to the self. As I
mentioned in the last chapter, many studies have shown that depressed
people, when given a list of negative and positive words, say that more
of the negative words describe their own personalities and, more
importantly, recall more of the negative words if given a surprise
memory test afterwards.34 We therefore administered this kind of test to
our participants. Consistently with previous research, our
bipolar-depressed participants endorsed and recalled more negative words
than our well controls. However, our manic patients endorsed more
positive words than negative words but recalled more negative words than
positive words (see Figure 11.4). Figure 11.3 Internality data for
manic, depressed and normal participants assessed using the Pragmatic
Inference Task. These scores should be contrasted with the ASQ data from
the same patients, shown in Figure 10.1, p. 244.

Figure 11.4 Left panel shows the number of positive and negative
personality traits endorsed as 'true' by manic, depressed and normal
participants. On the right is shown how many of the items were recalled
by the participants when they were given a surprise recall test. From
Lyon, Startup and Bentall (1999).

Clearly, more psychological research must be carried out with manic
patients. However, the evidence available to date supports at least the
weak version of the manic-defence hypothesis, which assumes that mania
arises from patients' attempts to avoid negative mood.

Becoming Manic The account of the psychology of mania that I have given
so far has focused on the remitted state, and on mania itself. However,
a workable theory of mania requires a further vital ingredient: a
mechanism that enables patients to pass from the former state to the
latter. We will begin considering this problem by examining two accounts
of the processes that lead to mania which, at first sight, seem to be at
odds with the manic-defence hypothesis. The first, which might be called
the excitability hypothesis (a term which, so far as I know, is not used
by any of its proponents), suggests that people who are vulnerable to
mania are in some way hyper-excitable. The most carefully worked out
version of this idea has been put forward by Richard Depue, of Cornell
University in Ithaca, New York,35 who based his model on a
neurophysiological theory of personality proposed by British
psychologist Jeffrey Gray.36 On the basis of animal studies, Gray argued
that two emotional systems could be identified in the brain, the
behavioural inhibition system (BIS), which responds to stimuli
associated with punishment or frustration, and the behavioural
activation system (BAS), which responds to stimuli associated with
reward. (Activation of the BIS is associated with negative mood whereas
activation of the BAS is associated with positive mood, so the theory
maps on to Watson and Tellegren's two-dimensional model of emotion,
which we discussed in Chapter 9.) According to Depue, manic symptoms are
a manifestation of a dysregulation of the behavioural activation system,
which is why patients are highly sociable, desire excitement, and show
high levels of motor activity, as if they are interminably over-reacting
to a reward.

Sheri Johnson has reported two findings that fit this theory rather
well. First, she demonstrated that hypomanic people score highly on a
questionnaire designed to measure the subjective experience of BAS
activation (items included, 'When good things happen to me, it affects
me strongly'; 'When I want something I usually go all-out to get it'; 'I
will often do things for no other reason than that they might be
fun').37 She also reported that patients with a diagnosis of bipolar
disorder experience an increased risk of manic symptoms following the
achievement of an important life goal.38 This second finding can be
interpreted in more ways than one, as Johnson also observed that
positive events in general did not lead to an increase in manic symptoms
(as might be expected from Depue's model), and as goal attainment often
carries with it the threat of later failure (examples of goal
attainments given in Johnson's paper include gaining admission to
graduate school and obtaining a new job). A more important limitation of
Depue's excitability hypothesis is that it does not seem to explain the
close association between depression and mania. The second apparent
alternative to the manic-defence hypothesis implicates sleep
disturbances. Many people feel energetic after a night without sleep,
only to feel tired after the following night. David Healy has argued
that, because of a disorder of the circadian clock, bipolar patients
experience a magnification of this effect, so that they rapidly spiral
into mania following a period of sleep deprivation. According to this
account, the euphoria experienced by manic patients, and their grandiose
ideas, are reactions to the high energy levels that they suddenly
experience.39 In an intriguing extension of this sleep deprivation
hypothesis, Charles Raison and his colleagues at the University of
California have recently suggested that old superstitions linking the
full moon to insanity may be explained in this way.40 Before the
development of modern lighting, the moon was the main source of
nocturnal illumination. People living before the development of
electricity would therefore have been especially likely to experience
sleep difficulties when the moon was full. It is commonly observed that
a period of sleep loss precedes an episode of mania.41 For example,
Thomas Wehr and his colleagues at the US National

Institute of Mental Health have described a number of cases of people
being provoked into a manic episode by a single sleepless night: For the
past 2 years, Mr. B, a 28-year-old bipolar patient, drove 800 miles to
spend the Christmas holidays with his family. Impatient to return home
and unable to find a motel room, he drove through the night without
stopping. By the time of his arrival, Mr. B, who had been euthymic
\[that is, in a normal mood\], became hypomanic. The first year the
mania escalated and required hospitalisation; the following year it was
possible to attenuate the severity of his mania through early treatment
with adjunctive neuroleptic medications.42 Nocturnal physiological
measurements have confirmed that loss of sleep is a characteristic of
mania.43 Several studies,44 including one reported by Thomas Wehr's
research group,45 have also noted correlations between sleep duration
and manic symptoms the following day. Taking this idea further, Susan
Malkoff-Schwartz, Ellen Frank and their colleagues at the University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine have investigated whether manic episodes
are typically preceded by what they term social rhythm disruption (SRD)
events.46 In their most extreme form, these events (for example,
starting night work, the arrival of a new baby) completely disrupt sleep
whereas, in their milder forms (for example, travelling between time
zones, staying up to revise for an examination), the sleep-wake cycle is
only partially disrupted. When bipolar and unipolar patients were
compared, it was found that about two thirds of patients who became
manic had experienced an SRD event in the eight weeks preceding their
mania, whereas no such effect was found for episodes of depression,
either in the bipolar patients or in the unipolar patients. It is
important to remember that SRD events may be stressful for reasons other
than their effect on sleep. For this reason, the best way to establish
whether sleep deprivation per se leads to mania is to ask patients with
a history of the disorder to volunteer to go without sleep. In general,
the results of experiments of this sort suggest that only a minority of
patients may be as sensitive to sleep deprivation as Thomas Wehr's case
studies suggest. In perhaps the best study of this kind, reported by
Christina

Colombo, Francesco Benedetti and their colleagues at the University of
Milan, over 200 bipolar-depressed patients underwent three nights of
total sleep deprivation, interspersed with nights of normal sleep (it
was hoped that this would benefit their depression). About 5 per cent of
the patients became manic and a similar number became hypomanic. Only
four of the patients became ill enough to require drug treatment.47
Overall, then, the available evidence suggests that disruption to sleep
can precipitate mania, but that this effect is not inevitable. The
excitability hypothesis and the sleep deprivation hypothesis should not
be regarded as mutually exclusive. As we have seen, both are to some
extent supported by research. However, unlike the manic-defence
hypothesis, both seem to assume that the events leading up to mania are
largely beyond patients' own control. We can incorporate both mechanisms
within the framework of the manic-defence hypothesis if we assume that
patients, faced with the threat of negative mood, sometimes choose to
pursue activities that either cause them intense excitement or lead to
sleep loss. To see how this might happen we must return to the
reaction-maintenance principle and some of the methods that people use
to cope with negative mood, which we considered in the last chapter (see
p. 262). Recall that, according to studies carried out by Susan
Nolen-Hoeksema, people tend to react to being depressed in one of four
ways. Some people ruminate about their feelings, others launch into
attempts to solve the problems that they believe have led to their
depression, some try to distract themselves and a few indulge in
dangerous activities. Nolen-Hoeksema's research established that
rumination leads to periods of depression that are deeper and more
enduring.48 In a recent study, my Ph.D. student Justin Thomas
administered NolenHoeksema's questionnaire to a large group of students,
who also completed questionnaire measures of depression and hypomanic
traits.49 Consistent with Nolen-Hoeksema's findings, we observed a
strong correlation between rumination and depression. However, although
we also found a weak

association between rumination and hypomania, hypomania was more
strongly predicted by the distraction and dangerous activities coping
styles. I think that anyone who has spent any time talking to bipolar
patients will recognize these coping strategies (which include working
around the clock, intense socializing, indulging in alcohol and drugs,
and generally seeking novel experiences) from the patients' own
accounts. Unfortunately, at the time of writing, only one study has
systematically asked bipolar patients about their coping styles. Dominic
Lam and Grace Wong at the Institute of Psychiatry in London divided
patients into those who seemed to cope well with their symptoms, and who
seemed to be able to control them, and those who did not. Many of the
strategies reported by the poor copers ('continue to move about and take
on more tasks', 'go out and spend money', and 'find more to do to fill
out the extra minutes of the day') obviously involved some kind of
distraction.50

Towards a Psychology of Mania Less psychological research has been
conducted into mania than into any other major psychiatric complaint. In
this chapter, I have tried to weave together an account of the pathway
from incipient negative mood to manic episodes that makes best sense of
the limited evidence. This pathway, from distraction and risk-taking, to
excitement, sleep loss and eventually mania, is shown in Figure 11.5,
which is a modification of the final model of depression that we arrived
at in the last chapter. It is important to note that this tentative
model seems to explain better some aspects of mania than others.
Earlier, I explained that mania consists of five separable components:
dysphoria, increased hedonic functioning (euphoria), psychomotor
pressure, psychosis and irritability. Dysphoria is accounted for by
those components of the model that are shared with our earlier model of
depression. It is possible that psychomotor pressure can also be
accommodated within this framework if we assume that it is a consequence
of hyper-excitability. Irritability may arise from the inevitable
conflict with other people that manic behaviour provokes. It is possible
that

euphoria can be partially accounted for also, especially if feelings of
excitement and boundless energy lead the individual to believe that he
is capable of extraordinary feats, thereby affecting current beliefs
about the self, as indicated by the dotted arrow on the diagram. The
psychotic elements of the condition, however, are not so easily
explained. In later chapters, we will see that these symptoms require
different models. Figure 11.5 The dysphoria model, modified to include
mania (unique features shaded).

OceanofPDF.com

12 Abnormal Attitudes I am absolutely certain that in this regard I
command experiences which -- when generally acknowledged as valid --
will act fruitfully to the highest possible degree among the rest of
mankind... You like other people may be inclined at first to see nothing
but a pathological offspring of my imagination in this; but I have an
almost overwhelming amount of proof of its correctness. Daniel Schreber1
It remains for the future to decide whether there is more delusion in my
theory than I should like to admit, or whether there is more truth in
Schreber's delusion than other people are yet prepared to believe.
Sigmund Freud2 In the first chapter of this book I described how Emil
Kraepelin's early career was influenced by an unsatisfactory encounter
with Professor Paul Flechsig, a respected psychiatrist who worked at the
University of Leipzig. Flechsig belonged to a generation of doctors who
devoted more of their time to anatomical studies than to developing
their clinical acumen. After they fell out, Kraepelin sought a new
mentor, and thereby came under the influence of Wilhelm Wundt. The rest,
as they say, is history. Flechsig's contribution to the evolution of his
discipline was not entirely negative. More at home with a microscope
than with fellow human beings, he carried out important research on the
localization of brain functions, helping to define the projection and
association areas in the cerebral cortex.3 However, he is rarely
remembered for these efforts, or for his argument with Kraepelin.
Instead he is most often remembered for his role in one of the most
curious cases in the history of his calling. Judge Daniel Paul Schreber
experienced his first nervous breakdown in 1884, after failing to gain
election to the Reichstag. He was 42 at the time. Very little is known
about this episode, but he was treated by Flechsig and,

after six months, recovered enough to resume a normal life. Eight years
later he suffered a second breakdown, which was more enduring. He had
just been appointed President of the Supreme Court of Saxony. One night
he found himself wondering what it would be like to be a woman
experiencing sexual intercourse. Several days later, he developed the
first of an expanding set of delusional ideas. His subsequent psychosis
lasted nine years, during which time he wrote his Memoirs of my Nervous
Illness,4 a book that was to make him one of the most frequently
discussed patients in medical history.5 The ideas that Schreber
described in his autobiography defy easy summary, but began with
hypochondriacal delusions, for example that his brain was softening,
that he was decomposing and suffering from plague. These beliefs rapidly
progressed to the conviction that Flechsig was transforming him into a
woman in order to sexually abuse him. Later they evolved into a complex
theological system, in which 'rays' from God, attracted by the highly
excited nerves in Schreber's mind, would, he believed bring about a
series of 'miracles' that would eventually feminize his body and induce
a state of 'voluptuousness'. This process, he believed, would culminate
in a state of heavenly bliss whereupon he would be reconciled with the
Almighty. Examples of these imaginary events included the 'miracles of
heat and cold' during which Schreber believed that blood was being
forced to different parts of his body, and 'the head-compressing
machine' into which Schreber believed his head was being forced by
'little devils'. Memoirs of my Nervous Illness attracted the attention
of the father of psychoanalysis, who wrote a speculative analysis of
Schreber's delusions, thus cementing the judge's reputation with future
generations of researchers. Undeterred by the fact that he had never met
Schreber, his dissection of the case is vintage Freud.6 Readingit today,
it is impossible not to be impressed by the skill with which he
marshalled various strands of evidence, until they pointed towards a
conclusion that, in the cold light of day, seems quite implausible. In
brief, Freud maintained that Schreber harboured homosexual feelings for
his father, a well-known physician, which he had displaced on to his
psychiatrist, Flechsig. According to Freud, in a further series of
defensive manoeuvres, Schreber's love for his psychiatrist was then
transformed into Flechsig's imagined hatred of Schreber, which
eventually generalized into God's bizarre manipulations of

Schreber's body. In this way, the judge was said to have avoided
awareness of impulses that otherwise would be disturbing to his
conscious mind. Later writers who were inspired by psychoanalysis agreed
with Freud that paranoid delusions have a defensive function, but took a
less exotic view of the underlying emotions that were being defended
against. Bleuler, for example, regarded all delusions as attempts to
attribute unacceptable ideas to external agencies but disputed that
these were necessarily homoerotic.7 Over half a century later, Kenneth
Colby, an American psychoanalyst who became a pioneer in the apparently
unrelated field of artificial intelligence, created a computer
simulation of paranoid thinking, which assumed that paranoid individuals
are highly sensitive to threats to their self-esteem, but protect
themselves from feelings of inadequacy by blaming disappointments on
other people.8 Although Schreber's beliefs would not be completely out
of place on a modern psychiatric ward, the delusions of today's patients
are usually less complex, and therefore more easily summarized.
Sometimes they straddle the fine line between tragedy and comedy as in
the case of a young man called Ian, who suffered a breakdown shortly
after leaving school and obtaining his first job. His most troubling
symptom was a series of extraordinary beliefs about his abilities and
achievements, on which he acted to the consternation of his
long-suffering parents. Maintaining that he was a millionaire, he
regularly telephoned a local bank to inquire about his savings, and
struck up quite a good relationship with a sympathetic bank clerk. (At
considerable cost to her employer, she would spend long periods on the
telephone, reassuring him that his imaginary millions had not been
stolen.) At other times he would ring military bases and inform them
that he was a general who was about to carry out an inspection. One day,
plausibly dressed in a well-cut suit, he left his ward and strayed on to
another, where he announced that he was a new consultant psychiatrist.
Searching for a job to match his perceived status, he awarded himself a
knighthood and applied for the position of chief executive of a hospital
in Wales. His requests for further information about suitable positions
often culminated in the delivery of bulky envelopes addressed to 'Sir
Ian...'.

Ian's delusions resisted his family's best efforts to challenge them.
Neither logical argument, nor their increasingly exasperated efforts to
point out the gap between his boasts and reality, seemed to bring about
any change in his behaviour. This kind of incorrigibility has been
considered a hallmark of delusions since clinicians first began to study
them. It receives its most severe challenge when patients with
incompatible delusions meet each other. One such encounter was described
by the French philosopher Voltaire who, in 1763, observed the meeting
between two inhabitants of a madhouse, one believing that he was
'incorporated with Jesus Christ', the other believing that he was 'the
eternal father'. The second of the patients was sufficiently shocked by
the experience to recover his sanity temporarily. However, a less
positive outcome was achieved in the only modern experiment of this
sort, published in 1964 by Milton Rokeach. A social psychologist based
at the University of Michigan, Rokeach was interested in the causes of
dogmatism, and decided that the nearby state psychiatric hospital at
Ypsilanti provided a wonderful opportunity to study rigidly held
beliefs. Discovering that three of the patients at the hospital believed
that they were Christ, he arranged for them to live together on a ward.
Confronted by others who also claimed to be Jesus, two clung to their
delusional identities. The third accepted the claims of his companions,
but began to entertain a series of new beliefs that were just as
bizarre, at one point claiming that he was a psychiatrist who was
married to God. All three expressed sympathy towards the other two,
apparently convinced that they were mad.9

Apparently not Beyond Belief Although delusions vary, they tend to
encompass a small number of themes. The most common type is persecutory
or paranoid,\* in which the individual feels himself the victim of some
kind of malevolent plot. In a study of patients who had recently been
admitted to hospital in Denmark, it was found that 42 per cent of those
with delusions had beliefs of this sort.10 The imaginary persecutors are
sometimes people known to the patient, but

more often are institutions such as government bodies or criminal gangs,
or ethnic, religious or ideological groups such as Catholics, communists
or Jews. A patient I once saw had become psychotic after travelling to
Australia, and had been deported back to Britain and hospitalized. He
believed that he was the object of a conspiracy conducted by the British
Home Office and the Australian secret service. It was, of course, part
of the conspiracy that his psychiatrists should diagnose him as
suffering from schizophrenia. As I attempted to interview him one day,
he leaned forward and, whispering, asked me to admit that I knew about
the plot, assuring me that no one would be able to overhear our
conversation. British psychologists Peter Trower and Paul Chadwick have
argued that it is important to distinguish between those individuals who
believe that their persecution is unwarranted (said to be suffering from
'poor me' paranoia) and those individuals who believe that persecution
or anticipated persecution is richly deserved on account of some
terrible sin they have committed (said to be suffering from 'bad me'
paranoia).11 Whether this distinction will prove to be useful remains to
be seen; in Kraepelin's own classification, delusions of sin were listed
separately from persecutory delusions, and it may be better to think of
'bad me' paranoia as belonging to a general category of depressive
delusions in which the individual is tormented by extremely negative
self-evaluations. Certainly, delusions of guilt or badness are common in
patients diagnosed as suffering from psychotic depression, who often
believe that others share the negative opinions they hold about
themselves.12 Grandiose delusions, such as those expressed by Ian and
the three Christs, embrace four main themes: beliefs that the individual
has special powers, is wealthy, has some kind of special mission, or has
some type of special identity.13 Often they occur with persecutory
delusions. Another of my patients, who lived in very poor circumstances,
asserted that he was the illegitimate heir to a fortune (special
identity), had invented the helicopter and the pop-up toaster (special
powers), and that the huge royalties from these achievements (wealth)
had been stolen by the staff at the hospital he was reluctantly
attending (persecution). My attempts to offer him help were

confounded by his demands that I call in the police so that these crimes
could be investigated. Delusions of reference, in which innocuous events
are held to have some special significance for the patient, are commonly
observed but have been much less studied by psychologists and
psychiatrists.14 (Peter Chadwick, a psychologist who has suffered from a
psychotic illness, has written a moving account of a delusional episode,
which began when a radio programme he was listening to seemed to be
directed at him.)15 Somatic or hypochondriacal delusions, in which the
patient entertains bizarre beliefs about his body, are probably
under-recorded, either because they are eclipsed by other symptoms, or
because they are assumed to be complaints about side effects of
medication. In a survey of 550 psychotic patients, psychiatrists Ian
McGilchrist and John Cutting recorded this kind of belief in 55 per cent
of those questioned, which would make them even more common than
persecutory delusions. McGilchrist and Cutting have argued that somatic
delusions can be subdivided into two main categories: elaborated beliefs
about the body that have apparently been inferred from sensations, and
beliefs that seem to involve the misinterpretation of sensory
experiences.16 Schreber's belief that he was changing sex presumably
belongs to the first class, of 'cognitive' somatic delusions, whereas
patients' assertions that they are burning, being sexually interfered
with, or are blocked and filling with fluid would belong to the second,
'perceptual' category. Much less common delusional themes include
delusional parasitosis (in which the patient believes that he is
infested by insects crawling under his skin),17 dismorphobia (the belief
that the individual is disfigured or ugly despite being completely
normal in appearance), erotomania (in which the patient believes that
she is secretly loved by someone who is in fact indifferent, usually a
person who is famous or holds a position of authority)18 and delusional
jealousy (in which a loved one is irrationally believed to be
unfaithful).19 Some authors have cited this last type of delusion as
evidence that a belief does not have to be false in order to qualify as
delusional: partners often get so fed up with the restrictions

placed upon them by their irrationally jealous spouses that they
eventually run off with somebody else.20 A few rare but more colourful
delusional systems have received more attention from researchers, some
of whom have been rewarded by having obscure disorders named after them.
An example is the Cotard syndrome, first described by the French
psychiatrist Jules Cotard in 1882, following an encounter with a
43-year-old female patient who believed that she had 'no brains, chests
or entrails and was just skin and bone', that 'neither God nor the Devil
existed' and that she was 'eternal and would live forever' and therefore
did not need to eat.21 After Cotard's death, it was widely believed that
he had identified a peculiar form of depression in which nihilistic
delusions are the prominent symptom. However, a recent survey of 100
cases of Cotard syndrome reported in the literature found that there was
considerable variation in the symptoms recorded, and that many of the
patients met the criteria for conventional diagnoses such as depression,
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.22 Another unusual disorder is the
Capgras syndrome, named after another French doctor, Joseph Capgras, who
first described the delusion that a loved one had been replaced by an
impostor, robot or doppelgänger.23 This last type of belief belongs to a
small family of delusional ideas in which misidentifications are the
central theme. Other members of the family include the Frégoli delusion
(named after a famous Italian impersonator of the 1920s), in which the
individual believes that persecutors have disguised themselves as
familiar people,24 and the delusion of inanimate doubles,25 in which
emotionally significant personal items are believed to have been
maliciously replaced by poor copies. The reader will recall that Karl
Jaspers held all truly delusional beliefs to be ununderstandable, by
which he meant that they are meaningless and unconnected to the
individual's personality or experience. I have already criticized this
account for being far too subjective -- the understandability of
delusions seems to depend, to some extent, on the effort made to
understand them. Indeed, when such efforts are made, it is apparent that
the most common delusional themes observed in clinical practice,
including most of

those that I have just described, reflect patients' concerns about their
position in the social universe. This much was recognized by Kurt
Schneider, who argued that in all cases of delusion, 'Abnormal
significance tends mostly towards self-reference and is almost always of
a special kind: it is momentous, urgent, somehow filled with personal
significance...'26 This intuition has been supported by research
conducted by Philippa Garety and her colleagues at the Institute of
Psychiatry in London. They used a simple five-way classification to
record the delusional beliefs of 55 patients. Consistent with the
research in Denmark I mentioned earlier (p. 297), the most common type
of delusion observed was persecutory (35 per cent) followed by abnormal
negative beliefs about the self (32 per cent), and abnormal positive
beliefs about the self (26 per cent). Less common were negative
delusions about the world (only three patients) and positive delusions
about the world (only one patient).27 Interestingly, this finding seems
to have some cross-cultural validity. In a comparison of the delusions
of psychiatric inpatients from Europe, the Caribbean, India, Africa, the
Middle East and the Far East, persecutory delusions were the most common
in all but one region, the exception being the Far East, where sexual
delusions were more often reported.28 Nevertheless, cultural, religious
and socio-economic factors obviously influence the precise nature of the
threat perceived by paranoid patients. For example, middle- and
upper-class Egyptian patients typically report persecutory delusions
that have scientific or secular themes, whereas the delusions of poorer
patients often involve religious institutions.29 Paranoid delusions in
Korean patients tend to reflect fears of rape, whereas fears of vampires
and poisoning are more common in Chinese patients.30 There is also
evidence that the content of delusions has changed over time. In the
United States during the 1930s (a period of material deprivation and
personal powerlessness), delusions of wealth and special powers were
common, whereas delusions about threats of violence have been more
common in recent decades.31

Defining delusions

Most modern definitions of delusions emphasize characteristics other
than ununderstandability, but none distinguishes between delusional and
ordinary beliefs in a manner that is entirely satisfactory. In DSM-IV a
delusion is defined as: A false personal belief based on incorrect
inference about external reality and firmly sustained in spite of what
almost everyone else believes and in spite of what usually constitutes
incontrovertible and obvious proof or evidence to the contrary.32 As
some sceptics have pointed out, this definition begs questions about
what we mean by 'incorrect inference', 'external reality' and
'incontrovertible and obvious proof'.33 Perhaps conscious of this
limitation, the authors of DSM-IV go on to add, '\[It\] is not
ordinarily accepted by other members of the person's culture or
subculture', thereby opening up the possibility that a belief regarded
as delusional in one culture might be considered perfectly rational in
another. Of course, much of the difficulty in defining delusions can be
resolved if we accept that they exist on a continuum with ordinary
beliefs and attitudes. In Chapter 5, we have already considered evidence
that seems to support this idea. I think most readers will be able to
think of acquaintances whose thoughts seem drawn to the same concerns
that preoccupy psychiatric patients (the academic who suspects that
rivals are stealing her ideas, the New Age enthusiast who sees special
significance in coincidences, the unhappy young man who believes that a
beautiful but indifferent woman will eventually admit to loving him).
Detailed studies have shown that delusional beliefs, like ordinary
beliefs and attitudes, vary across a number of dimensions, such as their
bizarreness, the conviction with which they are held, the extent to
which the patient is preoccupied by them, and the extent to which they
cause distress.34 It is true, as psychologist Martin Harrow and his
colleagues in Chicago have documented in carefully conducted long-term
investigations, that delusions sometimes persist apparently unchanged
for many years.35 However, as Milton Rokeach recognized when conducting
his 'three Christs' experiment

at Ypsilanti Hospital, the same might be said of any beliefs that are
important to an individual's identity, such as, for example, political
and religious convictions. In fact, over short periods of time, the
conviction with which delusions are held may fluctuate, so that beliefs
that are held to be absolutely true on one day may be described as only
possibly true on the next.36 Unfortunately, clinicians and researchers
schooled in the biomedical approach to psychiatry have often assumed
that delusions and ordinary beliefs are completely different. As
recently as 1991, for example, the Cambridge psychiatrist German Berrios
asserted that delusions are not beliefs at all, but 'empty speech acts,
whose informational content refers to neither world nor self'.37
Consequently, throughout most of the twentieth century, delusions were
generally ignored by experimental psychologists. My own work on this
topic began a few years after I had qualified as a clinical
psychologist, by which time I had published several studies of auditory
hallucinations, and was keen to see whether my general approach could be
brought to bear on other symptoms. Delusions seemed an obvious
candidate, and I was amazed to discover the extent to which researchers
had neglected them. Fortunately, I had just moved from a National Health
Service post to a junior lectureship at the University of Liverpool,
which ran a small fund for junior staff who wished to embark on new
lines of research. My application was written in a couple of hours,
without much optimism, was brief and could be summarized in two
sentences: 'No one has done much research on delusions. Give me some
money and I'll do some.' To my amazement, they did. The funds provided
to me by the University allowed me to employ a research assistant for
six months. Sue Kaney, a recent graduate, was recruited and proved to
have a knack for persuading suitable patients to cooperate. The initial
studies that we completed together led to further experiments, which
have kept me busy ever since. As psychologists in other universities had
also spotted the dearth of research on delusions, by the late 1990s
there had emerged a small cottage industry of investigators struggling
to explain why psychotic patients hold unusual beliefs.

The Psychotic as Scientist Faced with the choice between changing one's
mind and proving that there is no need to do so, almost everyone gets
busy on the proof. John Kenneth Galbraith38 Most people probably regard
delusional and scientific thinking as completely incompatible phenomena.
After all, it is easy for scientific researchers to assume that there is
something unique or special about the systematic way in which we
approach our task. According to this orthodox view, the scientific
approach involves the careful and dispassionate collection and
evaluation of evidence, common sense reasoning is open to all sorts of
self-interested biases, fuzzy thinking and naked prejudices, and
delusional reasoning exemplifies these biases in excess. Of course, it
is not that simple. The inhabitants of this planet cannot easily be
divided into different species on the basis of their scientific skills,
any more than they can be easily divided into the mad and sane. On the
one hand, studies of what scientists actually do (as opposed to what
undergraduate textbooks say that they do) have shown that research is
far from an emotionless activity. In pursuit of the recognition of their
peers, famous scientists have deviated from prescribed methods so
frequently that some historians have suggested that the history of
science should be Xrated.39 At the same time, sociologists have observed
that the language employed by modern scientists, when talking freely
about their work, often reveals intense rivalries between different
research groups, and portrays the scientific process as an epic struggle
in which heroes and villains battle for high ground.40 At moments when
the scientific ego is especially threatened, the dividing line between
the practice of science and paranoid thinking becomes almost
undetectable. On opening the letter from a journal that tells us that
the editor has on this occasion declined to accept our manuscript for
publication, we scan the accompanying anonymous referees' reports to see
if we can work out who to blame. ('It must be John Doe! He's always been
envious of my work!')

On the other hand, ordinary people sometimes approach problems in their
lives in ways that are no less systematic than the strategies of trained
researchers, as highlighted in the following quotation from the clinical
psychologist George Kelly: One of my tasks in the 1930s was to direct
graduate studies leading to the Masters Degree. A typical afternoon
might find me talking to a graduate student at one o'clock, doing all
those familiar things that thesis directors have to do -- encouraging
the student to pin-point the issues, to observe, to become intimate with
the problem, to form hypotheses either inductively or deductively, to
make some preliminary test runs, to control his experiments so he will
know what led to what, to generalize cautiously and to revise his
thinking in the light of experience. At two o'clock I might have an
interview with a client. During this interview, I would not be taking
the role of the scientist but rather helping the distressed person to
sort out some solutions to his life's problems. So what would I do? Why,
I would try to get him to pin-point the issues, to observe, to become
intimate with the problem, to form hypotheses, to make test runs, to
relate outcomes to anticipations, to control his ventures so that he
knows what led to what, to generalize cautiously and to revise his dogma
in the light of experience.41 When exploring these parallels, a good
starting point would be a simple framework for understanding how beliefs
and attitudes are formed. Figure 12.1 shows a simple 'heuristic' model I
devised in order to guide my own research when I obtained my small
priming grant.42 (I literally drew it up on the back of an envelope one
day.) According to this model, beliefs about the world are not plucked
out of the blue but are based on events (data). The events have to be
perceived and attended to (those which we fail to notice cannot
influence our thinking). Once we have noticed them, we can make
inferences about their importance and meaning and this leads to beliefs
about the world. Finally we may seek further information to either
support or refute our beliefs, and so the cycle is repeated.

(The philosopher of science Sir Karl Popper argued that data that refute
a hypothesis are nearly always more informative than data that appear to
support it.43 This is because negative evidence can be decisive whereas
positive evidence may support several alternative hypotheses. Popper
therefore suggested that scientists should vigorously seek evidence that
disconfirms their pet theories in the hope that there will be no such
evidence. Ordinary people, however, usually seek Figure 12.1 A simple
heuristic model of the processes involved in acquiring and maintaining a
belief (from R. P. Bentall (ed.) (1990) Reconstructing Schizophrenia.
London: Routledge, pp. 23--60).

evidence that favours their ideas, a phenomenon known to psychologists
as the confirmation bias.44 Interestingly, some studies have shown this
bias in professional scientists, although whether it has an adverse
affect on their work remains a matter of debate.)45 It is probably worth
noting that the model shown in Figure 12.1, although superficially
different from the model of depression I developed in Chapter 10, is
really quite similar to it (after all, an attribution could be described
as a type of inference). Of course, it is not a model of delusions per
se. It is a very crude account of the way in which beliefs and attitudes
are acquired by scientists, ordinary people and psychiatric patients.
However, by considering each part of this account in turn, we can begin
to explore how different factors may lead an individual to develop
beliefs that appear strange or unusual to other people.

The Nugget of Truth in Paranoia

When accused by Henry Kissinger of being paranoid about the Arabs, Golda
Meir, the Israeli prime minister, retorted that 'Even paranoids have
enemies.'46 Of course, if patients' accounts of their lives were
completely realistic, it would be wrong to regard them as delusional at
all. In fact, it seems that clinicians sometimes do mistake patients'
well-founded but unusual fears for delusions. A group of psychiatrists
working on Long Island, USA, reported their attempts to help a
distressed woman who had been brought into their clinic by friends. The
woman said that 'something horrible' would happen to her if she did not
leave the Islandby the end of the day. Although the psychiatrists
diagnosed her as suffering from a psychotic illness, she was later able
to record a series of unpleasant phone calls, thereby confirming that
her life had been threatened by an acquaintance.47 It is possible that
delusional beliefs, even if clearly unrealistic, contain a nugget of
truth that is distorted by the delusional process. Evidence in favour of
this hypothesis has come to light from modern research into the case of
Daniel Schreber. Following up Freud's insight that Schreber's delusions
had something to do with his father, American psychoanalyst William
Niederland investigated the judge's family.48 Schreber's father, it
transpired, was a well-known physician and educationalist who had
unusual views about childrearing, which he proselytized in books that
were widely read in his day. Believing that children should learn to
hold rigid postures when sitting, walking or even sleeping, he invented
a series of braces to force them to adopt the desired positions. For
example, one brace was designed to make children sit upright while
eating. Bolted to the table in front of the child, it consisted of an
iron bar that extended up to the child's face, which it gripped by means
of a leather strap under the chin. Although subsequent research by the
historian Zvi Lothane49 has suggesteda more positive view of the
Schreber family than that painted by Niederland, it seems likely that
the younger Schreber spent much of his childhood restrained by his
father's devices. Moreover, the contents of the bizarre ideas he
developed later in his life seem to reflect these experiences. For
example, a delusion about a 'chest compression miracle' seemed to relate
to his father's practice of securing the child to his bed by means of a

specially designed strap. Similarly, the miracle of the 'head
compressing machine' seems much more understandable when we known that
Schreber's father invented a kopfhalter (head-holder, consisting of a
strap, with one end clamped to the child's hair and the other to his
underwear, so his hair was pulled if he did not hold his head straight)
and a chin band (a helmetlike device designed to ensure proper growth of
the jaw and teeth, see Figure 12.2). Of course, it is difficult to gauge
the extent to which real experiences colour most delusions, because it
is hard to verify deluded patients' accounts of their lives. In an
attempt to circumvent this problem, University of Illinois sociologists
John Mirowsky and Catherine Ross studied persecutory beliefs (which they
assessed by a brief interview) Figure 12.2 Schreber's chin band
(reprinted from M. Schatzman (1973), Soul Murder: Persecution in the
Family. London: Penguin Books).

in a survey of 500 randomly selected residents of El Paso, Texas, and
Juarez in Mexico. As sociologists, Mirowsky and Ross were interested in
objective circumstances that would encourage feelings of external
control and mistrust, which, they believed, would lead to paranoid
thinking. Such circumstances might include experiences of victimization
and powerlessness which, previous research had shown, are very common in
people of low socio-economic status who lack educational opportunities.

Mirowsky and Ross were able to show that, in their sample, persecutory
beliefs, beliefs about external control, and mistrust were connected to
socioeconomic status and educational attainment in roughly the manner
they had expected.50 Although the sceptical reader might be forgiven for
wondering whether Mirowsky and Ross's findings can be generalized to
psychiatric patients, two further lines of evidence support this
possibility. The first concerns the role of stressful experiences in
psychosis. British sociologist Tirril Harris studied patients living in
the community and found a high rate of events that she described as
'intrusive' in the weeks preceding psychotic and especially paranoid
relapses.51 These kinds of events, by Harris's definition, involve
someone -- not a close relative -- imposing demands on the patient.
Examples include threats from landlords, police inquiries, burglaries
and unwanted sexual propositions. Harris's finding was replicated in
some but not all of the centres participating in the WHO study of the
Determinants of Outcome of Severe Mental Disorders.52 More recently,
Thomas Fuchs of the University of Heidelberg has collected biographical
data from elderly patients diagnosed as suffering from late paraphrenia
(a term sometimes used to describe paranoid-like psychotic illnesses
which begin late in life) and depression, finding evidence of a higher
frequency of discriminating, humiliating and threatening experiences in
the paranoid group.53 The second relevant source of evidence concerns
the high rate of psychotic, and especially paranoid, illness seen in
Afro-Caribbean people living in Britain,54 which I discussed in Chapter
6. Of course, immigrants living in a racially intolerant society are
especially likely to have experiences of victimization and powerlessness
of the kind described by Mirowsky and Ross. The evidence that this kind
of stress is really responsible for the high rates of psychosis observed
in British AfroCaribbeans will be discussed in detail in a later
chapter. For the moment, we can merely note that the elevated risk of
psychosis experienced by this particular group can certainly be
interpreted as consistent with the 'nugget of truth' hypothesis.

My own clinical experience is that delusional ideas rarely lack a nugget
of truth. No matter how bizarre the ideas expressed by patients, it is
usually possible to identify events in their lives that have contributed
to their content. Of course, this observation does not imply that
delusions are rational. (Very few people really are victims of
government plots.) The nugget of truth is usually distorted in some way,
and the challenge to psychologists is to discover how this happens.

Seeing is Believing The next part of our back-of-an-envelope model
concerns perceptual and attentional processes. The idea that delusions
might be the product of rational attempts to make sense of anomalous
perceptions was considered by Kraepelin, but later elaborated in detail
by Harvard psychologist Brendan Maher. Maher's theory consists of two
separable hypotheses. The first, which we will consider here, is that
delusions are always a reaction to some kind of unusual perception. The
second, which we will consider later, is that delusions are never the
product of abnormal reasoning. Clearly the second hypothesis does not
follow inevitably from the first, although Maher sometimes seems to
suggest that it does.55 Maher has pointed to case study evidence that
appears to support the first part of his theory.56 For example, he has
interpreted Schreber's delusions as attempts to explain unusual bodily
sensations. (It seems likely that many somatic delusions develop in this
way.) In clinical practice, it is not unusual to encounter patients
whose delusions seem to be interpretations of other types of peculiar
experiences. An unpleasant auditory hallucination, for instance, may be
attributed to a malevolent spirit or to the Devil. Most of the research
on Maher's theory has focused on the effects of perceptual deficits.
Following clinical observations of an apparent association between the
slow onset of deafness in later life and paranoia, for example, it was
suggested that elderly patients' failure to recognize that they have
hearing difficulties might cause them to be mistrustful and suspicious
of others (if you notice that your friends have begun to speak in

whispers in your presence you might incorrectly infer that they are
talking about you).57 In an attempt to test this hypothesis,
psychologist Philip Zimbardo and his colleagues at Stanford University
in California used hypnosis to induce a temporary state of deafness in
hypnotically susceptible students, allowing some to remain aware that
they had been hypnotized. Those who were unaware of the source of their
deafness, but not those who knew that they had been hypnotized, showed
an increase in paranoid ideas, as indicated by their responses on
various questionnaires, and their attitudes towards others who were
present during the experiment.58 Unfortunately, these findings are
difficult to interpret because it is not clear how well hypnotic
deafness simulates real hearing loss. Moreover, recent, more carefully
conducted studies have failed to show the correlation between deafness
and paranoid symptoms reported by earlier researchers.59 Clearer
evidence in favour of the anomalous perception model exists for the
Capgras delusion. The case of Madame M, described by Joseph Capgras and
J. Reboul-Lachaux (and recently translated into English), is worth
considering in some detail because it illustrates the complexity of the
condition.60 Mme M's illness began with the conviction that she was a
member of the French aristocracy and had been dispossessed of her
inheritance, having been replaced by an impostor. This grandiose
delusion was transformed into a series of delusional misidentifications
after the death of her twin sons and the deterioration of her marriage.
Looking into the grave as a small coffin descended into the earth, she
believed that she was witnessing the burial of a young boy who was not
her own. Later, she came to believe that an impostor had been
substituted for her husband and, furthermore, that the impostor had been
replaced by further impostors on no less than eighty occasions. During
the First World War, Mme M believed that tunnels beneath Paris contained
thousands of people who had been abducted and replaced by substitutes,
and that the aircraft that flew overhead were attempting to drive people
below so that they would suffer a similar fate. It is not difficult to
see why Capgras offered a psychoanalytical account of Mme M's illness.
Many later psychologists and psychiatrists have similarly assumed that
the delusion results from some kind of ambivalence towards the person
who is believed to have been replaced.61

Haydn Ellis, a neuropsychologist at the University of Wales in Cardiff,
has recently pointed to several reasons for doubting the psychodynamic
account of the Capgras delusion.62 The theory implies that the delusion
should exclusively concern individuals who have a close relationship
with the patient, whereas this is not invariably the case. Also, Capgras
patients usually express no fears about the genuineness of voices heard
over the telephone, suggesting that some difficulty in processing visual
information is a crucial element of the disorder. Most importantly of
all, about one third of Capgras patients are known to have suffered from
some kind of brain damage that predates the appearance of their
delusion. With Andy Young, a psychologist at the University of York,
Ellis has argued that the Capgras syndrome is caused by damage to brain
systems responsible for recognizing faces.63 When we encounter someone
who is familiar to us, we normally experience a brief emotional
response. This reaction, which is experienced as the feeling of
familiarity, has considerable survival value, as it tells us whether we
are meeting a friend or a foe. Not surprisingly, in most people it
occurs automatically and very efficiently. (We may recognize a person as
familiar after meeting him or her just once, many years ago.) In
comparison, the skill of recalling specific information about a person,
for example their name and occupation, is much less reliable. For this
reason, most of us have had the embarrassing experience of meeting
people who seem familiar to us without our being able to remember
precisely who they are. These two types of recognition seem to involve
different pathways in the brain.64 A pathway through the visual cortex
to the limbic system is involved in the specific identification of
individuals. A second pathway, which passes through the inferior
parietal lobe, appears to be responsible for the feeling of familiarity.
Capgras patients show subtle deficits when they are tested for their
ability to recognize faces, indicating that they do not always gain a
sense of familiarity on encountering people they know well, so that the
second pathway is disrupted. The delusion seems to be an attempt to
explain this experience.

Ellis and Young predicted that Capgras patients would show no emotional
response when meeting people well known to them. Normally, when we greet
someone familiar, our emotional reaction (however slight) results in a
slight increase in sweat, leading to a transient change in the
electrical conductivity of our skin (the electrodermal response) which
can easily be detected from electrodes placed on the back of the hand.
Ellis, Young and their colleagues tested five Capgras patients and found
this response to be absent, just as they had predicted.65 It is not
clear whether an anomalous face recognition experience on its own is
enough to create a Capgras delusion. Some brain-damaged patients who
suffer from impairment in their ability to recognize faces retain
insight into their difficulties, know that they have a perceptual
problem, and do not develop bizarre explanations of their experiences.
On the other hand, as Andy Young points out, patients like Mme M very
often entertain grandiose or paranoid ideas, indicating that some kind
psychological disturbance may also be required for a full-blown Capgras
delusion to develop.66 The evidence we have considered so far concerns
the impact of perceptual deficits on delusional thinking. An interesting
but nearly overlooked possibility is that delusions might arise as a
consequence of perceptual skills that are over-developed. This
possibility was tested in a strange experiment reported in 1978 by
Canadian psychologist Lucrezia LaRusso. LaRusso persuaded a group of
normal volunteers to allow her to film their facial expressions as she
gave them brief electric shocks. She also filmed them as they pretended
to receive the shocks. Showing the films to paranoid patients and to a
second group of normal volunteers, she found that the paranoid patients
were better able to tell the differences between the genuine emotional
responses and the pretend responses.67 Similar findings have recently
been reported by Penelope Davis and Melissa Gibson of Griffith
University in Australia, who studied schizophrenia patients' ability to
recognize genuine and posed facial expressions. While most of their
patients were poor at recognizing posed expressions, their paranoid
patients were better at recognizing genuine expressions of surprise and
negative emotion than ordinary people.68 These

observations raise the intriguing possibility that over-sensitivity to
other people's disingenuous communications might provoke paranoid
thinking. It is difficult to determine the extent to which the anomalous
perception theory applies to delusions in general. One complication is
that what counts as an anomalous experience may vary from person to
person. Three American psychologists, William Johnson, James Ross and
Marie Mastria of the University of Mississippi Medical Center, reported
an extraordinary case study that illustrates this problem. Their patient
complained that he was being sexually molested at night by 'warm forms'.
A detailed history revealed that, from the age of 12, he had had
numerous sexual partners and had never learned to masturbate. The warm
forms appeared during a long period of sexual abstinence, occasioned by
his contracting of a venereal disease. During this period, he
experienced spontaneous episodes of sexual arousal at night-time, which
seemed anomalous to him, but which would have seemed quite normal to
anyone with a less colourful history. Because, previously, sexual
arousal had always occurred in the presence of a partner, the patient
had concluded that an invisible sexual partner (a warm form) was
responsible for these experiences. The treatment, which was brief and
successful, is left to the imagination of the reader.69 There have been
few systematic attempts to address the extent to which delusions are
products of anomalous experiences. In one study, Loren and Jean Chapman
of the University of Wisconsin carefully interviewed students who scored
very high on their questionnaire measures of schizotypy. They found that
some expressed delusional ideas but reported no anomalous experiences,
and that others reported anomalous experiences in the absence of
delusional ideas. In only a few cases did there appear to be an obvious
causal connection between anomalous experiences and unusual beliefs and,
even in these, the steps leading from the anomalous experience to the
delusion were often judged not to be 'reasonable'.70 In a more recent
three-year prospective study of eighty children who heard voices, Sondra
Escher, Marius Romme and their colleagues found that only 9 per cent
developed delusions during the follow-up period.71

On this evidence, at least, Maher's theory probably holds for only a
minority of patients.

The role of attention Despite the limited evidence for Maher's theory,
it is possible that perceptual and especially attentional processes play
a role in maintaining delusional ideas, once they have been formed. Our
brains constantly scan the environment for information that is relevant
to us and ignore information that is not. In the late 1960s, two
American psychologists, Leonard Ullmann and Leonard Krasner, suggested
that this process would lead deluded patients to notice selectively
evidence that supported their beliefs.72 Sue Kaney and I used the
emotional Stroop technique to investigate this hypothesis. (Recall that,
in this type of test, described in detail in the last chapter
(pp. 281--2), participants are required to look at words written in
different ink colours and name the colours while ignoring the words. The
difficulty they have in doing this indicates the extent to which they
are selectively attending to the words.) We used four types of stimuli:
paranoiarelated words (for example, 'deceit', 'follow'),
depression-related words (for example, 'defeat', 'failure'), neutral
words (for example, 'bud', 'recipe') and meaningless strings of letters.
The words and letter-strings were in five different ink colours and were
printed on cards, five words to a line, in random order. As we had
expected, paranoid patients took much longer to colour-name the
paranoia-related words than the neutral words, indicating that the
meaning of the words was grabbing their attention and interfering with
their ability to name the ink colours. This effect was not found for a
group of ordinary people or for a control group of depressed patients.73
Perhaps this finding should be regarded as unremarkable. As we have
already seen, people will show a Stroop effect for words relating to any
topic that causes them concern.74 Deluded patients are no exception to
this rule.

In an interesting variant of this experiment, Kate Leafhead, Andy Young
and Krystyna Szulecka studied a woman who was suffering from the Cotard
delusion (she believed that she was dead). Their patient also suffered
from a Capgras delusion that her brother and mother were impostors. She
was tested on three occasions using words relating to death (for
example, 'coffin', 'dead'), depression-related words, words relating to
duplicates (for example, 'copy', 'double'), paranoia-related words,
anxiety-related words and emotionally neutral words (see Figure 12.3).
When very ill, on the first occasion that she was tested, the woman was
slow to colour-name both the death-related and the duplicate-related
words. On a second occasion, when she was beginning to improve, only the
duplicate-related words caused her difficulty. By the third test, when
she was nearly recovered, colour-naming was not impaired for any of the
words.75 If people attend excessively to information relating to their
delusions they should also recall this kind of information particularly
easily. In several studies, Sue Kaney and I found that this was indeed
the case. For example, after listening to a series of stories describing
threatening and nonthreatening social interactions, paranoid patients
specifically recalled the threatening elements from the stories, but
tended not to remember emotionally neutral elements.76 Interestingly,
deluded patients do not seem to spend excessive time looking at stimuli
relating to their delusions. Recently, Mary Phillips and Tony David at
the Institute of Psychiatry in London studied the eye movements of
patients as they looked at various pictures, some of which showed people
making threatening gestures. Using sophisticated equipment to track the
direction of gaze, they measured the amount of time spent visually
scanning different parts of the pictures. Patients with paranoid
delusions, compared with patients with other symptoms, spent less time
looking at the threatening parts. Quick to identify stimuli in their
environment that could be threatening, it seems they move rapidly to
checking whether threats can be found elsewhere.77 Figure 12.3 Extent to
which a patient suffering both a Cotard delusion and a Capgras delusion
had difficulty colour-naming death-related words, depression-related
words, duplicate-related words, paranoia-related words and
anxiety-related words when tested while ill (Test 1) and during recovery

(Tests 2 and 3). Scores indicate the extent to which colour-naming for
these words is slowed in comparison with colour-naming neutral words.
From Leafhead, Young and Szulecka (1996).

What Happens in the Inference Box? The third component of the
back-of-an-envelope model concerns the process of drawing inferences
from observations. Two lines of research have focused on this process in
deluded patients. One was initiated by British psychologist Chris
Frith,78 and the other (which we will come to shortly) was started by
myself.

Inferences about other minds Frith has argued that a deficit in theory
of mind (ToM; the ability to infer mental states in others, see Chapter
8), which is less severe than that found in autistic patients, and which
is only present during episodes of psychotic illness, could lead to
paranoid symptoms. According to this theory, paranoid patients suddenly
discover that they have lost the ability to understand the thoughts and
feelings of other people, and then explain this experience by assuming
that other people are trying to hide their intentions. Together with

fellow psychologist Rhiannon Corcoran, Frith has used a number of
strategies to test this theory. One approach has involved testing the
ability of patients to comprehend the beliefs and actions of people
portrayed in simple stories.79 For example, consider the following tale:
Burglar Bill has just robbed a bank and is running away from the police
when he meets his brother Bob. Bill says to Bob, 'Don't let the police
find me. Don't let them find me!' Then he runs off and hides in the
churchyard. The police have looked everywhere for Bill except the
churchyard and the park. When they come across Bob they were going to
ask him: 'Where is Bill? Is he in the park or the churchyard?' But the
police recognize Bob and they realize that he will try to save his
brother. They expect him to lie and wherever he tells them, they will go
and look in the other place. But Bob, who is very clever, and does want
to save his brother, knows that the police don't trust him.\* The person
being tested is asked 'Where is Bill really hiding?' to ensure that he
can remember the story. If he answers correctly, he is then asked:
'Where will Bob tell the police to look for Bill -- in the churchyard or
in the park? Why?' Answering this second question requires the ability
to make complex inferences about Bob's beliefs and intentions. Frith and
Corcoran found that two groups of schizophrenia patients experience
problems with questions of this sort: paranoid patients and patients
with mainly negative symptoms. In the latter group, ToM performance
correlated strongly with IQ, suggesting that their poor performance was
probably caused by general cognitive deficits. In the paranoid patients,
however, poor performance on the ToM questions seemed to be unrelated to
IQ. Interestingly, as Frith had predicted, recovered paranoid patients
performed normally in these studies, indicating that ToM deficits are
present only in episodes of illness. Further experiments conducted by
Frith and Corcoran involved other ingenious methods of assessing ToM
skills. For example, in one study they

investigated the ability of patients to recognize simple hints (as when
a husband in a hurry to leave for work glances at the ironing board and
laments to his wife that none of his shirts is ironed). In this study,
patients with persecutory delusions were poor at inferring intentions
from hints, but schizophrenia patients whose symptoms were in remission
performed the task as well as the ordinary people.80 Frith and
Corcoran's ideas sparked off a series of studies by other researchers.
Unfortunately, although these generally found that ToM skills are
impaired in currently ill psychotic patients, the evidence that this
kind of deficit is specifically associated with paranoid symptoms proved
to be unclear. In studies carried out in France, Yves Sarfati and his
colleagues have found strong associations only between ToM dysfunction
and thought disorder,81 while Robyn Langdon and Max Coltheart, working
in Australia, have found evidence of ToM problems in groups of patients
with negative symptoms but not in people with persecutory delusions.82
Using a series of ToM tests, Val Drury and others in Birmingham found
evidence of deficits in currently ill schizophrenia patients suffering
from multiple positive and negative symptoms, but when they compared
patients with persecutory delusions and those without they found no
difference.83 Some studies have even found that some paranoid patients
perform better on ToM tasks than other groups of schizophrenia
patients.84 Overall, then, the evidence pretty decisively shows that ToM
deficits are not specific to paranoia. Indeed, as one of my own
postgraduate students, Natalie Kerr, found that both bipolardepressed
patients and bipolar-manic patients performed poorly on ToM tasks,85 it
seems likely that this kind of disability is present in acutely ill
psychotic patients whatever their diagnosis. Despite this negative
evidence, I don't think we should give up on Chris Frith's theory.
Indeed, there is obviously something theory-of- mind-ish about
persecutory delusions, which inevitably involve mistaken assumptions
about the intentions of other people. It is as if the paranoid person
can make inferences about the beliefs and attitudes of other people but,
for some reason, reaches the wrong conclusions about what those beliefs
and attitudes are. I will return to this idea later.

Inferences about causes When I obtained my priming grant to study
delusions in the late 1980s, an immediate difficulty was my embarrassing
lack of hypotheses worth testing. After a few weeks thinking through
this problem, I hit on the strategy of measuring the same processes that
had been studied in depression, particularly attributions. After all, I
speculated vaguely, Abramson and Seligman's attributional model of
depression seemed to imply that dysphoric mood springs from some kind of
delusional interpretation of events. Moreover, it seemed obvious just
from listening to paranoid patients that many of their beliefs were, in
fact, unusual causal statements. This intuition was reinforced by an
almost trivial incident that occurred at about this time. One of my
patients, Gerald, arrived half an hour late for an appointment and, as
another patient was expected, I had to tell him that I would be unable
to see him. Embarrassed, Gerald explained that a malicious neighbour had
used supernatural powers to enter his mind and mess with his memory of
the appointment. This explanation appeared to have all the
characteristics of an external attribution, as the cause of Gerald's
lateness was attributed to an external agent over which he had no
control. Readers will recall that the attributional model of depression
was first tested by giving patients the Attributional Style
Questionnaire (ASQ), which asks the person completing it to think of
likely explanations for hypothetical positive and negative events (see
Table 10.1, p. 242). In one of our first studies of paranoid thinking,
Sue Kaney and I used this questionnaire to compare paranoid patients,
depressed patients and ordinary people.86 We found that paranoid
patients, like depressed patients, tended to make excessively global and
stable explanations for negative events. (In other words, when things
went wrong they tended to assume that the cause would affect all aspects
of Figure 12.4 Internality scores on the ASQ for paranoid, depressed and
normal participants (from Kaney and Bentall, 1989).

their lives and that they were powerless to change it.) However, we were
more intrigued by their scores on the internality dimension of the
questionnaire. Recall that this part of the scale measures whether the
perceived causes of events are internal (to do with the self) or
external (to do with other people or circumstances). Our findings are
shown in Figure 12.4. Replicating the results of previous investigators,
we found that depressed patients had lower internality scores for
hypothetical positive events than for negative events -- if something
went wrong they tended to blame themselves whereas, if something good
happened, they tended to assume that the cause was something to do with
other people or circumstances. Again, as observed by other researchers,
the ordinary people who served as controls tended to be more willing to
attribute positive than negative events to themselves. This self-serving
bias was markedly exaggerated in our paranoid patients, who appeared to
be experts at blaming themselves for positive events and at avoiding
blame for negative events. This observation has been repeated by other
investigators in Britain,87 Canada,88 Australia89 and even South
Korea.90 However, an abnormal attributional style is not found in all
deluded patients. In a study carried out in North Wales, Helen Sharp,
Chris Fear and David Healy tested patients who expressed a variety of
unusual beliefs. They observed an abnormal self-serving bias in patients
with persecutory or grandiose delusions, but not in those who reported
other kinds of delusional ideas.91 This makes intuitive sense, because
only paranoid and grandiose delusions appear to involve preoccupations
about success and failure.

The studies we have considered so far have all used the ASQ. However,
there are other ways of assessing attributions. In a later study, Sue
Kaney and I asked paranoid, depressed and ordinary people to play a
computer game in which they were required to discover a rule. On forty
occasions, two pictures were presented on the computer screen and they
could choose one or the other by pressing button 1 or button 2. The
participants started with 20 points and, when they made a 'correct'
choice, another point was awarded. When they made an 'incorrect' choice,
a point was deducted and the computer made an angry chimpanzee noise. Of
course, we had programmed the computer so that the participants' choices
had no effect on whether they won or lost points. No matter what they
did, one game (known to us as the 'win game') awarded more points than
it deducted, leaving the player with 33 points at the end, whereas the
other (known to us as the 'lose game') deducted more points than it
awarded, leaving the player with 6. After each game the participants
were asked to indicate on a 0-- 100 scale the extent to which they
believed they had controlled the outcomes (see Figure 12.5). The
depressed patients were sadder but wiser and claimed little control over
either of the games (their judgements were therefore accurate). The
normal control participants were thoroughly irrational, claiming control
when they were winning but not when they were losing. As we had
expected, the paranoid patients showed this self-serving bias to a
significantly greater degree. (One of the paranoid patients, who played
the win game first, was annoyed to discover that he was losing the
second game and complained that we had 'rigged' it. As he was perfectly
correct about this, he could be said to be suffering from paranoid
realism.)92 So far in this discussion, we have assumed that attributions
can be catalogued on a one-dimensional scale running from internal
(self-blaming) to external (blaming other people or circumstances).
However, many people find the distinction between 'internal' and
'external' difficult to comprehend93 so it is not surprising that
patients' judgements about internality are sometimes inconsistent.94
Part of the problem seems to be that the ASQ and similar measures fail
to distinguish between two types of external attributions that are
different: explanations that implicate circumstances (which can be
called external-

Figure 12.5 Paranoid, depressed and normal participants' estimates of
personal control over the outcome of computer games that were 'rigged'
so that they would either win or lose (from Kaney and Bentall, 1992).

situational attributions) and those which implicate other people
(external-personal attributions). The importance of this distinction
becomes obvious when we think about common events that provoke
attributions. For example, most people explain being late for a meeting
in situational terms ('The traffic was dreadful').\* From what we learnt
in Chapter 10, we might expect a depressed person to point to an
internal cause ('I'm lousy at keeping track of time'). A paranoid
person, however, might blame the police for maliciously setting all the
local traffic lights to red. The implication of this simple
thought-experiment is that external-situational attributions may be
psychologically benign because they allow us to avoid blaming ourselves
while, at the same time, blaming no one else. This is presumably why
they are the essence of a good excuse. External-personal attributions,
on the other hand, appear to be psychologically toxic: they allow us to
avoid blaming ourselves only at the expense of blaming someone else.
Peter Kinderman and I conducted a series of studies to explore this
distinction.95 When we compared paranoid, depressed and ordinary people,
we obtained the pattern of results shown in Figure 12.6. Although this
figure may seem fairly complex, there are only three important features
to focus on. First, as shown in the left panel of the

Figure 12.6 Locus of attributions made by paranoid, depressed and
non-patient participants for positive (+) and negative (-) events
(Kinderman and Bentall, 1996).

figure, the depressed patients we tested uniquely tended to blame
themselves for negative events. Second, as shown in the centre panel,
and as we had expected, the paranoid patients uniquely tended to blame
other people for negative events. The right panel of the figure shows
externalsituational attributions. Although these might seem unimportant,
a glance will reveal that the paranoid patients made fewer explanations
of this sort, either for positive or for negative events, than the other
groups. It was as if they just did not know how to make a good excuse.
Their excessive use of external-personal (other-blaming) explanations
can be partly understood in the light of this deficit. Unable to
attribute negative events to situations, and with an excessive tendency
to avoid attributing such events to themselves, the only choice left is
to blame someone else.

The Epistemological Impulsiveness of the Deluded Patient We can now move
to the final box in the back-of-an-envelope model of belief acquisition
that I introduced earlier in the chapter. This part of the model
concerns the search for further information that might illuminate our
beliefs, causing us to hold on to them more tightly, or to modify them
on the basis of new evidence. Researchers have suggested two ways in
which this process may be handicapped in deluded patients. First, they
may be unable

to adjust their beliefs appropriately in the light of additional
information. Second, they may avoid seeking additional information
altogether.

Evaluating hypotheses When we try to figure out what is going on around
us, the evidence rarely points exclusively in one direction. For
example, imagine that you are struggling to make sense of a tense
relationship with your employer. Perhaps she has taken a dislike to you.
On the other hand, perhaps her occasional scowls reflect the constant
pressure of her job. When you saw her earlier today she seemed
irritable, but when you bumped into her last week she was cheerful and
encouraging. Under these kinds of circumstances it can be very difficult
to balance different strands of information to decide which explanation
is most likely to be correct. The ability of deluded patients to weigh
up inconsistent evidence was first studied by clinical psychologists
Philippa Garety and David Hemsley, at the University of London's
Institute of Psychiatry. They argued that an inability to think clearly
about the probable truth of incompatible hypotheses might lead people to
hold on to bizarre beliefs and reject beliefs that are more
reasonable.\*96 In order to test this theory, they conducted a series of
experiments in which patients were asked to estimate the probability of
a different hypothesis in the light of evidence that changed as the
experiments progressed. The task they chose for this purpose may seem
very abstract and removed from the demands of everyday life. The people
taking part in their experiments were shown two jars, each containing
beads of the same two colours. In one jar, one colour far outnumbered
the other (by a ratio of 85:15) whereas, in the other, the proportions
were reversed. The jars were then hidden away, and the participants were
shown a predetermined sequence of beads (some of one colour and some of
the other). Their task was to guess which jar the beads had been drawn
from. (In some experiments, they made a guess after seeing each bead, in
others they were

required to guess whenever they had seen enough beads to feel confident
about their decision.) In their first study, Garety and her colleagues
demonstrated that deluded patients made guesses on the basis of less
evidence and with greater confidence, in comparison with a mixed group
of psychiatric patients without delusions.97 A more surprising result
was obtained in a second study, in which the sequence of beads was
designed so that it favoured one jar early in the sequence (when one
colour appeared much more often than the other), but the other jar later
(when most beads were of the colour which had initially been least
frequent). In this experiment, Garety found that her deluded patients
more rapidly changed their minds about the jar of origin than her
non-deluded control participants.98 This finding is paradoxical because
it implies that deluded patients can sometimes be excessively flexible
in their beliefs. Garety's findings provoked other investigators to
carry out experiments that have generally supported her initial
observations. Yvonne Linney, Emmanuelle Peters and Peter Ayton at the
Institute of Psychiatry in London found that ordinary people who scored
highly on a questionnaire measure of delusional thinking also showed a
tendency to jump to conclusions on a range of reasoning tasks.99
Psychologists Caroline John and Guy Dodgson in Newcastle tested deluded
patients and ordinary people using a variant of the well-known
twenty-questions game, in which participants pose a series of questions
(for example, 'Is it vegetable?') to elicit yes/no answers, until they
have enough evidence to guess the identity of a hidden object. When
taking part in this game deluded patients asked fewer questions than
ordinary people before making their first guess.100 Some studies have
also shown that this tendency in deluded patients is more pronounced
when they are asked to reason about meaningful stimuli. Robert Dudley
and his colleagues asked participants to guess whether a series of
statements had been made by a person with mostly negative or mostly
positive opinions about someone similar to them-selves.101 In a
comparable study conducted by Heather Young and myself, we asked
participants to guess whether a list of descriptions concerned someone
who

had mainly positive traits or someone who had mainly negative traits.102
In both of these experiments, all of those who took part made more hasty
and extreme judgements in these emotionally salient conditions than on
Garety and Hemsley's original beads task. Unfortunately, the cause of
the deluded patient's epistemological impulsivity is unknown. One
possibility, which might explain why they change their minds quickly
when the weight of evidence on the beads task changes, is that they
respond only to recent information. This explanation would be consistent
with a neglected theory of schizophrenia proposed by American
psychologist Kurt Salzinger, who argued that many of the cognitive
deficits experienced by patients are a consequence of their tendency to
respond to the most immediate stimuli in their environment.103 Robert
Dudley and his colleagues104 and Heather Young and I105 carried out
experiments to test whether this kind of deficit could account for
Garety's results, by seeing how patients managed when the balance of the
evidence was less clear-cut. For example, Heather Young and I repeated
the beads-ina-jar experiment using colour ratios of 90:10, 75:25 and
60:40. We found that deluded patients, like ordinary people, become more
cautious in their judgements as the ratio of the colours approached
50:50. This increasing caution in uncertain situations is completely
rational and would not be expected if the patients based their
judgements only on the last beads that they had seen. A second
possibility is that deluded people do not understand how to go about
testing hypotheses. Earlier in this chapter, I discussed Sir Karl
Popper's famous proposal that the most logical way of evaluating a
theory is to look for evidence against it.106 According to Popper, a
single piece of disconfirmatory evidence can be enough to bring a theory
to its knees, whereas confirmatory evidence may be equally consistent
with rival theories. Although the observation that ordinary people
typically seek confirmatory data when testing their hypotheses (the
so-called confirmation bias) has sometimes been cited as evidence that
we can be highly irrational, it has recently become clear that this bias
may reflect 'sensible reasoning' strategies which, although illogical in
the formal sense, are highly effective in real life.

Typically, the strategy we adopt when testing a hypothesis depends on
the nature of the hypothesis. When some kind of choice is believed to
have resulted in a good outcome (for example, when we believe that a
cake is particularly nice because we used honey instead of sugar), it is
sensible to test the hypothesis by looking for confirmatory evidence
(for example, by baking another cake with honey but changing some of the
other ingredients). This is because the result of the test is likely to
be a further positive outcome (another nice cake). However, if the
outcome is negative (for example, if we think that a cake tastes awful
because we used margarine instead of butter) it is sensible to devise a
disconfirmatory test (for example, by baking a cake with butter) as this
will reduce the possibility of another disappointing result. Studies
show that both children and ordinary adults vary their
hypothesis-testing strategies according to the expected outcome in just
this way.107 When Heather Young and I asked paranoid patients, depressed
patients and ordinary people to choose methods of testing a range of
hypotheses about positive and negative outcomes, we found no
differences. Like ordinary people, our deluded patients consistently
chose confirmatory tests of positive outcomes and disconfirmatory tests
of negative outcomes.108 Emotional and motivational factors provide a
third possible explanation for the deluded patient's tendency to jump to
conclusions. The idea that people vary in their ability to cope with
ambiguous information was familiar to Milton Rokeach, who saw it as a
cause of political dogmatism. More recently, this idea has been explored
by American social psychologists Arie Kruglanski and Donna Webster, who
have proposed the term need for closure to describe the general desire
for 'an answer on a given topic, any answer compared to confusion and
ambiguity'.109 In experiments with ordinary people Kruglanski and
Webster have shown that this need can be provoked by circumstances (most
obviously, when we have to work against the clock) but also that some
people tend to be less tolerant of ambiguity than others. In order to
measure this tendency, they developed a simple questionnaire, which
assesses a subjective need for order and structure, emotional discomfort
in the face of uncertainty, decisiveness, the inability to cope with
unpredictability, and closed-mindedness.

Do deluded patients have a high need for closure? One observation that
we have already considered suggests that they might. In Chapter 5, I
briefly described a study carried out by British psychiatrist Glen
Roberts, in which deluded patients were compared with trainee Anglican
priests. Both the priests and the patients scored very high on a measure
of their need for meaning in their lives. In the same study, the
patients were asked whether they would welcome evidence that their
delusions -- which often caused them considerable distress -- were
false. Surprisingly, the majority said that they would not. Roberts
interpreted this finding as evidence that, for the patients, their
delusional worlds were 'preferred realities', embraced perhaps because
they were more predictable than the real world.110 Direct evidence of a
high need for closure in deluded patients has recently been obtained in
a study conducted by my Ph.D. student Rebecca Swarbrick, who used
Kruglanski and Webster's questionnaire to test patients suffering from
paranoid delusions, patients who had recovered from paranoid delusions
and ordinary people.111 The currently deluded patients and those who had
recovered scored very highly on the questionnaire compared to the
ordinary people, suggesting that they experience emotional discomfort
when confronted by uncertainty. This finding from the remitted patients
is particularly interesting because it suggests that a high need for
closure may be a trait that predisposes people to developing delusions,
and which remains even after their delusions have remitted. However,
whether a high need for closure can explain the findings obtained from
Philippa Garety's beads-in-a-jar task seems doubtful. In a recent study,
Emmanuelle Peters found that ordinary people who scored highly on a
delusions questionnaire also scored highly on Kruglanski and Webster's
need-for-closure questionnaire. However, in the same study no
relationship was found between scores on the need-for-closure
questionnaire and scores on Garety's beads-in-a-jar test.112

Back to the reaction-maintenance principle It is possible that the
ability of deluded patients to evaluate their hypotheses may be limited,
not only by their inability to weigh evidence

appropriately, but also by their avoidance of disconfirmatory
information. A few years ago, my colleague Tony Morrison noticed an
interesting parallel between the behaviour of paranoid patients and the
behaviour of patients suffering from phobias or anxiety disorders.113
Patients suffering from these conditions often fail to notice that the
object of their fear cannot harm them, because they avoid situations in
which this would be obvious. Instead, they perform safety behaviours,
which keep them in situations in which their fears never have to be
confronted. For example, a man who is very seriously frightened of dogs
may stay at home all of the time, thereby preventing himself from
discovering that most dogs are friendly. The concept of safety
behaviours exemplifies, yet again, the reactionmaintenance principle
(see p. 262). It is easy to see why persecutory beliefs in particular
may lead to these kinds of behaviours, and why these behaviours in turn
may help to keep the beliefs alive. It is fairly commonplace to find
that patients who fear that secret organizations are conspiring to hurt
them stay away from places where they believe that they may be
vulnerable to attack, or that those who mistrust people living nearby
avoid talking to their neighbours. An extreme example of this kind of
behaviour studied by Tony Morrison concerned a woman who believed that
she was being followed by the IRA, and who attempted to lose her
trackers by wearing disguises, varying her routes to local shops, and by
hiding behind cars at intervals while out walking. In a survey of a
small group of paranoid patients recently carried out by Daniel Freeman
at the Institute of Psychiatry in London it was found that the majority
reported safety behaviours.114 Whether or not this concept can be
extended to other types of delusions remains to be seen. There is
evidence, for example, that dismorphobic patients (who believe that they
are disfigured or ugly, despite being completely normal in appearance)
avoid social situations in which they may be able to judge how other
people look at them,115 but it is difficult to see how, say, grandiose
or somatic delusions could be maintained in this way.

An Embarrassment of Riches By now, the reader will have appreciated that
research on delusions has moved forward dramatically over the last
decade. Whereas ten years ago there was hardly any evidence to discuss,
we now have the opposite problem of trying to make sense of a wide range
of research findings which can be interpreted in a variety of ways. The
comparison between deluded patients and scientists that I have taken as
my theme in this chapter seems to make some kind of sense (at least as a
framework for organizing this information) but obviously leaves a lot of
questions unanswered. For example, we can ask which of the many
processes we have considered is most important in the causation of
delusional beliefs. Of course it is possible that all play an important
role but to different degrees in different people. (It is easy to
imagine that somatic delusions arise primarily as an attempt to explain
unusual bodily sensations, whereas what may be termed the social
delusions-- of persecution, grandiosity and jealousy -- seem to involve
the mental mechanisms responsible for generating causal explanations and
understanding others' mental states.) This idea raises the interesting
possibility that it may one day be possible to construct a typology of
delusions based on different psychological processes, rather than merely
on content. However, it is equally possible that, in the case of some
delusional systems, we will be able to construct a unifying theory that
shows how these different processes interact. In the next chapter, I
will try and construct such a theory to explain delusions of
persecution. OceanofPDF.com

13 On the Paranoid World View When I was coming up, it was a dangerous
world, and you knew exactly who they were. It was us vs. them, and it
was clear who them was. Today, we are not so sure who they are, but we
know they're there. George W. Bush1 Only the paranoid survive. Andrew
Grove2 In this chapter I will attempt to bring together some of the
ideas covered in the last three chapters and, at the same time, make
good my promise to outline a detailed theory of paranoid (persecutory)
delusions. The theory3 that I will describe has evolved over more than a
decade, during which time earlier versions4 have been proposed and
modified as they have confronted new data.\* Of course, it is likely
that further modifications will be required as new research findings
become available. I will begin with two assumptions. First, given that
paranoid ideas involve worries about relationships with other people,
they surely must have something to do with social cognition. Second,
most people who have thought seriously about delusions in general have
assumed that they arise from attempts to explain unusual or troubling
experiences. This assumption seems to lie behind nearly every study that
we considered in the last chapter.5 Together, these assumptions suggest
that attributions must play a central role in paranoid ideas. And,
indeed, we have already seen evidence that this is the case. In the last
chapter, we saw that paranoid patients show an exaggeration of the
self-serving bias (the normal tendency to attribute positive events to
the self and negative events to external causes) and that, when they
make external attributions for negative events, their explanations
usually implicate the intentions of others (they make external-personal
attributions) rather than circumstantial factors (external-situational

attributions). It is not difficult to see how complex conspiracy
theories might arise from repeatedly explaining unpleasant experiences
in this way.

The Paranoid Self As the self-serving bias is a homeostatic mechanism
that most of us use to regulate our self-esteem, the obvious inference
from these findings is that paranoid patients are struggling excessively
to protect themselves from negative beliefs about themselves. This idea
is consistent with the account of paranoia proposed by psycho analyst
and computer scientist Kenneth Colby, which I discussed at the beginning
of the last chapter, and seems to lead to the prediction that paranoid
patients should score normally on selfesteem measures.6 In fact, the
available evidence on self-esteem in paranoia is inconsistent and
overall not favourable to this prediction. Daniel Freeman at the
Institute of Psychiatry in London administered a questionnaire to a
group of schizophrenia patients taking part in a treatment study and
reported that many of the patients who had paranoid delusions had quite
low self-esteem, although they also identified a small group in which
self-esteem appeared to be normal.7 B. Bowins and G. Shugar, two
psychiatrists in Canada, also used a questionnaire to measure
self-esteem in psychotic patients, reporting that deluded patients in
general (although not necessarily patients suffering from persecutory
delusions) had low self-esteem.8 Most recently, Christine Barrow-clough
and Nick Tarrier in my own university used a detailed interview to
assess separately positive and negative self-esteem in a large group of
schizophrenia patients, finding that paranoia was associated with high
levels of negative self-esteem. This association remained even when the
effects of depression and other symptoms were taken into account.9
Against these studies, several others have reported that self-esteem is
relatively normal or even high in paranoid patients. For example, Carmie
Candido and David Romney in Canada assessed global self-esteem in
paranoid, depressed-paranoid and depressed patients. They reported high
self-esteem in the paranoid group, low self-esteem in the depressed
group,

and intermediate scores in the depressed-paranoid group.10 In one of my
own studies, paranoid patients scored normally on a simple self-esteem
questionnaire.11 Perhaps the most interesting study to provide evidence
of high self-esteem in paranoid patients was conducted by Thomas Oxman,
Stanley Rosenberg and Paula Schnurr at the University of Washington in
Seattle, who, instead of administering a questionnaire, simply asked
paranoid patients and several other groups of patients to speak about
anything they wished for five minutes. They then used a computer to
analyse the frequency with which different concepts were expressed in
the speech samples. The concepts expressed by the paranoid patients were
judged to indicate 'an artificially positive, grandiose self-image, and
a defensive abstractness'.12 When data are as inconsistent as this it is
a fair bet that researchers have been asking the wrong question, or at
least asking the right question in the wrong sort of way. In this case,
a stumbling block seems to be the concept of self-esteem, which, as we
saw in Chapter 10, fails to capture adequately the psychological
processes involved in self-representation and can be measured in many
different ways. Clearly, we need to turn to methods of assessing the
self that more accurately reflect its dynamic nature. Borrowing the
ideas of American social psychologists E. Tory Higgins and Tim Strauman,
Peter Kinderman and I asked paranoid patients, depressed patients and
ordinary people to describe themselves as they actually were (the actual
self), how they would like to be (the ideal self, a self-standard) and
how they believed their parents saw them (the parentactual self). (We
began by asking our participants to describe how they thought their
friends saw them. However, this strategy foundered because many of the
paranoid patients reported that they had no friends!) We then examined
the discrepancies between these different descriptions.13 (Higgins and
Strauman, it will be recalled from Chapter 10, showed that discrepancies
between the actual self and ideals are associated with depressed mood.)
As other researchers had reported previously, we found that these
descriptions were fairly concordant in our normal control group, who

believed that they were more or less the sort of people they would like
to be, and that their parents shared their positive self-perceptions.
Like depressed patients in previous studies (see Chapter 10), our
depressed group showed marked discrepancies between how they saw
themselves and how they said they would like to be. In contrast, our
paranoid patients showed very little discrepancy between their
self-actual and self-ideal concepts but very marked discrepancies
between their self-actual concepts and their beliefs about how their
parents saw them. In general, they seemed to believe that their parents
had extremely hostile attitudes towards them. The observation that
paranoia is associated with the belief that other people harbour
negative attitudes towards the self might be regarded as a statement of
the obvious. However, it is an observation that is consistent with the
attributional data we considered in the last chapter. If paranoid
patients consistently blame their misfortunes on the intentional actions
of other people, it is not surprising that they believe that other
people hate them.

Implicit beliefs about the self So far we have considered immediate,
conscious judgements about the self. However, many of our judgements
about ourselves, for example when we make remarks that reflect our
feelings without carefully thinking about what we are saying, are more
implicit. These implicit judgements echo relatively enduring stored
knowledge and beliefs about the self, rather than what we consider to be
our virtues and deficits at the present moment in time. They may well be
different from the kinds of opinions expressed when we actively reflect
about the self, but (because they are ephemeral) can be difficult to
capture. Peter Kinderman devised an approach to this problem that
exploited the Stroop effect, which I first described in Chapter 11
(pp. 281--2). He reasoned that people who are uncomfortable about
themselves should be slow to colour-name self-descriptive words. He
therefore showed paranoid patients, depressed patients and ordinary
people a questionnaire consisting

of high self-esteem words (for example, 'capable', 'wise') and low
selfesteem words (for example, 'childish', 'lazy'). They were asked to
indicate with a tick which of the words described themselves. As
expected, ordinary people endorsed most of the positive words and very
few of the negative words. The depressed patients, on the other hand,
ticked about equal numbers of positive and negative words. The paranoid
patients ticked mostly positive words but also slightly more of the
negative words than the normal controls. In the second stage of the
study, the participants completed a Stroop task in which they were asked
to colour-name the same words. Peter Kinderman found that the normal
people had little difficulty with this task and colour-named both the
high self-esteem and the low self-esteem words about as fast as they
colour-named a list of emotionally neutral words. However, the depressed
patients showed slowed colour-naming for the high self-esteem words and
especially for the low self-esteem words. This effect was even more
pronounced for the paranoid patients, indicating that the words had
special emotional significance for them (see Figure 13.1).14 These
findings were recently repeated in two studies carried out by Hon Lee in
South Korea, one comparing students who scored high and low on a
paranoia questionnaire, and one comparing clinically paranoid,
clinically depressed and normal participants. In the first study, the
paranoid students showed slow colour-naming only for low self-esteem
words. In the second, paranoid patients showed slowed colour-naming for
both positive and negative trait words.15 A second method of assessing
implicit beliefs about the self involves studying implicit attributions.
The ASQ asks people to make deliberate and thoughtful judgements about
the causes of events, and it is therefore unsurprising that paranoid
patients' responses on it are defensive. If patients could be led to
make more implicit or thoughtless judgements, perhaps their responses
would be more concordant with any underlying negative beliefs about the
self. As we saw in Chapter 11 (pp. 279--80), a suitable measure -- the
Pragmatic Inference Task (PIT) -- has been developed by researchers
investigating bipolar patients. Helen Lyon, Sue Kaney and I administered
the PIT and a conventional attributional style questionnaire to paranoid
patients, depressed patients and

ordinary people. As we expected, the ordinary people showed a
self-serving bias on both measures. In contrast, both the deluded and
the depressed patients made more internal attributions

Figure 13.1 The upper panel shows the number of positive and negative
trait words endorsed as true by paranoid, depressed and normal control
participants on a questionnaire (PPQ). The lower panel shows the
interference index (extra time taken in comparison with emotionally
neutral words) for the same words in a Stroop colour-naming task
administered to the same participants (from Kinderman, 1994).

for negative than for positive events on the PIT (see Figure 13.2). In
the case of the depressed patients, this pattern corresponded with their
scores on the conventional questionnaire, and is consistent with the
research we considered earlier in this book. However, on the explicit
measure the paranoid patients made more external attributions for

Figure 13.2 Internality scores for paranoid, depressed and normal
participants on the PIT (from Lyon, Kaney and Bentall, 1994).

negative than for positive events, an attributional style that was
consistent with our previous findings but completely different from
their pattern of responding on the PIT.16 A final indirect method of
assessing beliefs about the self that we will consider here concerns the
enduring standards by which we judge ourselves. In order to measure
these standards, Sue Kaney and I used the Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale
(DAS), a widely used questionnaire, which I described in Chapter 10
(p. 253). Because paranoid patients often complain of being depressed,
and because depressed patients typically score highly on the DAS, we
wanted to ensure that any highly perfectionistic attitudes we detected
could not be a mere consequence of negative mood. We therefore struggled
hard to identify two groups of deluded patients, one with concurrent
depression and a smaller group who were not depressed at the time of
testing. As it turned out, both groups scored similarly to a group of

depressed patients who were not suffering from delusions, and showed
very high scores on the questionnaire.17 Similar findings were obtained
in a study by Chris Fear, Helen Sharp and David Healy, which was
published at about the same time.18 As perfectionistic self-standards
presumably make individuals vulnerable to negative self-evaluations,
these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that paranoid patients
are strongly motivated to avoid threats to the self.

The dynamic nature of the paranoid defence It is clear that paranoid
patients do not consistently maintain a high level of self-esteem.
Indeed, the findings obtained from the indirect measures that we have
just considered seem more consistent with the opposite conclusion --
that paranoid patients have low self-esteem. However, even this would be
an over-simplification. The picture that emerges suggests a much more
complex and dynamic relationship between attributions, different kinds
of self-representations, mood and paranoid delusions, as if the paranoid
patient is constantly fighting to maintain a positive view of the self,
sometimes winning and but more often losing. This picture is, of course,
consistent with the idea of the attribution-- selfrepresentation cycle,
which we arrived at a few chapters back (see Figure 10.6, p. 260).
Remember that, according to this idea, attributions and
selfrepresentations are coupled in a cyclical relationship. Current
beliefs about the self influence attributions, but attributions have the
power to bring about changes in beliefs about the self (a psychological
chicken-or-egg phenomenon). To see how paranoid beliefs fit into this
general model, let us look at the results of two experiments that Peter
Kinderman and I carried out. The relatively minor differences between
the experiments need not detain us here; suffice it to say that, in
both, ordinary people described themselves, their ideals and their
beliefs about other people's attitudes towards them before and after
making a series of attributions for negative events. As we had expected
from our existing understanding of depression (see Chapter

10) those who initially showed substantial discrepancies between their
beliefs about themselves and their ideals tended to make internal
attributions for the negative events, whereas those who had relatively
few discrepancies tended to make external attributions. However, the
most interesting finding emerged when we measured the changes in beliefs
about the self that had occurred by the end of the experiments (see
Figure 13.3). Again, as we had expected on the basis of previous
research, those who made internal attributions tended to show even more
substantial discrepancies between their beliefs about themselves and
their ideals. However, the effects of external attributions depended on
the precise nature of the attributions. External-situational
attributions (the essence of

Figure 13.3 Diagram indicating the influence of self-discrepancies on
attributions, and the subsequent impact of attributions on later
self-discrepancies, as found in two experiments by Kinderman and Bentall
(2000).

good excuse-making, as in 'I'm sorry I'm late but the traffic was
dreadful') led to few changes in discrepancies between beliefs about the
self and ideals ('I'm still the sort of person I'd like to be') and very
few discrepancies between beliefs about the self and beliefs about the
opinions of other people ('and other people still think I'm wonderful').
However, external-personal attributions ('I'm sorry I'm late but the
police deliberately set all the traffic lights to red to stop me from
getting here on time'), although also resulting in few discrepancies
between beliefs about the self and ideals ('I'm the sort of person I'd
like to be'), led to increased discrepancies between beliefs about the
self and the perceived beliefs of others ('but other people hate me').
Of course, as we have seen, it is

precisely these kinds of attributions that are made in excess by
paranoid patients.19 Paranoid patients can therefore be accommodated
within the model of the attribution--self-representation cycle if we
assume that, like depressed patients, their stored knowledge about the
self is very negative but, unlike depressed patients, they have somehow
learnt to avoid making internal attributions for negative events, and
instead tend to make external-personal attributions. Because of the
cyclic relationship between attributions and self-representations, these
efforts to attribute negative experiences to external causes may not be
sufficient to ensure that their current beliefs about themselves are
always positive. This theory neatly ties together the evidence on
attributions and the paranoid self, but leads us to conclude that it may
be impossible to make simple predictions about the way that paranoid
patients will answer selfesteem questionnaires. Indeed, it is easy to
see why some patients appear to have what Peter Trower and Paul Chadwick
describe as 'poor me' paranoid delusions (they express relatively
positive opinions about themselves and believe themselves to be the
innocent victims of imaginary conspiracies) while others appear to have
'bad me' delusions (they seem to have low selfesteem and apparently
believe that others have good reasons for wanting to harm them).20
Depending on the precise nature of their stored selfknowledge, the
circumstances in which they find themselves, and the extent to which
they are able to attribute their most troubling experiences to
external-personal causes, either of these types of delusional systems is
a likely outcome of many iterations of the
attribution--self-representation cycle. Of course, sceptics might argue
that a theory of this sort should not be trusted because it cannot be
properly tested. (This is precisely the reason that many modern
psychologists have rejected the theories of the early psychoanalysts.)
Against this argument it can be said that some phenomena just are
unpredictable (the weather is a familiar example), and establishing when
this is the case is an important kind of scientific achievement. (This
is one of the main goals of the mathematical science of non-linear
systems

theory, more popularly known as chaos theory.)21 More importantly, as we
saw in Chapter 10, it is possible to make other kinds of predictions
that can be subjected to experimental investigation. For example, the
theory suggests that under some circumstances the attributions of
paranoid patients will not always be excessively self-serving. If
something happens to activate their underlying negative beliefs about
themselves, their subsequent attributions should be temporarily more
pessimistic. We have already seen evidence that this actually happens.
Figure 10.5 (p. 259) shows the data from an experiment in which
depressed patients, paranoid patients and ordinary people were asked to
make attributions for hypothetical negative events before and after
completing an anagram task that included impossible questions. Before
the task, the paranoid patients made excessively external attributions
for negative events, an observation that is consistent with the results
of previous studies. However, afterwards, their attributions had shifted
to become much more internal (almost like those of depressed patients),
presumably because their failure on the anagrams task had brought some
of their negative beliefs about themselves to the surface. It is
difficult to see why these changes would happen if the
attribution--self-representation cycle was not a real phenomenon.

Why External-Personal Attributions? There is one remaining puzzle about
the role of attributions in paranoia. Given that paranoid patients
appear to avoid making internal attributions for negative events, why
don't they just do what most of us do, and make external-situational
attributions? After all, as we have seen, externalsituational
attributions are benign. They keep us from thinking bad things about
ourselves, and from attributing malevolent intentions to other people.
There are two main explanations for the paranoid patient's failure to
generate situational explanations. First, hyper-vigilance to
threat-related information might lead the paranoid person to notice
person-relevant information more than ordinary people. Second, paranoid
patients may

suffer from some kind of cognitive disability that prevents them from
noticing situational information. As there is quite good evidence for
both of these mechanisms, they are clearly not mutually exclusive.

Attention and attributions In the last chapter, we saw that paranoid
patients excessively attend to22 and recall23 threat-related
information. More intriguingly, they seem to be more proficient than
ordinary people at identifying negative emotional expressions on the
faces of others.24 The availability of this kind of information at the
forefront of their minds is likely to make them attribute negative
social interactions to something about the other people involved, rather
than to themselves or to circumstances. For example, we can imagine a
paranoid patient having a minor argument with an acquaintance and,
detecting a subtle expression of suppressed anger, concluding that the
acquaintance maliciously set out to provoke a disagreement. If this idea
is correct, it should be possible to influence ordinary people to make
paranoid attributions for negative experiences by making them focus
their attention on the actions of others. This effect has been
demonstrated by social psychologists Ehud Bodner and Mario Mikulincer in
a series of experiments conducted at Bar-Ilan University in Israel. In
these experiments, ordinary people were asked to explain their
performance after they had failed to solve a series of problems that
were in fact unsolvable. When their attention was focused on themselves
(for example, they could see a video camera pointing towards them, and
their own faces on a nearby television screen), they made depressive
attributions. However, when their attention was focused on the
experimenter (because the video camera was pointing at the experimenter
and the television screen was showing the experimenter's face) the
participants in the experiments were especially likely to make paranoid
attributions. Interestingly, these effects only occurred when the
participants believed that they had uniquely failed to solve the
problems. If they knew that everyone had failed to solve them, they made
neither depressive nor paranoid attributions.25

The difficulty of understanding situations The second possible
explanation for the paranoid patient's tendency to make
external-personal attributions is an inability to make situational
attributions. To see why these kinds of attributions might present
special difficulties, we need to look again at what happens when we try
to explain things. In Chapter 10, I argued that this process probably
involves some kind of mental search that is terminated when a suitable
explanatory construct is found. We rack our brains until we arrive at a
satisfactory explanation and then stop. I also suggested that this
search almost always begins with current beliefs about the self. In the
case of ordinary people, if we can immediately think of aspects of the
self that match the event we are trying to explain, we will attribute
the event to an internal cause. On the other hand, if we are unable to
find a characteristic of ourselves that matches the event, we will find
ourselves searching for some other kind of cause, most likely something
external to ourselves. (Paranoid patients going through the same process
presumably reject most candidate internal attributions for negative
events, and move smartly onwards in order to search for external
causes.) Studies carried out by social psychologist Daniel Gilbert at
the University of Texas suggest that this further search for external
causes does not happen in a single step. Gilbert required ordinary
people to make attributions about the behaviour of other people in
relaxed circumstances and also when their minds were being kept busy
with a competing task. Without the competing task, the participants in
these experiments tended to make external attributions that were
situational whereas, when their minds were otherwise occupied, they
tended to make attributions that implicated fixed traits in the other
people. Gilbert concluded that, when accounting for the behaviour of
other people, we first of all make external-personal attributions and
then later discount these in favour of more situational explanations in
the light of whatever information is available about the circumstances.
This second step

requires mental effort, so it tends not to occur when our minds are
occupied with other tasks.26 There might be many reasons why paranoid
patients lack the mental resources necessary to generate
external-situational attributions. It is possible that, during a
psychotic episode, some of the attentional and memory deficits we
considered in Chapter 7 limit the extent to which they can think about
situational factors. It is also possible that the tendency to jump to
conclusions and a strong motivation to avoid ambiguity (characteristics
of deluded patients that we discussed in the last chapter) result in a
rush to attributional judgement, so that the second step described in
Dan Gilbert's model is skipped. Another intriguing possibility is that
the failure to understand other people's mental states contributes to
this deficit. When I earlier considered Chris Frith's suggestion that
paranoid patients suffer from an impaired theory of mind (ToM),27 we saw
that, overall, the available evidence suggests that psychotic patients
in general seem to suffer from difficulties of this sort (although only
when they are ill). That is, these difficulties do not appear to be
specifically connected to paranoia. Nonetheless, I would now like to
suggest that ToM deficits, even though they may not be specific in this
way, might indirectly influence paranoid thinking by limiting the
ability of patients to make situational attributions. To see why an
inability to think about the mental states of others might have this
effect, imagine that you are walking down a road and a friend passing in
the opposite direction ignores you. What do you think? Most people
considering this type of event generate some kind of excuse for the
friend, such as 'She's having a bad day' or 'She's worried about
something.' Many of these kinds of explanations have a situational
flavour -- they explain the friend's behaviour in terms of circumstances
that are affecting her. Moreover, these kinds of explanations also
require you to take your friend's point of view, in other words, to use
your ToM skills. If you are unable to do this, and especially if you are
anxious to avoid blaming yourself, you may well attribute your friend's
behaviour to some kind of simple disposition or trait ('He's a bastard'
or 'He's selfish and unreliable').\*

In an attempt to test this prediction, Peter Kinderman, Robin Dunbar and
I administered a ToM measure and also a measure of attributional style
to a large group of students.28 As we had predicted, students who
performed relatively poorly on our ToM task made more paranoid-style
externalpersonal attributions than students who performed well, a
finding that has since been replicated.29 Obviously, this study was
limited by our use of students, rather than of people who were actually
suffering from psychiatric symptoms. The necessary studies of the
relationship between ToM skills and attributions in patients are
currently being conducted by some of my postgraduate students.

More Understanding of the Ununderstandable In this chapter I have argued
that the paranoid world view arises from the tendency to make extreme
self-protective attributions, together with the failure (for whatever
reason) to take into account situational causes of events. Of course,
this account does not mean that biological processes are not involved --
attributions, self-representations and associated cognitive processes
are presumably generated by circuits in the brain. Clues about the
specific neural circuits that may be involved have emerged from studies
of patterns of regional cerebral blood flow in deluded patients,30 and
in patients with positive symptoms in general,31 which have implicated
the left lateral prefrontal cortex among other areas. More recently,
Nigel Blackwood and Rob Howard at the Institute of Psychiatry in London
have begun a programme of research (in which I am a collaborator)
focusing specifically on paranoia, in which fMRI is being used to study
relevant cognitive processes in both patients and ordinary people.
Initial findings indicate that, in ordinary people, attention to
threatening statements relevant to the self activates a neural network
involving the left lateral inferior frontal cortex, the ventral striatum
and the anterior cingulate.32 It remains to be seen whether these areas
are more highly activated in paranoid patients. The reader will have
noticed that many of the psychological processes implicated in the model
I have described in this chapter are the same as

those involved in abnormal mood. Indeed, the model is represented
schematically in Figure 13.4 as a variation of the models of depression
and mania previously presented in Figures 10.7 and 11.5. These parallels
suggest a close relationship between depression, mania and paranoia,
which bridges the Kraepelinian divide between dementia praecox and the
affective psychoses. In fact, I am not the first to suggest a close
relationship between paranoid symptoms and depression. Previous
researchers have noted that psychotic patients with paranoid symptoms
are more likely to have a history of depression than those without.33
Some studies have also shown that paranoid personality characteristics
are frequently observed in the close relatives of patients diagnosed as
suffering from an affective disorder,34 but less commonly observed than
might be expected in the relatives of patients diagnosed as suffering
from schizo-phrenia.35 Some years ago, American psychologists Edward
Zigler and Marion Glick pointed out that preoccupation with the self is
a central feature of depression, paranoia and mania, but not of other
symptoms of psychosis.36 Their own research also led them to conclude
that social and occupational functioning is usually good before the
onset of a paranoid or depressive illness, but typically poor in people
who later develop other psychotic symptoms. Zigler and Glick proposed
that both paranoid schizophrenia and delusional disorder are therefore
forms of camouflaged depression.

Figure 13.4 The model of paranoid thinking (unique features shaded).

This theory takes Kraepelin's distinction between schizophrenia and the
affective psychoses for granted, but draws the line between the two
types of disorder in a novel way. It will be evident from earlier
chapters that I do not think that this is the right solution to the
problem of classifying the psychoses. OceanofPDF.com

14 The Illusion of Reality Trintano: Your Excellency, haven't we seen
each other somewhere before? Rufus T. Firefly (Groucho Marx): I don't
think so. I'm not sure I'm seeing you now. It must be something I ate.
Duck Soup (1933) Hallucinations may seem unpromising candidates for
psychological analysis. The hallucinatory experiences described by
patients often seem so frightening and senseless that it is easy assume
that they are exclusively the product of some kind of brain malfunction.
When I first attempted the psychological treatment of patients who heard
voices, I was not convinced that I had anything useful to offer. I was
just one year out of the Liverpool training course and going through my
divorce, and my mind was more focused on personal problems than on
clinical innovation. The Mersey Regional Forensic Psychiatry Service,
where I was working, was responsible for the care of psychiatric
patients who had committed criminal offences or who were considered to
be dangerous to others. Most patients resident in the service's
inpatient facility had been diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia.
However, before my arrival, the psychologists in the service had focused
their efforts mainly on nonpsychotic patients attending the outpatient
clinic (mostly sex offenders), and had left work with the inpatients to
nurses and psychiatrists. It was only because I had expressed a
tentative interest in psychosis that one of the consultant psychiatrists
encouraged me to see a few patients who were proving difficult to treat
with medication. Many years later, I can remember very little about the
first patient I saw, a young woman who told anyone who cared to listen
about her desire to kill old people. As she was at times quite paranoid,
and had a history of violence, it seemed prudent to take this strange
and frightening fantasy

seriously. Unfortunately, although she freely admitted to an
indiscriminate hatred of anyone above the age of 65, she was in other
ways uncooperative. Unable to make any sense of her strange obsessions,
or the voices she occasionally disclosed, I eventually admitted defeat
and left decisions about her management to my wiser and more experienced
colleagues. It was the second patient who helped me to overcome my now
growing therapeutic pessimism. Speaking to Brian1 for the first time as
we sat together in a small side room, it suddenly occurred to me that,
during my lengthy training, no one had thought it necessary to instruct
me in the best way of talking to mad people. I was not sure where to
start. I need not have worried. Brian was charming and helpful. No doubt
assisted by the many previous occasions on which he had told his story,
he described how his problems had developed after he had failed at
college, the years of periodic hospital treatment that had followed, and
the violent confrontation with his father that had led to his recent
admission. With hardly a pause for breath, he then proceeded to talk
about his voices. He told me that they appeared to originate from inside
his head, but seemed as real to him as my voice. They revealed to him
evidence of a Jewish plot to confine Gentiles to concentration camps
and, at the same time, tormented him with the simple refrain, 'Give
cancer to the crippled bastard!' Brian believed that the voices were
being projected into his head by a team of parapsychologists, and asked
me to use whatever influence I might have to end this bizarre and, to
his mind, unethical experiment. Yet, even on the occasion of our first
meeting, it was obvious that his voices were not merely the random
product of a damaged nervous system. The 'crippled bastard' referred to
by the voices was easily identifiable -- Brian was sitting in a
wheelchair, having crushed his legs in a bungled suicide attempt. (He
had jumped from the top floor of a multistorey car park.) I later
learned that the girlfriend who had recently abandoned him was Jewish. I
also learned that Brian's mother had died from cancer. No doubt 'Give
cancer to the crippled bastard!' encapsulated a constellation of ideas
linked by a common thread of guilt.

Emboldened by this insight, I tried to help Brian gain some
understanding of his experiences. Over the following few months, we met
regularly for periods of half an hour or so (any longer and he became
exhausted). Sometimes I would sit in silence as Brian listened to his
voices and described what they were saying, so that we could consider
how their content might relate to events that had befallen him. At other
times we considered the idea that his voices might be fragments of his
mind that had somehow become separated from his conscious self. As the
weeks passed, the voices became less frequent, and Brian's belief that
he was the victim of a parapsychological experiment diminished. In
retrospect, I realize that my efforts were not particularly well
thought-out and, of course, it is possible (as a particularly cynical
nurse enjoyed pointing out to me) that much of the improvement Brian
experienced was due to simultaneous adjustments to his medication.
However, Brian -- a very gentle person who was happiest when idly
strumming his guitar -- seemed to gain something positive from our time
together. Perhaps it was just the chance to have somebody listen to his
point of view.

Impossible Perceptions According to the historian German Berrios,
'Experiences redolent of hallucinations and illusions are part of the
common baggage of humanity.'2 Certainly, it is not difficult to find
evidence of quasi-hallucinatory experiences in the historical record. As
we saw earlier, American psychologist Julian Jaynes has attempted to
account for the linguistic peculiarities of the Iliad by supposing that,
in Ancient Greece, hallucinating was the normal mode of thinking.3
Although this bold hypothesis has been disputed,4 it is certainly true
that hallucinatory experiences have been recorded since biblical times.5
Socrates, to take one well-documented example, had a 'daemon' that spoke
to him, offering moral and political advice. Unfortunately, researchers
have been slow to consider the relationship between hallucinations and
normal perceptual processes. As psychologists Theodore Sarbin and Joseph
Juhasz have noted, 'Since the 1920s textbooks of general psychology have
differentiated hallucinations

from errors of perception by the simple expedient of locating them in
separate chapters.'6 Before the efforts of the classificationists of the
nineteenth century, hallucinations were considered to be independent
diseases rather than symptoms of more general conditions. A French
psychiatrist, Jean-Etienne Esquirol, first offered a definition of
hallucinations in a paper published in 1832, observing that the
hallucinating person, 'ascribes a body and actuality to images that the
memory recalls without the intervention of the senses'.7 In this way, he
distinguished between hallucinations (roughly perceptions of objects not
present at the time) and illusions (the misperception of objects which
are present). Modern definitions of hallucination are similar to
Esquirol's. For example, DSM-IV states that a hallucination is 'A
sensory perception that has the compelling sense of reality of a true
perception but that occurs without external stimulation of the relevant
sensory organ.'8 In an earlier book, Peter Slade and I attempted to be
more precise by suggesting that a hallucination is 'any percept-like
experience which (a) occurs in the absence of an appropriate stimulus,
(b) has the full force or impact of the corresponding actual (real)
perception, and (c) is not amenable to the direct or voluntary control
of the experiencer'.9 Our emphasis on the absence of an appropriate
stimulus acknowledges that the world external to the individual does
impact on hallucinations, as we will see later. However, even this
definition is not without its difficulties. What are we to make, for
example, of rare individuals who say that they can make themselves
hallucinate? Karl Jaspers suggested that an important distinction could
be made between 'true' hallucinations, which appear to be external to
the individual (for example, a voice coming from somewhere beyond the
boundaries of the body), and 'pseudohallucinations', such as those
experienced by Brian, which are experienced as originating from inside
the head.10 However, the usefulness of this distinction has been
disputed, and most modern psychologists and psychiatrists lump both
types of experience together. In my own clinical work, I have often
found that patients describe their

hallucinations as external to themselves but, after being encouraged to
think about them carefully, decide that they are occurring inside them.
Oddly, this reattribution does not seem to alter the perception that
these experiences are caused by some kind of external agency. A
phenomenon that appears to be a further step away from full blown
hallucinations is known as thought insertion. Patients who have this
experience say that they have thoughts inside their heads that have been
put there by someone else. For example: I look out the window and I
think that the garden looks nice and the grass looks cool, but the
thoughts of Eamonn Andrews \[a television presenter who was popular in
Britain in the 1960s and 1970s\] come into my mind... He treats my mind
like a screen and flashes thoughts onto it like you flash a picture.11
Intrusive or obsessional thoughts seem to lie still further down the
scale of alienness. These kinds of thoughts, which are often the main
complaint of non-psychotic patients given the diagnosis of
obsessive-compulsive disorder, arrive unbidden in the head, and may vary
from trivial memories (for example, an irritating advertising jingle
that seems impossible to expel from the mind), to fears about violating
social norms (for example, the worry that one might shout something out
during a solemn ceremony, such as a marriage), to the self-critical
automatic thoughts of the depressed patient. Surveys have established
that just about everyone has these kinds of experiences, but that
obsessional patients are unique in their fear of the consequences that
might ensue (they may fear acting on thoughts that are socially
unacceptable, for example,), and the efforts they make to suppress
them.12 The most common type of hallucination encountered in the modern
psychiatric clinic is auditory and consists of voices, like Brian's. As
we have seen, these types of experiences, for example of voices telling
the patient what to do or discussing the patient's behaviour, were
thought by Schneider to be first-rank symptoms of schizophrenia.13
Although some studies have shown that about three quarters of
schizophrenia patients

experience voices,14 this no doubt reflects modern psychiatrists'
adherence to Schneiderian diagnostic principles. Even so, hallucinations
are often reported by patients receiving other diagnoses, particularly
bipolar disorder and, more recently, dissociative disorder,\* leading
some researchers to lament that they have no diagnostic specificity
whatsoever.15 Often, the voices described by patients have a negative
quality. They may insult the patient, or tell the patient to do
something unacceptable (for example, to commit suicide). However, it
would be wrong to assume that this is invariably the case. When three
American psychiatrists, Laura Miller, Eileen O'Connor and Tony
DiPasquale, interviewed a group of chronically hallucinating patients
they found that many thought their voices were pleasant and they did not
want them to disappear as a consequence of treatment. Some regarded
their voices as important personages in their impoverished social
networks, perhaps filling a gap created by the isolation they
experienced as a consequence of their illness.16 Hallucinations may also
be experienced in other modalities, such as visual hallucinations of
people who are not really present. I have met a number of patients who
have claimed to see the Devil. (As we saw in Chapter6, these kinds of
hallucinations are more often reported by patients in the developing
world than by patients in the West.)17 Others may have tactile
hallucinations in which they believe that invisible people are touching
them, or olfactory hallucinations in which they experience unusual
smells that are not detectable by others. Sometimes it is difficult to
decide whether an experience really is a hallucination. For example, the
term 'olfactory reference syndrome' has been used to describe a
relatively circumscribed complaint in which the patient believes that he
smells.18 In practice, it can be difficult to decide whether this belief
reflects a delusional explanation of social isolation ('People are
avoiding me, and it's probably because I smell') or an olfactory
hallucination. It may also be difficult to distinguish between a
hallucination and ordinary mental imagery. I once saw a patient in a
high-security hospital who complained of visual hallucinations in which
he would 'see' himself having sex with naked women. When I suggested
that it was not

unusual for bored and sexually deprived young men to have these kinds of
experiences, he insisted that his visions could not be mere fantasies,
because the women were unknown to him and, 'You can't imagine someone
you've never met in real life.' The idea that hallucinations exist on a
continuum with normal mental imagery was suggested by American
psychiatrist John Strauss in an influential paper published in 1969.19
Strauss studied schizophrenia patients' accounts of their positive
symptoms and concluded that they could be classified along four
dimensions: the strength of the individual's conviction in the objective
reality of the experience; the extent to which the experience seems to
be independent of stimuli or cultural determinants; the individual's
preoccupation with the experience; and its implausibility. 'Fullblown'
hallucinations fall at the end of all of these dimensions. However,
there is no doubt that some experiences fall midway along these
dimensions (for example, you may think but not be certain that you have
glimpsed someone you are hoping to avoid).

Back to the illness debate In Chapter 5 we considered the possibility
that there is a dimension of personality reflecting the extent to which
people are likely to suffer from a psychotic illness.\* On examining
this evidence, we established that it is not necessary to assume that
everyone who experiences a hallucination is suffering from an illness.
Indeed, it was apparent that as many as ten times more people experience
voices than receive treatment for psychosis. In Holland, Marius Romme
and Sondra Escher have taken this discovery to its logical conclusion by
forming a national society for people who hear voices.20 Nevertheless,
it is clear that hallucinations can be provoked by disturbances of the
nervous system. They are common consequences of many medical conditions,
including progressive sensory loss (blindness or deafness), fever, focal
brain lesions, delirium and, most obviously, intoxication.21 Although a
variety of drugs (including alcohol if consumed

in sufficient quantities) can cause hallucinations, the most potent
known hallucinogen is lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), first
synthesized in 1938 by the Swiss chemist Albert Hoffman. As we saw in
Chapter 7, the discovery of LSD provoked the hypothesis that
schizophrenia might be caused by an endogenous neurotoxin. One problem
for this theory is that drug-induced hallucinations are usually quite
different from those reported by patients in the absence of
intoxication. For example, the hallucinations induced by LSD and other
drugs usually consist of intense visual experiences involving bright
colours, and explosive, concentric, rotational or pulsating movements
like those originally described by Hoffman.22 Careful medical
investigations have revealed that only a very small proportion of
psychiatric patients who experience hallucinations suffer from a
recognizable medical condition. In a study by Eve Johnstone, Fiona
MacMillan and Tim Crow at Northwick Park Hospital, near London, 15 out
of 268 patients with an initial diagnosis of schizophrenia were found to
be suffering from an identifiable medical disorder and, of these, 10
were experiencing hallucinations.23 In a similar study in the United
States, it was found that hallucinations associated with medical illness
generally appear suddenly, and are usually visual.24

Learning to live with voices When Marius Romme compared voice-hearers
who had been diagnosed as suffering from a mental illness with others
who had not, he found remarkably few differences in the experiences of
the two groups. Both patients and non-patients experienced a combination
of positive and negative voices, but the proportion of positive voices
was greater in the non-patients. The non-patients in contrast with the
patients often felt they had some control over their voices.25 In
Britain, a similar comparison conducted by Ivan Leudar and Phil Thomas
found comparable results.26 The majority in both groups reported that
their voices played a role in regulating everyday activities, for
example by issuing instructions. For many of those interviewed, their
voices appeared to be aligned with significant members of the person's
family, although this was less so for the patients. Overall,

these similarities suggest that it is not hallucinations per se that
determine whether people seek help from psychiatric services, but how
well they are able to cope with these experiences. Marius Romme and
Sondra Escher have suggested that the process of adapting to
hallucinations occurs in three distinct stages. They found that the
majority of those they interviewed first heard voices during a period of
emotional turmoil or following a traumatic experience of some kind. When
the voices appeared, they typically provoked feelings of confusion,
panic and powerlessness. However, this was usually followed by a phase,
lasting months or even years, during which the person hearing voices
struggled to find ways of coping. Some people learned to ignore their
voices, others learned to listen to those that offered positive advice,
and still others formulated some kind of 'contract' with the voices (for
example, agreeing to listen to them for only a limited amount of time
each day), which would limit their emotional impact. Eventually, some
voice-hearers began to regard their voices as a positive facet of
themselves. Romme and Escher's observations have been echoed by recent
studies carried out by clinical psychologists in Britain. Studies
conducted by Paul Chadwick and Max Birchwood in Birmingham have shown
that patients who believe that their voices are omniscient (all-seeing)
and omnipotent (all-powerful) have greatest difficulty in coping with
them, and that patients who appraise their voices as malevolent tend to
resist them, whereas those who appraise their voices as benevolent tend
to engage with them, by talking with them or taking seriously what they
have to say.27 Extending this work further, Birchwood has recently
studied the origins of these kinds of appraisals, finding that patients
who believe themselves to be less powerful and lower in social rank than
most other people are especially likely to regard themselves as
subordinate to their voices.28 Patients' relationships with their
voices, it seems, mirror their relationships with other people. A
slightly different approach to understanding patients' appraisals of
their hallucinations has been taken by my colleague in Manchester, Tony
Morrison, who has suggested that patients' interpretations of their
voices might be influenced by their more general beliefs about the
mind.29 These

kinds of metacognitive beliefs (literally, beliefs about beliefs) are
known to play a role in obsessional thinking. For example, people who
complain about intrusive thoughts often have excessive expectations of
their mental efficiency, catastrophic fears about losing control of
their thoughts, and superstitious beliefs about the consequences of this
happening (for example, 'If I did not control a worrying thought, and
then what I worried about really happened, it would be my fault'). In a
recent study, he has compared patients who hear voices with patients
suffering from persecutory delusions, patients suffering from panic
attacks, and ordinary people, finding that the hallucinating group had
more dysfunctional metacognitive beliefs than any of the other groups.30

Hear One Moment and Not the Next Most people who hear voices do not hear
them continuously or, if they do, the loudness and content of the voices
vary. Research that has explored factors influencing these changes has
provided important clues about the psychological mechanisms involved in
experiencing hallucinations. Three factors appear to be particularly
important.

Believing is seeing The findings of Romme and Escher in Holland, and
Chadwick, Birchwood and Morrison in Britain, suggest that patients'
beliefs about their voices may influence how they are experienced, a
conclusion that seems to be supported by the cross-cultural and
historical studies that we examined at earlier in the book. American
psychologist Ihsan Al-Issa has suggested that the positive attitude
taken towards hallucinations in some developing countries reflects
philosophical perspectives that differ markedly from the dominant
philosophy of the Western world.31 In Western societies, where
scientific materialism prevails, the need to distinguish between what is
'real' and what is 'imaginary' seems self-evident whereas, in less
materialistic cultures, this distinction is less important.

Al-Issa's survey of the cross-cultural evidence revealed that visual
hallucinations are more commonly reported by psychiatric patients in
nonWestern countries than by patients in the developed world, a finding
that was supported by evidence from the WHO study of the Determinants of
Outcome of Severe Mental Disorders.32 Similar differences have been
observed in historical comparisons. Herman Lenz studied psychiatric
records in Vienna that dated back over 100 years, finding that visual
hallucinations were more often recorded at the end of the nineteenth
century than in modern times.33 There is also evidence that the typical
content of hallucinations has changed with the passing of centuries.
Hallucinatory experiences recorded during the Middle Ages were almost
always religious in content, whereas those reported by modern
psychiatric patients often have persecutory or technological themes34
(one of my patients was convinced that the local police force was
talking to him via a radio receiver that they had surgically implanted
inside his head). The suspicion that these kinds of cross-cultural and
historical differences reflect differences in people's beliefs and
expectations is fuelled by the results of studies in which
hallucinations have been induced by suggestion. One of the first studies
of this sort was carried out, not with psychiatric patients, but with
students at a secretarial college. In the early 1960s, American social
psychologists Theodore Barber and David Calverley attempted to
demonstrate that most if not all hypnotic phenomena were caused by
compliance with the hypnotist's unusual instructions, rather than by the
induction of a special trance state. In one of a series of experiments,
they simply asked their group of secretarial students to close their
eyes and listen to the record 'White Christmas', but did not actually
play it. When questioned afterwards, about 5 per cent of the students
said that they had heard the record.35 When psychologists Sanford Mintz
and Murray Alpert repeated this procedure with psychiatric patients in
New York,36 they found that the 'White Christmas' effect was more
pronounced inpatients who were experiencing hallucinations than in
non-hallucinating patients or ordinary

people, a finding that one of my postgraduate students, Heather Young,
was later able to replicate.37

The role of external stimulation The second factor that is known to
influence hallucinations is external stimulation. Classical definitions
of hallucination, for example Esquirol's, imply that hallucinations
occur in the absence of any stimulus. Of course this cannot be strictly
true; there is always some kind of stimulus around. Patients' accounts
of their experiences often reveal the influence of this kind of
background stimulation. For example, they may complain that their voices
are worst when they are on their own at night, when they are in a crowd,
or when they are close to electrical machinery such as fans and washing
machines. In one of the few experiments to assess systematically the
impact of stimulation on hallucinations, Andrew Margo, David Hemsley and
Peter Slade asked a small group of highly co-operative patients to sit
in a soundproofed room and listen to various kinds of sounds. The
experiment included a sensory-restriction condition, in which the
participants wore headphones through which no sound was played, and
other conditions in which participants heard interesting speech, boring
speech, speech in a foreign language, pop music, meaningless blips and
'white noise' (the kind of unpatterned hiss that can be heard from a
mistuned radio). The main finding was that the patients' voices became
worse (louder and longer in duration) during the sensory-restriction and
white-noise conditions, but became less troublesome when the patients
were listening to interesting speech. Margo and his colleagues also
found that asking the patients to read aloud also seemed to suppress
their hallucinations.38Figure 14.1 shows the results of an experiment
that almost perfectly repeated these findings, which was recently
carried out by Tony Gallagher and colleagues at Trinity College,
Dublin.39

Stress and the impact of emotion

The third important factor that seems to affect hallucinations is
emotional arousal. Clinical reports have documented cases of previously
unaffected people who have experienced hallucinations following
particularly stressful events, such as extended military operations,40
being trapped in a coalmine,41 or after being taken hostage by
terrorists. In the last case, a study by Ronald Siegel found that eight
out of thirty-one terrorism victims experienced hallucinations varying
from simple geometric shapes to complex memory images.42 However,
perhaps the best evidence of a link between emotional stress and
hallucinations has emerged from investigations of people who have
recently suffered bereavement. In one study carried out in Britain it
was found that over 13 per cent of recently widowed men and women had
heard their dead spouse's voice.43 In another, carried out in Sweden, 71
per cent of bereaved elderly people reported a hallucination, or
hallucinatory-like experience, of their deceased partner.44 The feeling
that the deceased was present was particularly common. However, many of
those surveyed reported seeing and talking to their dead spouse.45 These
kinds of experiences were usually comforting, and were most commonly
reported by people who described their marriages as very happy. It is
possible that many apparent encounters with ghosts are in fact
hallucinations of this sort.46 Key to conditions 1: control (sitting
quietly); 2: reading aloud; 3: listening to interesting speech; 4:
listening to boring speech; 5: listening to pop music; 6: listening to
regular electronic blips; 7: listening to irregular electronic blips; 8:
sensory restriction (wearing headphones and dark goggles); 9: white
noise. Figure 14.1 The effects of external stimulation on the duration,
loudness and clarity of auditory hallucinations (from Gallagher, Dinin
and Baker, 1994).

As we have seen in earlier chapters, emotional arousal is usually
accompanied by physiological phenomena, such as changes in the
electrical conductivity of the skin (the electrodermal response). The
relationship between these changes and hallucinations has hardly been
investigated. However, one study has reported excessive fluctuations in
skin conductance in hallucinating patients,47 and, in another, these
fluctuations were observed to coincide with the appearance of voices.48

Murmurings Within

We are now close to being able to construct a theory of hallucinations.
Before we proceed, however, it will be helpful to remind ourselves about
a facet of normal mental life that seems particularly relevant to the
experiences of patients who hear voices. In Chapter 8, I discussed the
important phenomenon of inner speech, noting that we speak not only to
other people but also to ourselves, and that silent speech directed to
the self has important intellectual and emotional functions. We covertly
comment to ourselves about what we have done, formulate our plans for
the day ahead, keep transient memories (for example of telephone
numbers) alive by rehearsing them, and wrestle with problems that we
find emotionally challenging. However, despite the apparent silence of
inner speech, it is accompanied by small activations of the speech
muscles-- a phenomenon known as subvocalization. These activations,
which can be recorded using a machine called an electromyograph, occur
because, in early childhood, we first learn to talk to ourselves out
loud, and only later learn to suppress overt speech when no one else is
listening. Subvocalization, therefore, is a neuromuscular echo of a time
when we did not know how to speak silently. By now the reader will have
realized why I took the trouble to discuss inner speech at length. As
Ivan Leudar and Phil Thomas noted from their interviews with people who
heard voices, the most common form of auditory hallucination -- a voice
or voices issuing instructions -- mirrors the most common form of inner
speech, which is a stream of instructions issued to the self.49 Other
forms of auditory hallucination reflect less common forms of inner
speech. For example, most people occasionally lapse into an inner debate
or dialogue, in which different arguments or points of view are played
off against each other. This form of inner speech is similar to the kind
of auditory hallucination in which voices discuss the perceiver's
actions among themselves. The inescapable conclusion is that auditory
hallucinations are inner speech. Hard evidence supporting this idea has
been available since the late 1940s, when the first electromyographic
studies of hallucinating patients were conducted at Norwich State
Hospital in Connecticut by American

psychiatrist Louis Gould.50 In his first experiment, using equipment
that must be judged crude by modern standards, Gould conducted EMG
assessments of 100 patients, finding raised muscular activity in the
lips and chins of those who experienced voices. In a later study, he was
able to show that the onset of this activity coincided with patients'
reports of hallucinations. This finding has since been repeated many
times. Two Japanese psychiatrists, Tsuyoshi Inouye and Akira Shimizu,
reported in 1970 that they had been able to time precisely the onset of
increased activity in the speech muscles, and showed that this happened
just a few seconds before their patients reported hearing voices. They
also found that the duration and amplitude of the EMG activity they
recorded corresponded with the duration and apparent loudness of their
patients' voices.51 In two extraordinary case studies, researchers
investigating the inner speech hypothesis even found that it was
possible to record and listen to their patients' voices. The first was
conducted by Louis Gould, who used a sensitive microphone and amplifier
to detect rapid subvocal speech in one of his patients.52 In a later
study, British psychologists Paul Green and Martin Preston were able to
record the whispers of a male patient who said that he was hearing the
voice of a woman. When they amplified and played back their recordings
to their patient this had the surprising (and as yet unexplained) effect
of making his speech less and less silent, until both sides of the
conversation between the patient and the voice could be clearly heard
without the aid of special equipment.53 Compelling though the
electromyographical data are, they do not exhaust the physiological
evidence in favour of the inner speech hypothesis. Hallucinations should
be accompanied, not only by activation of the speech muscles, but also
by activation of the centres in the brain that control language. Since
the middle years of the nineteenth century, it has been known that, in
the majority of people, these centres are located on the left side of
the brain. An area of the left frontal cortex, identified by the French
neurologist Paul Broca in the 1860s, appears to be particularly
important in speech generation, so that damage to this area causes a
form of expressive aphasia, in which the ability to transform verbal
ideas into speech patterns is impaired. A second important area, located
in the left temporal lobe, was

discovered by the German neurologist and psychiatrist Karl Wernicke at
approximately the same time. Damage to this area causes a disorder known
as Wernicke's aphasia, in which language comprehension is particularly
disrupted. Figure 14.2 The left cerebral hemisphere of the brain,
showing Broca's and Wernicke's areas (from N. Gershwind (1979)
'Specializations of the human brain', in The Brain: A Scientific
American Book. San Francisco: Freeman).

An attempt to measure brain activations in hallucinating patients by
means of EEG, reported in 1982, found that the onset of auditory
hallucinations coincided with an increase in activity in the left
temporal lobe.54 This initial finding was later supplemented by evidence
gathered by means of the new functional neuroimaging technologies, which
allow activations in particular brain regions to be visualized with a
precision that far exceeds that achievable with the best EEG equipment.
Using single positron emission tomography (SPET) (a forerunner of PET)
with a small group of co-operating patients, British psychiatrists
Philip McGuire, G. M. Shah and Robin Murray were able to confirm that
the onset of auditory hallucinations coincided with increased blood flow
in the left temporal lobe, and also in Broca's area.55

A later study by David Silbersweig and colleagues, using PET, also found
that auditory hallucinations were associated with activation of the left
frontal cortex, together with structures deeper in the brain (various
subcortical nuclei and paralimbic regions). They also studied a single
drugfree patient who experienced combined auditory and visual
hallucinations in which adisembodied head talked to him. These
hallucinations were associated with activations not only in the auditory
association cortex (near Wernicke's area in the temporal lobe) but also
in the visual association cortex towards the rear of the brain, which is
involved in processing visual imagery.56 Taken together, the EMG, EEG,
SPET and PET findings strongly support the theory that auditory
hallucinations consist of inner speech. The findings from the
investigation by David Silbersweig and colleagues, which was unique in
studying a patient with visual hallucinations, also imply that visual
hallucinations consist of visual imagery. As Ralf Hoffman, a
psychiatrist at Yale University, has pointed out, these discoveries
therefore suggest that people who experience hallucinations are
mistaking their own thoughts and imaginings for things they are hearing
or seeing.57 Hoffman attempted to explain why these errors occur, by
suggesting that a difficulty in planning speech might lead hallucinating
patients to experience their speech as unintended and therefore alien to
themselves. According to this idea, we mentally formulate a speech plan
before we speak, and we recognize our speech as self-generated because
it matches the plan. The hallucinating patient, who lacks a plan, is
unable to do this. For some reason, this theory has attracted the
attention of a number of professional philosophers, who have enjoyed
pointing out various logical difficulties that it creates. Kathleen
Akins and Daniel Dennett have objected that the idea that speech is
normally preceded by a plan seems to create an infinite regress.58 If
intelligent behaviour requires a plan, the plan itself (which is
evidently intelligent) must surely also require a plan, and so we go on
for ever. Of course, Hoffman might escape this objection by arguing that
not all speech requires a plan, and that it is only unplanned speech
that is mistaken for a voice. However, as G. Lynn Stephens and George
Graham

have observed, when we come to consider the origins of speech plans this
version of the theory still leads us into a logical dead end.59
Presumably speech plans could themselves be intended or unintended. If
they are intended, they must require a plan, and we are back in the
Akins--Dennett regress. If, on the other hand, speech plans are
unintended, Hoffman's theory leads us to conclude that they should be
experienced as alien and, presumably therefore, the speech that follows
from them would be experienced as alien also. The answer to these
conundrums is not to reject Hoffman's proposal that auditory
hallucinations are inner speech, but to look more carefully at the
processes involved in recognizing that thoughts and images are
selfgenerated.

How we Recognize the Real Most of us take for granted the process of
distinguishing between our thoughts and images and the things we hear or
see. The experiences of people who hallucinate remind us that the
mechanisms responsible for this process are anything but self-evident.
There are good philosophical and scientific reasons for supposing that
we do not have a priori knowledge of whether a perceived event is
something that we have generated by ourselves, or something that is
generated by an agency or process external to the self. The
philosophical argument follows from Ludwig Wittgenstein's analysis of
the difficulties involved in describing our mental states. We saw in
Chapter 7 that emotional states cannot be identified by brute
introspection, because they do not come with appropriate labels attached
to them. Similarly, there is no reason to believe that perceptual states
have the labels 'real' or 'imaginary' printed on them. We have to infer
how best to describe any particular experience from whatever information
there is available to us, and there is no unique source of information
that we can rely on in order to make this judgement.

Scientific research on our ability to discriminate between mental events
(thoughts and emotions) and events in the world (someone speaking to us
or standing in front of us) has been pursued over the last two decades
by American experimental psychologist Marcia Johnson.60 Johnson calls
this ability source monitoring and she has focused, in particular, on
our ability to tell the difference between memories of things we have
perceived and memories of things we have thought ourselves. As Johnson
points out, professional scientists and artists often get into disputes
following a failure of this kind of source monitoring. This usually
results in someone claiming credit for an idea that originated from
someone else, but occasionally the opposite kind of error can occur.
(The songwriter Paul McCartney woke one morning with a tune that was
later to be the hit song 'Yesterday' running through his mind, and spent
days checking whether he had heard it from someone else.)61 There is not
enough space here to describe Johnson's many elegant experiments. It is
sufficient to say that she has shown that accurate source monitoring
depends on a variety of cues. For example, we often make use of
contextual information about time and location to decide whether an
event has 'really happened'. The inherent plausibility of the experience
may also be important -- if we recall ourselves performing acts that
violate the laws of nature we are likely to realize that we are
remembering a dream. Sensory qualities also play a role, since the more
vivid our memory of an event, the more likely we are to believe that it
really happened. Johnson has also shown that the mental operations we
use when generating a thought may provide us with useful information.
Try thinking of a vehicle beginning with C -- it is probably not
difficult to come up with an answer. Now try thinking of a vegetable
beginning with O -- most people find this much more difficult.\* When
thinking of the vegetable, you may have been aware of a feeling of
'cognitive effort' as you searched your mind for an appropriate
exemplar. At a later time, you will be able to remember this feeling,
which will help you recognize that you were not told the name of the
vegetable in question, but thought of it yourself. (The role of
cognitive effort explains Paul McCartney's confusion about the
authorship of 'Yesterday'. Apparently, the composition of the song had
not been

accompanied by the cognitive effort necessary for him to realize that
the song was his.) Marcia Johnson's research tells us that source
monitoring is a skill, much like the skill of discriminating between
rhinoceroses and elephants. Imagine that you are a game warden and, in
order to conduct some kind of zoological research, you are required to
shoot with an anaesthetic dart the former beast but not the latter. You
are standing in a jungle clearing, when a large grey animal charges into
view. Pulling the trigger, you discover to your dismay that you have
knocked out an elephant. On asking yourself how you could have made such
a bad mistake, you will discover that your judgement was undermined by
the same factors that undermine the sourcemonitoring judgements of
hallucinating patients. Perhaps your beliefs and expectations overrode
the evidence of your eyes. One of your companions may have told you that
only rhinoceroses live at this particular location. You therefore
assumed that you were seeing a rhinoceros and pulled the trigger without
making sure. Similarly, hallucinators who mistake their inner speech or
mental imagery for voices or visions of other people may be influenced
by what they expect to hear or see. This is why culture has such a
profound impact on hallucinations. Someone who grows up in a society
that recognizes the existence of ghosts, or that values spiritual
experiences, will be more likely to mistake the mental image of a
deceased relative for an apparition than someone who has grown to
maturity in a society that emphasizes the scientific world view. Another
possibility is that your judgement was impaired by degradation of the
stimulus. You may have been stalking your prey in darkness, or your view
may have been obscured by foliage, so that it was difficult to tell a
rhinoceros from an elephant. Our ability to vary the level of evidence
required before deciding that a stimulus is present, allows us to be
flexible when making judgements about the external world. In situations
in which our perception of our surroundings is degraded, it is often
necessary to adopt a weak 'criterion' for deciding that an expected
event has in fact occurred. (The rustle of the undergrowth, and the
vague perception of a bulky object moving before us, may be enough to
persuade us that we are in

the presence of a rhinoceros.) For similar reasons, hallucinating
patients are especially likely to mistake their thoughts for voices in
conditions in which there is very little external stimulation (for
example, when alone at night), or when external stimulation is chaotic
and unpatterned (for example, in the middle of a noisy crowd, or when
bombarded by white noise during a psychology experiment). Finally,
stress and a sense of urgency may have played a role. You may have
feared that a failure to anaesthetize the rhinoceros quickly would leave
you vulnerable to being charged and injured. Of course, stress
undermines mental efficiency. The extent to which we process the
information that is available to us is reduced, and our decisions tend
to be hasty and less accurate as a consequence. Just as we are more
likely to pull the trigger inappropriately when adrenalin is running
through our veins so, too, patients under stress are especially likely
to mistake their imaginings for real events. The influence of these
factors on the source-monitoring judgements of hallucinating patients is
illustrated in Figure 14.3. I have laboured my analogy with hunting
because the idea that source monitoring is a skill is not intuitively
obvious to many people. After all, we rarely consciously think about the
source of our perceptions, and source-monitoring judgements are nearly
always automatic (but, then, so are many of our judgements about
rhinoceroses and elephants). The analogy shows how hallucinations arise
from an error of judgement rather than an error of perception. It also
shows how hallucinating can be explained in terms of the same kinds of
mental processes that affect normal perceptual judgements.

Testing the Source-Monitoring Hypothesis The argument we have pursued so
far states that people who hallucinate make faulty judgements about the
sources of their experiences, and it is for this reason that they
mistake their inner speech or visual imagery for stimuli external to
themselves. However, we have not so far considered direct evidence that
hallucinating patients make this kind of error more frequently

than other people. The experiments that have addressed this issue have
been complex, and so the following account will necessarily highlight
only the essential elements of key studies. Figure 14.3 An outline model
of hallucinatory experiences. Adapted from R. P. Bentall (2000)
'Hallucinatory experiences', in E. Cardena, S. J. Lynn and S. Krippner
(eds.) Varieties of Anomalous Experience: Examining the Scientific
Evidence, Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.

Source monitoring for memories The earliest source-monitoring experiment
with hallucinating patients was reported by psychologist Arthur Heilbrun
in 1980.62 Heilbrun, based at Emory University in Atlanta, USA,
interviewed hallucinating and nonhallucinating patients and recorded
their opinions about a number of topics. Their verbatim remarks were
later included in a multiple-choice test alongside other statements
which were similar but not identical. The hallucinators had particular
difficulty when asked to recognize their own statements, and were less
able to do this than the non-hallucinating patients. Since this
promising start, other source-monitoring experiments have been conducted
with hallucinating patients by Heilbrun, by myself and by other
investigators.63 Rather than describing each of these experiments in
detail, I will focus on a recent study reported by Liverpool-based
psychologists

Peter Rankin and Pierce O'Carrol, which highlights some of the
complexities involved in this kind of research.64 Rankin and O'Carrol
decided not to study patients, but instead compared students who had
high scores on a questionnaire measure of hallucinatory experiences with
students who had low scores. Their experimental design was based on the
work of Marcia Johnson. The students were asked to learn 'paired
associates' (pairs of words, for example, 'vehicle--car'). Sometimes the
word-pairs were presented to the students and at other times their
memory was tested by presenting them with the first word in each pair
and asking them to recall the second (for example, 'Which word goes with
"vehicle"?'). The number of times that the words were presented and
tested was cunningly varied so that, for example, some of the words were
presented many times but tested on only a few occasions, whereas others
were presented on only a few occasions but tested on many. At the end of
this sequence of presentation and testing, the participants were asked
to say how many times they thought they had been presented with each
item. As Marcia Johnson had previously found, participants gave inflated
estimates for those words which had been most tested, indicating that
they were mistaking occasions on which they had recalled the words for
occasions on which the words had been presented. In Rankin and
O'Carrol's study, this effect was most evident in those students who
scored high on the hallucination measure, indicating that these people
were most prone to misattributing their mental events (the times they
recalled the words) for events in the world (presentations). Despite
these positive results, experimental studies of source monitoring for
memories with psychiatric patients, using similar methods, have produced
mixed results. In one investigation, Gus Baker, Sue Havers and I found
that patients who experienced hallucinations were especially likely to
mistake words that they had generated themselves for words that they had
heard,65 but Mark Seal and his colleagues in Melbourne, Australia,
failed to find the same result with an almost identical procedure.66
More recently, a similar study was conducted by Gildas Brebion at the
New York State Psychiatric Institute and his colleagues, who did find
evidence that hallucinators were more likely than non-hallucinating
patients to misattribute to an external source words that they had
produced themselves.67

Monitoring current perceptions One reason why the experiments we have
considered so far may have been inconclusive is that they have focused
on source monitoring for memories. However, hallucinations presumably
involve errors in the source monitoring of current perceptions. The
measurement of these kind of errors is particularly challenging, and was
the focus of my first experimental study of hallucinations, which
utilized a technique known as signal detection theory (SDT). SDT is a
mathematical model of perceptual judgement. When I was a psychology
student, it was one of my least favourite topics in the undergraduate
curriculum, partly because I found its mathematical realization hard
going. It was with some dismay that I later concluded that SDT was
exactly what I needed to test the source-monitoring theory of
hallucinations. In order to avoid generating the same level of distress
in my readers, I will try to outline the basic idea behind the theory in
a nonmathematical form (see Figure 14.4 for a diagrammatic explanation).
SDT attempts to explain how we decide that we really are perceiving
something. Although this is precisely the problem confronted by the
person suffering from hallucinations, the theory was initially designed
to account for our ability to detect weak stimuli (or 'signals' in the
jargon of the theory) when working with communication devices such as
telephones or radios. Imagine that you are in a darkened room. You think
that you have seen a chink of light but you cannot be certain. Before
the 1960s, psychologists would explain what happens in these
circumstances by 'threshold theory', according to which the light is
perceived only if it is above a certain magnitude. However, attempts to
measure the thresholds for particular kinds of stimuli (lights or
noises) failed to yield consistent results, so a different kind of
approach was required. SDT proposes that our ability to detect a signal
in these kinds of circumstances depends on two factors. The first factor
is perceptual

sensitivity, which might be thought of as the efficiency of our
perceptual system. The greater our perceptual sensitivity, the easier it
is to detect signals. The second factor is known as perceptual bias,
which can be thought of as our willingness to assume that the signal is
present.

Figure 14.4 Relationship between choices made in signal-detection
experiments and sourcemonitoring judgements. High perceptual sensitivity
results in a high proportion of hits and correct rejections and few
signal-detection errors (misses and false alarms). Increasing bias
towards detecting signals results in more hits and fewer misses, but at
the expense of an increase in false alarms and a decrease in correct
rejections (from R. P. Bentall (2000) 'Hallucinatory experiences', in E.
Cardena, S. J. Lynn and S. Krippner (eds.), Varieties of Anomolous
Experience: Examining the Scientific Evidence. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association).

Unlike perceptual sensitivity, which can only be affected by fairly
gross physiological changes, perceptual bias can change from moment to
moment, and is particularly affected by our beliefs and expectations.
Despite the dangers of analogy-overload, I will resort to one more in
the hope of making these ideas clear. In a typical signal-detection
experiment, participants listen to bursts of white noise, some of which
contain a signal (for example, a brief voice). After each burst, the
participant is asked to say whether the signal was present or not. In
these circumstances, the participant is behaving like a Cold War radar
operator whose job is to detect a possible incoming Soviet air strike.
Four things can happen. The person can detect the signal (the Soviets
attack, the radar operator spots them and they are intercepted), which
is known as a 'hit'. The person can also correctly fail to report a
signal (a 'correct rejection'). However, there are also two kinds of
possible error: a 'miss' (the Soviets strike without being

spotted, so that civilization as we know and love it is laid to waste)
and a 'false alarm' (the radar operator incorrectly believes that the
Soviet air force is on its way, and a lot of aviation fuel is wasted
before the error is discovered). Pursuing this analogy further, an
improvement in perceptual sensitivity is equivalent to an upgrade of the
radar system, resulting in an increase in hits and correct rejections
and a decrease in misses and false alarms. However, a change in
perceptual bias involves a greater willingness to believe that the
signal is present without any improvement in sensitivity, as if the
radar operator's haste to sound the alarm is influenced by the
prevailing political climate. An increase in bias (for example, during
periods of political tension such as the Cuban missile crisis) will
produce an increased probability of a hit (if the Soviets come they will
be detected) but also an increase in false alarms (the nervous radar
operator will be more likely to scramble the intercepting aircraft
unnecessarily). A decrease in bias (perhaps following a period of
détente) will reduce the risk of false alarms (aviation fuel will be
conserved) but increase the risk of misses (if the Soviets do attack
unexpectedly, they have a better chance of getting through). By now, it
should be obvious that false alarms are the hallucinations of signal
detection theory. The theory therefore provides us with a method for
determining whether hallucinations are the product of perceptual
problems (which would be evident as impaired perceptual sensitivity) or
biased source monitoring. Peter Slade and I therefore conducted two
signaldetection experiments, one comparing hallucinating and
non-hallucinating patients and one comparing students who had high
scores on a hallucination questionnaire with students who had low
scores. Both involved participants listening to many brief episodes of
white noise in order to detect occasions when a voice was also present
in the background. Applying a bit of mathematics to the participants'
judgements allowed us obtain separate measures for sensitivity and bias.
The results, which are shown in Figure 14.5, show clearly that the
hallucinating participants differed from their respective control
participants in bias but not in sensitivity.68 This finding was later
replicated by Peter Rankin and Pierce O'Carrol in their study of
Liverpool students,69 and also, using a slightly different

methodology, in an experiment conducted with patients by Gildas Brebion
and his colleagues.70 Overall, these observations are consistent with
our hypothesis that hallucinations arise from peculiar judgements about
what is real, rather than from deficits in patients' perceptual systems.
Other researchers have devised simpler methods for measuring source
monitoring for perceptions. My colleague Tony Morrison has carried out a
series of experiments in which participants were asked to provide
associations for words which were either emotionally positive (for
example, 'courage'), emotionally negative (for example, 'crazy') or
neutral (for example, 'bookcase'). Immediately after responding to each
cue word, the participants were asked to rate their responses for
'internality' ('How much was the word that came to mind your own?'). The
hallucinating patients gave much lower ratings (stating that the words
that came to mind did not seem to be their own) than the other
participants, especially when the cue words were either positively or
negatively emotionally salient.71 In a recent study that followed up
these findings, Morrison found that these effects were more marked when
patients were first encouraged to focus their thoughts on themselves (by
first being required to make up a short story about themselves) and were
less evident when the patients' attention was first directed elsewhere
(by asking them to make up a short story about someone else).72 Figure
14.5 Bias (B) and sensitivity (P(A)) scores from signal-detection
experiments conducted by Bentall and Slade (1985). The left panels show
comparisons between students scoring high and low on the Launay-Slade
Hallucination Scale (LSHS-A), and the right panels show comparisons
between hallucinating and non-hallucinating schizophrenia patients. Note
that low B scores indicate a strong bias towards detecting signals.

An even more direct measure of immediate source monitoring has been
developed by Louise Johns and Phil McGuire at the Institute of
Psychiatry in London. Johns and McGuire had participants speak into a
microphone. Their speech was immediately played back to them through
earphones after being distorted electronically. They were then asked to
say whether the speech they were hearing was theirs or someone else's.
In this experiment, hallucinating patients, in comparison with
non-hallucinating patients and ordinary people, were much more likely to
say that their voice belonged to someone else, especially if the content
of what was being said was derogatory.73 This progress in establishing
that hallucinating patients experience difficulty with source monitoring
has been matched by progress in identifying the neural structures
involved. Of course, we should not expect these to be the same
structures as those involved in generating the inner speech which
hallucinating people mistake for a voice. In a study carried out in
Toronto, Canada, Henry Szechtman and his colleagues PET scanned ordinary
people, some of whom were highly hypnotizable and had been selected for
their ability to experience hypnotic hallucinations. Blood flow to
different regions of the brain was measured as the participants listened
to

speech, imagined speech and, in the case of the hypnotizable
participants, hallucinated a voice. A region in the area on the right
side of the cerebral cortex known as the right anterior cingulate (also
known as Brodmann area 32)\* was found to be active in the hypnotizable
participants when they heard or hallucinated a voice, but not when they
imagined hearing it. The same conditions did not cause similar
activations in the non-hypnotizable participants. Szechtman and his
colleagues have concluded that the right anterior cingulate may contain
neural circuits that are responsible for deciding whether experiences
originate from the external world.74

Unfinished Business In this chapter I have tried to tell a story about
how hallucinations have become amenable to psychological analysis. I
have focused on auditory hallucinations, and have shown that they occur
when people mistake their inner speech for the speech of others. This
mistake seems to result from a failure of the psychological mechanisms
that normally allow us to tell the difference between the things that we
are thinking and the things that we are hearing. However, as a model of
hallucinations, the story is obviously incomplete. Some researchers,
notably Ivan Leudar and Phil Thomas, have questioned whether it is
accurate to characterize hallucinating people as poor at source
monitoring, because people who hear voices usually make very clear
distinctions between their hallucinations and their thoughts.75 The
implication of this observation is that the hallucinating person
experiences only some mental events as alien, and correctly identifies
others as selfgenerated. A related objection to the account that I have
offered is that it has treated source monitoring as an 'all-or-nothing'
phenomenon. The experiences of patients who have pseudohallucinations or
who suffer from thought insertion suggest that source monitoring can
fail to varying degrees or in different ways. As philosophers G. Lynn
Stephens and George Graham have pointed out, thought insertion seems to
be particularly difficult to explain, because patients having this
symptom describe their experiences as thoughts but deny that the
thoughts are their own.76

It seems likely that the selective failure of source monitoring can be
partly explained by taking into account the environmental factors that
are known to influence source-monitoring judgements. However, other
factors almost certainly play a role. Earlier, when I discussed the work
of Marcia Johnson, I pointed out that source monitoring in ordinary
people is less efficient for automatic thoughts than for thoughts that
require considerable cognitive effort. (When you struggle hard to think
of something, you know that it is you who is doing the thinking -- a
modern spin on Descartes' famous dictum 'cogito ergo sum'.) It therefore
follows that highly automatic thoughts are particularly likely to be
misattributed to an alien source. Of course, as we discussed in the
context of depression, negative thoughts about the self are usually
highly automatic, so it is not surprising that psychiatric patients
often mistake these kinds of thoughts for voices. Interestingly, when
Tony Morrison and Caroline Baker questioned a group of hallucinating
patients about their experiences, they found that they reported, in
addition to their voices, many more intrusive thoughts than ordinary
people. These thoughts were usually interpreted as distressing and
uncontrollable.77 A second possibility is that people's reactions to
their hallucinations help to determine which particular thoughts are
misattributed in the future. Tony Morrison draws a parallel between
hallucinations and intrusive thoughts that is helpful in this context.78
People who are troubled by obsessions often struggle to suppress them, a
strategy that can be counterproductive. Just as the injunction not to
think of a white bear immediately evokes an image of a snow-coloured
furry animal, so too, in ordinary people at least, the effort not to
think of ideas that are disturbing appears to guarantee that these ideas
recur.79 As Morrison has pointed out, in hallucinating patients, this
effect (another example of the reaction-maintenance principle) might
well lead to further experiences of the very thoughts that the
individual believes are alien. A third possibility, suggested by G. Lynn
Stephens and George Graham, is that thoughts are misattributed elsewhere
when they are experienced as egodystonic (that is, not consistent with
the individual's current beliefs about

the self). As they point out, this might happen for a variety of
reasons. For example, taking up a suggestion by the psychologist and
philosopher Louis Sass,80 they suggest that the hallucinating person may
be unable to construct an integrated representation of his thoughts,
emotions and actions, in order to make sense of his hallucinated
thoughts. Alternatively, perhaps the hallucinating patient denies that
she is the agent of an experience because she cannot explain it in terms
of her conception of her own intentional psychology ('Someone like
myself would never have a thought like this'). (The availability of an
alternative explanation for an experience -- for example, that it is a
ghost -- presumably makes this more likely.) Interesting though these
speculations are, they have yet to be properly tested by researchers.
Even if one or more of these three proposals should turn out to be
supported by future research, they probably fail to provide a completely
satisfactory account of the hallucinating person's source-monitoring
difficulties. Here are a few questions that remain unanswered: Why do
some patients experience their intrusive thoughts as voices outside
themselves, some experience them as voices inside their heads, and still
others experience them as thoughts that have been inserted into their
minds by other people? (Possibly because, once source-monitoring
failures occur, different patients form different theories in order to
explain their experiences.) Why do hallucinations typically begin during
periods of stress or trauma? (Possibly because these periods tend to
provoke a flood of intrusive, automatic thoughts about the self.) More
importantly, perhaps, why is it that some people seem to be more
vulnerable to source-monitoring failures than the rest of us? Could it
be that they never learn to monitor efficiently in the first place, but
manage to function adequately until their source-monitoring ability is
further compromised by some kind of trauma? (I will discuss this idea
further in Chapter 18.) Or could it be that people who later hallucinate
have some kind of subtle dysfunction of the neural circuits that are
responsible for source monitoring? (Henry Szechtman's findings suggest
that these circuits are located in the right anterior cingulate, but do
not tell us whether they are damaged in hallucinating people.)

The search for answers to these questions will probably keep
psychologists busy for a few years yet. OceanofPDF.com

15 The Language of Madness Language is the light of the mind. John
Stuart Mill1 In this review of what is known about psychotic complaints
I have held back until the end discussion of the symptom that has been
subjected to the most extensive psychological analysis. I have done so
because much of the relevant research has been misdirected by false
assumptions made by the founders of modern psychiatry. We will see that
even the term commonly used to describe this symptom -- thought
disorder-- is fraught with difficulty.

Misunderstanding the Problem? I have presented examples of thought
disorder in earlier chapters, when discussing the work of Eugen Bleuler
in Chapter 2 and when debating the boundaries of madness in Chapter 5.
On the surface, at least, the speech of the thought-disordered patient
seems jumbled and incoherent -- in extreme cases it is sometimes
described as a 'word salad'. When encountering thought-disordered
patients for the first time, the neophyte clinician, like the layperson,
might be forgiven for assuming that here, at last, is a symptom that
unequivocally meets Karl Jaspers' criterion of ununderstandability. This
was certainly how Kraepelin regarded the speech of mad people, as
revealed in the following case presentation to medical students: The
patient I will show you today has almost to be carried into the room, as
he walks in a straddling fashion on the outside of his feet. On coming
in, he throws off his slippers, sings a hymn loudly, and then cries
twice (in English), 'My father, my real father!' He is eighteen years
old, and a pupil of the Oberrealschule \[higher-grade school\], tall,
and rather strongly built, but with a pale complexion, on which there is
very often a transient flush. The patient sits with his eyes shut, and
pays no attention to his

surroundings. He does not look up even when he is spoken to, but he
answers beginning in a low voice, and gradually screaming louder and
louder. When asked where he is, he says, 'You want to know that too? I
tell you who is being measured and is measured and shall be measured. I
know all that, and could tell you, but I do not want to.' When asked his
name, he screams, 'What is your name? What does he shut? He shuts his
eyes. What does he hear? He does not understand; he understands not.
How? Who? Where? When? What does he mean? When I tell him to look he
does not look properly. You there, just look! What is it? What is the
matter? Attend: he attends not. I say, what is it, then? Why do you give
me no answer? Are you getting impudent again? How can you be so
impudent? I'm coming! I'll show you! You don't whore for me. You mustn't
be smart either; you're an impudent, lousy fellow, such an impudent
lousy fellow I've never met with. Is he beginning again? You understand
nothing at all, nothing at all; nothing at all does he understand. If
you follow now, he won't follow, will not follow. Are you getting still
more impudent? Are you getting impudent still more? How they attend,
they do attend,' and so on. In the end, he scolds in quite inarticulate
sounds...2 Quoting this encounter more than half a century after it was
published, the British anti-psychiatrist R. D. Laing drew attention to
Kraepelin's own understanding of the exchange. According to Kraepelin:
Although he understood all the questions, he has not given us a single
useful piece of useful information. His talk was... only a series of
disconnected sentences having no relation whatever to the general
situation.3 Research into thought disorder following Kraepelin has been
dominated by a set of assumptions that was made explicit by Eugen
Bleuler. Recall that, according to Bleuler, loosening of the
associations is one of the most important features of the disorder.
Elaborating on this hypothesis, he argued that the speech of psychotic
patients is difficult to understand because 'Fragments of ideas are
connected in an illogical way to create a new idea', and 'New ideas crop
up which neither the patient nor the observer can bring into any
connection with the previous stream of thought.' Bleuler described

the results of simple psychological experiments in support of this
analysis. For example: In experimental investigations of associations,
we find a notable frequency of 'mediate associations'. I suspect that
only the lack of sufficient observation has been responsible for our
inability to demonstrate them more frequently in the thought-processes
of our patients. The above mentioned example \[a patient had associated
the death of a relative to the word 'wood'\], the association 'wood
(wood-coffin) -- dead cousin' may be considered as a mediate
association.4 Although a careful reading of Bleuler reveals that he did
not believe speech to be merely an overt manifestation of thought, his
account suggested to many later investigators that thought disorder is
literally a disorder of thinking. Because thinking was seen as a proper
object of psychological inquiry by even the most hard-nosed biological
psychiatrist, the thinking of psychotic patients therefore began to
receive special attention from psychologists. The consequence was a
plethora of studies and theories published from the 1930s onwards. Some
researchers suggested, for example, that schizophrenia patients fail to
follow the rules of logic.5 Others, such as the Russian developmental
psychologist Lev Vygotsky6 and the American neurologist Kurt Goldstein,7
argued that schizophrenia patients were incapable of dealing with
abstract ideas. A particularly influential theory was developed by the
American researcher Norman Cameron in the 1940s. Cameron, who was
trained both in psychology and psychiatry, observed patients as they
attempted psychological tests, and proposed ways of categorizing their
unusual responses. For example, some responses could be classified under
the term asyndesis, indicating the incorrect connecting of concepts that
lacked genuine causal links (as in a patient attempting to explain why
the wind blows, with 'Quickness, blood, heat of deer, length; driven
power, motorized cylinder, strength'). Others, in which a term is
replaced by an approximately related term, were classified as metonymic
distortion (as in a patient saying that he was alive 'because you have
menu three times a day; that's the physical').8 Expanding on these
ideas, Cameron eventually

grouped all of these deviant responses under the single heading of
overinclusion, which he believed was a consequence of failing to limit
attention to relevant stimuli.9 When experiments were conducted to test
these early ideas, the results were often inconclusive, or could be
interpreted in many different ways. In retrospect, it is now obvious
that the research conducted during this period was constrained by two
major limitations. First, as University of Wisconsin psychologists Loren
and Jean Chapman pointed out in a seminal review published in 1973, most
investigators had failed to establish that the patients they were
studying were actually thought-disordered.10 Because 'schizophrenia' was
regarded as a lump, it was often assumed that any abnormality in
thinking should be observable in all schizophrenic patients, regardless
of their actual symptoms. Second, as the linguists Sherry Rochester and
J. R. Martin pointed out in their book Crazy Talk, published in 1979,11
Blueler's identification of thought disorder with thinking had led
researchers to neglect what psychotic patients were actually saying.
Flying in the face of this trend, Rochester, of the Clark Institute in
Toronto, and Martin, at the University of Sydney in Australia, argued
that, as the only evidence of thought disorder is peculiar speech,
speech and not thinking should be the focus of the psychopathologist's
inquiries (see Figure 15.1). Furthermore, they pointed out that it is
the incomprehensibility of the psychotic person's speech that leads to
the diagnosis of thought disorder. They therefore suggested that the
question, 'What is abnormal about psychotic thinking?' should be
replaced with the more useful question, 'Why do ordinary listeners find
psychotic speech so difficult to understand?'

Will the real symptoms of schizophrenia please stand up? Rochester and
Martin's approach to thought disorder amounted to something of a
revolution in schizophrenia research. At the same time,

other investigators were questioning other assumptions about the speech
of psychotic patients. Nancy Andreasen, a prominent neo-Kraepelinian who
had obtained a Ph.D. in literature before training in medicine, realized
that research was only likely to progress if adequate criteria could be
devised for determining when speech is psychotic. Like Rochester and
Martin, she noted the anomalous status of the term 'thought disorder',
suggested that it might be abandoned and, after careful consideration,
proposed that it be replaced by the more precise but longer term,
disorder of thinking, language and communication.12 Figure 15.1 Cartoon
(adapted from S. Rochester and J. R. Martin (1979). Crazy Talk: A Study
of the Discourse of Psychotic Speakers, New York: Plenum) illustrating
the problem of defining thought disorder.

Andreasen developed her Scale for the Assessment of Thought, Language
and Communication (TLC Scale) in the hope that it would enable
investigators to measure psychotic speech more precisely.13 (In Chapter
5, p. 102 I described the use of this scale in a study of eccentrics.)
On the basis of classic and modern accounts of thought disorder, and
from observations of patients, she defined twenty different kinds of
disordered speech, which are listed in Table 15.1. The scale provides
fairly precise definitions, allowing each type of abnormality to be
rated on a five-point scale. High inter-rater reliabilities can be
obtained for these scores when raters are appropriately trained.

Factor analysis revealed that psychotic speech abnormalities fell into
two main types. Items on the TLC Scale that reflected various kinds of
speech incoherence fell into a single factor, which Andreasen labelled
positive thought, language and communication disorder. However, some
items, particularly poverty of speech (saying very little) and poverty
of content of speech (speech with only vague content), fell into a
second factor, which she labelled negative thought, language and
communication disorder. (This distinction clearly maps on to the more
general distinction between positive and negative symptoms of psychosis,
which we considered in Chapter 4.) When Andreasen used her scale to
compare patients with different diagnoses, she found that some types of
speech described in the classic literature of psychiatry -- for example
clanging, echolalia and neologisms -- were so uncommon that they
appeared to have very little practical significance. Others, for example
tangentiality, derailment, incoherence, illogicality, loss of goal and
perseveration, appeared to be equally common in schizophrenia and
mania.14 To Andreasen's surprise, the manic patients showed more
evidence of positive thought, language and communication disorder than
the schizophrenia patients, whereas the reverse was true of negative
thought, language and communication disorder.15 Positive thought,
language and communication disorder, it seems, is not a specific
complaint of schizophrenia patients. Table 15.1 Main types of thought,
language and communication disorder described by N. C. Andreasen (1979)
'The clinical assessment of thought, language and communication
disorders', Archives of General Psychiatry, 36: 1315--21.

Type of disorder Poverty speech

of

Poverty

of

Definition

Example

Restriction in the amount of spontaneous speech. Replies to questions
are brief and concrete. Speech

that

content of speech

Pressure speech

conveys little information. Language is vague and over-abstract. of

An increase in the amount of spontaneous speech compared to what is
considered customary.

Distractible speech

During mid speech, the subject is changed in response to a stimulus.

'Then I left San Francisco and moved to... Where did you get that tie?'

Tangentiality

Replying to questions in an oblique, tangential or irrelevant manner.

Q: 'What city are you from?' A: 'Well, that' a hard question. I'm from
Iowa. I really don't know where my relatives came from, so I don't know
if I'm Irish or French.'

Derailment

Ideas slip off the track on to another which is obliquely related or
unrelated.

'The next day when I'd be going out you know, I took control, like uh, I
put bleach on my hair in California.'

Incoherence (word salad)

Speech that is incomprehensible at times

Q: 'Why do people believe in God?' A: 'Because making a do in life.

Isn't none of that stuff about evolution guiding isn't true any more.'
Illogicality

Conclusions are reached that do not follow logically (non sequiturs or
faulty inductive inferences).

Clanging

Sounds rather than meaningful relationships appear to groven words.

'I'm not trying to make noise. I'm trying to make sense. If you can make
sense out of nonsense, well, have fun.'

Neologisms

New formations.

word

'I got so angry I picked up a dish and threw it at the geshinker.'

Old words used in a new and unconventional way.

'His boss was a see over.' and unconventional way.

Word approximations Circumstantiality

Speech that is very indirect and delayed at reaching its goal. Excessive
long-windedness.

Loss of goal

Failure to follow chain of thought to a natural conclusion.

Perseveration

Persistent repetition of words of ideas.

'I think I'll put on my hat, my hat, my hat.'

Echolalia

Echoing of other's speech.

Q: 'Can we talk for a few minutes?' A: 'Talk for a few minutes.'

Blocking

Interruption of a train of speech before completed.

Stilted speech

Speech excessively and formal.

Self-reference

stilted

'The attorney comported himself indecorously.'

Patient repeatedly and inapropriately refers back to self.

Q: 'What's the time?' A: 'It's 7 o'clock. That's my problem.

Phonemic paraphasia

Mispronunciation; syllables out of sequence.

'I slipped on the lice and broke my arm.'

Semantic paraphasia

Substitution of inappropriate word.

'I slipped on the coat, on the ice I mean, and broke my book.'

Meaning, Emotion and Disordered Speech One further assumption about
thought disorder has taken a tumble in the last few decades. It will be
recalled that Kraepelin regarded his patient's disordered speech as
merely 'a series of disconnected sentences having no relation whatever
to the general situation'. Rochester and Martin's

characterization of thought disorder as failed communication, in
contrast, leaves open the possibility that the patient is attempting to
communicate something of real importance to himself. This much was
obvious to R. D. Laing, who found it is all too easy to comprehend the
apparently bizarre utterances of Kraepelin's patient: What does the
patient appear to be doing? Surely he is carrying on a dialogue between
his own parodied version of Kraepelin, and his own defiant rebelling
self. 'You want to know that too? I tell you who is being measured and
is measured and shall be measured. I know all that, and I could tell
you, but I do not want to.' This seems to be plain enough talk.
Presumably he deeply resents this form of interrogation, which is being
carried out before a lecture room of students. He probably does not see
what it has to do with the things that must be deeply distressing him.
But these things would not be 'useful information' to Kraepelin except
as further 'signs' of a 'disease'. Kraepelin asks him his name. The
patient replies by an exaggerated outburst in which he is now saying
what he feels is the attitude implicit in Kraepelin's approach to him:
What is your name? What does he shut? He shuts his eyes... Why do you
give me no answer? Are you getting impudent again? You don't whore for
me (i.e. he feels that Kraepelin is objecting because he is not prepared
to prostitute himself before the whole classroom of students), and so
on... Now it seems clear that this patient's behaviour can be seen in at
least two ways... One may see his behaviour as 'signs' of 'disease'; one
may see his behaviour as expressive of his existence... What is the
patient's experience of Kraepelin? He seems to be tormented and
desperate. What is he 'about' in speaking and acting in this way? He is
objecting to being measured and tested. He wants to be heard.16 Laing
was correct in supposing that psychotic speech can often be accurately
decoded by an empathetic clinician. Psychologist Martin Harrow and his
psychiatrist colleague Mel Prosen, working in Chicago in the late 1970s,
took the unusual step of asking patients to account for their

apparently bizarre verbalizations.17 Their patients were first asked to
complete a few simple tests of verbal intelligence -- for example,
explaining the meaning of simple proverbs. Bizarre or idiosyncratic
statements were then identified from the patients' tape-recorded
answers. A week later, each patient was sensitively interviewed by
Prosen, who said that he was interested in learning what had been in the
patient's mind. Independent judges later evaluated each patient's
tape-recorded explanations. It would have surprised Kraepelin to learn
that the patients were often able to give coherent explanations of their
incoherent speech. Their idiosyncratic statements often reflected the
intrusion of personally salient ideas, for example memories from early
life, a phenomenon that Harrow and Prosen described as 'intermingling'.
Usually, the intermingled material centred around a variety of topics,
rather than a single issue. It was as if the patient, when struggling to
answer the intelligence questions, was constantly reminded of things
that were more important to her, and was unable to stop herself from
deviating from the task in hand. It should therefore be no surprise that
the quality of speech of thoughtdisordered patients depends on what they
are trying to discuss. Although unequivocal evidence that this is the
case has only recently become available, this possibility was considered
by earlier researchers. Unfortunately, although many studies carried out
during the 1950s and afterwards attempted to assess the thought and
language of patients when they were presented with emotionally laden and
emotionally neutral stimuli, the results were inconclusive, almost
certainly because the emotionally laden material was not personally
signifi-cant.18 (For example, in a study carried out by Loren and Jean
Chapman, patients were asked to solve analogy problems such as 'Vagina
is to lock as penis is to...?').19 An exception was an experiment
reported in 1972 by Algimantas Shimkunas, working at the University of
Missouri, who interviewed patients in two conditions. In one, Shimkunas
disclosed his own feelings about difficult interpersonal relationships
and asked the patients to do the same; in the other, the same general
themes were addressed but no pressure was put on the patients to talk
about their feelings. Far more thought disorder was observed in the
disclosure condition.20

Recent studies have supported Shimkunas' findings. In a small experiment
conducted by Gill Haddock and myself, in which we used Andreasen's TLC
Scale, we compared thought-disordered patients' speech when talking
about emotionally neutral topics (for example, football) with their
speech when talking about the circumstances leading to their admission
to hospital. More thought disorder was evident in the second of these
conditions.21 Similar findings were obtained by American psychologist
Nancy Docherty and her colleagues at Kent State University in Ohio, in a
much more impressive and extensive series of investigations. Docherty
examined the speech of schizophrenia patients when asked to talk about
'good memories of pleasant, nonstressful times' and when asked to talk
about 'bad memories of stressful times'. In the different studies,
communication disorder was measured in different ways, but a consistent
pattern emerged -- speech disturbance was markedly more evident when
patients were asked to talk about negative topics.22 This effect of
emotional arousal does not seem to be restricted to schizophrenia
patients. Sara Tai, a clinical psychologist based in my own department,
has recently shown that bipolar patients who are currently manic are
especially sensitive to the topic of conversation.23 Interestingly, she
found that the speech of bipolar patients who are currently depressed is
not affected in this way. Drawing this evidence together, it seems that
vulnerable individuals are most likely to speak in an incoherent way
when they are emotionally aroused, and they are most likely to be
emotionally aroused when talking about personal issues. This conclusion
will probably fail to amaze any reader who has attempted to explain
something complex to a friend while feeling distressed; however, the
effect seems to be much more marked in psychotic patients than in
ordinary people.

From Psychology to Language Given that thought disorder appears to be
primarily a disorder of communication, it is obviously important to
examine the linguistic skills of

affected people. In this context it is useful to distinguish between
language comprehension and language production. The account I have given
so far suggests that psychotic patients experience specific difficulties
when generating speech, while, not surprisingly, their ability to
understand the speech of others seems relatively unimpaired. William
Grove and Nancy Andreasen examined the ability of schizophrenic and
manic patients to understand spoken language, using a variety of
measures, and also included a test of digit span (the ability to recall
short sequences of numbers) in order to check that poor performance on
their linguistic tests could not be attributed to global handicaps, such
as poor attention or a lack of motivation. Although they expected their
patients to perform poorly on the linguistic tests and not on the digit
span measure, the opposite turned out to be the case.24 If
thought-disordered patients can understand the speech of others, it
might be expected that they would recognize when the speech of other
patients is idiosyncratic. This prediction was supported by the results
of a study carried out by Martin Harrow and Joan Miller. Patients were
asked to explain the meaning of common proverbs and were then asked to
judge their own answers and also the answers of other patients. Patients
suffering from thought disorder failed to realize that their own
incoherent answers were atypical. However, they accurately judged normal
answers to be typical and the abnormal answers of other
thought-disordered patients as idiosyncratic.25 It will be recalled that
Rochester and Martin argued that researchers should attempt to find out
why ordinary people find psychotic speech so difficult to understand.26
In a nearly attempt to answer this question, Brendan Maher and his
colleagues at Harvard University used a primitive computer program to
analyse passages written\* by schizophrenia patients.27 This system
worked by using a dictionary to look up and assign words to various
categories. Prior to the analysis, a panel of judges divided the
passages into those that were thought-disordered and those that were
not. The main finding was that writing tended be judged
thought-disordered when there were more objects than subjects, which
usually happened at the end of sentences ('Doctor, I have pains in my
chest and hope and wonder if

my box is broken and heart is beaten for my soul and salvation and
heaven, Amen').28 Rochester and Martin's own research introduced the
concept of cohesion analysis, which they took from the work of the
linguists M. A. K. Halliday and R. Hasan. They studied three groups:
thought-disordered schizophrenia patients, non-thought-disordered
schizophrenia patients, and ordinary people. Speech was elicited from
each of the participants using three procedures: an interview in which
they were asked to speak about anything they found interesting, an
experimental condition in which they were asked to talk about a series
of cartoons, and a narrative task in which they had to listen to and
repeat a short story. 'Cohesion', as defined by Halliday and Hasan,
refers to the extent to which different parts of a spoken text are
linked meaningfully together, so that they appear coherent to the
listener. The links that achieve this effect are known as cohesive ties,
and are categorized into five main types (see Table 15.2). For example,
'reference' refers to a link in which the interpretation of something
said has to be sought elsewhere. An example is the use of pronomials, as
in 'John went down and later he returned home' (the correct
interpretation of 'he' is given by 'John' earlier in the sentence).
Another type of cohesion is given by ellipsis, in which part of a
sentence appears to have been deleted in order to avoid repetition, as
in 'He's got energy too; he's got a lot more than I do' ('energy' is
implicit but missing from the second part of the construction). Lexical
cohesion involves parts of the text that are linked by meaning, as in 'I
got angry at my brother but I don't often get mad' ('angry' and 'mad'
are synonyms in this example). As American psychologists Phil Harvey and
John Neale later observed, perhaps one of the most important findings
from this study was the unexpected competence of the
non-thought-disordered patients.29 The speech of these patients appeared
to be completely normal. By contrast, the thought-disordered patients
produced fewer cohesive ties in the narrative condition and, during the
interviews, they seemed to make excessive use of lexical cohesion. In a
further analysis, Rochester and Martin classified the cohesive ties as
endophoric and exophoric according to the location of the

reference entailed. Endoph-oric ties refer to information that lies
elsewhere in the text (as in, for example, 'Penny is always late. I hope
she gets here soon'). Exophoric reference involves information from the
context or circumstances surrounding the speech ('Here she comes!').
They found evidence that the thought-disordered patients made excessive
use of exophoric references, and were more likely to provide unclear
references than ordinary people. Table 15.2 Cohesive ties defined by
Halliday and Hasan (adapted from S. Rochester and J. R. Martin (1979).
Crazy Talk: A Study of the Discourse of Psychotic Speakers. New York:
Plenum).

Type cohesion

of

Example

Reference

Pronomial reference: 'We met Joy Adamson and had dinner with her in
Nairobi.'

Substitution

Verbal substitution: 'Eastern people take it seriously, at least some of
them do.'

Ellipsis

Nominal ellipsis: 'He's got energy too. He's got a lot more \[energy\]
than I do.'

Conjunction

Additive conjunction: 'I read a book in the past few days and I liked
it.'

Lexical cohesion

Synonym: 'I got angry at M. but I don't often get mad.'

The publication of Rochester and Martin's book was followed by a number
of studies which mostly replicated their main findings for schizophrenia
patients, although findings for manic patients were less consistent. In
Britain, Til Wykes and Julian Leff conducted cohesion analyses of
samples of speech from a small number of patients in both diagnostic
groups. Like Rochester and Martin, they found a low number of cohesive
ties in the speech of the schizophrenia patients, but more cohesive ties
in the speech of the manic patients.30 (As there were no healthy
controls, this finding should not be taken to imply that manic speech is
normal.) In a more ambitious study, conducted in New York, Phil Harvey

divided both schizophrenia and manic patients into subgroups according
to whether they were thought-disordered or not, and compared them with
ordinary people. There was no difference between the schizophrenia and
many patients overall, but there were clear differences between those
patients who were thought-disordered and those who were not. The
thought-disordered patients, regardless of their diagnosis, used fewer
cohesive ties and more incompetent references.31 Although some linguists
have not been persuaded by Rochester and Martin's approach,32 the
evidence on the whole suggests that poor cohesion and abnormal
references contribute to the listener's bafflement when confronted with
psychotic speech. Applying these ideas, Nancy Docherty has recently
developed a measure of thought, language and communication disorder that
focuses specifically on these kinds of peculiarities. The Communication
Disturbance Index measures six types of linguistic abnormalities
observed in schizophrenia and manic patients (see Table 15.3).33 Using
this measure, Docherty was able to show that some kinds of speech
disorder (over-inclusive or vague references, ambiguous word meanings
and confused references) increase when patients are asked to speak about
emotionally negative topics, whereas others (missing referents and
structural unclarities) are unaffected.34

And Back to Psychology So far I have emphasized the idea that thought
disorder is best considered a disorder of communication. However, our
ability to speak is presumably influenced by global cognitive processes.
In order to explain psychotic speech, therefore, it will be necessary to
ascertain how abnormal communication is connected, if at all, to the
more general psychological deficits found in psychotic patients. (Of
course, this approach does not necessarily imply a return to the old
idea that thought disorder is literally disordered thought.)

Discourse planning

One possibility is that psychotic people have difficulty planning what
they are going to say. Consistent with this idea, Ralf Hoffman, at Yale
University in the USA, inferred ineffective discourse planning in
thoughtdisordered patients from a structural analysis of their speech,
in which the links between different ideas were traced. It was found
that propositions contained in the speech of ordinary people seemed to
be organized into a 'strong hierarchy' of ideas whereas this was not the
case for the speech of thought-disordered schizophrenia patients.35 In a
subsequent study, Hoffman claimed that his method allowed him to
discriminate between the disordered speech of schizophrenia Table 15.3
Categories of linguistic abnormality measured by the Communication
Disturbance Index (Docherty, DeRosa and Andreasen, 1996).

Category

Definition

Example

Vague references

Over-inclusive words or phrases that obscure meaning because of a lack
of specificity.

'Being is is, it's not bad. You can do things and plus you can make
people afraid of you.'

Confused references

Words or phrases that refer ambiguously to one of at least two clear-cut
alternative referents.

'Take the clock, for instance. You got ten, twelve on it, you got other
numbers on it, you got a volume button on it, it go up and down.'

Missing information references

References to information not previously presented and not known to the
listener.

'I like to work all right. Some of those shops were filthy... I liked
the bakeries, some of the shops are clean.' (No prior mention of shops
or bakeries.)

Ambiguous word meanings

Instances in which a word or phrase could have a number of different
meanings, and the intended meaning is not obvious from the context.

'I had a chance to grow with him but I got a divorce because I
couldn't.'

Wrong word references

Use of an odd or apparently inappropriate word or expression in an
otherwise clear utterance.

'I was trying to predict them people that I need, I need to get out of
there.'

Structural unclarities

Failures of meaning due to a breakdown or inadequacy of grammatical
structure.

'I was socializing with friends. Girlfriends and friends the same as
male.'

patients, and that of manic patients, which was characterized by rapid
shifts from one discourse plan to another.36 Unfortunately, Hoffman's
method of analysis has been criticized by other researchers for being
unreliable and subjective.37 Although other researchers have reported
findings that have been interpreted (to my mind, unconvincingly)as
consistent with Hoffman's theory,38 it seems fatally flawed for reasons
that we identified in the last chapter. The idea that speech requires a
plan in order to be coherent raises the spectre of an infinite regress
in which a plan is required in order to compose the discourse plan, and
seems to underestimate the extent to which people can construct coherent
speech 'on line'.

Speaking to the needs of the listener

A second possibility is that thought-disordered patients are somehow
unable to adjust their speech to meet the needs of the listener. In
principle, this might happen for one or both of two reasons. First,
patients may be unable to monitor their own speech, so they fail to
recognize that it is unintelligible. Second, they may be unable to
understand what the needs of the listener are. The study by Martin
Harrow and Joan Miller which I discussed earlier is consistent with the
first of these hypotheses; it will be recalled that thoughtdisordered
patients failed to recognize that their own speech was unintelligible to
others but could easily recognize when the speech of others was
incoherent. An observation that is also consistent with the hypothesis
was made by linguist Elaine Chaika when she asked psychotic patients and
ordinary people to repeat a short story; when digressing or breaking off
in the middle of a grammatical construction the normal participants
would signal that they had done so and then return to the story, whereas
the schizophrenia patients appeared unaware they were deviating from the
task.39 A more sophisticated approach to examining the role of
self-monitoring in thought-disordered patients was used in a series of
studies conducted by Phil Harvey at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York. In
the last chapter I introduced the concept of source monitoring when
discussing hallucinations, focusing on difficulties that patients
experience when attempting to distinguish between things that they hear
and things that they think. However, there is another type of source
monitoring in which we distinguish between what we have thought and what
we have said. Clearly, an impairment of this skill will make individuals
vulnerable to omitting important segments of information when speaking
to others, making their speech appear incoherent. Throughout the 1980s,
Harvey and his colleagues carried out a number of studies in which
patients were asked to read one set of words aloud, and to imagine
themselves reading a second set of words (the 'think' condition).
Afterwards, they were shown a list of words including those they had
read aloud, those they had thought, and some which had not been
presented

previously, and were asked to say which of them they had read and which
of them they had thought. In general, it was found that poor performance
on this kind of task was associated with thought disorder in
schizophrenia patients but not in manic patients.40 The second possible
explanation for the thought-disordered patient's inability to speak to
the listener's needs has also received some support. If
thought-disordered patients cannot understand those needs, we should
expect them to perform badly on theory-of-mind tests. This possibility
has been explored in a series of studies recently undertaken at the
Centre Hospitalier de Versailles in France by Yves Sarfati, Marie
Christine HardyBayle and others.41 In brief, these studies have shown
that patients who have high scores on Andreasen's TLC Scale perform less
well on a variety of ToM tasks than patients who show no evidence of
thought, language and communication disorder.

Working memory A third possibility is that more basic cognitive
processes are compromised in thought-disordered patients. We have
already seen evidence that these patients suffer from deficits in
working memory (the part of the memory system responsible for holding
information for brief periods of time). In Chapter 8, I described a
study by Tom Oltmanns and John Neale in which it was discovered that
poor performance on the digit span with distraction task was associated
with communication disorder.42 The findings of Grove and Andreasen,
which we considered earlier, are also consistent with this observation,
as are the results of many other studies.43 In attempts to demonstrate a
causal connection between working memory deficits and communication
disorder, some investigators have experimentally impaired the working
memory system in ordinary people. Deanna Barch and Howard Berenbaum of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign interviewed undergraduate
students in two conditions: under normal circumstances and in a
'dual-task' condition in which they also had to perform a task that was
designed to keep the working memory

system busy. As a consequence, the speech of the students showed less
grammatical complexity and more long pauses. As Barch and Berenbaum
note, these characteristics have been observed in the speech of
psychotic patients. However, other well-documented features of psychotic
speech (for example, incompetent references) were not observed.44 More
dramatic impairments of working memory can be temporarily induced by
administering ketamine, and a number of investigators have therefore
studied the speech of healthy volunteers who have been persuaded to take
this drug. A group of investigators at the US National Institute of
Mental Health gave an infusion of ketamine to ten ordinary people, who,
afterwards, showed evidence of thought disorder as measured by
Andreasen's TLC Scale, and also poor performance on a working memory
measure. Interestingly, the decrease in working memory performance
experienced by the participants correlated with the severity of their
communication difficulties.45 Terry Goldberg and Daniel Weinberger, also
at NIMH, have pointed out that the relationship between working memory
and communication disorder may not be as simple as these results seem to
suggest. Neurological patients who have damage to their frontal lobes
often suffer from impaired working memory, but almost never show
evidence of thought disorder. On the other hand, thought-disordered
patients often respond abnormally on simple word association tests,
which do not require the use of working memory.46

Was Bleuler right? A final approach to understanding the relationship
between cognitive deficits and communication disorder has focused on a
part of our cognitive system known as semantic memory, and bears some
similarity to Bleuler's original theory. The semantic memory system --
which stores meanings, knowledge and ideas -- is thought to consist of
complex networks of concepts, connected by associative links. According
to this very general model (of which there are many specific versions),
one concept leads to another by a process of 'spreading activation' --
as a concept becomes

awakened in the mind (because the individual is thinking about it)
closely connected concepts are also activated or 'switched on'. In this
way, one idea leads to another. A phenomenon that demonstrates this
effect is known as 'semantic priming'. In a semantic priming experiment,
participants are shown words in quick succession and are asked to
indicate in some way (for example, by reading aloud, or by pressing a
button on a computer) when they have recognized each word. Recognition
is faster (by a few tens of milliseconds) if a word is preceded by a
meaningfully related word (for example, if 'black' is preceded by
'white') than if it is preceded by an unrelated word (for example,
'soft').47 The conventional explanation for this effect is that
perception of a word ('black') leads automatically to the partial
activation (or 'priming') of related words ('white'), so that the brain
is already 'tuned' into them, and recognition is easier. It is believed
that many of the concepts represented in semantic memory are organized
hierarchically. For example, the concept of 'living things' includes
'animals', which includes 'birds', which in turn includes 'crows'. A
robust finding from ordinary people is the so-called
category-relatedness effect-- it takes us less time to decide that a
typical exemplar belongs to a category ('a crow is a bird') than it
takes us to decide that an atypical exemplar belongs to a category ('a
penguin is a bird'). Again this can be understood in terms of activation
spreading from the category concept to typical exemplar concepts, but
not to the atypical exemplars. As we have already seen, some of the
earliest attempts to study these processes in schizophrenia patients
were made by Bleuler and Jung, who examined patients' word associations.
In fact, modern research has consistently shown defective semantic
memory in schizophrenia patients. For example, some studies have shown
that patients often perform poorly when asked to sort objects into
categories, to remember object names, or to describe the defining
features of concepts such as 'animals' and 'birds'.48 Although there is
evidence that these problems cannot simply be attributed to poor
motivation or more general intellectual deficits, many of these studies
have been compromised by the failure to link the findings to

particular complaints. Over the past few years, however, evidence has
accumulated supporting Bleuler's view that abnormal semantic processes
play a specific role in disordered communication. Some of this evidence
has emerged from studies of word associations. Manfred Spitzer at the
University of Heidelberg in Germany replicated some of Bleuler's
original experiments, and confirmed that thoughtdisordered schizophrenia
patients show fewer typical associations and more indirect or 'mediate'
associations.49 In a study by Terry Goldberg and his colleagues in the
USA, a group of schizophrenia patients and a group of normal
participants were given a battery of psychological tests. Two measures
discriminated those patients with severe thought disorder from those
with mild or no thought disorder -- a verbal fluency test (in which the
individual is asked to think of as many words as possible beginning with
a particular letter) and a vocabulary test -- both of which depend
heavily on semantic memory.50 Goldberg and his colleagues went on to use
patients' responses on a test in which they had to generate words
belonging to particular categories, to 'map' the way that their semantic
systems were organized. For example, by analysing the relationships
between successive words generated during the task, it was possible to
show that most ordinary people organize the category 'animals' along two
dimensions: wild-- domestic and large--small. However, when maps were
generated for thought-disordered patients, they appeared to be less well
organized than those of non-thought-disordered patients or ordinary
people.51 Less consistent findings have been obtained when researchers
have attempted to assess semantic functioning by measuring the kinds of
priming effects I described earlier. Brendan Maher in the United
States52 and Manfred Spitzer in Germany53 have reported that priming is
increased in patients with communication disorder. In a particularly
complex experiment, Spitzer has also observed abnormal spreading
activation effects.54 Whereas priming of direct associations (for
example, priming of 'foot' by 'shoe') was found in ordinary people,
communication-disordered patients also showed priming for indirect
associations (for example, 'hand' by 'shoe', presumably mediated by
'foot').

Other studies, for example by Terry Goldberg and his colleagues,55 have
observed reduced priming in patients with thought disorder. It is
possible that some of these inconsistencies are more apparent than real.
Priming effects are notoriously sensitive to experimental conditions --
the duration for which words are presented, and the interval between
them, for example. One possible interpretation of the evidence is that
reduced spreading activation to immediate associates, and increased
activation of indirect associates -- either as separate processes or the
consequence of a single abnormality in the semantic memory system --
make it more difficult for the thought-disordered patient to find
appropriate words when speaking.

The Roots of Incoherence It is possible that dysfunctions in working
memory, source monitoring, theory of mind and semantic memory are all
implicated in thought disorder to some degree. As American psychologists
Deanna Barch and Howard Berenbaum have noted, language production
processes are highly complex, and it is therefore likely that
abnormalities in a number different cognitive mechanisms can influence
them.56 A tentative model that tries to draw together some of the ideas
we have considered in this chapter is shown in Figure 15.2. It suggests
that semantic problems, which I assume to be long-standing, make
individuals vulnerable to thought, language and communication disorder.
It further assumes that, in vulnerable individuals, emotional arousal
leads to working memory deficits, which in turn lead to poor source
monitoring and ultimately to speech that is incomprehensible to others.
However, I must emphasize that this account is highly speculative (and
certainly not secure enough to be deemed a 'theory'), so it is possible
that I have misjudged the flow of causal relationships between the
different processes that appear to influence psychotic speech. More
research is surely needed.\* Figure 15.2 A very tentative model of
positive thought, communication and language disorder.

One remaining matter of controversy is the relationship between
communication disorder in schizophrenia patients and communication
disorder attributed to mania. Some researchers have suggested that these
are quite different, whereas others have assumed that they are similar
or even identical. My own prejudice -- fuelled by my earlier critique of
the Kraepelinian paradigm -- is to consider them similar. However, on
more careful consideration it becomes obvious that 'similar' or
'different' do not exhaust the possibilities. In a thoughtful discussion
of these issues, Linda Grossman and Martin Harrow remarked: We believe
that the disordered cognition that is so prominent in manic and
schizophrenic patients is the product of several underlying factors
acting together, rather than a single factor. Further, it is probable
that there are underlying factors leading to psychopathology that are
common to both manic and schizophrenic patients, and that there are also
other underlying factors that differ in these two patient groups...
Until recently, the assumption that thought disorder is found only in
schizophrenia has so governed diagnostic practice as to shape routine
clinical observation to such an extent that many grossly disorganized
manic patients who thought and verbalized strange ideas were not seen as
having disordered cognition.57 OceanofPDF.com

Part Four Causes and their Effects 16 Things are Much More Complex than
they Seem\* My own suspicion is that the universe is not only queerer
than we suppose, but queerer than we can suppose. J. B. S. Haldane1 In
the previous parts of this book, I have attempted to show how
psychological research has begun to unravel the processes involved in
the various complaints of psychotic patients. In each case, these
experiences and behaviours appear to be understandable when viewed in
the context of what we know about the normal human mind. It is important
to repeat that there is nothing 'anti-biological' in this analysis. The
psychological processes that give rise to complaints are located in the
brain (although whether psychosis is caused by damage to the brain is
another matter, which we will return to later). Once the various
psychotic complaints have been explained in this way, no ghostly illness
remains that also requires an explanation. The complaints (particular
classes of behaviours and experiences that have been singled out because
they sometimes cause distress) are all there is. And yet, I would not be
surprised if the account I have so far given seems incomplete to many
readers. Although it begins to explain what happens when someone has
these kinds of unusual experiences, it does not seem to

explain how the complaints come into being in the first place. In short,
it seems to say very little about aetiology. This criticism lies at the
heart of Mojtabai and Rieder's objections to the symptom-orientated
approach,2 which we briefly considered at the end of Chapter 6. In the
following three chapters I will try and counter these arguments by
showing how the symptom-orientated approach can be expanded to provide a
richer account of aetiology than has been possible within the
Kraepelinian paradigm. In doing so, I will attempt to do justice to the
complexity of psychiatric problems. As we have seen, symptoms sometimes
congregate together, although not in a simple way that is amenable to a
categorial system of classification. Symptoms also wax and wane with
time, often unpredictably. These types of complexity are difficult to
explain within the Kraepelinian paradigm but I will show that they can
be readily understood within the context of the symptom-orientated
approach. I would like to begin with a few words of warning. The
argument I will outline in the first part of this chapter will probably
seem quite abstract. I ask the reader to stick with it, because it will
help us to make sense of some of the scientific findings that will be
presented later on. Also, because I will sometimes have to extrapolate
from limited data, some of the conclusions I will reach in this chapter
and the two that follow will be fairly speculative. In these
circumstances I ask the reader to focus on the general principles that I
am attempting to expound (about which I feel fairly confident) rather
than the details, which may have to be amended as more evidence becomes
available.

Thinking Carefully about Causal Processes Many people assume that the
main aim of psychiatric research is to establish the cause of each
psychiatric disorder. Often, psychologists and psychiatrists encourage
this assumption by prejudging some kinds of causal factors as
pre-eminent. (For example, Mojtabai and Rieder seem to regard genetic
causes as particularly important, whereas the British historian of
psychiatry German Berrios3 seems to discount explanations unless they

point to abnormalities in particular brain regions.) However, a moment's
reflection will reveal that causal factors come in many different shapes
and sizes. Even a simple physical event is the product of a complex
network of causal effects and circumstances. Consider an example offered
by the philosopher Ted Honderich.4 In order for a match to ignite it
must rub against a rough surface with a certain force. However, the
match also has to be of a certain chemical composition and it must have
been kept in a place that is dry for a period prior to ignition. Which
of these factors should be singled out? To pursue this question further,
we could choose to explain the ignition of the match in terms of its
design and manufacture, or the actions of the person who strikes it.
Rather than selecting one factor as pre-eminent, we need a way of
classifying these different kinds of causal events and thinking about
the relationships between them. For our purposes it will help to
distinguish between three general kinds of causes. (These distinctions
are fairly arbitrary but will aid our thinking.) Aetiological factors
lie somewhere in the individual's past, and will be the focus of the
next two chapters. In contrast, the factors that will concern us in the
present chapter play a more immediate role in determining whether
complaints occur at particular points in time. These in turn can be
divided into events and circumstances that appear to elicit or trigger
symptoms, and those that help to keep symptoms going once they have
occurred. The former can be described as proximate determinants because
they occur at approximately the same time as symptoms. Proximate
determinants provoke or exacerbate the cognitive abnormalities that
coincide with complaints. For example, unpatterned environmental noise
can be thought of as a proximate determinant of auditory hallucinations,
as the presence of this kind of stimulation immediately increases the
likelihood that someone will misattribute their inner speech to an
external source. Events and circumstances that keep complaints going
once they have become established are sometimes described as maintenance
factors. As the reaction-maintenance principle reminds us, some
maintenance factors are psychological. For example, in Chapter 10, I
described research by the American psychologist Susan Nolen-Hoeksema
which has shown that some

ways of trying to cope with depression, particularly ruminating, tend to
prolong depressive episodes. Similarly, in Chapter 12, I discussed Tony
Morrison's proposal that paranoid beliefs are sometimes maintained by
safety behaviours. Other maintenance factors are social or
environmental. Poverty, stigmatization and unemployment all serve to
keep psychotic people locked out of society and into the role of the
psychiatric patient.5 Of course, this kind of social marginalization can
also be a consequence of patients' complaints. Friends, neighbours and
potential employers may shun people who begin to have psychotic
experiences. Proximate determinants and maintenance factors affect the
course of complaints -- whether they wane so that the individual
recovers, or whether they worsen so that the individual becomes more
disabled. It will not be possible to provide an exhaustive account of
these factors in a single chapter. Some (for example, the impact of
environmental noise on hallucinations) have been described in previous
chapters, so I will avoid repeating discussion of them here.

Functional Relationships I will begin by introducing an abstract concept
from mathematics that will facilitate our discussion. (Don't worry, no
knowledge of maths will be required to follow my argument!) In
mathematics, the association between two variables is described by a
functional relationship. For example, y = f(x) indicates that y is a
function of x; in other words, as x changes, y changes also in some
orderly fashion. The way in which y changes will, of course, reflect the
precise mathematical equation that is used to express the relationship.
For example, if y = x2, y will increase ever more dramatically for small
increases of x; the graph of this particular relationship is a parabola.
This concept of a functional relationship should not be confused with
the idea that certain types of processes have a function for the
individual. There is nothing wrong with this idea, which is commonplace
in biology (for example, we known that the function of the heart is to
deliver blood to

various parts of the body) and, indeed, I have resorted to it at various
points in the preceding chapters (when I asserted that the human brain
has evolved to sustain complex relationships, or that the function of
the self-serving bias is to maintain positive beliefs about the self).
However, this is not what I mean by a functional relationship in the
present context. Functional relationships provide a language for
describing the interrelations between events in nature. To take a simple
example from the physical world, the laws of classical mechanics
describe how the acceleration and velocity of a moving body change when
a force acts on it. As this example shows, mathematical specifications
of functional relationships often lead to descriptions that are more
precise than those that can be given in ordinary language.
Unfortunately, there have so far been few attempts to construct
mathematical descriptions of the processes involved in psychotic
phenomena, although there are no reasons for supposing that such
descriptions will not be possible in the future. Even in the absence of
mathematical models, the idea of a functional relationship remains
useful in psychopathology, and the term functional analysis\* is
sometimes used to indicate the effort to describe, in general terms,
those relationships that may be important in determining psychological
complaints.6 This approach has at least three strengths. First, it is
relatively devoid of philosophical baggage. By describing a network of
relationships between different groups of events that ultimately lead to
complaints, it is not necessary to single out any particular event or
class of events as the ultimate cause. Second, this kind of description
can alert us to the possibility that many of these relationships are
non-linear. (A linear relationship is one in which a change in one
variable leads to a linear increase or decrease in another; even the
simplest relationships in nature are usually more complex than this.)
Third, a functional analysis can highlight reciprocal interactions in
which two or more processes influence each other, either directly or
indirectly. As we have already seen, these kinds of interactions can be
very important. At this point, the reader may be forgiven for wondering
precisely where this argument is heading. It may help to consider
whether any functional

relationships have been described in the preceding chapters. In fact,
the accounts I have given of the psychological processes involved in
symptoms have been packed with them. A give-away is the presence of the
following symbol: Figure 16.1 The symbol for a functional relationship.

So, Figure 10.7 (p. 269) shows some functional relationships that appear
to be important in depression, Figure 13.4 (p. 345) shows some that are
involved in paranoid delusions, and Figure 14.3 (p. 368) shows some that
seem to play a role in auditory hallucinations. These examples establish
that there is nothing mysterious or magical about functional analysis.
However, as I will now show, it is an approach that enables us to cut
through much of the confusion that exists about the complexity of
psychiatric phenomena.

At last, the problem of psychiatric classification solved (?) First, let
us return to the problem of psychiatric classification. When considering
the evidence reviewed in Chapter 4 some readers may have been struck by
an apparent paradox. I concluded that chapter by arguing that the
Kraepelinian paradigm seems to propose at the same time too many
categories of disorder and also too few. The similarities between some
definitions of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder seemed to push us
towards the einheitspsychose or unitary psychosis concept. On the other
hand, the factor-analytic evidence seemed to suggest that each of these
diagnostic categories could be split into a number of separate
components or symptom clusters (for example, according to Peter Liddle's
model, positive symptoms, negative symptoms, and symptoms of cognitive
disorganization). At the same time, it is not immediately obvious why
any symptoms should go with any other (for example, why some one who is
suffering from delusions should have a high but less than certain
probability of experiencing hallucinations). This question lies at the
heart of the problem of psychiatric classification. Indeed, it is the
problem of psychiatric

classification, as a successful attempt to resolve it will make the
problem go away. Kraepelin's attempt to solve the problem can itself be
expressed as a set of functional relationships. In fact, I have already
done so in Figure 1.2, a part of which is reproduced below as Figure
16.2. According to this model, symptoms go together because they are
functionally related to the same underlying biological abnormalities.
Most people who have worked in the field of psychiatry over the last
century or so have implicitly endorsed this model, even when they have
disputed Kraepelin's version of it. Indeed, this model has been the
driving force behind the quest to find the causes of schizophrenia and
manic depression. Figure 16.2 Kraepelinian paradigm expressed as a set
of functional relationships.

Of course, the Kraepelinian paradigm is not the only possible model of
the relationship between aetiological variables and symptoms. Symptoms
could be functionally connected to several causal variables. In fact,
these kinds of relationships are portrayed in many of the models
outlined in previous chapters. For example, Figure 14.3 shows how
hearing voices can be influenced by beliefs, environmental noise and
emotional arousal. This kind of model edges us towards an understanding
of why symptoms sometimes but not invariably occur together. Perhaps
they have some functional relationships in common. For example, in
Chapters 12 and 13, we considered evidence that theory-of-mind deficits
(the inability to

understand the beliefs, thoughts and intentions of other people) may
contribute to paranoid ideas. In Chapter 15 we saw that these kinds of
deficits also appear to play a role in disordered communication. These
relationships are portrayed together in Figure 16.3. Note that,
according to this amalgamated model, we should expect paranoid delusions
and disordered speech occasionally to occur together (because they are
both influenced by theory-of-mind deficits). However, we should not
expect this to happen very often, because theory-of-mind deficits have
only an indirect influence on paranoid delusions (see Chapter 12), and
because both symptoms are influenced by processes that they do not share
in common. Even this kind of model must be an oversimplification. One
complication is that complaints sometimes cause each other. In Chapter
12, we considered Brendan Maher's anomalous perception model, which
Figure 16.3 Overlapping functional relationships implicated in paranoia
and incoherent speech.

suggested that delusions are sometimes rational interpretations of
anomalous experiences.7 The most obvious way that this can happen is
when a patient makes a delusional interpretation of a hallucinated
voice. (Recall that, in Sondra Escher and Marius Romme's prospective
study of children who heard voices, some 9 per cent developed delusional
interpretations of their experiences.)8 However, in Chapter 14 we also
saw that hallucinations can be facilitated by certain kinds of beliefs
(for example, as demonstrated in experiments in which patients have been
given various kinds of suggestions).9 Which of these accounts of the
relationship between hallucinations and delusions is correct? Given the
evidence, both must be, as illustrated in Figure 16.4. If Figure 16.4
Hallucinations can influence delusions, and delusions can influence
hallucinations.

delusions can provoke hallucinations and hallucinations can provoke
delusions, it is no wonder that they very often occur together. However,
the fact that they sometimes occur in isolation shows that this
association is not inevitable. (For this reason, in order to understand
the mechanisms that are responsible for these complaints it has been
necessary to consider them in isolation.) Some depressive symptoms
experienced by psychotic patients may be explained in this way. As we
have already seen, abnormal mood often precedes the development of
hallucinations and delusions. Although, in many patients, the high
levels of depression experienced during an episode reduce as they
recover from their psychotic episode, about a third go on to develop a
severe post-psychotic depression.10 Max Birchwood and his colleagues at
the University of Birmingham have shown that this type of depression is
often a consequence of patients feeling humiliated and entrapped by
their illness, and their expectation that they will be doomed to a low
social status as a consequence.11 In this case, patients' appraisals of
one set of complaints (delusions and hallucinations) lead to new
complaints (depression). A final complication concerns less direct ways
in which one complaint can increase the probability that another will
occur. For example, there is evidence that social isolation and the
absence of social support can maintain psychotic symptoms--the more that
people who experience psychosis live in impoverished and unsupportive
social networks, passing each day with very little contact with other
people, the more likely it is that their complaints will persist or even
worsen.12 It is easy to see how psychotic people can become isolated,
either because their delusions leave them in fear of others, or because
they are shunned by others who are frightened of them. But it is also
easy to see how isolation can further provoke difficulties. Without the

company of others, the paranoid person is not able to put his fears to
the test. In the absence of external stimulation in the form of
conversation, the source-monitoring problems of the person who hears
voices will be exacerbated. The lessons we have just learnt can be
summarized as a general principle of functional interconnectedness,
which might be stated formally in the following way: Psychiatric
complaints are connected by a rich network of functional relationships,
which may be causal, or reflect shared causal pathways. Cooccurrence of
complaints depends on the strength and number of these functional
relationships. The more functional relationships connecting two
complaints, and the stronger they are, the more likely it is that they
will occur together. This principle gives a much richer account of the
way in which symptoms cluster together than the Kraepelinian paradigm.
It explains why some symptoms tend to occur together (for example,
hallucinations and delusions) but also why attempts to break down
psychosis into a small number of categories (schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder and so on) have failed.

The Ups and Downs of Mental Health We must now turn to the second level
of complexity that I promised to address at the outset of this
discussion. In ordinary language, people who suffer from psychiatric
problems are sometimes said to be 'unstable'. This description reflects
our common experience that psychological well-being can vary from day to
day, or even from hour to hour. In the case of those of us who have been
lucky enough to avoid the psychiatric clinic, these fluctuations may be
quite mild. Occasionally we 'get out on the wrong side of the bed'. We
have good days and we have bad

days. In contrast, day-to-day variations in the frequency and intensity
of psychotic complaints may be much more marked. Sometimes superimposed
on these fluctuations are changes that take place over longer intervals
of weeks or months. We therefore speak of people having 'relapses' or
'episodes' -- periods of time when their difficulties are quite severe
-- interspersed by periods of 'remission' when symptoms are attenuated,
or have disappeared altogether. Unfortunately, much of the research that
I reviewed in Part 3 has consisted of 'snapshots' of the relevant
psychological processes. In the absence of further elaboration, these
snapshots provide a rather misleading picture of what must be happening
in the minds of both ordinary people and psychiatric patients. We are
more like movies than still photographs.

States, traits and meaningless debates The standard way of thinking
about the relationship between psychopathology and time requires making
a distinction between states and traits. Like many concepts widely
employed by psychopathologists, this distinction seems commonsensical
when first encountered but, on closer examination, appears more suspect.
A state is said to be some characteristic of the individual (a type of
cognitive organization or a facet of personality) that is present during
episodes of illness. A trait, on the other hand, is a more enduring
characteristic that seems to precede the onset of complaints, and which
is often thought to be aetiologically important. This distinction is
explicitly evoked in many of the theories we have encountered earlier.
The models proposed by Paul Meehl13 and Gordon Claridge14 both suggest
that schizotypal personality traits predispose people to develop
schizophrenic symptoms, an idea that is mirrored in the
stress-vulnerability models of psychosis developed by researchers such
as Keith Nuechterlein and his colleagues in the USA.15 The distinction
between states and traits is also important in some theories of
depression. For example, as we have seen, Martin Seligman, Lyn Abramson
and others have argued that a pessimistic attributional style
predisposes people to become depressed when they are exposed to
unpleasant events.16

There are two problems with this distinction. First, and most obviously,
it is doubtful whether states and traits are two distinct types of
psychological phenomena. Psychological characteristics probably vary in
their mutability from highly unstable and state-like to highly stable
and trait-like. Indeed, we have already seen in Chapter 10 that
individuals vary in the extent to which at least one important
characteristic -- global self-esteem -- is traitlike. Michael Kernis
found that, in some people, global self-esteem is relatively stable over
time whereas, in others, it fluctuates dramatically.17 He also found
that individuals whose self-esteem fluctuated greatly tended to make
extreme attributions about hassles they encountered in their lives.18 Of
course, observations of this kind are not too difficult to accommodate
so long as we realize that we are talking about gradations of
psychological flexibility, rather than two different kinds of processes.
A deeper and more sinister difficulty concerns the inferences that are
sometimes made on the basis of this distinction. It is often assumed
that state-like processes are mere epiphenomena of symptoms, and
therefore causally unimportant. According to this way of thinking,
unless the psychological characteristics we observe in patients can be
shown to be present prior to episodes, they can play no causal role. The
considerable efforts that have been directed towards determining whether
psychological processes implicated in complaints are trait-like or
state-like have often been motivated by this assumption. The despair
sometimes experienced by psychologists on discovering that their
favoured psychological mechanisms are not trait-like may be something of
an over-reaction. There is no reason why we should not attribute a
causal role to psychological processes that vary alongside complaints.
To see why this is the case, it will be helpful to recall the model of
the attribution--self-representation cycle that I introduced in Chapter
10 (p. 254--62) According to that model, beliefs about the self
influence appraisals of events, which in turn influence future beliefs
about the self. We saw that one property of a non-linear system of this
kind is that, under certain circumstances, the positive feedback loop
between one process and another allows marked shifts in both over time.
They are like neatly balanced weights that topple together when given a
push of sufficient

magnitude. The person making an internal attribution for a negative
event feels more miserable about herself as a consequence, and this
increases the probability that she will make an internal attribution for
negative events in the future. Over a period of time, the psychologist
observing this process sees someone whose attributions become more
self-blaming at the same time as she becomes more depressed. However,
this does not mean that her attributions were causally unimportant in
this process. Of course, when two people react to exactly the same event
in different ways -- one with stoicism and the other with distress -- we
can be sure that there must be something different about them to begin
with. However, these differences need not be dramatic at the outset in
order for them to spiral into extreme and more easily detected
differences later on. Given the inherently unstable nature of
psychiatric complaints, and the complex functional relationships that
lie behind them, I suspect that direct or indirect feedback loops of
this kind affect many of the psychological processes involved in mental
illness.

Chaos and complexity If the analysis I have just given is even half
correct, fluctuations in psychotic complaints might provide a valuable
source of information about the psychological processes that give rise
to psychiatric problems. Unfortunately, these kinds of fluctuations,
although widely recognized by clinicians, have rarely been studied in
detail. A handful of studies that are exceptions to this rule are worth
looking at in some detail. American psychiatrists Allan Gottschalk, Mark
Bauer and Peter Whybrow studied day-to-day fluctuations in mood in a
small group of bipolar patients over periods ranging between one year
and two and a half years. Using complex mathematical techniques, they
searched their data for patterns but found no evidence of cyclic
variations between positive and negative moods. Indeed, Gottschalk and
his colleagues concluded that the mood changes in their patients
appeared to be formally 'chaotic' (see Figure 16.5).19

Although these findings show that patients' moods do not follow a
regular rhythm, they do not imply that mood changes are the products of
random mechanisms. Although in popular language the term 'chaos' implies
disorder, in the mathematical sciences it is used to describe the
complex and unpatterned behaviour that often arises out of quite simple
systems of interacting processes. Chaotic systems are deterministic,
which is to say that each element in the system influences the others in
ways that can be precisely specified as functional relationships
(usually in the form of mathematical equations). Nonetheless, because of
the cumulative effects of these influences, the overall behaviour of a
chaotic system is highly unpredictable even over short periods of time
(changes in the weather, and long-term variations in populations, tend
to be chaotic in this formal sense).20 Despite this unpredictability,
chaotic systems tend to exhibit a degree of self-organization or Figure
16.5 Daily mood variations (ranging from 'best I have ever felt' to
'worst I have ever felt') for seven bipolar patients (from Gottschalk et
al., 1995).

homeostasis. (For example, although annual population changes in some
species are chaotic, under most conditions the population levels remain
between certain minimum and maximum levels; similarly the average
rainfall in a particular region and in a particular season is reasonably
predictable.) A more recent series of studies, conducted by Inez
Myin-Germeys and her colleagues at Maastricht, in Holland, has revealed
something of the mechanisms involved in these kinds of mood
fluctuations.21 Myin-Germeys used portable electronic bleepers to cue
participants to fill in simple questionnaires about their experiences at
random points in time. (In Chapter 9 we saw that this
experience-sampling method has been used to demonstrate that patients
with flat affect experience subjective emotional states that are as
strong as those of ordinary people.) Her participants were remitted
psychotic patients, first-degree relatives of patients, and ordinary
people. When the bleepers went off, the participants were asked to
record their current mood, to describe the most important event that had
happened to them since the last time the bleeper had sounded, and to
answer a series of simple questions about how stressed they were
feeling. In all of the groups, it was found that experiencing
subjectively stressful events was associated with increases in negative
affect and decreases in positive affect. However, the patients reported
less positive affect and more negative affect than their relatives or
ordinary people, made more extreme appraisals of the events they had
experienced, and reacted to the experiences with more extreme shifts in
mood. On Myin-Germeys's own account, these findings are evidence of
extreme sensitivity to stress in psychotic patients. This, of course, is
true, but they are more specifically consistent with the idea that
psychotic patients make abnormal attributions for negative events, and
with the model of the attribution-- self-representation cycle that I
developed in earlier chapters. In an interesting further study,
Myin-Germeys found that sensitivity to everyday stressors, as assessed
by her experience-sampling method, was unrelated to neurocognitive
functioning, as measured with the kinds of tests favoured by American
neuropsychologists. She therefore argued that neurocognitive deficits
and stress sensitivity separately and independently

contribute towards vulnerability to psychosis.22 Of course, this is
exactly what we would expect from the research we considered earlier in
this book (especially in Chapter 8, where we saw that neurocognitive
deficits appear to play little or no role in positive symptoms).

Understanding relapse The account I have just given of the ups and downs
of mental health has been fairly speculative -- it is more an agenda for
further research than a polished theory. It also has at least two
important limitations. First, I have said very little about the kinds of
external events that buffet the individual, bringing about changes in
mood and symptoms. Second, I have not considered the more global changes
that occur as patients move from periods of remission, in which they are
relatively well, to periods of illness. In the remaining part of this
chapter I will attempt to show how the account I have offered can be
extended still further to overcome these limitations. Relapse is rarely
a simple step-like event. Rather, the transition from remission to
active psychosis is usually gradual, often taking a number of weeks,
during which time the patient often shows evidence of the kind of
chaotic symptom fluctuations that we have just considered.23 Two clues
suggest that social cognition may play a crucial role in this process.
First, as we saw in Chapter 9, studies of the prodromal symptoms that
precede relapses have shown that these mainly consist of depression,
anxiety, irritability, tension and sleeplessness.24 (Episodes of mania
appear to be an exception to this rule, as they are usually preceded by
periods of excitement, energy and sleeplessness.25 However, we saw in
Chapter 11 that fear of incipient dysphoria may nevertheless play a
crucial role in the onset of manic symptoms.) Although it is possible,
as some psychologists have argued,26 that these mood symptoms are
brought about by the patient's perception that another episode of
illness is imminent, the absence of frank psychotic symptoms during the
early stages of relapse suggests that this is usually not the case. It
seems much more likely that changes in patients' attributions, their
beliefs about themselves, their perceptions of other people

and related processes bring about initial changes in mood, which later
cascade into full-blown psychosis. The second clue concerns the kinds of
events that are known to influence the likelihood that a relapse will
occur. Many types of stressors can make vulnerable individuals suffer an
exacerbation of their psychotic complaints. Some, for example the taking
of illicit drugs or abstaining from sleep, can be thought of as
biological stressors, because they have obvious effects on the
individual's physical as well as psychological well-being. However, the
best-understood stressors are social, and are precisely the kinds of
events that are likely to challenge the individual's social-cognitive
system.

Why Stressful Relationships are Damaging to Mental Health Most of us
intuitively recognize that emotionally charged relationships, even those
in which the dominant feeling is love, can make us feel miserable. The
idea that such relationships can have especially adverse effects on
people who are vulnerable to psychiatric symptoms has a long history. In
a later chapter, we will see that theories that implicate dysfunctional
family relationships in the onset of psychosis were popular in the 1950s
and 1960s, but have usually been discounted in recent years. However,
the idea that families can have a negative influence on the future
well-being of people who are already ill is now widely accepted. Studies
of this effect began with the work of a small group of investigators
based at the Institute of Psychiatry in London in the late 1950s.
Initially, this group consisted of Jim Birley, Morris Carstairs and
Gillian Topping. However, the person who was to have most influence on
how the work progressed was George Brown, an anthropology graduate who
was later to become Professor of Sociology at Birkbeck College.
According to his own account, Brown arrived at the Institute knowing
very little about serious mental illness:

A... dominant memory of those days was my emotional revulsion on reading
some of the standard psychiatric accounts of the condition
\[schizophrenia\]. Was it all so clear-cut? Were the core symptoms and
handicaps so clearly linked to underlying endogenous processes? My
feelings were so strong that it was several years before I could force
myself to finish the account of schizophrenia in Mayer-Gross, Slater and
Roth's (1954) Clinical Psychiatry.27 Brown was interested in the fate of
those patients who, in an era that preceded care in the community, were
able to achieve discharge from psychiatric hospitals. Unlike Ronald
Laing, who was beginning his work at about this time, Brown did not feel
that he had any particular skill at communicating with mad people.
Instead, therefore, he decided to focus on the experiences of their
parents and other relatives. An early study conducted by Brown,
Carstairs and Topping published in 1958 produced an unexpected and, at
the time, quite unsettling result. Following up 229 recently discharged
men, most of whom had a diagnosis of schizophrenia, they found that
those leaving hospital to live with wives or parents were less likely to
remain out of hospital, and hence more likely to relapse, than those
leaving to live in lodgings or with brothers or sisters. Among those who
had been married, those who were widowed, separated or divorced were
more likely to remain well than those who left hospital to live with
their spouses. Among those who went to live with their parents, those
who spent most of their days with their mothers were particularly likely
to do badly. Although various interpretations of these findings were
considered, it was impossible to escape the conclusion that close family
relationships could be hazardous to patients who were recovering from a
psychotic illness. This result was quite opposite to the researchers'
expectations.28 The next step was to discover which aspects of family
relationships had this toxic effect. In a prospective study in which
relatives were interviewed as patients were discharged from hospital,
Brown observed that patients returning to live in families characterized
as having a high level of 'emotional involvement' had especially high
rates of relapse. This risk was

reduced in those families in which the mother worked, limiting the
amount of time that she spent in face-to-face contact with her mentally
ill son or daughter.29 Soon afterwards, Michael Rutter joined the team
and an attempt was made to develop a measure of family atmosphere that
would adequately capture the crucial emotional characteristics. After
two years of development work, the team came up with the Camberwell
Family Interview (CFI), a structured assessment in which a close
relative is asked about the patient's behaviour and its impact on the
household.30 Based on the relative's responses, five scores are obtained
from the interview. Critical comments, which are simply counted, are
remarks that express a negative emotional attitude towards things that
the patient has done. Hostility, on the other hand, is rated on a
five-point scale and refers to a general negative attitude towards the
patient's personality. Emotional over-involvement, also rated on a
five-point scale, refers to extreme emotional distress experienced by
the relative accompanied by self-sacrificing and over-protective
behaviour towards the patient. Positive comments, which are counted, are
remarks which praise or express a positive attitude about things the
patient has done, and warmth, rated on a five-point scale, measures
general positive attitudes towards the patient as a person. In practice,
the positive comments and warmth scales are rarely used, as they have
been found to have little or no predictive value. However, scores on the
critical comments, hostility and emotional over-involvement scales were
found to be associated with a high risk that patients would relapse. It
is easy to picture the emotional tone associated with high scores on
each of these scales -- anger at the patient for being ill in the case
of critical comments and hostility, and guilt about the origins of the
illness in the case of emotional over-involvement. In the years
following Brown's work it has become commonplace to describe a relative
who scores highly on any one or more of these scales as exhibiting high
expressed emotion (or EE). It is unfortunate that the label 'high EE
relative' is now occasionally used pejoratively by mental health
professionals, in a way that gives the impression that there is
something nasty or unpleasant about those who are so categorized.
Paradoxically, perhaps, high EE parents often seem to be

very caring people, who have been emotionally overwhelmed by the trauma
of seeing their sons or daughters afflicted by a condition that appears
to be severely disabling, but which has no obvious physical cause.
Whereas administering the Camberwell Family Interview requires no skills
beyond those possessed by most competent clinicians, scoring these
scales from tape-recordings of conversations between interviewers and
relatives is very difficult indeed and requires special (and, from
personal experience, very tedious) training. This is because the
intonation and emotional expression of the relative are crucial. For
example, a statement such as 'He wandered around town in a confused
state and was picked up by the police' can bea straightforward
description of events if expressed in a level tone of voice but can be a
highly critical comment if expressed with sufficient venom. Not
surprisingly, some researchers have attempted to develop alternative
measures to the CFI, based, for example, on questionnaires or analyses
of short segments of speech, but these have never been entirely
successful.31 The results of research on schizophrenia patients
conducted in the years since Brown's initial studies have been very
consistent. In 1994, Paul Bebbington and Elizabeth Kuipers of the
Institute of Psychiatry in London obtained individual data from 1346
families who had been studied in twenty-five separate investigations, of
which only three had yielded negative results.32 Across the studies,
about half of the families investigated were judged to include a high EE
relative. The overall relapse rate during the first year after patients
had returned to these families was 54.4 per cent whereas the rate for
low EE families was 21.8 per cent. However, as always, other factors
complicate this apparently simple picture. Figure 16.6 shows data from a
famous study of the effects of EE by Figure 16.6 Relapse rates for
schizophrenia patients living with low and high EE relatives, showing
the moderating effects of face-to-face contact time with the relatives
and receipt of neuroleptic medication (from Vaughn and Leff, 1976).

British researchers Christine Vaughn and Julian Leff, published in 1976,
from which it is obvious that patients living with high EE relatives are
especially likely to relapse if they spend a lot of time in contact with
those relatives.33 Vaughn and Leff's findings also indicate an
interaction between expressed emotion and patients' medication. Over the
nine months of the study, patients taking anti-psychotic drugs received
some protection from their high EE relatives. Although the data seem to
indicate that those living with low EE relatives received no benefit
from their drugs, this finding was not supported when the patients were
followed up over a longer period. Vaughn and Leff concluded that
medication protected patients from all kinds of stress, and not just the
stress of living with a critical or overcontrolling relative.34 Vaughn
and Leff's research led to a second important qualification about the
impact of expressed emotion. Studying people who had experienced
admission for depression as well as those with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia, they found that the depressed patients were even more
vulnerable to the adverse effects of stressful relationships than the
schizophrenia patients. In fact, it is now clear that Brown's discovery
was not a discovery about schizophrenia at all, but a discovery about
people with psychiatric complaints in general. The impact of high EE
spouses on the well-being of recovering depressed patients has since
been the focus of a series of investigations by Jill Hooley, a
British-trained psychologist based at Harvard University, in the USA.35
David Miklowitz and his colleagues at the University of California in
Los Angeles have extended EE research to

patients with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder. Once again, it has been
shown that living with a high EE relative increases the risk of future
episodes of illness, in this case of depression and mania.36
Surprisingly, researchers have almost completely neglected the
psychological mechanisms responsible for the impact of high expressed
emotion. Although it seems obvious that exposure to constant criticism
and over-protective (in extreme cases, infantilizing) attitudes will
result in emotional distress and a loss of self-esteem, few attempts
have been made to investigate these kinds of effects, or to reveal how
they might lead to an exacerbation of psychotic symptoms. A few
researchers have attempted to measure the immediate emotional impact of
exposure to a high EE relative. British psychologists Nick Tarrier and
Graham Turpin have demonstrated that schizophrenia patients show
unusually high levels of emotional arousal (as measured by changes in
the electrical conductivity of their skin) when meeting a high EE
relative.37 In a study conducted by the UCLA schizophrenia research
group, it was also found that high expressed emotion relatives can
provoke transient increases in patients' symptoms. Patients in the study
often expressed unusual thoughts immediately after hearing a critical
remark from a high EE parent.38 Christine Barrowclough and Nick Tarrier
have recently carried out the first study in which the impact of
expressed emotion on self-esteem has been measured directly. They used
an interview measure of self-esteem, which allowed them to distinguish
between positive and negative beliefs about the self. They found that a
high level of criticism by a close relative was a strong predictor of
negative beliefs about the self, and that these negative beliefs in turn
predicted positive symp-toms.39 This finding is, of course, consistent
with other evidence about the role of the self in psychosis that we have
encountered in earlier chapters.

The nature of high expressed emotion

Some investigators have wondered how the high EE attitudes translate
into the actual behaviour of relatives in the presence of a patient. In
an attempt to answer this question, researchers at UCLA watched
schizophrenia patients and their parents as they discussed family
problems. They found that high EE parents, in comparison with low EE
parents, made more critical and intrusive comments to their ill sons and
daughters.40 David Miklowitz described this type of interaction as
negative affective style. Subsequent studies have shown that, when
measured as an alternative to EE, negative affective style is a strong
predictor of relapse.41 Other researchers have wondered why some
relatives exhibit high expressed emotion, whereas others do not. One
approach to this problem has involved looking in more detail at the
beliefs associated with high EE. In earlier chapters I have emphasized
the role that patients' attributions (causal beliefs) play in their
complaints, but, of course, psychotic patients are not the only people
who make inferences about the causes of events. The attributions of
schizophrenia patients' relatives have been investigated in studies
conducted by Chris Brewin in London42 and by Christine Barrowclough in
Manchester.43 Perhaps unsurprisingly, those relatives who were judged to
be high EE, especially those who were hostile or made many critical
comments, tended to explain the distressing behaviour of their mentally
ill sons and daughters in terms of causes that were internal to the
patient and controllable, for example, saying that they were 'lazy' or
'difficult', as if they could choose to be otherwise. Other
investigators have wondered whether parents' EE status might be related
to the stress involved in caring for their mentally ill children. Of
course, the experience of seeing an adult son or daughter suffering is
almost always extremely distressing. This distress is often compounded
by the problems involved in attempting to help the son or daughter cope
with the demands of everyday life, while at the same time trying to
obtain help from psychiatric services that are under-resourced and
sometimes unsympathetic to parents' needs. When it is remembered that
these kinds of difficulties can continue for many years, often at a time
of life when most parents can expect to be released from the
responsibility of caring for their children, it is

not surprising that many parents in this position experience high levels
of depression and anxiety.44 In a recent study conducted by Elizabeth
Kuipers and David Raune at the Institute of Psychiatry, it was found
that high EE parents experienced the burden of caring for their mentally
ill sons and daughters more severely than low EE parents. However, in
the same study, it was found that they often attempted to cope with this
burden by 'disengaging' from it, for example by avoiding discussing
problems with their children, or by using alcohol to relieve their
distress.45 This finding raises the possibility that high expressed
emotion arises partly as a consequence of the parents' difficulties in
coping with relationships in general. An earlier study conducted by
American psychologists Diana Diamond and Jeri Doane provides some
support for this idea.46 Parents of severely disturbed adolescents and
young adults (some of whom were psychotic) were interviewed about their
relationships with their children, and also about their relationships
with their own mothers and fathers. The more inadequate the attachment
relationship between the mothers in the study and their own mothers, the
more likely they were to show a negative affective style towards their
children. As a consequence of not receiving adequate emotional support
in childhood, it seemed that they did not have the emotional resources
necessary to offer effective support to their own distressed children.
This finding has since been replicated by a group of British
investigators.47

Further caveats Overall, studies of expressed emotion add up to one of
the few unequivocally successful stories in modern psychiatric research.
The findings from these studies clearly demonstrate that the behaviour
of psychotic patients cannot be fully understood without understanding
the social environment in which they live. However, two further
qualifications about the expressed emotion findings are warranted.
First, we must recognize that interactions between patients and their
relatives are

determined in part by both parties. It is dangerous to assume that high
EE parents are somehow exclusively 'to blame' for the adverse affects
that they have on their children. Patients themselves contribute to
these kinds of negative emotional interactions. This was demonstrated in
the UCLA study that examined the immediate impact of criticism on
patients' symptoms. Careful analysis revealed that critical comments by
parents were often triggered by unusual or psychotic comments made by
their children. Indeed, high EE behaviour appears to be part of a cycle
of escalating negative emotion, in which the bizarre or unusual
behaviour of the patient triggers critical comments, which in turn lead
to more bizarre and unusual behaviour. The second qualification concerns
researchers' focus on stressful relationships with parents. Jill
Hooley's work with people suffering from depression has mostly examined
expressed emotion in spouses, so it is clear that husbands and wives can
also have a negative impact on the well-being of people who are
recovering from a psychiatric crisis. More recently, researchers have
wondered whether mental health professionals can also be capable of high
expressed emotion attitudes. Studies carried out by Elizabeth Kuipers
and Estelle Moore at the Institute of Psychiatry in London have
demonstrated that expressed emotion can be reliably measured in
psychiatric care staff.48 In a comparison of two hostels for recovering
patients, one of which was staffed by high EE carers, it was found that
patients were more likely to leave the high EE hostel, presumably
because it did not provide a comfortable living environment.49 A similar
study in Los Angeles found that patients living in a residential care
home staffed by high EE carers had a poorer quality of life and worse
symptoms than patients living in a low EE environment.50 Clearly, mental
health professionals cannot afford to be complacent about their
therapeutic impact on their patients. Indeed, it seems likely that there
are high EE psychiatrists, high EE nurses and (although I do not like to
admit it) high EE clinical psychologists who would probably be better
employed doing something different.

The Slings and Arrows of Outrageous Fortune When recovering patients
live with a high EE relative, spouse or care worker they are exposed to
a constant and persisting form of stress. Other stressful events, which
occur more suddenly and unpredictably, are known as life events in the
jargon of modern psychiatric research. These may include separation from
a loved one, losing a job, being forced to move home, being arrested by
the police, or any number of other calamities. Again, the idea that such
events can have a negative impact on mental health is hardly new --
Kraepelin noted that periods in which his patients' symptoms remitted
often came to an end when they experienced major life changes. However,
despite the intuitive appeal of this observation, it has been
surprisingly difficult to establish a clear link between specific life
events and episodes of illness. Part of the problem lies in the
formidable challenges facing researchers. For practical reasons, most
studies have been retrospective, and have attempted to assess what has
happened to patients in the weeks or months preceding a breakdown.
However, memories are not always reliable, patients' interpretations of
events may be affected by their difficulties and, in any case, the
importance of different kinds of events may vary between individuals. In
practice, researchers have attempted to overcome these problems in one
of two ways.51 Some have attempted to draw up questionnaires listing
life events that have previously been judged as stressful by a panel of
ordinary people. Participants have then been asked to indicate those
events on the questionnaire that they have experienced within a
particular period. The second, more sophisticated approach was developed
by George Brown and his colleagues in London and involves interviewing
patients, using a Life Events and Difficulties Schedule (LEDS), to
obtain a detailed account of their recent experiences. The patients'
descriptions of events are then presented to a panel of independent
judges who score them on various rating scales, for example measuring
their severity from the standpoint of the patient.

A further difficulty has been that of teasing out the causal
relationship between an event and the emergence of symptoms. Although it
is easy to assume that stressful life events must precipitate
complaints, sometimes the relationship is the other way round. For
example, a patient may become so paranoid that she falls out with her
employers and loses her job. George Brown and his colleague Tirril
Harris therefore argued that life events should be rated according to
whether or not they appear to be independent of symptoms. This is
usually done by assigning each recorded event to one of three
categories: independent, possibly independent and dependent. In general,
researchers have only counted the first two of these categories when
exploring the link between life events and increases in episodes of
illness. Using this approach, in 1978 Brown and Harris reported the
results of a landmark study, which they had carried out in Camberwell,
an economically deprived suburb of London. In by far the majority of
cases of depression they detected in a group of women living in the
community, they found that significant life events preceded the onset of
symptoms by only a few weeks. However, they found that many women who
experienced life events did not become depressed, so other factors were
obviously important. Women who were living in stressful social
circumstances (who were unemployed, had small children at home or lacked
supportive relationships), or who had lost their mothers at an early
age, were especially vulnerable to reacting badly to an adverse event.52
In general, later studies have confirmed Brown and Harris's finding of a
clear link between negative life events and depression. Indeed, in
twenty studies using Brown's Life Events and Difficulties Schedule,
estimates of the number of depressive episodes closely preceded by
negative life events have varied between 67 per cent and 90 per cent.53
These studies have also shown that the kinds of social factors that
leave people vulnerable to the impact of life events may vary with
location. (In a study conducted in the Outer Hebrides, for example,
Brown found that people who were poorly integrated with the local
community were especially vulnerable.)54 Not surprisingly, some
researchers have tried to discover whether there is a similar
association between life events and episodes of psychosis. The

earliest study of this kind was conducted by Brown and his colleague Jim
Birley, which was published in 1968.55 They reported that 46 per cent of
a group of schizophrenia patients had suffered a life event in the three
weeks preceding a relapse, and therefore concluded that life events
could trigger the onset of psychotic symptoms. However, the results of
subsequent studies have not always been consistent with these findings.
Whereas some found a similar link between life events and relapse,
others did not. A study by Paul Bebbington, conducted in Camberwell in
the early 1990s, compared the life events of fifty-one patients who had
experienced a relapse with the life events experienced by a group of
ordinary people living in the community, and found that the patients had
experienced an excess of independent life events in the three months
prior to becoming ill.56 Another recent study, carried out by Steven
Hirsch and his colleagues, also in London, involved the regular
assessment of patients who received either anti-psychotic medication or
a placebo. In this study, no effect of life events was observed when the
four weeks preceding a relapse were examined, but an effect was found
when life events over the previous year were calculated.57 One possible
implication of this finding is that psychotic breakdowns sometimes occur
after stressful experiences have accumulated over a long period of time.
In a 1995 review of similar studies conducted with bipolar patients,
American psychologists Sheri Johnson and John Roberts were able to
identify fifteen studies that had used questionnaire measures and ten
that had used interview methods (usually the LEDS).58 Although the
findings were not entirely consistent, the overall picture suggested
that life events can trigger episodes of mania as well as depression.
Johnson's own study of sixty-seven bipolar patients, published two years
later, found that those whose episodes had been triggered by negative
life events took, on average, three times longer to recover than those
whose episodes began without severe life events.59 It would obviously be
very useful to know whether different kinds of life events tend to
provoke different complaints. Unfortunately, this question (which is
much more complex than the question of whether life events, in general,
provoke episodes of psychosis) has rarely been studied. In one

investigation, Brown and his colleague Robert Finlay-Jones found that
events associated with loss (broadly defined to include not only the
loss of a person but also the loss of a role, goal or cherished idea)
were especially likely to lead to depression, whereas events associated
with long-term threat were more likely to lead to anxiety.60 In later
studies it was found that depression was also likely to follow
humiliating events (for example, being deserted by a partner) or events
that created a sense of entrapment (for example, the onset of a
debilitating physical illness). It was also found that life events were
particularly likely to have an emotional impact if they matched an
ongoing difficulty (for example, a mother's discovery that her son has
been arrested, matching her ongoing concerns about their difficult
relationship and his delinquent behaviour).61 As we saw in Chapter 12,
Brown's colleague Tirril Harris has suggested that the events most
likely to lead to psychotic and especially paranoid symptoms can be
characterized as intrusive, because they involve unwanted experiences
being forced on the patient (examples include threats, burglaries and
police investigations).62 This suggestion has been partially supported
by research conducted by other investi-gators.63 In the case of mania,
as we saw in Chapter 11, it appears that episodes of illness are often
precipitated by events that disrupt social rhythms64 or which involve
goal attainment.65 Each of these effects seems to be relatively easy to
understand in the context of our knowledge of the psychological
mechanisms involved in these kinds of symptoms. Those which bring to
mind a sense of loss or failure are most dangerous to people who already
doubt their self-worth; those with a persecutory element appear to bring
out pre-existing fears about others' intentions; and those which
exacerbate subjective feelings of energy and excitement are particularly
hazardous to people who are vulnerable to mania. Despite these findings,
some researchers have been sceptical about the link between life events
and psychotic episodes. In part, this has been because they have been
influenced by genetic evidence, which has suggested to them that there
is little room for environmental influences on patients' symptoms (a
prejudice that I will address in the next chapter). Whereas I have tried
to point to the overall pattern of the findings from

many research projects, critics have focused on the methodological
inadequacies of some investigations and some inconsistencies in the
results from different studies. As a counter to these kinds of
arguments, it is worth pointing out that there are at least two reasons
to think that existing findings underestimate the role of life events in
psychosis. First, as Paul Bebbington has noted, some of the apparent
inconsistencies in the research findings may reflect the extreme
sensitivity of psychotic patients.66 Perhaps they are so easily affected
by adverse experiences that even relatively trivial events affect them.
Consistent with this suggestion, studies have shown a clearer link
between life events and psychosis in patients who take anti-psychotic
drugs or who live in low EE households, than in patients who refuse
drugs or live in high EE environments. The implication of these findings
is that even very minor events -- which would not be picked up by the
methods developed by Brown and Harris -- may be capable of triggering
symptoms in patients who refuse medication or are embroiled in stressful
relationships. Second, because most researchers have deliberately
ignored life events that could be the consequence of symptoms, they have
failed to record circumstances in which life events and symptoms
exacerbate each other in an escalating spiral of psychopathology.
Imagine a remitted patient who is not coping well with life, becomes
depressed and, as a consequence, loses his job. Later, the patient
becomes floridly psychotic. In this case, the loss of the job is clearly
not independent of the patient's prodromal symptoms, so it would not be
counted in a study of life events. Nonetheless, sudden unemployment will
almost certainly have been a further source of distress and may well
have played a role in moving the patient from a prodromal phase into
frank psychosis.

The Process of Relapse Stressful relationships and life events do not
exhaust the factors that can increase the likelihood that a person will
once again experience psychotic complaints. There is evidence that the
excessive use of either legal or street

drugs, such as alcohol, amphetamine, cannabis or the hallucinogens, can
increase the probability of relapse in both schizophrenia patients67 and
patients with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder.68 Unfortunately, in
Europe and North America at least, psychotic patients very commonly
abuse alcohol or take drugs, partly because these substances often make
them feel better in the short term.69 Keith Nuechterlein and his
colleagues at UCLA have proposed an influential model of schizophrenic
relapse, which is shown in Figure 16.7.70 Although at first glance it
appears very complex, it encompasses just a few simple ideas.
Nuechterlein argues that the risk of a psychotic episode is affected by
a combination of personal and environmental factors. The personal
factors include those (such as schizotypal personality traits and
putative abnormalities in the dopamine system) that increase an
individual's likelihood of experiencing complaints, and also protective
factors (such as coping skills and taking medication), which have the
opposite effect. The environmental factors are similarly divided into
those that protect (a supportive family, for example) and those that
increase the risk of symptoms (stressful life events, for example).
According to the model, some interactions between these factors can
exacerbate existing cognitive deficits, leading the patient's cognitive
system to become overloaded and also to increased emotional arousal.
These in turn are thought to lead to prodromal symptoms and then,
eventually, to the full symptoms of a psychotic episode. Importantly,
the UCLA group propose that the experience of an episode can feed back
to change the earlier personal and environmental factors, so that
further episodes are more likely (a sort of kindling effect). The UCLA
group has marshalled a lot of evidence for some of the core assumptions
of their model. As I explained in Chapter 7, they have carried out
experiments to show that working memory deficits become more severe as
patients become ill. However, notice that, despite its apparent
complexity, the model remains very general in its scope. In fact,
although it is proposed as a theory of schizophrenic relapse, with a few
modifications it could equally well serve as an account of relapse in
depression or mania. This is because the main weakness of the model is
that it does not explain

how cognitive changes lead to specific complaints such as
hallucinations, delusions or mania. What appears to be missing is any
reference to the social-cognitive processes that play a role in
prodromal dysphoria, and which we have directly implicated in these
symptoms. It is easy to see how the model might be tinkered with to
overcome some of these limitations, and I will leave this task to the
reader. Of course, as different cognitive processes are implicated in
different complaints, the protective and vulnerability factors
associated with them are also likely to differ. If this is the case, a
truly comprehensive model of psychotic relapse will consist of a series
of inter-related and more specific models, each specifying pathways
involved in the exacerbation of one particular type of psychotic
behaviour or experience. Figure 16.7 The UCLA model of psychotic relapse
(from Nuechterle in et al., 1992).

OceanofPDF.com

17 From the Cradle to the Clinic The childhood shows the man, As morning
shows the day. John Milton1 Any attempt to explain the origins of
madness must address an important puzzle. Since Kraepelin's time, it has
been known that schizophrenia symptoms most often appear for the first
time during late adolescence or early adulthood. It was for this reason
that Kraepelin christened his disorder dementia praecox. Modern studies
have generally supported this observation. Figure 17.1 shows a fairly
typical age distribution for the onset of psychosis, which I have
obtained from a sample of 254 first-episode schizophrenia or
schizoaffective patients who took part in a clinical trial of
psychological treatment for early psychosis carried out at my own
University.2 It is obvious from the graph that most people became ill in
their early twenties; the age of maximum risk seems to be about 22
years. However, notice also that a few patients were in their sixties
when they were first affected, so that the mean (average) age of onset
was exactly 29 years. However, a better indication of the typical age of
onset is the median (the age at which half of the patients are younger
and half are older), which is 26.5 years. When the data are broken down
by sex, we find that the median age of onset for women (29.3 years) is a
few years older than that for men (25.6 years). This earlier onset for
men than for women has been found in nearly every other study that has
examined this issue.3 It is sometimes forgotten that diagnoses of
bipolar disorder follow similar age trends. The period of peak risk for
developing bipolar Figure 17.1 Ages of onset of illness for 254
first-episode schizophrenia and schizoaffective patients recruited to
the SoCRATES (Study of Cognitive-Realignment Therapy in Early
Schizophrenia) project.

symptoms is during adolescence and early adulthood and the distribution
of ages of onset is very similar to that of schizophrenia patients;
interestingly, there is evidence that those who first show symptoms
early in life are especially likely to become floridly psychotic.4 There
is also some evidence that women are slightly more likely than men to
develop bipolar symptoms later in life, although the data pertaining to
this difference are relatively sparse and not entirely consistent.5
These observations raise the possibility that psychosis is the end-point
of a developmental process. But what kind of process? Once again, the
ground has been staked out by biological researchers, who have proposed
various versions of what I term the biological time-bomb hypothesis.
According to this theory, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are
consequences of defects in the developing brain, which only 'explode'
into frank illness as or after the afflicted person reaches maturity.
The exact nature of the hypothesized time-bomb varies from theorist to
theorist, and includes genetically determined neurodevelopmental
deficits,6 faulty brain maturation,7 and late manifestations of a virus
contracted by the pregnant mother.8 In a twist to this tale, it has been
suggested that the average age at which women develop schizophrenia
symptoms is later than the average age for men

because the female hormone oestrogen confers protection against
psychosis (apparently, oestrogen shares some of the pharmacological
properties of the neuroleptics, the class of drugs most widely used in
the treatment of psychotic patients).9 Clearly, a developmental approach
has much to recommend it, but it is pretty obvious that there is
something missing from any account that portrays madness exclusively as
the product of processes unwinding within the individual. What is
missing is any recognition that psychosis might be influenced by the
trials of life.

Rethinking the Genetics of Psychosis Writing in 1939, Robert Gaupp,
one-time Professor of Psychiatry at the University of Tübingen, made the
following comment: We are, of course, clearly aware of the fact, which
we don't deny even for a second, that the greater part of all genetic
work in psychiatry would immediately collapse like a house of cards if
Kraepelin's theory was shown to be altogether mistaken.10 In Chapter 4,
I discussed family, twin and adoption studies that have pointed to the
role of genetic factors in the origins of psychosis. I suggested that
genetic researchers have often exaggerated the weight of the evidence
obtained from these kinds of studies, and have tended to ignore serious
methodological weaknesses in their own work. I think this observation
would be widely accepted by many fellow psychologists and psychiatrists
who are familiar with the data. However, what is less widely recognized
is that even if (and it is a big if) very substantial genetic
contributions to psychosis could be proven, this proof would not
preclude the possibility that the environment also plays a major role in
the development of symptoms. Geneticists commonly use the data from
their studies to calculate heritability estimates, which describe the
amount of variability in some

phenomenon (say, intelligence or mental illness) that can be attributed
to genes.\* Typically, researchers investigating schizophrenia or
bipolar symptoms obtain estimates that are very high -- as much as 80 or
90 per cent. Values of this sort seem to leave little room for
environmental influences. However, this conclusion is based on the
assumption that the amount of variability attributed to genes and that
attributed to the environment are independent of each other, and
therefore can be simply added to total 100 per cent. In real life, genes
and environments are almost always correlated, so that genetic and
environmental influences cannot be separated out in this way. This
happens because individuals (not only human beings, but even plants and
small animals)11 influence their environments in ways that depend on
their genetic endowment. When this happens, environmental influences can
bring about dramatic changes in behaviours or abilities, even when the
behaviours and abilities are under strong genetic control. A formal
mathematical analysis of this kind of interaction † has recently been
published by William Dickins of Harvard University and James Flynn of
the University of Otago.12 However, rather than attempting to summarize
their difficult proof here, I will offer a hypothetical case study that
may help the reader to understand how gene--environment correlations can
have this effect. Imagine that a young man, who is destined to become
psychotic by virtue of inheriting genes that make him vulnerable to
negative symptoms, has poor social skills. Such a person might be more
likely than most to be rejected when asking a potential girlfriend for a
date. Moreover, because he does not know how to seek emotional support
from friends, or because his parents (who also have poor social skills)
do not know how to reassure him, he may become more socially anxious and
self-conscious afterwards. Consequently, he may become withdrawn, making
him more likely to be ridiculed by unkind peers. As time goes by, he may
become progressively more isolated until, perhaps reacting to some
further difficulties, he becomes psychotic. In this imaginary, but not
implausible, scenario, genes have predisposed the unlucky young man to
an environmental trauma (being rejected by a potential girlfriend), but
the trauma has had a major impact on his future life. Had he decided to
approach the one girl in his neighbourhood who was attracted to quiet
young men, the outcome might have been very different.

Evidence that gene--environment interactions of this sort happen in
psychiatric conditions has emerged from genetic studies of depression,
which have shown that the close relatives of depressed patients
experience a higher rate of unpleasant life events than the general
population.13 Presumably because of their genetically determined
characteristics they are more likely to find themselves in circumstances
in which these kinds of events are likely to occur. If these kinds of
effects occur across the spectrum of patients suffering from severe
psychiatric disorders (and I would be amazed if they did not)
environmental events may have a much greater ability to influence
psychosis than most psychiatric geneticists have supposed.

From genes to madness Perhaps the central argument of this book is that
the problems involved in explaining 'schizophrenia' and 'bipolar
disorder' will disappear once we have adequately explained the
complaints that lead to these diagnoses. An implication of this argument
is that we must consider genetic influences on particular kinds of
psychotic behaviours and experiences. This task is especially important
because, in their critique of the symptom-orientated approach, Ramin
Mojtabai and Ronald Rieder have argued that no such influences can be
discerned.14 According to Mojtabai and Rieder, twin and family studies
show that a diagnosis of schizophrenia is more heritable than any of the
symptoms that contribute to the diagnosis. American psychologists Howard
Berenbaum, Tom Oltmanns and Irving Gottesman analysed data from a twin
study to show that the concordance rates for positive or negative
symptoms were lower than the concordance rate calculated for a global
diagnosis.15 In a more recent study of 'high density schizophrenia
families' living in Ireland, conducted by American researcher Kenneth
Kendler and his colleagues, sibling pairs in which both had received a
diagnosis of schizophrenia were examined to see whether they experienced
similar symptoms; in general the concordance between the symptoms of the
affected pairs were low.16

According to Mojtabai and Rieder, these observations are impossible to
square with a symptom-orientated approach. It is worth unpacking
Mojtabai and Rieder's argument, using the functional analysis framework
that I introduced in the last chapter. They have implicitly contrasted
two models, which I have shown in Figure 17.2. According to their
preferred model (which is a version of the Kraepelinian paradigm), genes
influence the development of a disease, which in turn causes the
affected individual to experience symptoms. The alternative model
supposes that genes influence symptoms, without the mediating disease
step. Mojtabai and Rieder argue that this alternative model must be
rejected because the empirical evidence shows that genes have only a
relatively weak effect on each of the symptoms but a strong impact on
the overall diagnosis. In fact, there is evidence of a specific genetic
contribution to at least one psychotic symptom. It has been known for
some time that thought disorder runs in families. In the 1960s, American
researchers Margaret Singer and Lyman Wynne carried out a series of
studies in an attempt to show that this happened because
thought-disordered parents communicate inadequately with their children.
(In essence, they proposed that thought disorder is learnt.)17 The
comments of patients' parents were recorded as they completed a series
of psychological tests, which were also administered to the patients.18
A detailed rating procedure was then used to analyse the comments for
unusual styles of communication (particularly, abnormal ways of handling
attention and meaning which might 'impair a growing child's capacity for
selective attention, purposive behaviour, and subjectively meaningful
experiences'). They also rated unusual ways of talking about
relationships, abnormal emotional responses (especially comments thought
to reflect 'underlying feelings of pervasive meaninglessness'), and
statements suggesting that Figure 17.2 Two models of genetic influences
contrasted by Mojtabai and Rieder (1998).

the overall structure of the family was poorly organized to cope with
stress. Singer then attempted to predict the patient's ratings from the
ratings taken from the parent, and found that she could do so with a
high degree of success. When given transcripts from the parents and the
patients without knowing which transcript went with which, she was able
to match them together, again with a high degree of accuracy. Most
subsequent studies have supported Singer and Wynne's conclusion that
communication deviance (to use their terminology) is found in the
families of thought-disordered patients.19 For example, in two recent
studies Nancy Docherty (whose work I discussed in some detail in Chapter
15) found that the speech of the parents of thought-disordered patients
contains frequent referential failures.20 However, whereas the speech of
patients becomes more incoherent as they become emotionally aroused,
Docherty found their parents' speech was not affected in this way.21

Communication deviance appears to be completely unrelated to expressed
emotion, the type of critical or over-controlling behaviour sometimes
observed in the families of psychotic patients, which I described in the
last chapter.22 There is some evidence that it reflects, in part,
genetic factors. For example, Orsola Gambini and colleagues at the
University of Milan recently studied the speech of normal monozygotic
and dizygotic twins. When they rated the speech for thought disorder,
they found higher concordance rates in the MZ twins than in the DZ
twins.23 In another recent study, Dennis Kinney and colleagues at
Harvard University used an adoption study strategy to investigate the
heritability of thought disorder, which they measured in Danish adoptees
who had developed schizophrenia symptoms and adoptees not diagnosed as
schizophrenic, before then tracing their biological parents through
Denmark's comprehensive adoption records. They found high levels of
thought disorder in the parents of the schizophrenia patients, but not
in the parents of the healthy adoptees.24 Of course, as we have already
seen, strong genetic influences do not exclude the role of environmental
factors. That such factors may play a decisive role in the case of
thought disorder was revealed in another adoption study, this time
carried out in Finland by a large team that included Lyman Wynne and
Pekka Tienari, a respected psychiatric geneticist.25 The team used a
refined version of Singer and Wynne's methodology to assess disordered
communication both in the adopted-away children of schizophrenia
patients and in their adopting relatives. Adoptees who were regarded as
being at high risk because their biological parents had been diagnosed
as schizophrenic showed high levels of communication deviance only if
their adopting parents showed evidence of communication deviance.
Adoptees who were not at genetic risk of developing a psychotic illness
did not develop thought disorder, even if their adopting parents showed
evidence of communication deviance. These findings show that thought
disorder results from an interaction between genes and the environment.
In contrast to these findings, genetic evidence on paranoid symptoms
suggests that these are very little influenced by heredity. For example,
studies of patients diagnosed as suffering from personality disorders
have

consistently yielded lower heritability estimates for the diagnosis of
paranoid personality disorder than for any other DSM axis-2 diagnoses.26
Furthermore, it also appears that, even if genes make a minor
contribution, they are unlikely to be the same genes as those involved
in other complaints attributed to schizophrenia. In a series of studies
carried out in the 1980s, Kenneth Kendler found that the relatives of
patients given a diagnosis of delusional disorder rarely showed evidence
of schizotypal traits,27 a finding that has been replicated many times
in subsequent investigations.28 On this evidence at least, different
psychotic complaints seem to be differentially influenced by genes. Of
course, this still leaves us with Mojtabai and Rieder's paradox that
diagnoses seem to be more heritable than individual symptoms, to which I
will return later.

What the new genetics tells us In order to understand further the
relationship between genes and symptoms it will be helpful to think
about the mechanisms by which genes influence behaviour. This takes us
into the complex territory of molecular genetics, where we will find
evidence that will further discomfort neoKraepelinians. I will begin
with a very brief primer covering some of the most important scientific
concepts in this area. Even when strong genetic effects can be
demonstrated by family, twin or adoption studies, many intermediate
steps must lie between genes and madness. Genes consist of sequences of
chemical elements, known as nucleotides, joined together in long
molecules of DNA, which in turn are contained in the chromosomes held in
the nucleus of every cell. In humans there are twenty-three chromosomes,
which together comprise the genetic material known as the human genome.
However, most cells contain a double set, so that there are twenty-three
pairs, with one member of each pair drawn from one parent and one from
the other. The gametes -- sperm and egg cells -- are exceptions to this
rule, as they contain only one version of each chromosome. During the
initial formation of these cells, DNA may be swapped between
corresponding sections of each pair of chromosomes,

and one chromosome from each pair is then selected at random to enter
each gamete. Of course, when sperm from the father and egg cells from
the mother combine at fertilization the single sets of chromosomes in
each gamete pair together, so that the resultant embryo contains
twenty-three new chromosome pairs. There are four types of nucleotides,
labelled A (for adenine), G (guanine), C (cytosine) and T (thymine). The
order in which these are arranged (sometimes described as the genetic
code) determines the synthesis of proteins in each cell. Some sequences
of nucleotides are involved directly in protein synthesis in
co-operation with other biochemical systems; some sequences switch on or
off the production of different proteins during different developmental
periods and in different parts of the body. Genetic variation occurs
because genes (sequences of nucleotides in particular regions -- loci --
on the chromosomes that are responsible for particular proteins) come in
different varieties (differences in the sequence), known as alleles.
Strictly speaking, therefore, rather than saying that someone has
inherited the gene for a particular characteristic, we should say that
they have inherited (one or two copies of) the relevant allele of that
gene. For some characteristics, inheriting one crucial allele is
sufficient, in which case the allele is said to be dominant. For others,
the characteristic does not appear unless both of the corresponding
alleles on a pair of chromosomes are of a particular type, in which case
the allele is said to be recessive. The precise composition of alleles
in the chromosomes is known as the individual's genotype. Ultimately,
the synthesis of proteins controls the structure of the developing body.
Thoughtful biologists have pointed out that unravelling this process of
development is a task that will dwarf in complexity the much-vaunted
efforts to map the human genome (that is, to determine the exact
sequence of nucleotides on the DNA in the twenty-three chromosome
pairs).29 Of course, it has long been recognized that single genes
rarely exclusively determine characteristics in the adult person, either
because interactions between different genes are involved, or because of
environmental influences. When only a small proportion of individuals
carrying crucial alleles develop a trait, the alleles are said to have
low

penetrance. In fact, the penetrance of an allele can be expressed as a
simple percentage describing the proportion of carriers who are
affected. Alleles also vary in their expressivity, which refers to the
extent to which genetic traits, when present, vary in magnitude. The
alleles responsible for some physical disorders, for example Marfan's
syndrome, which is characterized by various abnormalities in the
skeleton and connective tissues, are 100 per cent penetrant (everyone
carrying the crucial allele gets it to some degree) but variable in
their expression (some people suffer from life-threatening defects in
the wall of the aorta, whereas some people just look odd).30 Not
surprisingly, given the evidence from twin and adoption studies reviewed
earlier in this book, most psychiatric geneticists assume that alleles
responsible for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder must be less than
completely penetrant and variable in their expression. Geneticists
sometimes use complex mathematical analyses of data from family, twin
and adoption studies to derive estimates of the number of genes
contributing to a particular disorder, whether the alleles are dominant
or recessive, and the extent to which they are penetrant and variable in
their expression. However, despite considerable efforts, no widely
accepted model of the genetic contribution to psychosis has been
generated this way. In the case of the brain, some genes that cause
undifferentiated cells in the embryo to become brain cells have been
identified, together with genes that control the segmentation of the
developing nervous system into different regions containing different
kinds of neurones utilizing different chemical transmitter systems.31
However, although genes help to determine the broad structure of the
nervous system, it is clear that they do not precisely determine the
final 'wiring diagram' of the adult brain. It has been estimated that
about 30,000 genes play a role in determining the structure of the human
body, a number that is remarkably invariant across mammalian species
that differ dramatically in the complexity of their nervous systems. By
contrast, it has been estimated that the adult human brain contains
about 100 trillion synapses, and that more than a quarter of a million
of these are formed every second during the very early stages of
development.32 Animals raised in impoverished environments compared to
animals raised in enriched environments develop fewer synapses, and a
lower density of blood capillaries (which supply neurones with
nutrients),33 confirming that this process is influenced by experience.
In a recent attempt to draw

together evidence about this process, a group of distinguished
researchers from Britain and the United States, led by Jeffrey Elman of
the University of California at San Diego, concluded that brain
development is determined by interactions with the environment at every
stage, leading them to ponder whether the idea of 'innate' behaviour
should be dispensed with altogether.34 Unfortunately, these advances in
the understanding of the genetic control of neurodevelopment appear to
have largely escaped the attention of psychiatric researchers. Following
the development of techniques for mapping DNA,35 psychiatric geneticists
have hoped to identify genes, and eventually alleles of those genes,
that determine the major psychiatric disorders. The most widely explored
approach is known as linkage analysis, which capitalizes on existing
knowledge about the location of certain genes (known as markers) on
particular chromosomes. Linkage analysis is usually carried out on data
collected from small numbers of families in which there are many
affected cases, as this increases the probability that specific alleles
are involved in the affected individuals' psychiatric problems. The
closer the physical location on a chromosome of a marker gene to a
psychosis gene, the more likely the marker gene will be shuffled
together with the psychosis gene during the interchange of DNA between
chromosomes prior to conception. Therefore, if marker genes are found
mostly in those family members who are affected by the illness, the gene
responsible for the illness is likely to be located close to the marker
gene on the relevant chromosome. Most linkage studies utilize a small
number of markers located along a single chromosome. However, in some
recent studies, markers spread evenly across all the chromosomes have
been examined together, a technique known as genome scanning.36 There
are several points to note about this approach. First, these techniques
assume that researchers can accurately diagnose affected individuals. As
most genetic researchers have accepted the validity of the
neoKraepelinian system, it is not surprising that they have come unstuck
on this very problem. Second, linkage analysis not only requires the use
of complex biochemical techniques, but also sophisticated mathematical
checks to ensure that any observed association between an illness and a

marker is not the result of chance. Third, even if it is possible to
locate psychosis genes in affected families, it is possible that the
genes play no or little role in non-familial forms of psychosis (that
is, in psychotic illnesses that appear sporadically, without a history
of illness in the family). Finally, for reasons that should now be
obvious, discovering the location of a psychosis gene is a long way from
understanding how that gene plays some part in the genesis of psychotic
behaviours and experiences. To make further progress, it will be
necessary to understand how the implicated gene is involved in the
synthesis of proteins, or how it influences the activity of other genes
which do this. We would need to know the difference that the aberrant
allele makes to that process, the role of the relevant proteins in brain
development, the final consequences of any developmental abnormalities
for the structure and function of different brain systems in adulthood,
the cognitive processes that are supported by those brain systems and,
last but not least, the role of those processes in patients' complaints.
The earliest linkage studies of psychosis were hailed as major
breakthroughs but soon turned out to be a source of embarrassment to
biological psychiatrists. Janice Egeland and her colleagues in the
United States chose to study a population with a restricted gene pool,
the Old Order Amish living in southeastern Pennsylvania. The Amish
(familiar to many people from their portrayal in Peter Weir's film The
Witness) are a religious sect that has shunned the trappings of modern
life, has pursued a rural existence with the minimum use of mechanical
aids, and whose members have rarely married outsiders. Psychiatric
interviews were conducted and hospital records examined for a pedigree
of 120 related individuals. Using the RDC, 19 received a diagnosis of
major depression, 14 received a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, and 5
received a diagnosis of unipolar depression. In 1987, Egeland and her
co-workers reported strong linkage between bipolar disorder and two
markers on chromosome 11, indicating that agene for bipolar disorder lay
somewhere on this chromosome.37 Only two years later, the investigators
reported a second analysis of the pedigree, adding data from a further
37 members.38 These new data, on their own, had little impact on the
findings. However, in the period between the two analyses, two
individuals who had been considered unaffected in the original analysis
developed bipolar symptoms. When these individuals were taken into
account in their mathematical analysis, Egeland and her

colleagues discovered that the association between bipolar disorder and
their markers disappeared. The earlier finding had been spurious.
Reflecting on similar efforts to find genes for schizophrenia, American
geneticist Cathy Barr described waking up one morning in 1988 to hear a
radio news bulletin announcing that researchers had found linkage for
the diagnosis. 'The significance of such a finding caused me to bolt
straight up from bed', she recalled.39 She immediately reviewed her
career plans and, soon afterwards, was carrying out her own research in
psychiatric genetics. Most British researchers similarly learned of the
first apparently successful linkage study of schizophrenia from a news
bulletin. Returning home from work one night in 1988, I turned on my
television set, to be greeted by a headline informing me that
researchers had discovered the gene for schizophrenia on chromosome 5.
The news bulletin announced that the results of a study conducted by
investigators at the Middlesex Hospital would shortly appear in the
prestigious journal Nature. When David Hill, a sceptical clinical
psychologist, rang Nature on behalf of a British news magazine to
inquire about the status of the report, he was told that it had not yet
been considered by the journal.40 Presumably, the researchers'
enthusiasm to win the race to find a schizophrenia gene led them to
assume that the journal would accept their report when it was eventually
submitted for publication. In this respect, at least, they showed sound
judgement, as their paper eventually appeared in Nature later in the
year,41 alongside a report from a group of US and Swedish researchers
claiming that a gene for schizophrenia did not exist on chromosome 5.42
The Middlesex group had obtained data from 104 people in five Icelandic
and two British pedigrees whereas the US--Swedish team had obtained data
from 81 people from a single Swedish pedigree but had used more powerful
mapping techniques. An examination of the Middlesex report reveals
causes for concern that should have been obvious to any competent
reviewer (raising important questions about why Nature accepted the
paper). For example, the researchers compared various different
definitions of schizophrenia in order to maximize their linkage
findings. Maximum linkage was achieved by including as 'schizophrenic'
individuals who were diagnosed as suffering from depression, phobias,
alcoholism and drug

addiction. Although these individuals would not be considered remotely
schizophrenic according to any definition of the disorder promulgated in
the last 100 years, the researchers described them as 'fringe
phenotypes' (that is, as individuals who were assumed to be genetically
schizophrenic, but whose symptoms differed from the prototype because of
presumed environmental influences). A subsequent study published by a
group of researchers in Edinburgh used markers similar to those employed
by the Middlesex group but obtained negative findings.43 After several
further failures to replicate their findings, the Middlesex group
reanalysed their data with an expanded sample and withdrew their
original conclusions.44 Linkage research has been pursued vigorously in
the decade or so since these first reports. However, consistent findings
have been elusive. In the case of bipolar disorder, efforts have focused
not only on chromosome 11, but also on chromosomes 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 13,
16, 18, 21, 22 and the X chromosome, but without consistent results.45
In the case of schizophrenia, numerous gene sites have been
investigated, and special efforts have been made to study loci known to
influence the structure and distribution of dopamine receptors in the
brain.46 Sites on chromosomes 10, 13, 18 and 22, which have been
tentatively linked to schizophrenia, appear to overlap those that have
been tentatively linked to bipolar disorder,47 an observation that has
special significance in the light of the persisting doubts about the
distinction between the two diagnoses. Again, however, findings have
been almost entirely inconsistent.48 In a particularly challenging
review of this kind of research, Tim Crow reflected on his own
participation in a multinational collaborative project that aimed to
replicate previously observed associations between schizophrenia and ten
genetic markers.49 Although the main authors of the collaborative
group's research report stated that they had found evidence of linkage
with genes on chromosomes 6 and 8,50 Crow disputed these findings on
statistical grounds. In an accompanying table, he listed no fewer than
twelve genetic loci that had been associated with schizophrenia by
linkage analysis. At the time that he was writing in 1997, other
researchers had failed to replicate these findings for eleven of the
twelve gene sites. As I complete the final draft of this chapter in late
2002, it is still the case that

replicable linkage results for major psychiatric disorders have remained
elusive.51 Frustrated by this 'maddening hunt for madness genes',52 many
commentators have begun to reflect on the limitations of the molecular
genetic approach.53 No doubt, the disappointing findings partly reflect
the obstacles that must be overcome by investigators (the difficulty of
diagnosing a homogeneous group of affected individuals; the difficulties
involved in statistically evaluating the results). In the face of these
obstacles, some researchers have even begun to search for genes that
influence particular complaints. For example, a research group at the
University of Milan reported a study of over 400 psychotic patients with
a range of diagnoses, in which they attempted to determine which
symptoms were associated with different alleles of a gene known to
influence the structure of the dopamine D4 receptor in the brain. The
gene is highly polymorphic (that is, there are many different alleles of
it) and there is evidence that different variants produce different
proteins in the receptor. It was found that patients with some of these
alleles were much more likely to be deluded than patients with others.54
If we do not entirely reject the findings of the molecular geneticists,
it is reasonable to reach three conclusions. First, the findings, such
as they are, seem surprisingly consistent with critical reviews of the
family, twin and adoption study data, which have argued that genetic
investigator shave almost always overstated the evidence that psychosis
is inherited.55 Second, it seems likely that psychotic disorders are
heterogeneous at the molecular level (that is, genes that predispose
some people to become psychotic may play no role in the psychotic
experiences of other people).56 Third -- and this is perhaps the most
important conclusion -- it seems likely that any genetic contribution to
psychosis is caused by many genes of minor effect. Despite the
limitations of existing methods, if just one or two genes played a major
role, they would almost certainly have been identified by now. For this
reason, it seems much more likely that many genes each make a small
contribution towards vulnerability to symptoms.

On the inheritance of symptoms: a genetic footnote

Before leaving genetic studies of psychosis behind us, I would like to
return briefly to the apparent paradox raised by Mojtabai and Rieder in
their critique of the symptom-orientated approach. Recall their claim
that diagnoses such as schizophrenia and manic depression are more
heritable than individual symptoms. Although they argued that this
observation is inconsistent with an analysis of madness that focuses on
particular complaints, we can now see why this is not necessarily the
case. Let us take the molecular geneticists' observations seriously and
suppose that there are no major genes for psychosis. Instead, let us
suppose that there are many minor genes, and that each gene influences a
particular complaint by means of a complex causal chain. As the
heritability of complaints, in general, appears to be quite small, we
can also assume that many other (perhaps environmental) factors play a
role in determining whether a complaint is experienced by a person who
inherits the relevant gene. (In other words, we can assume that the
relevant alleles have low expressivity and/or low penetrance.) Mojtabai
and Rieder's paradox is resolved when we note that psychiatric studies
mainly focus on people with many complaints. This is because the rules
embodied in the DSM and similar systems require several complaints to be
present before a diagnosis can be made, and also because people with
many complaints are especially likely to experience distress and seek
psychiatric treatment. The more complaints people have, the more
psychosis genes they are likely to have inherited, and the more likely
it will be that some of those genes will be shared by close relatives.
Because of the role that other factors play in each complaint, an
affected person's close relatives may not experience the same complaint.
However, if they have a sufficient number of psychosis genes, enough may
be expressed as complaints to enable them to meet the criteria for a
global diagnosis. As a consequence, the diagnosis will appear to be more
heritable than each of the complaints. I offer this argument merely to
establish that Mojtabai and Rieder's genetic objection to the approach I
am advocating is not as compelling as it

at first appears. Although admittedly highly speculative, it probably
understates the weakness of Mojtabai and Rieder's position. As we have
seen, genes do not directly cause particular kinds of experiences and
behaviours but instead influence the development of the brain, which in
turn affects the cognitive resources available to the individual.
Furthermore, as I described in the last chapter, complaints may be
functionally interconnected to each other in complex ways. When these
added levels of complexity are taken into account, the Kraepelinian
paradigm seems even less buttressed by the genetic evidence.

Is There a Biological Time-Bomb? Earlier in this chapter, I introduced
the biological time-bomb hypothesis, the idea that some kind of
neurodevelopmental defect is responsible for psychotic breakdowns that
occur in late adolescence. Theories of this kind have been stimulated by
the recent discovery that the normal brain undergoes major structural
changes throughout the second decade of life. This process was first
detected in electro-encephalographic (brain-wave) studies, which
revealed that the kind of electrical activity generated by the brain
changes during this period.57 Anatomical studies subsequently revealed
that these changes coincide with a decrease in the density of synapses
(connections between neurones) in the human cortex,58 a process now
known as 'neural pruning'. Whereas early brain development is
accompanied by a rapid increase in the brain's connectivity, it now
appears that late development is accompanied by some kind of 'weeding
out' of connections that serve no purpose. (Not surprisingly, some brain
scientists have drawn analogies between this process and the process of
natural selection.)59 Although there are several different versions of
the biological time-bomb hypothesis, it is usual to distinguish between
'early' and 'late' theories. According to the former, damage to the
brain or abnormal development very early in life (perhaps before birth)
only leads to symptoms when the brain reaches a particular developmental
stage; on this view, the primary cause of the psychotic patient's
neurodevelopmental deficits is the early

insult experienced by the brain.60 According to late versions of the
hypothesis, excessive neural pruning in the second decade of life leads
directly to symptoms.61

Arduous research The best way to test developmental theories of
psychosis is to study children who later become psychotic. Of course,
the practical difficulties inherent in this kind of research are
formidable. It is possible to collect some developmental data
retrospectively, for example by asking parents to recall milestones or
by examining school reports or other kinds of archives. A recent study
of this kind examined psychological tests routinely administered to all
Israeli adolescents in preparation for their induction into the
military, and matched them against a national register of psychiatric
patients. It was found that adolescents who were diagnosed as
schizophrenic between four and ten years after their military assessment
functioned more poorly socially, and scored considerably lower on
intellectual tests, than peers who remained well.62 American
psychologist Elaine Walker at Emory University has reported a
particularly interesting series of archive investigations, in which she
analysed home movies taken by the parents of children who developed
schizophrenia symptoms in later life. In one study, evidence of abnormal
or clumsy movements was observed in seven future patients but not in
their brothers or sisters who later remained well.63 A similar analysis
of film clips of a larger group of future patients and their siblings
revealed emotional problems in the future patients.64 In film clips
taken between birth and adolescence, there was more evidence of negative
emotion and, in the case of girls, less evidence of positive emotion in
the future patients in comparison with their brothers and sisters. Other
retrospective investigations have used educational records to show that
children who later develop negative symptoms function poorly at

school,65 and child-guidance records to show that unhappy adolescents
who later develop positive symptoms are abnormally suspicious of other
people.66 Although these findings suggest that social, cognitive and
emotional problems may precede the onset of psychosis by decades,
retrospectively collected information is rarely entirely reliable,
limiting the conclusions that can be drawn from this kind of research.
Prospective investigations are of greater scientific value but are
inevitably more difficult. Because they require children to be followed
up over many years, a single investigation may take up a researcher's
entire career. Studies of this kind require considerable forethought
about the kinds of measures to be employed, as decades of effort can be
wasted if the wrong kind of information is collected during the early
stages of the project. The most common type of longitudinal
investigation is the high-risk study, in which children who are believed
to have a high risk of developing a future psychiatric disorder (usually
because one or both of their parents have been diagnosed as suffering
from a mental illness) are examined at regular intervals, together with
comparison children who are believed to be at low risk. These studies
aim to discover whether or not the high-risk children are especially
likely to become psychotic in adulthood, and whether any indications of
future illness can be detected in early life. One of the earliest
studies of this kind was initiated by psychologist Sarnoff Mednick and
psychiatrist Fini Schulsinger in Copenhagen in 1962 and has involved 207
children of schizophrenic mothers and 104 children of normal parents.67
The New York High-Risk Project, which commenced in 1971 under the
direction of geneticist L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling and psychologist Barbara
Cornblatt, has followed up two separate cohorts, each including some
children whose parents had been diagnosed as schizophrenic, some whose
parents suffered from affective disorders, and some whose parents were
psychiatrically normal.68 Although these studies might appear relatively
simple in conception, interpretation of the findings has not always been
straightforward, as important factors have often been confounded. For
example, many of the children of schizophrenia patients recruited to the
Copenhagen study had

been given up for adoption or raised in institutions. It was therefore
decided to compare them with children who had similar histories. It
later transpired that the biological parents of many of the children in
the control group were recidivist criminals. (In an effort to overcome
these kinds of difficulties, a study was set up in Israel in which some
high-risk and control children were recruited from kibbutzim.69 In the
kibbutz system of communal living, which is unique to that country,
children are raised collectively, live in dormitories, and spend
comparatively little time in the exclusive presence of their parents.)
Because of these kinds of confounds, researchers have usually employed
complex statistical techniques (especially a group of procedures known
collectively as path analysis) to try to tease out the way in which
different possible predictor variables interact to influence the future
development of psychotic complaints.70 However, these efforts have
sometimes been undermined by the unexpectedly low rates of psychiatric
disorder observed in many of the high-risk children as they have
matured. For example, in the Copenhagen study, only 13 of the high-risk
group had met the ICD-8 criteria for schizophrenia by the age of 25
years, although many more were said to show evidence of neurosis,
personality disorder or 'borderline states'.71 In the New York study,
only 36 out of 208 individuals had shown evidence of any psychiatric
disturbance by the time they reached the age of 20 years, most of these
having come from the high-risk group. Of these, only 13 appeared to be
psychotic, and they were drawn in equal proportions from the disturbed
children in all three groups.72 Clearer evidence of the emergence of
psychotic symptoms was reported when the children had reached 25 years
of age, by which time 13 per cent of the children of parents diagnosed
as suffering from schizophrenia had themselves met the criteria for the
disorder.73 In total, more than twenty high-risk studies designed to
detect the developmental precursors of psychosis have been carried out,
mostly focusing on schizophrenia. (Oddly, there have been no high-risk
studies that have specifically focused on the children of bipolar
parents, even though, as we saw in Chapter 4, family and twin studies
have generally yielded stronger genetic effects for bipolar symptoms.)
The results of these studies

are not entirely consistent, but the broad picture that emerges has been
drawn together by American psychologist Joan Asarnow74 and more recently
by British psychiatrists Chris Hollis and Eric Taylor.75 Some studies
have detected evidence of motor abnormalities in the first few years of
life. During middle childhood, many future schizophrenia patients show
evidence of poor social adjustment, and poor performance on attentional
and other cognitive tests, and these differences from children who do
not later become psychotic become more evident during adolescence.
Overall, the balance of this evidence points to the role of early brain
abnormalities in children who will later become psychotic, although a
contribution from later maturational processes such as neural pruning
cannot be ruled out. More detailed analyses of the data from the
individual studies point to complex interactions between biological and
environmental factors and suggest that different pathways may lead to
different complaints. For example, the Copenhagen researchers identified
those in their sample who had predominately positive or negative
symp-toms.76 In the positive group there was strong evidence of
inadequate parenting (six out of eight had been separated from their
mothers for more than one and a half years during early childhood, one
had been separated from her mother for more than five years, and one had
been physically abused by her father). Similar evidence of inadequate
parenting was absent in the negative symptom group, many of whom had
suffered complicated births and showed enlarged cerebral ventricles on
CT scans. In the New York study, poor social adjustment in adulthood
(suspicious solitude, social insecurity or a lack of empathy) was
associated with physical anhedonia and attentional impairments in
childhood.77 Almost certainly, the children recruited to high-risk
studies are an unrepresentative sample of pre-psychotic children. After
all, by far the majority of people who receive a diagnosis of
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder do not have psychotic parents. This
potential source of bias is avoided in a second type of longitudinal
approach, in which individuals from the general population are followed
up from birth. These kinds of investigations, known as cohort studies,
are usually set up with broad aims in mind, and so measures of specific
interest to psychiatrists and clinical

psychologists are often not included at the outset. Two such studies
carried out in the UK are the National Survey of Health and Development
(NSHD) and the National Child Development Study (NCDS). The NSHD was
originally a survey of all children born in England, Scotland and Wales
between 3 and 9 March 1946, and was carried out to assess the need for
maternity services in the planned National Health Service. Multiple and
illegitimate births were excluded, and 13,687 births were studied in
total. Regular contact has been maintained with a subset of 5362
individuals, who receive a birthday card from the project every year. As
time has passed, various assessments have been made and additional data
have been collected from educational and health services. The NCDS is a
similar study, set up in 1958, designed to monitor the physical, social
and educational development of children through to adulthood. British
psychiatrists Peter Jones, Robin Murray and their colleagues have
exploited these studies by identifying participants who had been
admitted to psychiatric hospitals.78 Diagnoses were obtained by
scrutinizing hospital case notes. From the data collected at an NSHD
assessment at 2 years of age, it was found that the future psychotic
patients were later to walk than their peers by an average of 1.2
months. Evidence of higher levels of clumsiness at 7 years in the
pre-psychotic children was observed in the NCDS. In both studies, the
future patients had, on average, slightly lower scores on IQ or similar
tests when assessed between the ages of 7 and 16 years. However, perhaps
the most interesting findings concerned speech. In the NCDS, qualitative
reports of speech difficulties by mothers and teachers at 7 and 11 years
discriminated between pre-psychotic and normal children, and a similar
association between future psychosis and non-specific speech
difficulties assessed by school doctors emerged from the NSHD. It would
be interesting to know whether speech problems early in life are
specifically associated with later thought disorder, but the NSHD and
NCDS studies do not provide sufficient clinical information to answer
this question. Unfortunately, most of the high-risk or cohort studies
have not included measures of the kinds of social-cognitive processes
which, I have argued, play a crucial role in depression, mania and
paranoia. In fact, so far as I am aware, only the Israeli High-Risk
Study has included a measure of this

sort.79 In that study, the adolescent children of schizophrenia patients
were administered a questionnaire measure of locus of control, a
construct that is similar to but predates the concept of attributional
style. Individuals are said to have an external locus of control if they
believe that important facets of their life, including their own
behaviour, are controlled by external influences, whereas they are said
to have an internal locus of control if they believe that they control
their own destinies. In the Israeli study, high-risk adolescents who
later became psychotic were found to have a more external locus of
control than those who did not later become psychotic. If verified by
future studies, this finding suggests that the attributional
abnormalities observed in some psychotic patients may be present, to
some degree, well before the onset of their delusional ideas.

The role of early brain damage Many investigators have assumed that the
neurodevelopmental abnormalities found in pre-psychotic children must be
genetically determined. However, others have argued that other kinds of
influences on the developing nervous system may affect a person's
vulnerability to psychosis. In the Copenhagen study it was found that
high-risk children who were later to become ill were more likely to have
experienced difficult births than children who stayed well.80 As
complications during birth can cause the brain to be temporarily starved
of oxygen, this observation is consistent with early versions of the
biological time-bomb hypothesis. Although some studies have replicated
this finding,81 others have not,82 or have found that the association
between birth complication and psychosis exists only for males.83 For
these reasons, the contribution of birth complications to psychosis
remains uncertain. A more recent hypothesis suggests that foetal
exposure to a virus contracted by the expectant mother might be the
cause of early neurodevelopmental abnormalities responsible for
psychosis. This suggestion was originally made to explain the much
repeated observation of a very slightly increased risk of psychosis in
people born in the late winter or early spring (and who were therefore
second trimester foetuses during

the winter, when viral infections are most common).84\* A bizarre
version of this theory, proposed by American psychiatrists E. F. Torrey
and Robert Yolken, holds that the 'schizovirus' can be caught by
expectant mothers from domestic house cats, which tend to spend more
time indoors during the winter. (Fuller and Yolken claim that
schizophrenia is especially common in countries where people keep cats
as pets.)85 However, most researchers have focused on the influenza
virus. Although some retrospective studies have reported evidence that
mothers of psychotic patients suffered from influenza during pregnancy
more often than mothers of non-psychotic people,86 many others have
failed to find this association.87 Even if the influenza virus is not
the culprit, one piece of evidence suggests that the role of maternal
infections in conferring vulnerability to psychosis should not be
dismissed entirely. Several studies have found that the season-of-birth
effect is especially evident in patients born in urban areas
characterized by high population density and crowded housing but is
absent or almost absent in patients born in rural areas.88 Of course,
the importance of this observation can be debated. In one study the
combined effect of season of birth and urban birth was only evident in
females.89 However, in another, more recent, study, it was calculated
that the population risk (number of cases) attributable to place and
season of birth exceeded the risk associated with having a first-degree
relative suffering from psychosis.90Of course, the urban environment
probably contains a number of psychological hazards to the developing
child, as we will see in the next chapter. Nonetheless, one explanation
for the greater evidence of the season-of-birth effect in urban
environments is infections; in crowded conditions viruses and other
infectious agents are easily passed from one person to another. Viral
infections are not the only conceivable cause of the season-of-birth
effect. As there is no seasonal bias in the births of brothers and
sisters of psychotic patients, the hypothesis that the effect is caused
by the seasonal reproductive enthusiasms of parents can probably be
ruled out.91 However, the possibility that poor maternal nutrition in
the winter months plays a role is raised by a study that found that a
higher than expected number of future schizophrenia patients were born
during the Dutch 'hunger winter' of 1944

to 1945, when a Nazi blockade precipitated a severe famine in western
Holland.92 Unfortunately the interactions between these kinds of factors
and others that appear to contribute to psychosis are not understood.
Attempts to determine whether birth complications play a greater role in
patients with or without a family history of mental illness have yielded
almost entirely inconsistent results,93 so it is not clear whether early
brain damage and genetic vulnerability represent separate or interacting
contributions to later psychosis. Attempts to demonstrate an association
between birth complications and the kinds of structural brain
abnormalities sometimes observed in brain scans of adult patients have
also been inconclusive.94 Nor can interactions with psychological and
social factors be excluded. The authors of a recent study, which found
an association between schizophrenia and maternal bleeding during
pregnancy,95 speculate that some aspects of maternal lifestyle (for
example, smoking during pregnancy, failure to comply with routines of
antenatal care) may partially explain their observations. As some of
these lifestyle characteristics are especially evident in mothers who
suffer from psychiatric problems, this hypothesis suggests a non-genetic
mechanism that might explain why psychosis sometimes runs in families.

What can we Conclude from Neurodevelopmental Studies? Overall, the
findings from developmental studies consistently show that unusual
characteristics are present in at least some future psychotic patients
many years before they become obviously ill. The findings on birth
complications and prenatal exposure to viruses or malnutrition lend
further support to the theory that early brain damage can make
individuals more vulnerable to becoming psychotic in later life.
However, it is important not to leap from these observations to simple
conclusions. Other types of challenges to the developing brain, for
example prenatal exposure to high

levels of alcohol,96 have been proposed as potential causes of
vulnerability to psychosis. Perhaps any kind of early brain damage can
have this effect. Nor are these effects specific to people who later
receive a particular diagnosis. Although most of the relevant studies
have been conducted by investigators who have been searching for the
origins of schizophrenia, whenever comparable data have been collected,
similar observations have been made for children who later develop
psychotic mood disorders.97 For example, in one study it was found that
the average IQ scores of future schizophrenia and future bipolar
patients were both slightly lower than normal during middle childhood.98
In the NSHD, there was evidence that those who later developed severe
depression, on average, showed poor performance on IQ measures, together
with speech irregularities.99 Retrospective reports by parents suggest
that future bipolar patients, like future schizophrenia patients, show
impaired social functioning in adolescence.100 The season-of-birth
effect has also been found for bipolar patients101 who, like future
schizophrenia patients, may have experienced higher than expected rates
of obstetric birth complications.102 Unexpectedly high rates of
depression and bipolar disorder, as well as schizophrenia, have been
found in children born in the Dutch 'hunger winter'.103 It is pretty
clear from this evidence that non-specific kinds of early brain damage
cause a non-specific vulnerability to psychotic symptoms later in life
(a conclusion that could obviously be interpreted as consistent with a
unitary psychosis model). The magnitude of this effect is drawn into
question by the low prevalence of psychotic illness. As we have seen,
studies of birth complications and prenatal influenza reveal, at best, a
very modest increase in exposure to these phenomena in future patients
in comparison to ordinary people. In this context it is important to
remember that, for every person who receives a diagnosis of
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, there are about 100 people who do
not. Simple arithmetic reveals that, even if exposure to these
challenges to the nervous system were three times more common in future
patients than in others(which would certainly be more than a modest
increase), the number of people who suffer these insults without
becoming

psychotic would still be more than thirty times greater than the number
who do so and later become ill.\* A final, and very important,
qualification about the evidence we have examined concerns the logic of
the neurodevelopmental time-bomb hypothesis. Whether theories of this
kind implicate processes early or late in development, their main
strength is that they explain the age of onset data discussed at the
beginning of this chapter. Herein also lies their fundamental weakness.
Whereas adolescents and young adults are more vulnerable to developing
psychotic symptoms than any other age group, symptoms can appear as
early as the age of 10 or as late as the age of 70 or afterwards. In
fact, despite the over-representation of adolescents among people
experiencing their first episode of psychosis, it seems likely that the
number of non-adolescents experiencing psychotic symptoms for the first
time exceeds the number of adolescents.† Because biological researchers
have attempted to explain the typical age of onset exclusively in terms
of some kind of endogenous process -- the biological time-bomb that
'explodes' during a critical period of development -- they struggle to
explain the very wide range of ages at which psychotic symptoms first
appear. In order to explain this range, it will be necessary to take
into account factors external to the individual, in particular the
life-experiences of those who become psychotic. OceanofPDF.com

18 The Trials of Life There is but one truly serious philosophical
problem and that is suicide. Judging whether life is or is not worth
living amounts to answering the fundamental problem of philosophy.
Albert Camus1 Life's a bitch, and then you die... Common saying My
mother telephoned me on a Sunday evening to tell me that my brother had
killed himself. It was a brief conversation, muted by shock. Afterwards,
the fact of Andrew's death seemed so big and difficult to absorb that I
sat silently on my living-room couch, searching my brain for appropriate
thoughts but finding none. The coldness of my home -- the small house I
had retreated to after the break-up of my marriage -- suddenly became
more evident. As minutes passed into hours, guilt began to lay siege to
my defences. I had visited my mother earlier in the day. She had
telephoned me only an hour after my return. Andrew had also planned to
visit her but for some reason, probably because he and I did not get on
very well, she had asked him not to come until the following weekend. He
had killed himself that morning by leaping from the fourteenth floor of
the tower block in which he lived. Visiting a police station early the
next day, my sister and I were relieved to discover that our brother's
body had already been identified by one of his friends. However, other
grim tasks fell to us later in the week -- clearing out the shabby flat
in which he had lived in his final years; sitting in an empty courtroom
to hear the coroner open and then adjourn the inquest; organizing the
funeral, which was attended by a surprising number of his friends, most
of whom were previously unknown to us. In the middle of the week, a
local priest called on my mother and, knowing my profession, remarked
that Andrew's suicide must have been especially difficult for me to cope
with. Tragedy always unleashes an immediate search for explanations. We
launch into attributional overdrive. However, as the priest who had
visited

my mother had shrewdly observed, it was unlikely that the concepts I had
absorbed during my training would adequately satisfy my need to
understand my brother's final and most decisive act. Of course, Andrew
had always been different. At school, he had constantly been at
loggerheads with his teachers and his peers. He had dropped out from
formal education without achieving qualifications, and had drifted in to
a life of drug-taking and unemployment. From the comfortable perspective
of a professional clinical psychologist, some of his behaviour could be
described as schizotypal. He complained of flashback hallucinatory
experiences that he attributed to his experiments with LSD. He sometimes
professed strange and magical beliefs, at one time telling my mother's
elderly neighbour of his ambition to absorb all the knowledge in the
universe. And yet, this kind of diagnostic labelling does not seem to do
justice to the story of my brother's life. He might have been
'schizotypal', for want of any better word, but he was not schizotypal
in a vacuum. The more he became disengaged from his roots, and the
middle-class values of his family, the more his relationships with us
came under stress. We became angry and distant from him and ultimately,
for my own part, quite rejecting. At his funeral, the friend who had
identified his body told me that all Andrew had wanted from us was to be
treated as 'an acceptable failure'.

Yet Another Interminable Debate They fuck you up, your mum and dad. They
may not mean to, but they do. They fill you with the faults they had And
add some extra, just for you. But they were fucked up in their turn By
fools in old-style hats and coats, Who half the time were soppy-stern
And half at one another's throats. Man hands on misery to man, It
deepens like a coastal shelf. Get out as early as you can, And don't
have any kids yourself.

Philip Larkin2 The idea that environmental factors, and especially
family relationships, contribute to madness is so difficult for many
patients and their relatives that many professionals treat it as taboo.3
Most of those who have worked on the concept of expressed emotion, in
particular, have been at pains to argue that, although families may
influence the course of illness, 'We consider that families do not exert
a causal influence.'4 In making this kind of assertion, psychologists
and psychiatrists have attempted to distance themselves from the equally
extreme viewpoint of an earlier era, in which the causes of madness were
exclusively laid at the door of 'schizogenic' parents. In the late
1950s, for example, the American anthropologist Geoffrey Bateson argued
that the parents of future schizophrenia patients drove their children
mad by giving them simultaneous but logically contradictory messages
(known as 'double-binds').5 A few years later, the British
anti-psychiatrists R. D. Laing and Aaron Esterson suggested that young
schizophrenia patients were victimized and scapegoated by family members
who wished to avoid dwelling on their own inadequacies.6 One consequence
of characterizing the parents of psychiatric patients as evil in this
way was described by the philosopher Peter Sedgwick, who witnessed a
meeting between trainee social workers and a group of parents in the
late 1970s, in which the former greeted the latter with undisguised
hostility.7 The taboo against considering the role of environmental
influences on psychosis has bolstered exclusively biological accounts of
madness, particularly genetic accounts that portray the close relatives
of patients as passive victims of a preordained tragedy. However,
prejudicial assumptions of any sort are a poor basis for a scientific
analysis. As we have seen in previous chapters, debates about the
origins of madness have tended to focus exclusively on single causes
that are either biological or environmental, as if the two were mutually
exclusive. Advocates of both positions have often naively assumed that a
focus on family relationships amounts to holding parents morally
culpable for the troubles of their children. In the last chapter we saw
some evidence that environmental factors play a role in the development
of psychosis. For example, in the adoption study

reported by Tienari and his colleagues, an interaction was observed
between genetic and environmental influences on thought disorder. In the
Copenhagen high-risk study, patients with positive symptoms were
especially likely to have suffered separation from their parents at an
early age. Of course, many different kinds of environmental factors
might, in theory, help to determine whether or not an individual
eventually becomes mad. In this chapter I will consider what these
factors might be, focusing on three broad types of influences: family
relationships, the general social environment, and traumatic
experiences. Wherever possible, I will try to indicate how specific
environmental influences contribute to specific complaints.

Family Influences We begin with the difficult question of whether family
relationships play a role in the aetiology of psychosis. One impediment
to thinking clearly about this issue has been some over-simplistic ideas
about how family relationships can go awry. The early family causation
theories of schizophrenia created an image of the 'schizogenic' parent
as a kind of monster. However, we do not need to assume that the parents
of future psychotic patients are wilfully neglectful, deranged or cruel
in order to accept that they have some influence on their children's
mental health. Psychopathologists have studied three different kinds of
non-optimal relationships between children and their families. The first
involves some kind of disruption of the emotional bond that is usually
formed between parent and infant at the beginning of the infant's life.
This kind of bond, known as an attachment relationship, has been the
subject of intense investigation by psychoanalysts, psychologists and
animal behaviourists. The second kind concerns the emotional climate
that develops in families as the child grows older, and is reflected in
the concepts of expressed emotion and affective style, which we
encountered in Chapter16. Finally, as we have already seen, some
research has focused on the concept of communication deviance, the idea
that persistently vague, fragmented or contradictory communications from
parents can lead to cognitive confusion in the child,

increasing the probability that he will eventually become
thoughtdisordered.

Attachment relationships Following the British psychiatrist John
Bowlby's claim that secure attachment to a parental figure is necessary
for healthy psychological development,8 opinions about the impact of
early relationships have varied widely. In part, this reflects the
difficulty of studying influences across the human life span. Sceptics
have argued that emotional deprivation at an early age can be
compensated for by adequate emotional care later in childhood.
Certainly, some highly resilient children survive appalling mistreatment
by their parents and emerge relatively unscathed as adults. However,
studies in which attachment relationships have been deliberately
disrupted in young animals suggest that negative consequences often
ensue. Infant rhesus monkeys who are separated from their parents and
raised with their peers, even if nurtured adequately in other ways,
develop quite marked behavioural and emotional difficulties in
adolescence, and these difficulties are accompanied by biochemical
changes in the brain (decreased levels of 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, the
primary metabolite of the neurotransmitter serotonin).9 Moreover, recent
studies of insecurely attached human children have revealed that they
are handicapped by subtle social-cognitive deficits that may not be
obvious to the casual observer. Although intellectually the equal of
securely attached children, at 2 years of age they are less persistent
and enthusiastic when solving problems.10 At the age of 11 years, they
are less able to recall specific incidents from earlier in life, and are
less able to reflect on their own mental processes.11 Perhaps more
importantly for our purposes, studies conducted by Peter Fonagy and his
colleagues at University College London12 and by Elizabeth Meins at
Durham University13 have shown that children between 4 and 6 years of
age who are insecurely attached perform less well than securely attached
children on tests designed to measure their ability to understand the
mental states of other people ('theory-of-mind' skills).

The suspicion that insecure attachment relationships confer
vulnerability to psychosis is fuelled by the results of the Copenhagen
high-risk study, which found an association between positive symptoms
and early separation from parents. However, more powerful prospective
evidence of this effect has emerged from a large cohort study carried
out in Northern Finland, which was initiated in 1966. Before the birth
of the 11,000 children who were entered into the study, their mothers
were questioned about whether their pregnancies had been planned and
whether they had considered an abortion. Examining outcome data
twenty-eight years later, a team of British and Finnish investigators
found that unwanted pregnancies resulted in a four-fold increase in
later psychosis, even when possible confounding socio-demographic and
medical factors were taken into account.14 Although the researchers did
not offer a psychological interpretation of their findings, the obvious
implication is that parents' emotional ambivalence towards their
children increases the risk that they will grow up to suffer from
positive symptoms. If this idea is correct, we should be able to detect
evidence of insecure attachment styles in adult patients who have become
psychotic. The definition and measurement of attachment styles is a
complex field, and there is not enough space here to describe this kind
of work in detail.15 Suffice it to say that several different styles are
commonly observed in normal children and adults. Furthermore, there is
evidence of intergenerational transmission of these styles. Children who
have secure relationships with their parents typically but not always
grow up to form secure relationships with adult partners, and later
become parents of securely attached children. Insecurely attached
children, on the other hand, often encounter problems when attempting to
form relationships in later life, and sometimes fail to bond adequately
with their own children. In a series of studies carried out in the USA,
Mary Dozier used questionnaires and interviews to assess psychiatric
patients' attachments to their parents. It is important to note that
Dozier's aim was to study attachment representations-- the patients'
understanding of their relationships with their parents, rather than
actual relationships. She accepted that her participants' accounts might
not be an accurate reflection

of what actually happened in their families many years before. In an
initial study, she found that patients with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia, in comparison with patients with affective disorders,
often had the kind of insecure attachment style that is described as
dismissing or avoidant.16 Most people feel that their relationships are
very important to them, however troublesome they may be. However, the
dismissing-avoidant person devalues the importance of attachments and
often fails to recall specific details about his relationship with his
parents during childhood. It is as if, as a consequence of early
emotional disappointment, the growing child develops a strategy that
allows him to avoid the emotional hazards of mature relationships. In a
later study, Dozier found that patients with this attachment style were
especially likely to be deluded, hallucinated and suspicious.17 Perhaps
this is unsurprising, as the emotional theme underlying the dismissing
style is lack of trust. Evidence supporting Dozier's findings has
emerged from community surveys of attachment styles undertaken by social
psychologist Philip Shaver and his colleagues in the USA. In two
studies, large representative samples of adults and adolescents were
administered questionnaires measuring attachments to others. Several
measures of psychopathology were also administered. In the adult sample
of over 8000 people, schizophrenia as defined by DSM-III-R criteria was
associated with an insecure and especially dismissing attachment
style.18 In the adolescent sample of over 1500 individuals, high levels
of psychoticism and paranoia were associated with both the dismissing
style and a second type of insecure style, known as
anxious-ambivalent.19 As the name suggests, people with this attachment
style desperately want to have relationships, but feel in their hearts
that no one will ever want to get close to them. Of course, it might be
argued that these styles are consequences rather than causes of paranoid
thinking. If this were so, we might expect recovered paranoid patients
to report warm and supportive relationships with their families.
However, in a recent study conducted by Peter Rankin, myself and former
colleagues at the University of Liverpool, we found that both currently
ill and recovered paranoid patients report extremely difficult
relationships with their parents.20

The idea that negative attitudes towards parents is a consequence of
psychosis is also difficult to square with some of the prospective
evidence we considered earlier -- for example, from the Finnish cohort
study and the Copenhagen high-risk study. In fact, early in the
Copenhagen high-risk study, the high-risk children were interviewed
about their relationships with their parents. Many years later, it was
found that those who reported a negative relationship with their parents
were especially likely to develop schizophrenia symptoms.21

Expressed emotion and communication deviance We have already considered
evidence that communication deviance in parents can contribute to the
later development of thought disorder in their children. Perhaps the
best indication that this is partly an environmental effect has emerged
from Pekka Tienari's adoption study, which found that both a genetic
predisposition and exposure to vague and fragmented parental
communications are necessary conditions for the development of this
complaint.22 The possible causal role of expressed emotion in psychosis
has hardly been investigated, perhaps because most researchers have
decided to reject this possibility from the outset. In support of this
prejudice, some have pointed out that studies of the relatives of
patients experiencing their first episode of psychosis have usually
found lower rates of high expressed emotion than studies carried out
with the families of patients who have been ill for some time.23 This
observation certainly supports the idea that expressed emotion grows
during interactions between psychotic people and their parents, so that
the emotional climate in families tends to deteriorate as patients
become more disturbed and less able to look after themselves. However,
it does not preclude the possibility that excessive criticism and
parental over-control can play a role in causing symptoms in the first
place. The only adequate way of addressing this possibility is by
studying the effects of expressed emotion prospectively.

The University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) Family Project was
initiated by psychologist Michael Goldstein and his colleagues in
1965.24 The sixty-five families who agreed to participate had all sought
help from the UCLA Psychology Department's outpatient clinic because of
difficulties they were experiencing with an adolescent child. At the
time at which the project started, none of these adolescents had
experienced psychotic symptoms. Two measures of family relationships
were employed: a measure of communication deviance derived from the work
of Singer and Wynne, and a measure of emotional climate (the Affective
Style Index, based on the concept of expressed emotion, but derived from
observations of the family members attempting to discuss a problem).
Five and fifteen years later, the children were graded on a seven-point
scale of psychopathology ranging from normal, through neuroses, more
severe personality problems, to borderline, probable and definite
schizophrenia. As in the other high-risk studies we have considered, the
proportion of children developing frank psychotic symptoms was quite
small (only four out of the fifty-two followed up met the criteria for
probable or definite schizophrenia). Nonetheless, there was evidence
that both communication deviance and affective style predicted future
psychosis. These two types of interactions between parents and their
children appeared to be independent influences, so that the combination
of high communication deviance and a negative affective style appeared
to be particularly dangerous to the children's mental health. Moreover,
there was evidence that the harmful effects of communication deviance
were most marked in families with a high genetic risk of psychosis (that
is, with other psychotic people in the family).25 This finding of an
interaction between family processes and genetic risk is, of course,
consistent with the results from Tienari's adoption study.

How families affect their children A complete account of the way that
families affect the development of madness would explain how different
family characteristics influence the psychological processes responsible
for particular complaints. Fortunately, clues about these influences can
be discerned from research carried out by

developmental psychologists, whose efforts to map out the pathways to
ordinary adulthood have too often been ignored by psychopathologists.
For example, we have already seen that secure attachment relationships
facilitate the development of 'theory-of-mind' skills, an observation of
some importance given that these skills seem to be compromised in some
psychotic patients. Similar progress has been made in mapping the ways
in which parents influence children's beliefs about themselves, and the
kinds of explanations that they make for important events. Martin
Seligman found that the attributional styles of 11-year-old children
correlate strongly with the styles of their mothers but not their
fathers.26 Although this observation seems to indicate that children
somehow 'copy' their mothers' characteristic way of explaining things,
other studies have shown that parents can influence their children's
attributions in less direct ways.27 For example, if a parent makes
attributions for a child's poor academic performance that are internal
to herself ('It's my fault because I did not bring up my child
properly'), the child is likely to make attributions for the failure
that are external to himself ('It's not my fault that I keep failing my
exams'). Conversely, if a parent criticizes a child's performance, the
criticism may be embraced by the child and later repeated as an internal
attribution ('I failed because I'm stupid'). These kinds of influences
may be important even in adolescence and earlyadulthood. In a recent
study, Judy Garber at Vanderbilt University in Nashville found that
explanations for positive and negative events given by adolescents tend
to match the explanations given by their mothers.28 Comparable findings
have been obtained from studies of children and young adults judged to
be at high risk of depression. Constance Hammen at the University of
California found that the children of depressed mothers have more
pessimistic styles of thinking, and more negative beliefs about
themselves, than the children of non-depressed mothers.29 In the recent
Temple--Wisconsin Cognitive Vulnerability to Depression (CVD) Project
(see Chapter 10, pp. 245--6), interviews conducted with parents of
students participating in the study revealed that the parents of the
high-risk students were less accepting of their children and more likely
to be 'negatively controlling' or emotionally abusive than the parents
of the low-risk

students.30 Moreover, the parents of the high-risk students were
especially prone to explain hypothetical negative events happening to
their children in terms of causes that were internal to the child (for
example, deciding that a child was not invited to a party because she
was unpopular).31 These findings strongly suggest that parents may
inadvertently teach their children a depressive style of thinking. As
attributions also play an important role in persecutory delusions, it is
reasonable to ask whether paranoid thinking is similarly influenced by
early relationships with caregivers. Studies have yet to be carried out
to test this possibility... To summarize, there seems to be quite good
evidence that family relationships affect the risk that the developing
child will eventually become psychotic. Families have this effect
because they influence the child's beliefs about himself, his thoughts
about the causes of things that happen to him, and his ability to
understand the behaviour of other people. At the risk of being tedious,
it is worth repeating that this conclusion does not imply that every
psychotic patient is a victim of an inadequate family, that parents
choose to confuse or criticize their vulnerable children, or that the
child plays no role in influencing these processes. It is also important
to remember, as attachment theorists have been at pains to note, that
parents are products of their relationships with their own parents. As
we saw in Chapter 16, parents who are unable to provide an optimal
emotional environment for their children have often themselves been
raised by parents who were unable to provide them with adequate
emotional support.32 This intergenerational spiral of affects was
brilliantly captured by the poet Philip Larkin. The less remembered
second verse of his most famous and irreverent poem, which I quoted
earlier in this chapter, encourages us not judge our parents too
harshly.

A World not of our own Making

The research literature contains several hints that long-term exposure
to a stressful social environment can contribute to the development of
madness. One hint comes from the over-representation of people with
paranoid or manic symptoms among immigrant populations. As I explained
in Chapter 6, this has been most extensively investigated in black
Afro-Caribbean immigrants to Britain.33 Although the reasons for this
over-representation have been the subject of much debate, careful
epidemiological studies indicate that the increased risk is real, and
cannot be explained away as just the product of culturally insensitive
diagnostic practices. Moreover, obvious biological factors (for example,
genetic influences) appear to be ruled out, or at least diminished in
likelihood, by the finding that incidence rates of psychosis in the
Caribbean are no higher than in other countries,34 by the observation
that the children of Afro-Caribbean immigrants are especially
vulnerable,35 and by the recent discovery that immigrant groups in other
parts of the world are similarly affected -- for example, Surinamese
immigrants to Holland,36 East African immigrants to Sweden,37 migrants
to Germany,38 and even Afro-Caribbeans returning to Jamaica after a
period of living in Britain.39 Further evidence that the critical factor
is something to do with different ethnic groups mixing closely has
emerged from a recent study carried out in London, in which the
researchers analysed the incidence of psychotic illnesses in different
neighbourhoods. It was found that non-white people living in white
neighbourhoods are more likely to become psychotic than non-white people
living in predominantly non-white neighbour-hoods.40 Exposure to racial
tension, it seems, can drive people mad. It is easy to see how exposure
to overt discrimination and institutional racism, perhaps coupled with
experiences of alienation and isolation, might affect psychological
processes (especially attributions and selfrepresentations) that appear
to play an important role in paranoia and mania. It is perhaps less
obvious why the children of immigrants should be particularly affected
in this way. One possibility is that the practical and economic problems
associated with migration make it difficult for families to provide
their children with optimum child-rearing experiences that would protect
them from these influences. Evidence that this might be the case was
found in a study of Afro-Caribbean schizophrenia patients living in
London carried out by psychiatrist Dinesh Bhugra and his colleagues. Of
38

Afro-Caribbean patients studied, 12 (34 per cent) had suffered
separation from their mothers for a period of four years or longer
during childhood, and 19 (53 per cent) had suffered a similar period of
separation from their fathers.41 Another possibility is that problems of
cultural identity are especially troublesome for second-generation
members of immigrant families. Crosscultural researchers use the term
acculturation to describe the process of psychological transition that
occurs when people move from one culture to another.42 According to one
influential theory, proposed by Canadian psychologist John Berry, the
outcome of this process can be of four kinds, depending on whether an
individual chooses to identify with her culture of origin or with the
host culture (see Table 18.1).43Integration occurs when the individual
identifies with and exhibits some characteristics of both cultures.
Assimilation occurs when the host culture is embraced and the culture of
origin is disowned. Separation is the outcome when the individual
retains the identity of her culture of origin and rejects the host
culture. Finally, marginalization occurs when the individual feels
uncommitted to either culture. Because the children of immigrants may be
at special risk of becoming trapped between two identity groups and
rejected by both, it is possible that they will be especially likely to
experience this last outcome, which, according to Berry, is the most
stressful of the four. Table 18.1 The four types of acculturation
identified by John Berry (1988).

Identification with host culture

Identification with culture of origin

Yes

No

Yes

Integration

Separation

NO

Assimilation

Marginalization

Cultural stressors and ethnic tension are not the only features of the
social environment that seem to confer an increased risk of psychosis.
In 1939, during the Great Depression, two American sociologists, Robert
Faris and

Warren Dunham, reported a survey carried out in Chicago, in which they
attempted to identify areas with a high prevalence of schizophrenia
patients. They found the highest rates in a slum area surrounding the
centre of the city, which was occupied mainly by unskilled workers with
low incomes. In areas further out from the centre, occupied by skilled
workers, the rates were lower, and they were lower still in commuter
areas occupied by middle-class professionals.44 This apparent
relationship between the prevalence of schizophrenia and socio-economic
status has since been observed in many other studies, and appears to be
most evident in the largest cities. The explanation of this phenomenon
has been a matter of some debate. Although Faris and Dunham concluded
that the stress associated with living in poor economic circumstances
plays a causal role in schizophrenic symptoms, other researchers have
suggested that the association between psychosis and poverty might be
accounted for by downwards social drift.45 According to this theory,
psychotic people are often unable to work, and so are forced to move to
the poorer areas, where accommodation is cheaper. The reality of social
drift has been documented in a number of studies. A recent survey of
psychiatric patients living in Inner London found that a large number of
patients had moved into the area from outside the city.46 However, clear
evidence that exposure to an urban environment can play a causal role in
psychosis has recently emerged from a very large Danish study, in which
data on childhood living circumstances and psychiatric difficulties in
adulthood were collated for nearly2million people.47 The researchers
found of a dose--response relationship between exposure to an urban
environment in childhood and the development of psychosis in later life.
It seems that the greater the proportion of childhood spent living in
urban environments the greater the risk of madness, with those who spend
their entire childhood in cities being most at risk in later life. A
recent World Health Organization study found that psychotic patients
living in urban and rural environments tend to have different types of
complaints.48 In rural areas, negative symptoms such as a loss of
interest in appearance and cleanliness are most often observed, whereas
urban patients

are more likely to hear voices and to feel persecuted. These
observations are quite easy to understand from a psychological
perspective. Intrusive life events of the kind that are likely to induce
paranoid thinking are especially likely to occur in city environments.
On the other hand, social isolation, leading to the absence of the kind
of social reinforcement that is necessary to maintain self-care skills,
is more likely the occur in a rural environment.

Trauma In this discussion of environmental influences on psychosis, I
have left the contribution of trauma until last because, for many
psychologists and psychiatrists at least, even to raise this issue is to
court controversy. For this reason, I am going to outline the available
evidence in quite a lot of detail. Of course, many different kinds of
disasters may befall us if we are unlucky. As children we may suffer
physical or sexual abuse at the hands of our parents or other people. In
adulthood, we may lose loved ones in sudden tragedies, find ourselves in
conflict with the law, or suffer sudden reversals of our financial
fortunes. If we are extremely unfortunate, we may become involved in
civil unrest, warfare or other kinds of violent conflict. After Vietnam
veterans persuaded American psychiatrists to include the diagnosis of
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in the DSM, the effects of these
kinds of experiences on mental health became the subject of vigorous
research. The DSM-IV definition of PTSD points to three groups of
symptoms commonly experienced by trauma victims. First, many complain
that they persistently re-experience their traumatic experiences (for
example, as intrusive and distressing memories or dreams). Second, many
avoid stimuli associated with their trauma (for example, by never
returning to the scene of an accident) or, alternatively, become
emotionally numb (believed to be a form of psychological detachment that
acts as a defence against intolerable feelings). Finally, many victims
show symptoms of persistent physiological arousal (for example, insomnia
and irritability).49 Although hallucinations and delusions do not fall
within this definition, a few researchers have not been deterred from
asking whether trauma can lead to psychotic breakdowns.

Some studies have examined the relationship between psychosis and sexual
and physical abuse. Investigations of this sort are quite difficult to
carry out. To begin with, there is considerable disagreement about the
best way of defining abuse. Depending on the definition used, a larger
or smaller proportion of the population can be said to be victims of
assaults. Moreover, evidence of assault is usually obtained from
descriptions given by patients during interviews. Recent debates about
whether patients ever experience false memories of abuse testify to
widespread suspicions that these kinds of descriptions are sometimes
unreliable. However, it is also worth remembering that victims sometimes
have powerful motives for not reporting this kind of trauma. They may be
embarrassed or ashamed about what has happened to them, or expect others
to blame them for allowing themselves to be victimized. Despite these
difficulties, there is consistent evidence that a history of physical or
sexual abuse is unusually common in psychotic women. In a review of the
research on this topic, American psychologists Linda Goodman, Kim Mueser
and their colleagues were able to identify thirteen adequately conducted
studies.50 For the purpose of their review, they defined physical abuse
as acts, 'intended to produce severe pain or injury, including repeated
slapping, kicking, biting, choking, burning, beating, or threatening
with or using a weapon'. They defined sexual abuse as, 'forcible
touching of breasts or genitals or forcible intercourse, including anal,
oral or vaginal sex'. The highest estimates of abuse were obtained in
those studies that Goodman and her colleagues judged to be most
meticulously executed. Across the thirteen studies, between 51 and 97
per cent of women reported some form of physical or sexual abuse in
their lifetime, suggesting that perhaps the majority of mentally ill
women have been victimized in this way. Although most studies have
focused on abuse during childhood, high levels of assaults during
adulthood have also been reported. In a study published several years
after they completed their review, Mueser and Goodman estimated that 52
per cent of 153 severely ill female patients they interviewed had
experienced sexual abuse during childhood, but nearly 64

per cent had suffered sexual abuse in later life.51 These figures
suggest that many psychotic women have been victimized on more than one
occasion. As Mueser and Goodman's figures are so much higher than even
the highest estimates for the general population (between 14 and 34 per
cent for abuse in adulthood, and between 15 and 33 per cent for
childhood sexual abuse, according to their own figures) I do not think
they can be easily dismissed. Nor is this association restricted to
schizophrenia patients; higher than expected rates of abuse have
recently been reported for patients diagnosed as suffering from bipolar
disorder.52 Comparable evidence of an association between trauma and
psychosis has emerged from studies of men. In Mueser and Goodman's
research, 35.5 per cent of male patients reported being sexually
assaulted in childhood, and 25.9 per cent reported that they had been
sexually assaulted as adults. Seventeen per cent had witnessed an attack
leading to the killing or serious injury of another person during
childhood, and the comparable figure for adult life was nearly 47 per
cent. These findings are supported by the results of studies that have
focused on the psychological impact of armed conflict. Follow-up
investigations of American soldiers taken prisoner by the Japanese
during the Pacific campaign of the Second World War, carried out in the
1970s, found higher than expected rates of schizophrenia in the most
severely traumatized, although elevated rates were not found in
prisoners taken by the Germans.53 (This difference may reflect the
comparative harshness of the treatment given to the POWs in the two
theatres. A survey of POWs living in Minnesota, USA, found that,
overall, 1.9 per cent met the DSM-III criteria for schizophrenia
whereas, among those who had lost more than 35 per cent of their body
weight while in captivity, the rate was 4.2 per cent, about four times
the expected rate in the general population.)54 Similarly, in two
studies conducted by Kim Mueser, high levels of auditory hallucinations
and delusions were found in Vietnam veterans diagnosed as suffering from
PTSD.55 The severity of these symptoms correlated with the severity of
their combat experience. (Of course, combatants are not the only
psychological casualties of warfare or political conflict. Psychotic
reactions have also been reported in Nazi concentration camp victims56
and, more recently, in survivors of Pol Pot's regime in Cambodia.)57

It might be argued that the high level of trauma reported by patients
sometimes reflects events that have befallen them after they have become
ill. On this view, patients whose judgement is impaired may be
especially likely to place themselves in situations of risk, may be
unable to take adequate avoiding actions if attacked, or may be forced
by economic necessity to live in unsafe environments. At a push, the
findings from veterans might even be interpreted this way (a sceptic
might argue that a mentally unstable soldier is especially likely to be
captured by an enemy). However, a recent large-scale survey of patients
experiencing their first admission for psychosis carried out in the
United States found very high levels of trauma that were comparable to
those reported by patients who had been ill for some time. When the
researchers took steps to exclude from their analyses any traumatic
events that could be a consequence of psychotic behaviour, only 5 per
cent of incidents could be accounted for in this way.58 If trauma does
play an important role in the development of psychosis, many psychotic
patients should also suffer from post-traumatic symptoms. Mueser and
Goodman found that, although fewer than 3 per cent of the patients they
surveyed had a PTSD diagnosis recorded in their medical notes, 40 per
cent of those with a primary diagnosis of bipolar disorder, 37 per cent
of those with a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder and 28 per cent of
those with a diagnosis of schizophrenia also met the DSM criteria for
PTSD. By comparison, they estimated the risk of developing PTSD in the
lifetime of an average member of the population to be less than 9 per
cent. By now the reader might be wondering whether crises more mundane
than assaults or warfare can lead to madness. In fact, one particular
type of commonplace trauma has long been known to trigger psychotic
episodes. This trauma is, of course, the experience of giving birth to a
child. In the nineteenth century, Esquirol carried out the first
quantitative studies of puerperal psychosis, describing a series of 92
cases.59 He noted that unmarried mothers seemed to be at special risk,
presumably because, at that time, they suffered from many additional
stresses and disadvantages. Modern studies -- such as those by Robert
Kendell in Edinburgh,60 and by

Ian Brockington in Manchester61 -- suggest that about 1 in every 1000
births is followed within three months by a psychotic reaction in the
mother. Consistent with Esquirol's much earlier observations, these
studies have also shown that additional stressors contribute to the risk
of breakdown. For example, both separation from a husband and a
stillbirth seem to increase the risk of psychosis. In a detailed (and
fascinating) historical review of research on puerperal psychosis, Ian
Brockington has noted that some clinicians have assumed it to be a
disease entity in its own right, whereas others have argued that it is a
variant of one of the diagnostic categories defined within the
Kraepelinian system. Brockington's own preference is to regard puerperal
psychosis as a form of manic depression, because manic features are
often evident. However, he notes that a minority of cases appear more
schizophrenic, according to conventional definitions.62 The similarity
between puerperal psychosis and mania is perhaps understandable when it
is remembered that new mothers frequently experience sleep loss in the
months following the birth of a child. However, in the case of other
types of trauma, delusions and especially hallucinations have been more
frequently recorded. For example, in two studies carried out by Colin
Ross and his colleagues in Canada, the number of Schneiderian first-rank
symptoms experienced by female inpatients correlated strongly with
measures of how severely they had been sexually abused.63 In a more
recent study carried out by University of Auckland psychologist John
Read, the case notes of 92 patients with a documented history of sexual
and physical abuse were compared with the case notes of 108 who had not,
and hallucinations stood out as the symptom most strongly predicted by a
history of trauma.64 To test whether this specific association is
confined to schizophrenia patients, Paul Hammersley, in my own
department, recently examined therapists' reports on nearly 100 bipolar
disorder patients participating in a clinical trial of a new form of
psychological treatment.65 As part of the trial procedure, a group of
research assistants had independently interviewed the patients about
their lifetime history of symptoms. Although only a minority of the
patients reported

hallucinations, Paul found that these patients were especially likely to
have disclosed to their therapists that they had been sexually abused.66
Overall, then, and contrary to received wisdom, the evidence that trauma
can play a causal role in psychosis appears to be surprisingly strong.
However, we are still left with a couple of unresolved questions. First,
it is difficult to explain why (with the possible exception of the
trauma of childbirth) there should be a specific association between
trauma and hallucinations. Second, it is also difficult to explain why
the effects of adverse experiences are sometimes delayed (so that, for
example, sexual abuse in early life increases the risk of psychosis in
adulthood). We will not be able to answer these questions properly until
we have an adequate understanding of how the cognitive processes
responsible for hallucinations develop during childhood and afterwards.
However, once again child psychologists have provided us with a few
clues, which may point us in roughly the right direction. Recall, first
of all, that hallucinations are the consequence of failing to monitor
accurately the source of thoughts and images. It is therefore especially
interesting that British developmental psychologists Charles Ferny-hough
and James Russell have recently found an association between efficiency
at source monitoring in early childhood and the use of private speech in
social settings -- children who speak a lot to themselves when other
people are present tend to be good at discriminating between their
thoughts and other people's voices.67 Perhaps children learn to tell the
difference between the external ('real') and the cognitive ('imaginary')
relatively easily in circumstances in which both types of events can
readily be contrasted. Opportunities for this kind of learning might
include not only private speech in social settings but also, for
example, waking from vivid dreams, or situations in which the child
learns to use mental imagery to solve complex visual problems.
Speculating, as I would hardly dare to when writing a paper in a
psychiatric journal, it is possible that some children who (for whatever
reason) are relatively deprived of these kinds of experiences never
become completely efficient at source monitoring.

On this account, it becomes possible to see why trauma might later lead
to hallucinatory experiences. In Chapter 14 we saw that
source-monitoring failures tend to occur when we experience intrusive or
automatic thoughts. (This is because the effort taken to generate a
thought acts as a cue telling us that the thought is self-generated.) It
follows that a person who has poor source-monitoring skills will be most
vulnerable to hallucinations when experiencing a flood of intrusive
thoughts and images. Trauma (we know from the research literature on
post-traumatic stress disorder) often has exactly this effect. It is
less easy to explain the delay that often occurs between trauma and the
onset of hallucinations. One possibility is that this happens when there
is a delay in the production of intrusive thoughts and images. This
might happen, for example, when an individual initially copes well with
a traumatic experience but is later reminded of it by a further trauma
or period of severe stress. Many of the patients interviewed by Marius
Romme and his colleagues in Holland reported being retraumatized in this
way.68 (I can think of several of my own patients whose life stories fit
this picture; for example a young man who was sexually abused by his
stepfather, who coped very well until his long-term girlfriend suddenly
deserted him for another man, and who then became very depressed and
lost his job, after which he began to hear threatening voices.) Another
possibility is that stressful events some time after a trauma lead to a
further reduction in the individual's already compromised
source-monitoring ability, so that mental events that are initially
experienced as intrusive thoughts are later experienced as
hallucinations. (Again, I can think of patients who have complained of
progressing from intrusive thoughts to hallucinations, but I have no
evidence that this happens very often.) If required to bet that these
ideas about the mechanisms linking trauma to hallucinations will turn
out to be correct, I would not offer more than a very small portion of
my salary as a stake. However, they at least offer plenty of
opportunities for further research.

Dialogue with a Sceptical Voice

Experience tells me that, for many of my colleagues, the account I have
just given of environmental contributions to psychosis is likely to be
seen as very controversial. (When I recently gave a talk about my
research on paranoid patients' perceptions of their parents, a much
respected psychologist -- ironically, a researcher who studies expressed
emotion -- became very heated and said that she thought my ideas were
'dangerous'.) Indeed, the suggestion that environmental influences could
be important has been so effectively censored over the last few decades
that these kinds of effects are scarcely mentioned in most textbooks of
psychiatry or clinical psychology. It seems a good idea, therefore, to
anticipate some of the objections that might be made to the ideas I have
introduced in this chapter. For example, an advocate of an exclusively
neo Kraepelinian approach to psychiatry might argue that the biological
findings we have considered in the previous chapter are somehow more
fundamental or tangible than the findings on environmental influences.
Perhaps the idea behind this objection is that biological variables,
such as sequences of DNA, brain scans or chemical assays, are more
easily defined, more objective phenomena than traumas or emotional
maltreatment. However, when making this claim, our sceptical friend
surely cannot doubt that traumas and frosty relationships really happen.
Moreover, he seems to forget that biological observations usually
require many inferential steps. Geneticists routinely manipulate their
data, inflating observed concordance rates to estimate the number of
participants in their studies who have not yet become psychotic but who
will do so in the future. Homovanillic acid is measured in the
cerebrospinal fluid instead of making more difficult measurements of
dopamine in the brain. The areas of the brain that appear to be
activated during a functional neuroimaging experiment depend on the
choice of the 'off-task' used as a comparison condition. Neither
biologist nor psychologist, it seems, has unfiltered access to the
world. Perhaps what my sceptical friend really means is that biological
abnormalities create the necessary conditions for psychosis, whereas

specific environmental factors merely increase the risk of symptoms.
This assumption lies behind stress-vulnerability theories of
schizophrenia such as Paul Meehl's schizotypy model or the model of
relapse proposed by the UCLA research group. My reply is that this is an
assumption, rather than a fact. However strong the overall influence of
heredity on psychosis, no one has yet proven that everyone who becomes
psychotic must carry particular genes. When we look at other biological
correlates of psychosis, in all cases we find people who go mad but who
do not show the relevant characteristics. Some schizophrenia patients do
not have enlarged cerebral ventricles, some do not perform poorly on
neurocognitive tests, and so on. A deeper problem with my sceptical
friend's attempt to prioritize biological causes over environmental
factors is that it assumes that these two types of influences are
independent of each other and can be easily distinguished. However, in
Chapter 7, I pointed to evidence that environmental influences literally
shape the brain. For example, I cited evidence that some brain
structures change in volume following the experience of trauma or sexual
abuse. We have also seen that disruption to attachment relationships can
have long-term effects on the chemistry of the brain. As neuroscience
progresses, it seems likely that many more of these kinds of
relationships between behavioural and biological variables will be
uncovered by researchers. Perhaps eventually the distinction between
what is psychological and what is biological will cease to be important.
Reviewing the evidence for these kinds of relationships that has been
gathered so far, University of Auckland psychologist John Read has
argued that many of the biological abnormalities apparent in psychotic
patients are similar to those demonstrated in the victims of trauma.69
These abnormalities therefore might be seen as evidence supporting the
hypothesis that adverse experiences contribute to psychosis, rather than
as evidence that is inconsistent with it. A related argument that my
sceptical friend might make is that environmental factors are simply not
strong or specific enough to be considered major determinants of
psychosis. Dealing with the strength issue first, it is now possible to
calculate a single value, known as an effect size, which can be used to
compare the magnitudes of different kinds of

influences. The larger the effect size, the greater the magnitude of the
effect being measured, with effect sizes over 0.50 usually being
considered quite large. Walter Heinrichs of York University in Toronto,
Canada, has recently calculated effect sizes for comparisons between
schizophrenia patients and ordinary people on a wide range of
neurocognitive and biological measures.70 For example, for the
Continuous Performance Test (see Chapter 8), the average effect size was
0.67, whereas, for the backward masking test (also described in Chapter
8), it was 1.27. For levels of homovanillic acid (a metabolite of
dopamine) in the cerebrospinal fluid of medication-free patients, the
effect size was not only small but in the wrong direction (-0.11). For
the density of dopamine D2 receptors, the average effect size was 0.93
but the effect sizes obtained in individual experiments varied between
large in the expected direction (2.44) and moderately large in the wrong
direction (-0.57). For structural neuroimaging studies comparing the
size of the prefrontal brain in schizophrenia patients and ordinary
people, the average effect size was 0.33. From the review of the
literature on sexual abuse in psychotic women carried out by Goodman and
her colleagues, I have calculated effect sizes for the influence of
childhood sexual abuse varying between 0.70 and 2.04, depending on
various assumptions about the rate of abuse in the general population.
These values compare well with those found for more widely recognized
factors influencing psychosis. The question of whether the environmental
effects I have identified are specific enough to be counted as major
determinants of psychosis cannot be answered quite so simply. It is
true, for example, that a very sizeable minority of the population is
insecurely attached whereas, my sceptical friend would surely point out,
only about 1 per cent of the population receives treatment for a
psychotic illness. However, it is worth recalling that more people have
psychotic experiences than receive psychiatric treatment. For this
reason, we might really be trying to explain the experiences of 10 per
cent of the population, rather than 1 per cent. Moreover, given the
difficulty in defining effects such as family relationships and trauma,
it is possible that any apparent lack of specificity reflects the
limitations of our current measures. (Perhaps attachment relationships
have to be disrupted in a specific, as yet undefined way. Although this
counter-argument may sound weak, it is worth remembering that it has
taken forty years to progress from George Brown's original studies to
our current knowledge

about expressed emotion.) We must also consider the importance of
interactions between different risk factors for psychosis. These
interactions may be between different environmental factors. (For
example, someone who is securely attached might cope reasonably well
with a violent or sexual assault, whereas someone who has a
dismissing-avoidant attachment style, and who has grown to maturity in a
stressful and threatening environment, might respond by developing
paranoid ideas.) There may also be interactions between environmental
and biological variables, for example between attachment style and
genes, or between trauma and early brain damage. (In the last chapter, I
described how gene--environment correlations can inflate the impact of
environmental influences on psychosis.)

The Origins of Psychosis This brings me nearly to the end of my outline
of an alternative to Kraepelin's paradigm. The findings we have
considered in the last three parts of this book are summarized in Table
18.2, which draws together what is known about the developmental
pathways and psychological processes that lead to specific kinds of
madness. Of course, many pieces of these parallel and overlapping
jigsaws remain missing. Nonetheless, in the case of each type of
complaint we can see a tentative outline of the steps that lead from the
cradle to the psychiatric clinic. For the last thirty years,
neoKraepelinian psychiatrists, like their predecessors in the first era
of biological psychiatry, have promoted the idea that madness is a brain
disease. In an earlier chapter, I described this paradigm as a cultural
system, because it reflects the starting assumptions made by
researchers, rather than conclusions drawn from scientific evidence.
Recent neurodevelopmental models of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
are the latest manifestation of this cultural system. In making this
claim, I am not attempting to deny that there is value in the
neurodevelopmental approach. However, the grip of the Kraepelinian
paradigm on the minds of researchers has been so great that many have
ignored the evidence on psychological or social influences, denied that
they

are important, or treated them as peripheral to the problem of
explaining madness, by diagnosing traumatized psychotic patients as
suffering from an atypical form of PTSD.71 Despite the enormous efforts
made by biological researchers, the effects that have been detected (for
example, on the influence of foetal exposure to the influenza virus or
on obstetric complications) have usually been small in magnitude, and
the findings have often been inconsistent. Moreover, the link between
these factors and the positive symptoms appears to be especially
tenuous. This observation parallels the results obtained from the
psychological studies I reviewed in Chapter 7, which have found only
modest relationships between the severity of cognitive deficits and
negative symptoms, and almost no relationship at all between deficits
and hallucinations and delusions. Table 18.2 Probable pathways to
different kinds of madness.

In contrast, although much less effort has been made to unravel the
psychological and social origins of psychosis, the evidence that is
available is consistent and points to effects that are at least as
strong as those measured by biological investigators. Moreover, this
evidence suggests that a socially stressful environment, attachment and
other family difficulties,

and trauma, all have an impact on positive symptoms, especially
persecutory delusions and hallucinations. It seems that we are presented
with something of a paradox. Although there can be no doubt that early
brain damage confers vulnerability to madness, it seems to have very
little impact on those symptoms which, since Schneider, have been
considered the hallmark of psychosis. Perhaps Bleuler72 and Michael
Foster Green73 are right in concluding that muted cognitive and
emotional signs lie at the core of madness, and that the more flamboyant
symptoms that have perplexed modern researchers are merely the
individual's reaction to these subtle deficits. Or perhaps cognitive
deficits impede the individual's ability to cope in times of crisis,
creating challenges that the individual's social reasoning skills are
unable to meet.

Why adolescence is a high-risk period With this possibility in mind, let
us now return briefly to the question of why psychotic symptoms so often
appear in adolescence and early adulthood. NeoKraepelinians would have
us believe that this age trend can be explained entirely in terms of
biological processes unwinding within the person -- the biological
time-bomb theory. But, of course, this high-risk period is a part of the
life cycle that places special demands on the developing person's social
and cognitive skills. The American psychologist G. Stanley Hall, author
of the first considered psychological theory of adolescence, famously
borrowed the German phrase Sturm und Drang (storm and stress) to
characterize it.74 This view of the transition to adulthood as a period
of emotional turmoil has since been assimilated by popular culture, so
that most people, at least in Western countries, accept it as
self-evident. If someone calls you an adolescent you are unlikely to
feel flattered. Unfortunately, adolescence is perhaps the least
understood developmental stage. There are not even agreed conventions
for defining where it begins and ends. (Hall's view was that it extended
from puberty to when full adult status was attained, which he took to be
around the age of 25.) Nor is it

clear that it really is a time of storm and stress, at least for the
majority of young people. It has been estimated that only 15 per cent of
adolescents report severe emotional disturbance.75 Nonetheless, the time
between puberty and settled adulthood clearly involves a number of
developmental tasks, each of which may be seen as a hurdle at which the
weak or ill-prepared may fall. In the ten years after puberty, the
emerging adult must remodel her relationship with her parents, begin to
explore sexual and emotional relationships with potential partners, and
decide on a career path. Overarching these tasks, there is the need to
establish an identity, a process that the developmental psychologist and
psychoanalyst Eric Erikson portrayed as the central problem of
adolescence in his famous book Childhood and Society.76 British
psychologists Chris Harrop and Peter Trower note that these challenges
seem to provoke in adolescents traits that are reminiscent of
characteristics often seen in psychotic patients: marked shifts of mood
coupled with equally dramatic shifts in self-esteem; self-consciousness,
egocentricity and grandiosity; magical thinking and a preoccupation with
powerful role models and the fable of one's own life.77 In a study of
normal adolescents carried out by Patrick McGorry and his colleagues in
Melbourne, Australia, it was found that these kinds of characteristics
are extremely difficult to distinguish from the typical prodromal
symptoms of psychosis.78 It seems unlikely that the high risk of
psychosis experienced by adolescents and young adults is unrelated to
these experiences. As American psychologist Barbara Cornblatt has
pointed out, children who suffer from the kinds of subtle social and
cognitive difficulties that have sometimes been found in pre-psychotic
children may be poorly equipped to face the developmental tasks of
adolescence.79Although she based this hypothesis on American
psychological research that has emphasized the role of cognitive
deficits in psychosis (described in Chapter 7 of this book), her
proposal seems even more plausible when what we know about
socialcognitive processes is added into the equation. Children who
reason abnormally about the causes of important events in their lives,
or who are

unable to guess accurately the thoughts of others, will be especially
handicapped when faced with the demands of complex social situations. It
is therefore quite unnecessary to assume that, in every case, disasters
must trip up the child on his pathway to adulthood (although, as we have
seen, this sometimes happens). The mere inability to adapt to new
demands, to cross hurdles which brothers, sisters, friends and
neighbours stride over with relative ease, may be sufficient to instil a
sense of failure and personal inadequacy, magnify pre-existing
social-cognitive peculiarities, and provoke thoughts that are
increasingly psychotic. Of course, the mere appearance of psychotic
experiences is not enough to turn a troubled adolescent into a patient.
For this to happen the experiences must be negatively valued and
perceived as at odds with the individual's culture. This suspicion may
arise suddenly, or may develop over a long period of time. Often people
wrestle with a variety of explanations of what is happening, sometimes
entertaining several contradictory hypotheses at the same time ('Maybe
I'm special? Maybe I'm going insane? Maybe this is just a phase I'm
going through?'). My colleague Tony Morrison has argued that the outcome
of this process often depends partly on the person's metacognitive
belief system (for example, a person who has unrealistic views about the
efficiency of the human mind may be especially troubled by the discovery
that his own mind is playing tricks on him).80 Often, the decision that
'something is seriously wrong' is reached with the help or persuasion of
other people: typically, a combination of parents, friends and
diagnostic experts. As I look back, I can remember many patients who, at
the end of this process, have seemed stranded in the no man's land
between childhood and the adult world. Often very sensitive individuals,
most have seemed aware, at least at some level, of the nature of their
predicament. Sometimes, the pain of being stuck and forced to watch as
peers have moved on to get jobs, marry and buy cars and houses has been
almost palpable. The task of helping young psychotic people to liberate
themselves from this state of frozen development is one of the greatest
challenges that a psychologist can face.

A Final Caveat Over forty years ago, the philosopher Karl Popper pointed
out that complex chains of interacting processes can rarely be reduced
to simple causal laws: The crucial point is this: although we may assume
that any actual succession of phenomena proceeds according to the laws
of nature, it is important to realize that practically no sequence of,
say, three or more causally connected concrete events proceeds according
to any single law of nature. If the wind shakes a tree and Newton's
apple falls to the ground, nobody would deny that these events can be
described in terms of causal laws. But, there is no single law, such as
that of gravity, nor even a single definite set of laws, to describe the
actual or concrete succession of causally connected events; apart from
gravity, we would have to consider the laws explaining wind pressure;
jerking movements of the branch; the tension in the apple's stalk; the
bruise suffered by the apple on impact; all of which is succeeded by
chemical processes resulting from the bruise, etc. The idea that any
concrete sequence or succession of events (apart from such examples as
the movement of a pendulum or a solar system) can be described by any
one law, or even by a definite set of laws, is simply mistaken.81 This
is precisely the situation that we find ourselves in when we try and
understand the origins of madness. No doubt this conclusion will seem
disappointing -- perhaps even nihilistic -- to many readers. It implies
that we should abandon hope of a quick scientific breakthrough that will
curtail madness in the way that antibiotics have curtailed infections.
The Nobel Prize that awaits the scientist who discovers the cause of
schizophrenia will never be claimed (or worse, it will be awarded to
someone who does not deserve it). However, a positive implication can be
drawn. Despite the tragedies that we encounter in the psychiatric
clinic, most children do not grow up to be disabled by delusions,
hallucinations, manic episodes or disordered thinking. In fact, because
psychotic complaints seem to require a combination of many factors, even
the majority of children of psychotic

parents grow up to lead healthy and rewarding lives. Adaptation and
triumph over adversity are the norm. Lives that are blighted by insanity
are the exception. OceanofPDF.com

19 Madness and Society Any man who goes to see a psychiatrist should
have his head examined. Samuel Goldwyn1 The first principle in the
psychic treatment of mental patients is frankness and unconditional love
of the truth. It is just in this point where laymen and doctors make
such serious mistakes. Emil Kraepelin2 The main purpose of this book has
been to present a new way of thinking about madness. This has
necessitated, first of all, showing that the traditional way of
explaining psychosis is fatally flawed, and then bringing together a
(hopefully) novel synthesis of research from a wide range of
disciplines. Along the way, I have attempted to explain relevant
concepts from psychology and the neurosciences in a manner that will
allow the layperson to follow my arguments, while at the same time
covering relevant findings in sufficient detail to satisfy the curiosity
of sceptical psychiatrists and psychologists. Inevitably, this has been
a lengthy process and, yet, even at the end, I am aware of so much that
I have left out in my attempt to avoid producing a book that (in the
nicely ambiguous terminology of my editor) is too 'monumental'. It is
worth reiterating, in just a few sentences, what I see to be the main
benefits of this new way of thinking. Its greatest advantage is that it
does not require us to make three dubious assumptions that were central
to Kraepelin's paradigm and its most recent manifestation as the neo
Kraepelinian project -- that there is an unambiguous dividing line
between the psychologically healthy and the psychologically disturbed,
that there is a finite and countable number of different mental
illnesses, and that these types of illness must be explained primarily
in terms of aberrant biology. Second, it allows us to make sense of (in
Jaspers' terminology, both explain and understand) the actual
experiences of men and women who receive

diagnoses such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. (In contrast,
Kraepelinian psychiatry had almost nothing to say about why people hear
voices, make strange inferences about the actions of other people,
become frighteningly excitable or just sit around all day doing
nothing.) Third, the account links the experience of madness to
processes that are important in ordinary life, and which are reasonably
well understood by psychologists (this is in contrast to the old
assumption that 'however much is known about the psychology of the
normal individual, in the pathological field new laws will be found to
operate').3 Fourth, I hope the vision I have offered is of a truly
'joined-up' psychopathology, in which the findings from various
disciplines (anthropology, sociology, developmental and cognitive
psychology, developmental biology, genetics and the neurosciences) are
linked together in a meaningful way, and in which no single level of
explanation (genetic or neurobiological) is seen as somehow 'trumping'
all the others. It is also worth emphasizing, for one last time, that
the approach I have outlined is genuinely scientific, in the sense that
it is evidence-based, so that most of the hypotheses that are components
of the framework have been tested by observation or experiment. Critics
have very occasionally attempted to dismiss my approach as emotional,
self-serving (because I am a psychologist criticizing theories mostly
but not exclusively put forwards by psychiatrists), or some kind of
throwback to 1960s style anti-psychiatry (as if all criticisms of
conventional psychiatry are equivalent). As it is clearly unscientific
to cling to the Kraepelinian paradigm, which enjoys almost no evidential
support, these kinds of criticisms amount to what Freudians sometimes
term projection (the tendency to attribute one's own faults to other
people). When planning this book, I had originally hoped to discuss at
length the many practical implications of the post-Kraepelinian
approach. In the end it proved to be impossible to provide a detailed
treatment of these implications while, at the same time, keeping this
book to a reasonable length. However, I will spend a few pages
indicating what I think they are.

Us and Them The Kraepelinian paradigm encouraged an 'us' and 'them'
distinction between the mad and the sane, whereas the evidence I have
described (especially in Chapters 5 and 6) shows that we are mad to
varying degrees, that the boundaries of madness are subject to
negotiation, and that some of us get on very well despite being (in
psychiatric terms) quite psychotic for much of the time. The 'us' and
'them' distinction has had a number of very serious negative
consequences for those living at the mad end of this spectrum. Most
importantly, it has denied them a voice. In the clinical and research
literature, this is most evident in discussions of the concept of
insight, an absence of which has often been seen to be a cardinal
feature of psychosis. In a famous paper published in 1934, British
psychiatrist Aubrey Lewis defined insight as: 'The correct attitude to
morbid change in oneself, and moreover, the realisation that the illness
is mental' (italics mine).4 Elaborating on this idea, Xavier Amador and
Henry Kronen-gold, psychologists working at the New York State
Psychiatric Institute, have recently suggested that lack of insight has
two separate components: unawareness of illness and 'incorrect
attributions' about the causesofillness.5 Armed with these kinds of
definitions, researchers have laboured mightily to discover how common
lack of insight really is in psychotic patients (very common,
apparently),6 and whether it is related to other variables of interest
such as the patient's neurocognitive abilities or a willingness to take
psychiatric drugs. Most of this research has been inconclusive.7
However, the real problem with this kind of approach is that it assumes
that psychologists and psychiatrists are privileged possessors of a
correct theory of psychosis, which patients are foolish to dispute. It
fails to recognize that patients may have good reasons to form
hypotheses about their difficulties that are at variance with those
accepted by mental health professionals. It also places patients in a
terrible double bind, in which their objections to unsatisfactory
aspects of psychiatric care are seen by the clinician as further
evidence that treatment is imperative. Indeed, the notion

that patients lack insight is routinely used to justify cajoling,
threatening or misleading patients about their rights in the hope that
these strategies will pressure patients into accepting treatment. Recent
surveys in Europe and North America have confirmed that, even in these
enlightened times, coercion is widely regarded as an acceptable and
routine strategy in the clinical management of madness.8 Because
patients have been denied a voice, they have often been subjected to
cruel and ineffective treatments. In the past, these have included
insulin coma (which involved patients being injected with the hormone
insulin, causing them to fall into a comatose state perilously close to
death, whereupon they were revived and the process was repeated), and
electroconvulsive therapy (which, before the introduction of
musclerelaxing drugs, sometimes caused patients to suffer spinal
fractures). Even more drastic was the prefrontal leucotomy, which was
pioneered by the Portuguese neurosurgeon Egas Moniz in the 1930s and
practised throughout the developed world until well after the
introduction of chlorpromazine.9 This crude brain operation was
championed in North America by the manically enthusiastic neurosurgeon
Walter Freeman, who, travelling throughout the USA and Canada in the
summer of 1951 in a car loaded with equipment, visited mental hospitals
to demonstrate his chillingly efficient technique for carrying it out.
After administering a jolt of ECT, Freeman would insert an ice-pick-like
instrument above the eye of the dazed and convulsing patient, smashing
it through the bone of the orbit and into the brain behind. This
procedure was cheap and quick; Freeman estimated that he could complete
as many as twenty-five operations in a single day, and claimed to have
carried out over 5000 during his professional career.10 These ghastly
practices were, of course, exceeded in Germany during the Nazi period,
when doctors introduced extermination as a treatment for severe mental
illness.11 Inspired by genetic theories which suggested that madness,
unless checked, would gradually weaken the Aryan gene-pool, they did not
require great encouragement from the state first to compulsorily
sterilize and then to kill the most vulnerable members of their society.
Gas chambers were constructed in psychiatric hospitals, where tens of
thousands of psychotic adults (and many more children said to be

suffering from genetic illnesses) were put to death, usually with carbon
monoxide, but sometimes by deliberate starvation. As historian Robert
Proctor has noted: It is important to recognise the banality of the
operation. In 1941 the psychiatric institution at Hadamar celebrated the
cremation of its tenthousandth patient in a special ceremony, where
everyone in attendance -- secretaries, nurses, and psychiatrists --
received a bottle of beer for the occasion.12 At the beginning of the
twenty-first century, it is easy to dismiss these excesses as products
of more primitive times. However, the abuses that were perpetrated
against psychiatric patients in every country in the West, and which
reached a crescendo in Nazi Germany, were made possible by assumptions
about psychosis that are the main elements of the Kraepelinian paradigm.
Without regarding madness as merely the product of a damaged brain, it
would not have been possible to devise a therapeutic system that relied
exclusively on physical treatments at the expense of treating people
with warmth and humanity. Without the hypothesis that this brain damage
is genetically determined, killing would not have been regarded as a
rational treatment by a generation of well-trained nurses and physicians
in Germany. Above all, without regarding psychosis as ununderstandable
(to use Jaspers' terminology), it would not have been possible to deny
psychiatric patients a voice, which might otherwise have been raised in
protest against these horrors. (Of course, I am not suggesting that it
was inevitable that Kraepelin's work would have these consequences.
Cruel treatments preceded Kraepelin and, in any case, judgements about
what ought to be done to other people are never exclusively determined
by beliefs about what is the case. It is perfectly possible to believe
that schizophrenia is a genetically determined brain disease while at
the same time acting compassionately towards people who receive the
diagnosis. But factual beliefs are often used to justify moral
intuitions, and the beliefs about psychosis promulgated by Kraepelin and
his followers were peculiarly suited to justifying the worst excesses of
twentieth-century psychiatric care. In this sense, these excesses were a

legacy of the paradigm, a legacy that, in human terms, has been much
more costly than the stifling effect that it has had on research.)

Medicines for Madness Today the assumption that psychosis is a form of
brain disease is translated into clinical reality by psychiatric
services that rely exclusively on neuroleptic medication, and which make
little or no effort to respond to patients' psychological needs. This
bias in the kinds of therapies that are made available to patients
reflects systematic misunderstandings about the relative effectiveness
of medical and psychological treatments that mirror the
misunderstandings about biological and environmental causes of psychosis
which I addressed in the previous chapter. I do not doubt that the
accidental discovery of the therapeutic effects of chlorpromazine was a
major breakthrough in the treatment of severe mental illness. (It has
recently been described as one of twelve defining moments in the history
of modern medicine.)13 Clinical trials have consistently demonstrated
that patients who take chlorpromazine, or any of the other widely used
neuroleptic drugs, experience fewer psychotic complaints and, if they
continue to take them when well, fewer relapses than patients who do not
take them.14 However, this obvious good news must be qualified by
considering the disadvantages of this kind of treatment. Long-term
outcome studies suggest that today's psychiatric patients do not do much
better than the patients of Kraepelin's era.15 Although most modern
recipients of psychiatric care find that neuroleptics to some extent
control their symptoms, it is doubtful whether any are cured by this
kind of treatment, and a substantial minority obtain no benefit
whatsoever. Despite extensive research, no one has found a way of
predicting in advance which patients will respond to neuroleptic
treatment.16 However, there is very good evidence that patients who fail
to benefit from one type of neuroleptic will fail to respond to any
other.17 These persistent 'neuroleptic non-responders' would almost
certainly do better if given no neuroleptic treatment

whatsoever, yet drug-free strategies for managing symptoms are almost
never considered by modern psychiatric services. The distressing and
sometimes dangerous side effects caused by conventional neuroleptics add
to the difficulty in forming a balanced opinion about their value. The
most obvious of these are the 'extrapyramidal'18 side effects, which
include Parkinsonian symptoms (the patient becomes stiff or suffers from
uncontrollable tremors, experienced by about 25 per cent of patients),
akathisia (a very unpleasant subjective feeling of restlessness and
agitation) and tardive dyskinesia (spasmodic movements of the jaw and
tongue, which are unsightly and, once established, are sometimes
irreversible even after the medication has been discontinued; now
thankfully very rare). Side effects that are less obvious to the
observer but which cause considerable distress to patients include
sexual dysfunction19 (experienced by over a third of patients)20 and
severe weight gain (probably the consequence of an increased craving for
carbohydrates;21 experienced by about 50 per cent of patients).22 The
psychological side effects of neuroleptics can be very distressing.\*
Akathisia is often accompanied by a type of depression sometimes
described as neuroleptic dysphoria,23 which can persist for many
years.24 In the long term, taking neuroleptics can also lead to a
profound lack of motivation, known as the neuroleptic induced deficit
syndrome, which is almost impossible to distinguish from negative
symptoms.25 In one clinical trial it was found that patients treated
with neuroleptics, although less symptomatic, achieved fewer life goals
than patients treated with a placebo.26 Effects that are
life-threatening but fortunately less common include sudden heart
failure (psychotic patients are about twice as likely to die this way
than ordinary people);27 the neuroleptic malignant syndrome (a disorder
characterized by muscular rigidity, fever and fluctuating consciousness,
which is often mistaken for a bacterial infection, and which is fatal if
drugs are not promptly discontinued);28 and agranulocytosis (a loss of
white blood cells, which is also fatal unless treated promptly).29 There
are also hidden risks of death associated with neuroleptic medication
that are

difficult to calculate. For example, because obesity increases the risk
of myocardial infarction and stroke, patients who experience
neurolepticinduced weight gain presumably suffer an increased risk of
dying from these illnesses, but such deaths are never recorded as drug
reactions.30 Similarly, there is evidence that severe akathisia can
provoke patients to attempt suicide,31 but patients' suicides are rarely
regarded as drug-induced. Because of these many adverse effects,
neuroleptics, if used indiscriminately, can cause more harm than good.
Biological psychiatrists should therefore have been strongly motivated
to establish the safest and most effective dose of this kind of
treatment. It is therefore all the more remarkable that the first
experiments to address this question were not published until 1990 --
approximately 40 years after the drugs were first introduced.32 The
results of these studies surprised many psychiatrists, because they
showed that no additional clinical benefits were obtained for doses
equivalent to more than about 350 milligrams of chlorpromazine a day, a
much lower dose than was commonly used in routine practice. The same
studies provided clear evidence of a simple linear relationship between
dose and side effects -- the higher the dose the more likely it is that
patients will experience side effects that are severe and very
distressing.33 The inescapable conclusion that follows from these
findings is that the overzealous use of neuroleptic medication has led
to a worldwide epidemic of avoidable iatrogenic illness, causing
unnecessary distress to countless vulnerable people, and no doubt
sending some to early graves. Astonishingly, this problem continues at
the time of writing. Despite advice to the contrary from organizations
such as the Royal College of Psychiatrists in Britain34 and the US
National Institute of Mental Health,35 surveys show that psychiatrists
continue to treat many of their patients with bizarrely high doses of
neuroleptic drugs.36 The recent development of a new group of atypical
neuroleptics adds a final twist to this unfortunate story. The first of
these drugs, clozapine, was synthesized in the 1960s37 but was quickly
discontinued when it was discovered that about one in 200 patients
receiving it suffered from agranulocitosis (as a consequence, eight
elderly patients in Finland died during an early clinical trial).
However, interest in the drug was revived

when it was realized that its low profile of extra pyramidal side
effects made it an attractive treatment for patients suffering from
tardive dyskinesia. Procedures were therefore developed to allow
patients to be closely monitored so that they could be quickly withdrawn
from the drug if signs of agranulocitosis became evident. A clinical
trial conducted by John Kane, Herbert Meltzer and their colleagues in
the United States, published in 1988, seemed to confirm that clozapine
could be taken safely, caused fewer extra pyramidal side effects than
chlorpromazine and was an effective treatment for patients who failed to
respond to conventional drugs.38 Pharmaceutical companies quickly
realized that drugs such as clozapine might provide an opportunity to
increase dramatically the profits they made from selling their products
to psychiatric services. (As most of the conventional neuroleptics are
out of patient, they can be manufactured as 'generic drugs' by any
company, keeping profit margins very tight.)In the last few years,
therefore, several more atypical neuroleptics have been licensed and
marketed as being kinder and more effective than conventional
anti-psychotic medication. Given that these drugs are extremely
expensive to tax payers (in the UK) and insurance companies (in the USA)
it is obviously important to establish whether these claims are
justified. A good starting point is John Kane's 1988 trial. In order to
select patients who had failed to respond to typical neuroleptics, Kane
and his colleagues required that anyone entering their study had
experienced at least three attempts at conventional treatment with doses
equivalent to one gram of chlorpromazine a day or higher. Of the 268
patients who eventually took part, half were randomly assigned to
treatment with clozapine. The remaining patients were assigned to
treatment with doses of chlorpromazine up to a (literally) staggering
1.8 grams per day. The patients were then followed up for six weeks,
during which time their psychotic symptoms and side effects were
monitored. The researchers claimed that those treated with clozapine
experienced less severe psychotic symptoms, and also fewer extra
pyramidal side effects, than those treated with chlorpromazine (although
statistically significant differences were only observed on one of the
two side-effect measures used in the study).

Considerable effort was required in order to carry out the experiment.
Herbert Meltzer has estimated that, because of the difficulty in finding
suitable patients and in monitoring them adequately, it cost the
pharmaceutical company Sandoz over \$5 million to complete.39 However,
despite this investment, the results of the study are almost impossible
to interpret because the comparison drug, chlorpromazine, was given at a
dose that was much too high to be optimally therapeutic. It has been
shown that patients treated with unnecessarily high doses of
conventional neuroleptics sometimes improve when their drug doses are
reduced.40 It is therefore possible that the patients in the control
group would have done as well as those patients given clozapine had they
been given a more sensible amount of chlorpromazine. Furthermore, given
the dose they actually received, it is astonishing that much larger
differences in side effects were not observed. A recent analysis of data
from clinical trials of the atypicals, published in the British Medical
Journal, has confirmed that the effectiveness of the new drugs has been
systematically exaggerated by studies that have compared them to
inappropriate doses of conventional medication. British psychiatrist
John Geddes and his colleagues analysed data from fifty-two studies
involving a total of 12,649 patients, in which the experimental
medication was either clozapine or one of four other recently introduced
atypicals (risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, or sertindole).41 When
the trials were divided into those in which control patients had
received a daily dose equivalent to 12 milligrams or less of haloperidol
(equivalent to about 300 milligrams of chlorpromazine), and those in
which the comparison dose was greater, no differences in outcome were
observed in the former studies, but the atypicals appeared more
effective and more acceptable to patients in the latter. The only
evidence of superiority for the atypicals that remained when the dose of
the comparison drug was optimal was in extrapyramidal effects, which
remained less frequent and less severe in those receiving the new
medications. However, even this benefit seems less than impressive when
it is realized that the atypical medications can cause other types of
side effects in abundance (olanzapine, for example, is notorious for
causing weight gain).

Addressing Patients' Psychological Needs

I expect that some psychiatrists will react to the account I have given
of neuroleptic treatment by assuming that I am motivated by some kind of
ideological hostility to medical treatment. Certainly, there are some
mental health professionals -- usually psychologists, but sometimes
nurses or even psychiatrists -- who believe that the use of psychiatric
drugs is always wrong, and that neuroleptics are mere 'chemical
straitjackets'.42 This is not my position. What I am arguing for is a
balanced appraisal of the benefits and costs of neuroleptic treatment,
based on scientific evidence. There is no doubt that neuroleptics are a
useful therapeutic tool if prescribed to the right patients in sensible
doses, but there is equally no doubt that they can be harmful if used in
excess. The failure to recognize the very real limitations of this kind
of treatment is just as short sighted as the blanket rejection of drug
treatment of any kind. The way forward in the drug treatment of
psychosis is therefore to find ways of targeting medication more
accurately to meet the needs of patients. As it is not possible to
predict neuroleptic response in advance of treatment, the only way that
this can be achieved is by adopting a systematic policy of 'suck it and
see'. To do this effectively, prescribers will have to work closely with
patients in order to monitor therapeutic benefits and side effects, and
will also need the courage to withdraw patients completely from their
drugs if they are obviously failing to benefit. Without proper research
into drug-free treatment (which is almost impossible in medically
dominated psychiatric services) it is difficult to know how many
patients are best treated without drugs of any kind, but the number is
likely to be many more than are treated this way at present. (In the
only study so far conducted to address this question, carried out by
Loren Mosher in the USA in the 1970s, it was found that most
first-episode patients treated without drugs but given very intensive
psychological support did just as well as drug-treated patients at
two-year follow-up.43 However, this important study has never been
properly replicated and, given the dominance of Kraepelinian thinking in
psychiatry, is not likely to be repeated in the foreseeable future.)

Just as the Kraepelinian paradigm has encouraged clinicians to rely on
neuroleptic drugs, it has discouraged the provision of psychological
treatments. Further discouragement has been provided by the results of
clinical trials of intensive psychoanalytic treatment (based on the
ideas of Freud and his followers). This type of psychotherapy encourages
patients to explore difficult emotional issues with therapists who offer
interpretations of their thoughts and feelings, but little in the way of
concrete advice. Although Freud himself was sceptical about the value of
this approach in the treatment of psychosis, it was adapted for this use
by a number of American psychoanalysts, most notably Harry Stack
Sullivan,44 a charismatic psychiatrist who was influential in the 1930s
and 1940s, and whose theories of mental illness were a blend of ideas
garnered from Freud and social psychology.45 Unfortunately, when
clinical trials have been conducted to assess the effects of
psychoanalytic treatment on positive symptoms the results have been
almost universally negative.46 The most rigorous study of this kind was
carried out in the early 1980s by Alfred Stanton, John Gunderson and
their colleagues in Boston, USA.47 One hundred and sixty-five patients
were offered therapy by highly experienced clinicians twice a week for
up to two years. By six months, all but sixty-nine had dropped out,
itself an indication that the therapy failed to meet the needs of the
majority of patients. After two years, a control group of patients who
had received simple supportive counselling (emotional support and advice
about practical difficulties) were no more symptomatic, and had spent
less time in hospital and more time in employment, than those
psychoanalytically treated patients who had persisted to the end.
Naturalistic long-term follow-up studies of patients who had received
intensive psychoanalytic therapy in specialist hospitals, published at
about the same time, yielded equally discouraging results.48 Although
psychoanalytic theory has at times led to useful insights into the
behaviour and experience of patients, analysts have been reluctant to
integrate their ideas with equally important insights gained from
scientific research. As a consequence, the theory has not led to a
coherent understanding of the origins of psychosis, or experimentally
testable theories about the psychological processes responsible for
complaints such

as delusions and hallucinations. Perhaps we therefore should not be
surprised that treatment based on psychoanalytic principles offers few
benefits for psychotic patients. By contrast, the psychological models
discussed throughout this book have been based on studies that have
followed the normal conventions of scientific investigation. They should
therefore be robust enough to guide the development of novel
interventions. In fact, two types of treatment that are consistent with
these models seem to offer tangible benefits for patients and their
families. In Chapter 16 I described evidence that family relationships
can affect the long-term course of psychotic difficulties. Patients
returning from hospital to live with relatives who are either critical
and hostile or emotionally overcontrolling are more likely to relapse
than patients living in less stressful circumstances. It did not take
long for the researchers who made this discovery to realize that
providing assistance to patients' families might therefore benefit both
the families and patients. In a paper published in 1982, Julian Leff and
his colleagues reported the effects of a nine-month treatment programme,
in which the relatives of schizophrenia patients were educated about
psychosis, took part in support groups, and met with therapists who
tried to help them improve their ability to resolve family conflicts.49
Twenty-four patients were followed up, initially for nine months and
then, in a subsequent report, two years after treatment had begun.50
Patients whose families had received the intervention had a much lower
rate of relapse than patients in the control group (8 per cent versus 50
per cent at nine months and 20 per cent versus 78 per cent at two
years). This finding has since been repeated many times, for example by
Ian Falloon and his colleagues in southern California,51 by Gerry
Hogarty and others in Pittsburgh,52 and by my colleagues Nick Tarrier
and Christine Barrowclough in Salford, near Manchester.53 A recent
systematic review identified twenty-five clinical trials published in
English- and Germanlanguage journals in which relatives had been
included in treatments for schizophrenia patients.54 In some of these
studies, benefits were maintained many years after treatment had
ended.55 Overall, the patients whose relatives participated in these
programmes benefited from a 20 per cent reduction in relapses during the
first year after treatment commenced, a

benefit similar in magnitude to that observed in trials comparing
neuroleptic medication with placebos. Much less effort has been made to
investigate the value of this kind of treatment for bipolar patients and
their families, but at least one study has reported encouraging
results.56 Whereas family interventions attempt to ameliorate the kind
of stress that makes psychotic symptoms worse, more recently developed
cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) interventions are designed to
influence the cognitive processes that give rise to symptoms. These
interventions have been modified from earlier techniques that were
developed for the treatment of depression by Aaron Beck and others in
the USA.57 Unlike psychoanalytic therapy, CBT is targeted at precisely
specified difficulties that are identified by the patient and the
therapist together. (Often, the first thing that they do together is
draw up a 'problem list'.) It involves the patient and therapist
collaborating in a very practical way to find solutions to the patient's
problems. (At the end of each session, patients usually take away
homework assignments so that they can test out new ideas or try out
novel solutions to their problems that emerge during the course of
discussion with the therapist.) The core idea of CBT is that patients
can learn to reflect on their own thoughts and beliefs, find ways of
testing their validity, and, if necessary, substitute more helpful
thoughts and beliefs. Patients receiving CBT for depression, for
example, learn to recognize when their attributions for events are
unnecessarily pessimistic, to replace them with more realistic
appraisals of events, and to find proactive ways of solving their
problems. Many of the psychologists who first began to experiment with
CBT for psychosis were also involved in some of the basic research that
I have described earlier in this book. For some reason (probably because
they were relatively uncommitted to the neoKraepelinian dogma) nearly
all were British. Paul Chadwick, whose ideas about paranoia were briefly
considered in Chapter 13, reported some early case studies of deluded
patients who had been successfully encouraged to reconsider their
abnormal beliefs.58 Gill Haddock, whose work we briefly touched on in
Chapter 14, investigated different methods of helping hallucinating
patients to identify the source of their inner speech.59 Max Birchwood,
working with Paul Chadwick, studied

the effects of encouraging hallucinating patients to question their
beliefs about their voices.60 However, psychiatrists David Kingdon (now
at the University of Southampton) and Douglas Turkington (now at the
University of Newcastle) and clinical psychologist Nick Tarrier (at the
University of Manchester) probably deserve most credit for integrating
these ideas into comprehensive therapeutic strategies. Kingdon and
Turkington proposed a general framework for working with psychotic
patients, which they described as a normalizing strategy.61 The idea
behind this approach is to demystify psychotic experiences and make them
seem less frightening, for example by pointing out the similarities
between hallucinations or paranoia and more mundane mental states, or by
explaining to patients that these experiences are much more common than
is often realized. Nick Tarrier's approach was initially named coping
skills enhancement, because it aimed to help patients learn better ways
of coping with their experiences, but was soon expanded to incorporate
various strategies for addressing patients' delusional ideas or beliefs
about their voices.62 Nick Tarrier published the first randomized
controlled clinical trial of cognitive behaviour therapy for
schizophrenia patients. At six-month follow-up, patients whose delusions
and hallucinations had not responded to neuroleptic medication, and who
had been offered CBT, had shown a greater improvement in their
complaints compared to patients who were taught simpler problem-solving
skills.63 The trial was soon followed by another small-scale study,
carried out by Philippa Garety and her colleagues at the Institute of
Psychiatry in London, who found greater improvements in delusional
beliefs in chronically ill patients treated with CBT than in patients
who did not receive this kind of therapy.64 In the last few years,
larger trials have begun to appear in scientific and medical journals,
nearly all of which have supported these initial results. At the time of
writing, seven trials have appeared, including further studies by David
Kingdon, Douglas Turkington and their colleagues,65 by investigators at
the Institute of Psychiatry,66 and by Nick Tarrier and his colleagues.67
Several others have been completed and are awaiting publication. One of
these is the SoCRATES(Study of Cognitive-Realignment Therapy in Early

Schizophrenia) trial conducted by Shôn Lewis, Nick Tarrier, Gill
Haddock, myself and others, in which we have found that a very brief
(five-week) intervention offered to patients when they become acutely
ill for the very first time results in modest benefits at eighteen-month
follow-up.68 Another is a study conducted by Andrew Gumley and his
colleagues in Scotland, who have found that a very brief intervention
with patients who have been ill for some time can dramatically reduce
the likelihood that they will relapse.69 Although bipolar patients have,
again, been largely overlooked in these developments, three small-scale
studies have provided preliminary evidence that CBT may be an effective
method of reducing the risk of manic episodes.70 None of these findings
suggests that CBT or family therapy is a panacea for madness. Despite
our best efforts, some patients fail to respond to psychological
treatment and it is often forgotten that less glamorous interventions,
for example providing opportunities for marginalized and isolated
patients to find work, or solving their accommodation problems, can have
effects on quality of life that are just as dramatic as any that can be
achieved by psychologists or psychiatrists. Nonetheless, very real
progress has been made in the psychological treatment of madness over
the last decade or so. Furthermore, it is unlikely that the best that
can be accomplished today is the last word on what is possible. Just as
pharmaceutical companies do not assume that today's medications cannot
be bettered, we should not assume that existing results represent some
kind of limit on what psychological interventions can do for people
afflicted with madness.

Can Psychosis be Prevented? Increasing optimism about both drug and
psychological treatments for psychosis, whether or not justified, has
led to a debate about when treatment should be offered. Recently,
clinicians and researchers have begun to consider the possibility of
intervening very early in the development of an illness.71 One impetus
for this has been the emerging understanding,

discussed in the last two chapters, that psychosis is the end point of a
long developmental pathway. Another has been the discovery that many
psychotic patients experience distressing symptoms for long periods
before either seeking or being offered psychiatric help, and that a long
delay in receiving treatment can lead to a poor outcome.72 This
discovery suggests that the early detection of psychosis might
substantially benefit patients. A team of investigators in Melbourne,
Australia, which includes Patrick McGorry, Henry Jackson and Alison Yung
among others, deserves particular credit for pushing this idea to its
logical conclusion. In one of their studies, they reported that they
could use a combination of methods to identify an ultra high-risk group
who were very likely to become ill in the near future.73 An amazing 40
per cent of their sample, who either had experienced subclinical or
transient psychotic complaints, or who were suffering from non-psychotic
distress and had a first-degree relative with psychosis, became floridly
ill within six months of being identified. Clearly, at this rate of
transition to psychosis, preventative intervention becomes a real
possibility. Several prevention studies are ongoing at the time of
writing. The first, carried out by the Melbourne team, has already found
evidence that a combination of psychotherapy and low-dose drug treatment
for people at very high risk can at least delay madness in some
people.74 In another trial, currently being conducted in the United
States, a similar high-risk group is being offered olanzapine, one of
the new atypical neuroleptics.75 However, giving drug treatments to
people who have not yet become ill raises some very real ethical
problems.76 From the experience of the Melbourne investigators, it seems
that this strategy will expose a large number of people who would never
make the transition to psychosis to a risk of very severe side effects.
It is for this reason that Tony Morrison, Shôn Lewis and I are now
conducting a small trial of CBT without medication for a highrisk group
of people identified using the methods developed in Melbourne.77 Even
the use of purely psychological interventions in this way is not without
danger. There is a risk of stigmatizing people by entrapping them into
psychiatric services that they might otherwise have managed to avoid

(for this reason, in our ongoing trial, we offer treatment separately
from already established psychiatric clinics). There is also the risk of
inflicting unwanted treatment on people who are quite happily living
with psychosis, or the prospect of becoming psychotic (which is why we
ask our patients to decide which difficulties should be prioritized in
therapy, and focus on problems other than psychosis if they so wish).

Liberation or Cure? In Chapters 6 and 7 of this book I argued that
diagnostic judgements in psychiatry always involve implicit reference to
broader human values.78 It is therefore important to recognize that
psychotic people may value their experiences differently from people
such as friends, family or mental health professionals, who are
observing the experiences at second hand. They may also appraise the
effects of treatment differently. For some the hazards of psychiatric
care may far outweigh any disadvantages conferred by madness itself,
whereas, for others, the opposite may be the case. Whether for or
against treatment, there is no obvious reason why patients' own opinions
should not be respected, especially if (as is usually the case)79 they
present no danger to other people. Ironically, I have found myself
supporting the wishes of psychotic patients who want to receive
neuroleptic drugs (on one memorable occasion attracting considerable
hostility from many of the delegates at a conference of
psychotherapists) almost as often as I have found myself defending their
right to refuse them. Some years ago, Marius Romme invited me to give a
talk at a conference at Maastricht, in Holland. Romme, it will be
recalled, is the psychiatrist who discovered that large numbers of Dutch
citizens (and presumably citizens of other countries also) hear voices
without needing psychiatric treatment. His conference had been planned
as an opportunity for sympathetic professionals like myself to exchange
ideas with members of Resonance, his organization for voice-hearers. As
we walked through the pristine white corridors of the brand-new
conference centre one morning, Romme and I discussed our different
approaches and, in the middle of this conversation, he said something
that I will never forget:

'I really like your research on hallucinations, Richard. But the trouble
is, you want to cure hallucinators, whereas I want to liberate them. I
think they are like homosexuals in the 1950s -- in need of liberation,
not cure.' It took me a little time to recognize the power of this
simple idea. If people can sometimes live healthy, productive lives
while experiencing some degree of psychosis (and the evidence we
considered in Chapter 5 suggests that they can), if the boundaries
between madness and normality are open to negotiation (and the
cross-cultural evidence we considered in Chapter 6 suggests that they
are), and if (as we have seen in this chapter) our psychiatric services
are imperfect and sometimes damaging to patients, why not help some
psychotic people just to accept that they are different from the rest of
us? Fear of madness may be a much bigger problem than madness itself. Of
course, this suggestion does not imply that people in distress should
not be offered the most effective treatment that is available (drug or
psychotherapeutic). It also does not imply that steps should not be
taken to protect society from the very small number of patients who
behave dangerously towards others. However, it acknowledges that, for
many people experiencing psychosis, treatment may not be the most
helpful way forward in their lives. Putting this idea into practice
would require a fairly major shift in society's attitude towards
eccentricity and madness. It would involve giving mad people some
control over our asylums. It would probably win no support from drug
companies or politicians. But it would almost certainly make the world a
better place for mad and ordinary people alike. OceanofPDF.com

Appendix: A Glossary of Technical and Scientific Terms Unless otherwise
stated, the following definitions are my own. Adoption study A type of
study designed to tease out genetic and environmental influences, by
examining what happens to children who are reared by adoptive parents to
whom they are not biologically related. One method involves examining
adopted-away children of parents who have a disease, and comparing them
with adopted-away children whose biological parents do not have the
disease. The alternative approach involves identifying adoptees who have
a disease, and comparing their biological parents with the biological
parents of adoptees who do not have the disease. Affective blunting See
Flat affect Affective reactivity The extent to which symptoms are
reactive to emotional stimulation. Affectively reactive symptoms, for
example some types of communication disorders, become more severe when
the individual is reminded of unpleasant events. Affective style The
style of interaction between relatives or significant others and
psychiatric patients, as observed in actual interactions. Relatives with
a negative affective style make many critical and intrusive comments to
patients, and also tend to score highly on measures of expressed
emotion. Akathisia An extrapyramidal side effect of neuroleptic
medication. The patient experiences a very unpleasant subjective feeling
of restlessness, often accompanied by profound feelings of depression.
There is some evidence that akathisia may be associated with suicide
attempts in patients receiving neuroleptics.

Alleles Different variations of the same gene. Thus, strictly speaking,
all human beings have the same genes and genetic variation is a
consequence of our having different alleles of those genes. Ambivalent
attachment A type of insecure attachment. In young children, it is
manifest in distress on separation from the caregiver, and an inability
to be comforted on the caregiver's return. In adulthood, ambivalent
attachment is associated with emotional over-responsiveness towards
potential partners, often leading to clingy behaviours or even jealousy,
often culminating in rejection. Anhedonia An inability to experience
pleasure. It is sometimes subdivided into physical anhedonia (the
inability to experience physical pleasures) and social anhedonia (the
inability to experience social pleasures). Although anhedonia has been
recognized as a negative symptom of schizophrenia, it is found in a wide
range of other conditions, especially depression. Anti-cholinergic drugs
Drugs that affect neural pathways that utilize the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine; used to control the extrapyramidal side effects of
anti-psychotic (neuroleptic) drugs. Attachment relationships The kind of
close emotional bond formed with a parent figure early in life, which
serves as a model for emotional relationships in adulthood. Attention
The psychological processes involved in responding only to important
environmental stimuli. Often a distinction is made between selective
attention (the filtering out of irrelevant stimuli) measured by tests
such as the digit span with distraction task, and sustained attention
(or vigilance, involving maintaining a focus on one task over a period
of time) measured by tests such as the continuous performance test.
Attribution A causal statement; a statement that either includes or
implies the word 'because'. It has been estimated that, on average,
ordinary

speech contains an attribution in every few hundred words. The types of
attributions that people make are thought to have an important impact on
mental health, and play a role in depression, mania and paranoia.
Attributional (explanatory) style An individual's characteristic style
of making attributions. Attributional style is often assumed to be a
stable personality trait, and is thought to play a role in a variety of
symptoms, especially dysphoria, paranoia and mania. Atypical
neuroleptics A new class of antipsychotic drugs, which are said to have
a kinder side-effect profile, and possibly to be more effective, than
traditional neuroleptic medication. The evidence for these claims is
equivocal, but these drugs are certainly much more expensive than the
typical drugs. Autonomy A type of self-schema, by which the individual
evaluates his or her worth according to freedom of choice and the
achievement of goals. Avoidant attachment A type of insecure attachment.
Avoidantly attached children are unmoved by the departure of a
care-giver, and ignore the caregiver on her return. In adulthood, the
avoidantly attached person avoids emotional closeness with others. This
type of attachment style is associated with the positive symptoms of
psychosis, especially paranoid delusions. Backward masking Visual
information processed by the brain is first held in a brief store,
sometimes known as 'the iconic memory'. The immediate presentation of an
unpatterned stimulus after an initial stimulus can displace information
about the initial stimulus held in the store, preventing it from being
passed on to other parts of the cognitive system for further processing.
In these circumstances the individual does not have a conscious
experience of the initial stimulus. This phenomenon is known as backward
masking, and has been exploited to investigate information processing in
psychotic patients.

Basic emotions (theory of) The idea that there are a small number of
distinct emotions. Behavioural activation system (BAS) A hypothesized
neural system thought to be responsible for determining response to
reinforcement (reward). According to some theorists, the BAS is
overactive in bipolar disorder. Behaviourism A much misunderstood
approach to psychology pioneered by the American psychologist John
Watson, who argued that psychology should be the scientific study of
observable behaviour. According to Watson (Behaviorism, New York: W. W.
Norton, 1924), 'Let us limit ourselves to things that can be observed,
and formulate laws concerning only those things. Now what can we
observe? We can observe behavior -- what the organism does or says. And
let us point out at once: that saying is doing -- that is, behaving.
Speaking overtly or to ourselves (thinking) is just as objective a type
of behavior as baseball.' Bias See Cognitive bias Bipolar disorder
Modern term for manic depression; a psychiatric illness in which the
individual experiences episodes of depression and also of either mania
or hypomania. Blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) response Areas of the
brain that become active when we attempt some kind of task demand
increased oxygen. Several seconds after we start to perform the task,
there is therefore a surge of oxygenated haemoglobin (oxygen enriched
blood) to those areas. This can be detected by the latest fMRI scanning
techniques, which thereby reveal which parts of the brain are most
active at any point in time. This technique can therefore be used to
determine which areas of the brain are most involved in different types
of tasks. Capgras syndrome A delusional system in which the individual
believes that someone (usually a loved one) has been replaced by an

imposter or doppelgänger. Cerebral lateralization The tendency for the
left and right hemispheres of the brain to take on different functions.
In most people, the left side of the brain is much more involved in
generating and understanding language than the right, although some
people are exceptions to this rule. Cerebral ventricles Fluid-filled
cavities inside the brain; it is thought that these are enlarged in some
psychiatric conditions. Circadian dysrhythmia Desynchronization of the
circadian rhythm with the natural 24-hour light--dark cycle, brought
about by a severe disruption of routine, which may play an important
role in mood symptoms. Circadian rhythm The daily rhythm of bodily
changes accompanying waking, sleeping and regular changes in activity.
Circumplex model of emotions See Emotional circumplex Clinical
psychologist A psychologist who has specialized in using psychological
methods to assess and treat clinical problems. Training begins with the
basic degree in psychology, followed by a postgraduate programme lasting
at least three years which includes a large amount of supervised
clinical work. In North America this has always led to the degree of
Ph.D. (doctor of philosophy) or D.Psy. (doctor of psychology). Until
recently, trainee clinical psychologists in Britain graduated with a
masters degree, but in the early 1990s all universities offering
training in clinical psychology upgraded the basic qualification to a
doctorate (usually D.Psy. or D. Clin. Psy.) on the American model. After
qualifying, clinical psychologists can learn to specialize in a number
of areas, including child clinical psychology, adult mental health,
learning disabilities, clinical neuropsychology and forensic clinical
psychology. Clinical psychologists in Britain cannot prescribe
psychiatric drugs. However, a small number in the United States have
been trained to do so,

and the question of whether this should become a routine part of the
psychologist's role is being extensively debated in that country. Not
surprisingly, the American Psychiatric Association is not keen on the
idea. Cognitive behaviour therapy A type of individual psychological
therapy that is problem-focused and usually time-limited. The patient
and the therapist work together collaboratively to define goals, to
identify dysfunctional thinking processes that may prevent the patient
from achieving those goals, and to find better ways of coping with life
stresses. Cognitive bias A bias towards preferentially processing
(attending to, remembering or thinking about) some kinds of information
as opposed to others. For example, depressed patients tend to recall
more easily negative than positive information. Because patients with
abnormal cognitive biases can process some kinds of information
perfectly well (for example, negative information in the case of
depressed patients) biases must be distinguished from more general
cognitive deficits. Cognitive deficit A gross, content-independent
deficiency of a fundamental cognitive process, such as attention or
memory. Often attributed to brain damage, cognitive deficits may also
reflect general motivational deficits. Cohesive ties Parts of speech
that serve the function of informing the listener that different
segments of speech are meaningfully related. There is evidence that
these are to some degree absent in thought-disordered speech. Cohort
study A study in which an entire (unselected) cohort of the population
(for example, all children born in a particular week) is followed up,
often over decades. Communication deviance An unusual style of parental
communication involving abnormal ways of handling attention and meaning,
unusual ways

of talking about relationships, and abnormal emotional responses.
Comorbidity The occurrence of more than one illness in the same person.
NeoKraepelinian researchers have often assumed that comorbidity reflects
the fact that individuals, through some misfortune, really do suffer
from more than one illness. Of course, apparent comorbidity often
reflects the fact that two illnesses are not really separate and
independent entities. Computer tomography (CT; sometimes known as
computed axial tomography or CAT) A type of structural imaging, in which
information from X-rays taken at different angles is integrated to
produce a picture of a cross-sectional slice of the body. Concordance
Agreement. In twin studies, this term is used to indicate the proportion
of twins in which, if one is affected by a disease (say schizophrenia),
the other is also affected. Confusingly, there are several different
methods of calculating concordance rates, some of which give higher
values than others (and hence are favoured by geneticists). See Chapter
4 for an explanation. Continuous performance test (CPT) A type of
psychological test used to measure vigilance; participants sit at a
computer screen and watch stimuli being flashed up before them, perhaps
at a rate of one every second, and are required to press a key when
seeing a particular target. Coping skills enhancement A type of
cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis which has the primary aim of
improving a patient's coping skills. Cotard syndrome A delusional
syndrome in which extremely nihilistic delusions (for example, 'I am
dead') predominate. Culture-bound syndromes Psychiatric conditions which
appear to be specific to one culture. Examples include koro (an illness
suffered by Chinese people, usually males, who believe that their sexual
organs are shrinking), latah (experienced by Indonesians, who develop an
exaggerated

startle response, which includes shouting rude words and mimicking the
behaviour of those nearby) and witiko psychosis (a rare disorder in
which Algonquian-speaking Indians of Canada believe themselves to be
possessed by vampires). It has been argued that anorexia nervosa and
chronic fatigue syndromes are Western culture-bound syndromes. Deficit
See Cognitive deficit Delusion A bizarre or irrational belief. It has
been difficult to find a definition of delusions that clearly
distinguishes them from normal beliefs and attitudes. According to Karl
Jaspers, delusions are held with extraordinary conviction, are not
amenable to counter-argument, and have a bizarre or impossible content.
However, Jaspers held that true delusions were also ununderstandable, in
the sense that they cannot be understood as arising meaningfully from
the individual's personality and experiences. Delusional disorder The
term introduced in DSM-III-R to replace 'paranoia', and which indicates
a psychotic illness in which delusions are present but other psychotic
symptoms are absent. Dementia praecox Literally, senility of the young.
The term was used by Kraepelin to describe psychiatric disorders
characterized by progressive intellectual deterioration. Later replaced
by the term 'schizophrenia'. Dismissing or avoidant attachment style See
Avoidant attachment style. Distracting response (coping) style A
response to dysphoric mood, in which the individual seeks out activities
that distract attention from the mood. It has been shown that this kind
of response reduces the duration and severity of dysphoria. Dizygotic
(DZ) twins Non-identical (fraternal) twins. DZ twins develop when two
separate eggs are fertilized by two separate sperm and grow into two
foetuses. In effect, they are sibs born at the same time. They have

approximately 50 per cent of their DNA in common and may be either the
same sex or of opposite sexes. A gene for psychiatric disorder inherited
by one DZ twin need not necessarily be inherited by the other. Dopamine
One of the neurotransmitters found in the brain. Some theories of
schizophrenia and manic depression propose that neural pathways that
utilize dopamine are abnormal in these conditions. Downward social drift
The tendency for people with severe mental illness to live in poor
social circumstances, usually because they are unable to work. Dualism
The belief that mental processes and brain processes are separate and
consist of different substances: a non-material mind in the case of the
former, and physical matter in the case of the latter. Although few
scientists and philosophers claim to support this doctrine today, it has
been surprisingly difficult to shake it from our heads. Many psychiatric
theories are implicitly dualist. Dysphoria Negative mood state
Electrodermal response A brief change in the electrical conductivity of
the skin that occurs during exposure to a stressful event. Caused by
sweating, the response can be easily measured using electrodes placed on
the back of the hand. Electroencephalography The technique of measuring
changes in electrical potential ('brain waves') generated by neuronal
activity from electrodes placed on the scalp. Electromyography The
technique of measuring changes in electrical potential in muscles as
they become more or less active. This technique can be used to measure
the subvocalization that accompanies inner speech.

Emotional circumplex A model of subjective emotional states, which
proposes that these can all be accounted for by two dimensions of
emotion. According to one version of this theory, the two fundamental
dimensions of subjective emotion are pleasantness versus unpleasantness
and the degree to which the individual is physiologically aroused.
According to another, the two fundamental dimensions are positive affect
and negative affect (this model has the implication that individuals can
experience both positive and negative emotion at the same time).
Expressed emotion A term describing the emotional attitude of relatives
or significant others towards patients suffering from mental illness.
High expressed emotion is reflected in a high rate of critical comments,
hostility, and/or emotional involvement (as indicated by extreme
emotional responses and over-protective behaviour towards the patient).
High expressed emotion relatives or significant others tend to score
highly on measures of negative affective style. Low expressed emotion
relatives or significant others, in contrast, might be described as very
laid back. Expressivity The extent to which genetic traits vary in the
degree to which they are expressed by those carrying the relevant genes.
Extrapyramidal side effects The most obvious side effects of
conventional neuroleptic medication, including Parkinsonian symptoms
such as stiffness and tremor, dystonias (uncontrollable muscle spasms),
akathisia and tardive dyskinesia. Factor analysis A method of analysing
correlations between many different measures, often used to assess which
symptoms cluster together. Factor analysis reduces the matrix of
correlations between the measures to a small number of factors or
dimensions. Symptoms appearing together in the same factor often
(although not invariably) 'go together'. The number of factors
corresponds to the number of different clusters of symptoms that occur
in the patients studied. There are many different methods of factor
analysis, and the choice between them is often arbitrary. Therefore,
although the technique looks

highly objective, some degree of subjectivity sneaks in when researchers
decide which method to use. Family therapy A type of psychological
treatment that involves the entire family. In the case of patients
suffering from psychosis, this approach is used to reduce stress in the
family, which is known to make the course of psychosis worse. Family
members are educated about psychosis so that they do not criticize the
member who is experiencing symptoms. The family is also taught ways of
managing family conflicts. This approach does not imply that families
are responsible for mental illness experienced by their members.
Effective treatment usually takes at least nine months. Flat affect An
apparent absence of emotion; one of the negative symptoms of psychosis.
In fact, the subjective emotional life of patients with flat affect
appears to be normal, and the problem seems to be a difficulty in
expressing emotion. Functional imaging/scanning Any scanning method that
is used to detect changing physiological functioning. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) A form of MRI scan that uses the BOLD
response to measure the flow of oxygenated blood to different regions of
the brain, thereby allowing the areas that are most active at any
particular time to be identified. Genome The entire genetic code
contained in the strands of DNA in the twenty-three human chromosomes.
Most cells in the human body have two sets, one derived from the mother
and the other from the father, forming twenty-three pairs of
chromosomes. Hallucination Usually defined as a perception in the
absence of an appropriate stimulus. The most common example is hearing a
voice when no one is present to account for it.

Heritability The proportion of variance in a trait that can be
attributed to genes. Usually expressed as a percentage, so that a
heritability of 100 per cent implies that the trait is completely
genetic. Psychiatric geneticists often assume that high heritability
values for psychiatric disorders leave little room for environmental
influences. However, this assumption is incorrect (see Chapter 17 for an
explanation). High-risk study A type of study in which individuals
thought to be at special risk of developing a disorder are followed up
over a period of time to see if they actually become ill, and to
identify factors that predict the development of illness. The most
common variant of this type of research starts with young people known
to be at genetic risk because they have a first-degree relative who is
suffering from the disorder. However, high-risk groups can also be
identified using psychological or behavioural indicators, for example by
selecting individuals who score highly on questionnaire measures of
schizotypal personality traits. Homovanillic acid A metabolite of
dopamine that can be measured in the cerebrospinal fluid. Hypofrontality
Reduced activation of the frontal lobes of the brain in response to
demanding tasks. Normally, when we try to solve certain types of
problems, the frontal lobes become engaged and demand more oxygenated
blood. In hypofrontal individuals this effect is less marked. Some
biological psychiatrists have argued that hypofrontality is a feature of
schizophrenia. Hypomania A subclinical form of manic symptomatology,
defined in DSM-IV as a distinct period of 'abnormally and persistently
elevated, irritable or expansive mood' accompanied by at least three
additional symptoms such as inflated self-esteem, non-delusional
grandiosity, decreased need for sleep, flight of ideas, distractibility
or 'excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high
potential for painful consequences'.

Hypomanic personality A personality type, in which hypomanic traits are
a persistent feature. Incidence The number of new cases of a disorder
appearing within a particular population in a particular period. Inner
or private speech Speech that is addressed to the self, which occurs
internally and which cannot be heard by other people. In other words,
verbal thought. It is believed that children first learn to talk to
themselves out loud, before internalizing this process. As the reader
will be aware, most adults still talk to themselves out loud under some
circumstances (a phenomenon which, by convention, is known as private
speech), especially when stressed or alone. Insight According to British
psychiatrist Aubrey Lewis, 'The correct attitude to morbid change in
oneself, and moreover, the realization that the illness is mental' ('The
psychopathology of insight', British Journal of Medical Psychology, 14:
332-- 48, 1934). Psychotic patients who do not believe that they have an
illness requiring treatment are therefore said to lack insight.
Conversely, patients are said to have insight when they agree with their
doctor. Internality--externality An important dimension along which
attributions can be categorized. Internal attributions locate the cause
of an event with the individual (for example, 'I failed the exam because
I'm not very bright') whereas external attributions locate the cause of
the event with other people ('The examiner had it in for me') or with
circumstances ('I was unable to revise because I had to go to my
sister's wedding'). Linkage analysis A method for attempting to identify
particular sites on particular chromosomes where genes responsible for a
trait or illness reside. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) A technique
for constructing detailed images of the body, by placing the body in a
very strong magnetic field in order to trick it to emit radio waves when
the field is turned off.

This approach can be used to generate spectacularly beautiful pictures
of the structure of soft tissues, for example the brain. Mania A state
of very intense emotional, cognitive and behavioural disturbance, in
which the individual may feel highly energetic, may act impulsively, and
may be both euphoric and irritable. Although sometimes regarded as the
opposite of depression, dysphoric (depressive) symptoms commonly occur
during manic episodes. Mania is often accompanied by psychotic symptoms
such as grandiose delusions and thought disorder. Manic depression A
term used by Kraepelin to describe any disorder in which abnormal mood
is the main symptom. However, in recent years the term has been used to
describe an illness in which the patient suffers from recurrent episodes
of depression and mania. Now often (and misleadingly) called 'bipolar
disorder' to distinguish it from 'unipolar depression' in which only
episodes of depression occur. Mentalizing Understanding the mental
states (beliefs, desires and intentions) of other people. Metacognition
Cognition about cognition; in other words, one's beliefs about one's own
mental processes. Monozygotic (MZ) twins Identical twins formed when a
fertilized egg splits in the uterus and grows into two separate
foetuses. MZ twins have identical DNA and are always the same sex.
Therefore, any genes for mental illness inherited by one MZ twin must be
inherited by the other. Negative symptoms Symptoms characterized by the
absence of desirable behaviours or experiences; for example social
withdrawal, flat affect, anhedonia and apathy (avolition). Neuroleptic
induced deficit syndrome (NIDS) Lack of motivation necessary to achieve
even modest goals, an undesirable consequence of long-term neuroleptic
treatment.

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome A side effect of neuroleptic medication,
characterized by muscular rigidity, fever and fluctuating consciousness,
which is often mistaken for a bacterial infection, and which is fatal if
drugs are not promptly discontinued. Neuroleptic (antipsychotic)
medication The class of drugs, first identified in the late 1940s and
early 1950s, which are known to have an ameliorative effect on positive
symptoms, and to reduce the risk of psychotic relapse. They have
numerous side effects. Neuropsychological tests Psychological tests
devised to detect different types of brain damage. Test designers
administer a large number of tests to patients with different kinds of
brain damage and select items on which patients suffering from the type
of brain damage of interest perform poorly. In the case of certain types
of diffuse damage, neuropsychological tests may be more sensitive than
brain scans. Normalizing strategy A strategy employed by therapists
practising cognitive behaviour therapy with psychotic clients. Efforts
are made to demystify psychosis and make it seem more 'normal'. Patients
may be educated about the prevalence of psychotic complaints in the
population, and about similarities between psychotic experiences and
normal mental states. Operational definition A definition that specifies
the method or rule used to measure a concept. For example, an
operational definition of length would be something like 'the number
obtained when a ruler is laid alongside an object'. Operationalism was
proposed as a philosophy of science by the physicist Percy Bridgeman in
the 1930s. It was later embraced by some psychologists, especially
behaviourists such as B. F. Skinner, as a way of making psychology more
objective. It was the philosopher Carl Hempel who first suggested that
some of the diagnostic arguments in psychiatry could be resolved by
agreeing on operational definitions of different disorders. DSM-III (and
subsequent revisions of the

manual) took this route by attempting to specify precisely which
symptoms are required for a diagnosis to be made. Paranoia and paranoid
These terms have a confusing history. First used by the Ancient Greeks
to mean crazy or mad, they were reintroduced in the nineteenth century
to describe a type of delusional disorder, a usage embraced by
Kraepelin. During the era after the Second World War, when psychiatric
diagnoses briefly became unfashionable among US psychiatrists, the term
'paranoid' was often used to describe persecutory beliefs that were not
necessarily delusional; hence the ordinary-language definition given in
the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 'A tendency to suspect or
distrust others or to believe oneself unfairly used'. DSM-III used the
term paranoia to refer to a pure delusional psychosis (Kraepelin's
concept) but the term delusional disorder was used in its place in
DSM-IIIR and DSMIV. However, paranoid personality disorder remains in
DSMIV as an axis-2 disorder, and is defined in a way that closely
matches the ordinary-language definition given in the OED. In this book,
the term 'paranoid delusion' is used to describe any delusional system
in which themes of persecution are prominent. Penetrance The extent to
which people in possession of a particular allele or set of alleles are
likely to have particular characteristics determined by those alleles.
If penetrance is low, only a fraction of those carrying the crucial
alleles will show the relevant traits. Not to be confused with
expressivity. Personality disorder Defined in the DSM system as
'enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the
environment and oneself'. They are considered to be distinct from
illnesses because they are present throughout adulthood, whereas the
illnesses are episodic. In the DSM system, they are listed on a separate
axis (axis 2) from psychiatric illnesses (axis 1). Positive symptoms
Symptoms that consist of experiences and behaviours that would
preferably be absent, such as hallucinations and delusions.

Positron emission tomography (PET) A technique used to image activity in
the brain, in which radio-labelled substances are injected into the
body. On reaching the brain, the substances release positrons which
almost immediately decay, releasing photons that travel in opposite
directions and which are then detected by a scanner. Post-traumatic
stress disorder A cluster of symptoms often experienced by survivors of
life-threatening events. These include constant re-experiencing of the
traumatic event (in the form of intrusive memories, flashbacks or
dreams), avoidance of stimuli associated with the event, and persistent
emotional over-arousal (for example, as indicated by irritability).
Prefrontal leucotomy A crude brain operation devised by the Portuguese
neurosurgeon Egas Moniz and inflicted on many psychotic patients,
especially in the 1950s. It involves severing neural pathways from the
frontal regions of the brain to the anterior regions. Often performed
quickly under local anaesthetic, by inserting a knife in a hole drilled
towards rear of the forehead, with little care about the precise
location of the lesions created. A version developed by Walter Freeman
involved displacing the eyeball downwards and thrusting an ice-pick-like
instrument through the bone of the orbit behind the eyes. There is no
evidence that this operation affects symptoms, but it may leave patients
more passive and easier to manage. Prevalence The proportion of a
population suffering from a condition at a particular point in time. Not
to be confused with incidence (the number of new cases in a particular
period). Prodromal symptoms Symptoms that precede the appearance of
fullblown psychosis. Typically, these include disturbances of mood, but
may also include subtle cognitive (thinking) and perceptual
abnormalities. Psychiatrist A medical doctor who specializes in the
treatment of psychiatric problems. After receiving the basic medical
qualification, the doctor receives a further four or more years of
training which mostly

consists of supervised clinical work. Psychiatrists often use
psychiatric drugs as their main line of treatment, but many also acquire
training in psychological techniques. Because psychiatrists have
important legal responsibilities (they can have patients compulsorily
admitted to hospital), because they are the only profession currently
allowed to prescribe psychiatric drugs, and because doctors have a long
history of telling other health professionals what to do, they are
usually the leaders of multidisciplinary psychiatric teams.
Psychoanalysis This has two meanings: the theory about the mind and the
origins of mental illness developed by Sigmund Freud, and the particular
type of psychotherapy that he invented. Psychoanalysis as a theory has
often been criticized as woolly and untestable by modern scientific
psychologists, but there is no doubt that Freud was an astute observer
whose sometimes bizarre ideas are peppered with acute insights into
human nature. Psychoanalysis as a treatment is long (often several
years), intensive (often several times a week), extremely expensive, and
has never been shown to be of benefit to psychotic patients. However, it
remains fashionable and is even regarded as a gold-standard therapy in
some intellectual quarters. More recent brief psychodynamic therapies,
which draw on Freud's ideas to some extent, have been shown to be
effective for some non-psychotic conditions. Psychoanalyst 'Analyst' for
short. One who practises psychoanalysis. Although Freud was a doctor, he
came to believe that medicine was a bad initial training for those
wishing to be psychoanalysts. However, this did not stop the American
Psychoanalytic Association from restricting training to doctors until
they were successfully sued by a group of disgruntled psychologists in
1965. Now psychoanalytic associations in most countries will take on
trainees from a wide range of backgrounds. The training includes a
personal analysis, in which the trainee is analysed by a qualified
analyst. The length of training is usually long and indeterminate and is
completed when the supervisor and his/her colleagues think the trainee
is ready. Why anyone would wish to undertake an expensive training in
this old-fashioned and ineffective treatment is another matter.

Psychopharmacology The scientific study of the effects of drugs
(including psychiatric drugs) on the brain, behaviour and experience.
Psychosis A term which has undergone dramatic changes of meaning since
the end of the nineteenth century, when it was used to describe mild
psychiatric problems with presumed psychological causes. It now refers
to the most severe psychiatric disorders, in which the individual to
some extent can be said to be out of touch with reality, which many
psychiatrists and psychologists have presumed to be biological diseases.
In practice, this means disorders in which the individual suffers from
delusions and/or hallucinations. Puerperal psychosis A psychotic
reaction experienced by a mother soon after (usually within three months
of) the birth of her child. Reinforcement and reinforcers Technically,
stimuli that, when consequent on a behaviour, increase the likelihood
that the behaviour will occur again in the future. In lay terms, a
reward (although it is important to recognize that some things which we
think are rewarding may not actually be powerful reinforcers). Primary
reinforcers reflect basic biological needs and include food, contact
with an attachment figure (caregiver) and sex. Secondary reinforcers
acquire their power by virtue of our learning history, and include
social reinforcement (praise for our achievements) and, of course,
money. Reliability The first test that must be passed by a diagnostic
concept if we are to say that it is scientifically valid. Reliability
refers to the consistency with which diagnoses are made, either by
different clinicians or on different occasions. Reliability can be
measured by having independent clinicians attempt to diagnose the same
patients and then measuring their level of agreement with the kappa
statistic, which varies between 0 (agreement at chance level) and 1
(perfect agreement). It can also be measured by making diagnoses at one
point in time and then repeating the procedure at a later date, again
using the kappa statistic to assess agreement between the two time
points. (Obviously this kind of test--retest reliability is

only meaningful in the case of measurements which we expect to remain
fairly stable across time.) Although a diagnosis must be reliable to be
scientifically valid, reliability is no guarantee of validity. For this
purpose, additional validity tests must be passed. Ruminative response
(coping) style A response to dysphoric mood, in which the individual
focuses excessively on the mood and its causes, asking questions such
as, 'How did I get in this mess?' and 'Will I ever feel better?' This
response seems to prolong dysphoric episodes. Self Cognitive
representation of who you are; roughly what is meant when saying 'I'. It
has been argued that the self consists of many domains (for example, the
self as it actually is, the ideal self, the self as it ought to be, the
self that might be possible in the future) and also different
perspectives on the self (for example, my beliefs about what sort of
person my mother thinks I am, and so on). Self-discrepancy Discrepancy
between one domain or perspective on the self and another. So, for
example, an actual--ideal discrepancy is a discrepancy between beliefs
about the self as it actually is, and the ideal self. Self-esteem Global
evaluation of the self. Typically regarded as a unidimensional scale
running from self-loathing to self-satisfaction. However, this is an
oversimplification, and there may be several different types of
self-esteem. For example positive self-esteem (positive beliefs about
the self) may be relatively independent of negative self-esteem
(negative beliefs about the self). Self-guides Self-representations that
have motivational properties, for example the ideal self and the ought
self, which are two different kinds of standards for self-evaluation.

Self-schema Core assumptions or beliefs about the self, often barely
articulated, including enduring standards of self-evaluation.
Self-serving bias The tendency to attribute positive events or
experiences to one's own actions and characteristics and negative events
to causes external to the self. This bias is found in ordinary people,
is exaggerated in paranoid patients and is absent or even reversed in
depressed people. Signal detection theory (SDT) As much an experimental
method as a theory. SDT presumes that an individual's decision that he
or she has detected a stimulus -- or signal -- is a function of two
separate factors: the sensitivity of the individual's perceptual system
(the more sensitive, the more likely that the signal will be accurately
detected, or that the individual will correctly realize that it is not
present) and perceptual bias, which can be roughly understood as the
individual's willingness to guess that a signal is present under
conditions of uncertainty (the greater the bias, the more likely that
the individual will correctly detect stimuli, but this gain is made at
the risk of falsely detecting signals which are in fact absent). SDT
experimental methodology allows these two factors to be measured
separately. This has been useful in the study of hallucinations. Social
brain hypothesis The hypothesis that the brain has evolved specific
mechanisms for dealing with the demands of complex social relationships.
Sociotropy A type of self-schema in which there is a tendency to judge
one's value in terms of relationships with other people. People high in
sociotropy tend to be very sensitive to rejection or relationship
problems. Source monitoring The process of determining the likely source
of a cognition. One type of source monitoring involves discriminating
between cognitions (thought, image or memories) and perceptions
(especially things heard). It is believed that this skill may be
compromised in people who hear

voices. Another involves telling the difference between things one has
thought, and things one has said. It is believed that people with
thought, language and communication disorder have difficulty with this
skill. State-dependent memory Material which is memorized while in a
particular state (physiological condition or context) is more likely to
be recalled when the individual is in the same state than when the
individual is in some other state. This state-dependent memory effect
has been shown to be true for a variety of circumstances, for example,
when material in learned under conditions of intoxication (in which
case, re-intoxication may improve recall) or when the individual is
scuba-diving (in which case, recall is better in the water than on dry
land). These observations show that even cognitive psychologists can
devise fun experiments. Stress-vulnerability models Models of
psychopathology that assume that some people are especially vulnerable
to developing psychiatric symptoms by dint of possessing particular
biological or psychological characteristics, but that exposure to
stressful experiences is required for a full-blown psychiatric disorder
to develop. It follows from these assumptions that many people who are
vulnerable to psychiatric disorder may be spared as a consequence of
living in a stress-free environment. Stroop effect The tendency to
experience difficulty when naming the ink colours of words that grab
attention. The effect is particularly evident when colour words are
printed in incongruent ink colours (for example, 'RED' printed in green,
or 'BLUE' printed in pink). Under these conditions, the individual
experiences competition between the urge to name the word ('Red') and
saying the ink colour ('Green'), which slows down the latter response. A
similar but slightly less strong effect is found for any emotionally
salient words and, under these circumstances, is known as the emotional
Stroop effect. Psychologists can use the emotional Stroop effect to show
that certain themes are troubling to patients. The effect is strongest
(that is, colournaming is slowest) for the most troubling words.

Structural imaging/scanning A type of neuroimaging (using, for example,
CAT or MRI) that reveals the structure of the brain. Used to make
anatomical comparisons between psychotic patients and ordinary people.
Subvocalization Micro activations of the speech muscles that occur
during inner speech. These can be recorded by means of electromyography.
Subvocalization typically occurs when we are thinking about demanding or
emotionally challenging problems. Tardive dyskinesia An extrapyramidal
side effect of neuroleptic medication, now thankfully rare. The patient
experiences spasmodic movements of the jaw and tongue, which are
unsightly and, once established, are sometimes irreversible even after
the medication has been discontinued. Theory of mind (skills) A
misleading term for the ability to understand the mental states
(beliefs, desires, wishes and intentions) of other people. People who
can do this are said to possess a theory of mind, in contrast to
autistic children, who seem unaware that others have mental states.
Theoryof-mind (perhaps better called mentalizing) skills are often
tested using problems that can only be solved by understanding that
others have false beliefs. A typical example used with children concerns
two individuals, Sally and Ann, who watch something (perhaps a sweet or
toy) being placed in one of two boxes. Sally leaves the room and Ann
moves the object to the other box before she returns. The child is asked
which box Sally looks in when attempting to find the object. To answer
correctly, the child must know that Sally believes the object is in the
wrong box. Psychotic patients tend to be impaired on more complex
theory-of-mind tests. It has been argued that their inability to
understand the mental states of others contributes both to paranoia and
to speech and communication disorders. However, the evidence on this is
not clear cut.

Thought disorder A misleading term for psychotic speech, which is
incoherent to the listener and, in extreme cases, forms a kind of 'word
salad'. The term was introduced by early psychiatrists and psychologists
who assumed that incoherent speech reflected incoherent thinking.
However, modern research has established that this is generally not the
case. Thought, language and communication disorder A rather unwieldy
term introduced by Nancy Andreasen as an alternative to 'thought
disorder'. Unipolar depression A mood disorder in which only episodes of
depression occur (i.e. mania is absent). Validity The extent to which a
set of measurements or a diagnostic system fulfils the purpose for which
it is designed. Not to be confused with reliability. There is no single
test of validity. For example, the validity of a diagnostic concept
might be assessed by seeing whether it corresponds to a naturally
occurring cluster of symptoms, by seeing whether the diagnosis runs in
families or is associated with any particular type of pathology, or by
seeing whether it usefully predicts what happens to the patient in the
future or which types of treatment are likely to be effective.
Ventricular enlargement Enlargement of the cerebral ventricles, reported
in some psychiatric conditions. Verbal community The community of
competent language-users. Working memory A relatively brief (tens of
seconds) memory store, used in everyday tasks such as comprehending
speech. When we repeat telephone numbers to ourselves when walking from
the telephone directory to the telephone, we are continually refreshing
the working memory store. Zeitgeber A clock-setting stimulus. Any
regular event (for example, dawn) or activity (for example, eating
breakfast) that has the effect of

resetting the circadian clock, and thereby keeping circadian rhythms in
step with the natural 24-hour light--dark cycle. OceanofPDF.com

Notes Chapter 1 Emil Kraepelin's Big Idea 1. L. Wittgenstein (1980)
Culture and Value (trans. P. Winch). Oxford: Blackwell. 2. A few years
before I arrived at Denbigh, a series of articles in the Guardian
newspaper (reprinted in T. S. Szasz (ed.) (1975) The Age of Madness.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul) had revealed that many elderly female
psychiatric patients in Britain had been incarcerated in their youth
after giving birth to illegitimate children, a form of behaviour deemed
to be evidence of psychiatric disorder in the 1920s and 1930s. Although
there was speculation that this might be true of some of the elderly
women in Denbigh, no evidence was uncovered to suggest that any of the
patients on the ward fell into this category. 3. The experiment,
together with some further work, actually appeared in a paper that I
wrote up, partly out of bloody-mindedness, many years later. The full
reference is: R. P. Bentall, P. Higson and C. F. Lowe (1987) 'Teaching
self-instructions to chronic schizophrenic patients: efficacy and
generalisation', Behavioural Psychotherapy, 15: 58--76. 4. See Richard
Warner (1988) Recovery from Schizophrenia: Psychiatry and Political
Economy. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 5. Quoted in E. J. Engstrom
(1991) 'Emil Kraepelin: psychiatry and public affairs in Wilhelmine
Germany', History of Psychiatry, 2: 111--32. The mission referred to in
the poem was apparently Kraepelin's fight against the evils of
alcoholism. 6. E. Shorter (1997) A History of Psychiatry. New York:
Wiley. 7. The English-language literature on the life of Emil Kraepelin
is relatively limited. I have used the following as the basis for my own
account: E. Kraepelin (1987) Memoirs (trans. H. Hippius, G. Peters and
D. Ploog). New York: Springer-Verlag; Franz G. Alexander and Sheldon T.
Selesnick (1966) The History of Psychiatry: An Evaluation of Psychiatric
Thought from Prehistoric Times to the Present. New York: Harper & Row;
Edward Shorter (1992) From Paralysis to Fatigue: a History of
Psychosomatic Illness in the Modern Era. New York: Free Press; and also
A History of Psychiatry. op. cit.

In addition, the following sources have provided useful information
about specific aspects of Kraepelin's work: G. E. Berrios and R. Hauser
(1988)

'The early development of Kraepelin's ideas on classification: a
conceptual history', Psychological Medicine, 18: 813--21 (on Kraepelin's
scientific ideas); G. E. Berrios and R. Hauser (1995) 'Kraepelin', in G.
E. Berrios and R. Porter (eds.), A History of Clinical Psychiatry.
London: Athlone Press (on Kraepelin's scientific ideas); E. J. Engstrom
(1991) 'Emil Kraepelin: psychiatry and public affairs in Wilhelmine
Germany', History of Psychiatry, 2: 111--32 (on Kraepelin's attitudes
towards alcohol, syphilis and nationalism); E. J. Engstrom (1995)
'Kraepelin', in Berrios and Porter (eds.), A History, op. cit. (on
Kraepelin's battles with bureaucracy while at Heidelberg); P. Hoff
(1995) 'Kraepelin', in Berrios and Porter (eds.), A History, op. cit.
(on Kraepelin's scientific ideas); S. E. Jelliffe (1932) 'Emil
Kraepelin, the man and his work', Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry,
27: 761--75 (an admiring account of Kraepelin's character and
achievements); M. Shepherd (1995) 'Two faces of Emil Kraepelin', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 167: 174--83 (on Kraepelin's nationalism). 8. My
account of Kraepelin's fall-out with Flechsig is based on Kraepelin's
memoirs, and also on the account of Flechsig's life given in Z. Lothane
(1992) In Defense of Schreber: Soul Murder and Psychiatry. Hillsdale,
NJ: Analytic Press. 9. See Engstrom, 'Kraepelin', in Berrios and Porter
(eds.), A History, op. cit. 10. See Engstrom, 'Emil Kraepelin', op. cit.
11. Jelliffe, 'Emil Kraepelin, the man and his work', op. cit.: 762. 12.
Quoted in Shorter From Paralysis to Fatigue, op cit., p. 243. 13. F.
Heynick (1993) Language and its Disturbances in Dreams: The Pioneering
Work of Freud and Kraepelin Updated. London: Wiley. 14. See E. Kraepelin
(1904/1974) 'Comparative psychiatry', reprinted in S. R. Hirsch and M.
Shepherd (eds.), Themes and Variations in European Psychiatry. Bristol:
Wright. 15. Engstrom, 'Emil Kraepelin', op. cit. 16. Kraepelin (1907)
quoted in O. Reider (1974) 'The origin of our confusion about
schizophrenia', Psychiatry, 37: 197--208. The italics are mine.

17. His thinking about this approach was influenced by Karl Ludwig
Kahlbaum, a psychiatrist who owned a private hospital in the German town
of Görlitz. Kahlbaum had written extensively on problems of psychiatric
classification and had noted that 'snapshot' observations of patients'
symptoms could be misleading because the presentation of an illness
could vary over time. According to Kahlbaum: 'We do not see the forms of
the various disease entities, but only the forms of their various stadia
or better still the forms of various symptom complexes any one of which
the illness can adopt during different periods of its course...' (quoted
in J. Hoenig (1995) 'Schizophrenia', in Berrios and Porter (eds.), A
History, op. cit.). 18. The eighth edition of the Textbook, quoted in
Hoenig, 'Schizophrenia', in Berrios and Porter (eds.), A History, op.
cit. 19. See G. E. Berrios (1995) 'Mood disorders', in Berrios and
Porter (eds.), A History, op. cit. 20. E. Kraepelin (1921)
Manic-Depressive Insanity and Paranoia (trans. R. M. Barclay).
Edinburgh: Livingstone. See also F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison (1990)
Manic-Depressive Illness. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 21. E.
Kraepelin (1920/1992) 'Clinical manifestations of mental illness',
History of Psychiatry, 3: 499--529. All the remaining quotations in this
chapter are from this paper. In the third of these, I have substituted
Kraepelin's original term 'dementia praecox' for 'schizophrenia', a new
name for the disorder introduced by Eugen Bleuler, and which Kraepelin
used sometimes in his later publications (see next chapter). 22. Victor
Parant (1905) quoted in G. E. Berrios and R. Hauser (1995) 'Kraepelin',
in Berrios and Porter (eds.), A History, op. cit.

Chapter 2 After Kraepelin 1. O. Wilde (1891) Intentions. London: J. R.
Osgood, McIlvaine. 2. My account of Eugen Bleuler's life is based mainly
on the following two sources: M. Bleuler and R. Bleuler (1986) 'Books
reconsidered: Dementia praecox oder die gruppe der schizophrenien by
Eugen Bleuler', British Journal of Psychiatry, 149: 661--4; H. F.
Ellenberger (1970) The Discovery of the Unconscious: The History and
Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry. New York: Basic Books.

For my account of Bleuler's rift with Freud I have relied on the
following sources: F. G. Alexander and S. T. Selesnick (1966) The
History of Psychiatry: An Evaluation of Psychiatric Thought from
Prehistoric Times to the Present. New York: Harper & Row; E. Jones
(1962) The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud (abridged edn). London:
Hogarth Press. My account of Bleuler's concept of schizophrenia is
mainly from his own work, Dementia Praecox or the Group of
Schizophrenias (trans. E. Zinkin), New York: International Universities
Press, from the same historical sources I have used in writing my
account of Kraepelin's work, and also from J. K. Wing (1995) 'Concepts
of schizophrenia', in S. R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger (eds.),
Schizophrenia. Oxford: Blackwell. 3. Ellenberger, The Discovery of the
Unconscious, op. cit. 4. Bleuler and Bleuler, 'Books reconsidered', op.
cit. 5. See C. G. Jung (1907/1960) The Psychology of Dementia Praecox,
vol. 3, in H. Read, M. Fordham, G. Adler and W. McGuire (eds.), The
Collected Works of C. G. Jung. London: Routledge. 6. Quoted in Alexander
and Selesnick, The History of Psychiatry, op. cit. 7. Quoted in
Alexander and Selesnick, The History of Psychiatry, op. cit. 8. Quoted
in L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman (1973) Disordered Thought in
Schizophrenia. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 9. Bleuler, Dementia
Praecox, op. cit., p. 236. 10. Bleuler, Dementia Praecox, op. cit. 11.
See F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison (1990) Manic-Depressive Illness.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 12. My account of Jaspers' life is
based largely on his Philosophical Autobiography, in P. A. Schilpp (ed.)
(1981) The Philosophy of Karl Jaspers. Illinois: Open Court Publishing
Company.

13. Unless indicated otherwise, all the following quotations from
Jaspers are from his Philosophical Autobiography. 14. See K. Kolle
(1981) 'Karl Jaspers as Psychopathologist', in Schilpp (ed.), The
Philosophy of Karl Jaspers, op. cit. 15. ibid. 16. In raising this
distinction, Jaspers anticipated later arguments between philosophers
about the relationship between everyday and scientific explanations of
human behaviour. The term folk psychology, introduced by the
Austrian-born philosopher Paul Feyerabend in 1963 ('Materialism and the
mind -- body problem', Review of Meta physics, 17: 49--65), refers to
the ordinary system of explaining human behaviour in terms of causal
mental states such as beliefs, desires and intentions. (Such states are
sometimes called intentional states. This convention follows the work of
the German philosopher Franz Brentano (Psychology from an Empirical
Stand point. London: Routledge, 1874/1973), who argued that the hallmark
of all mental states was the property he called 'intentionality', by
which he meant the 'aboutness' that linked the mental state to the
world. On this view it is impossible to have a mental state which is not
about something.) According to self-styled eliminative materialists, for
example the American philosophers Paul and Patricia Churchland
(e.g. Paul M. Churchland, Matter and Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1984), folk psychology is a pre-scientific approach to explaining
human behaviour, and must be replaced by accounts that emphasize
specific brain mechanisms; after all, the Churchlands argue, examination
of the brain reveals nothing corresponding to beliefs, desires and
intentions. On this view, psychology must eventually give way to
neuroscience. Jaspers' position, however, is closer to that of another
American philosopher, Dan Dennett (The Intentional Stance, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1987), who argues that we can choose between taking an
intentional stance (in which we explain behaviour in terms of the
elements of folk psychology; for example, explaining my writing of this
book in terms of my desire for fame, money and career enhancement) and
the design stance (in which we explain behaviour interms of the
biological machinery of the brain; for example, explaining my writing of
this book in terms of the various neurobiological processes which
sustain my memory of previous research, allow me to generate sentences,
and control the movement of my fingers across my Macintosh keyboard).
Dennett argues that both stances have distinct advantages and that, for
most purposes, the intentional stance provides us with a powerful way of
explaining and predicting the behaviour of our fellows (for example,
from my belief that my editor at Penguin is a nice fellow I can predict
that he will not be angry if this manuscript is many months overdue).
Like Jaspers, Dennett notes that we tend to be thrown on to design
stance explanations ('there's something wrong with the brain') when
intentional stance explanations fail us (that is, when we say that the
behaviour we are observing is 'mad', 'crazy', 'loco' or, in Jaspers'
terminology, un understandable). 17. I have managed to find few
English-language sources on Schneider's career. The account here is
based largely on the following papers by J. Hoenig: 'Kurt Schneider and
anglophone psychiatry', Comprehensive Psychiatry, 23: 391--400, 1982;
'The concept of schizophrenia: Kraepelin--Bleuler--Schneider', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 142: 547--56, 1983; 'Schneider's first rank
symptoms and the tabulators', Comprehensive Psychiatry, 25: 77-- 87,
1984.

18. Understandably, psychiatrists have not advertised this part of their
history. However, much has been made of the association between Nazism
and genetic research by critics of institutional psychiatry, for example
radical psychiatrist Peter Breggin (Toxic Psychiatry. London: Fontana,
1993) and the scientology movement (see, for example, T. Roder, V.
Kubillus and A. Burwell (1995) Psychiatrists: The Men behind Hitler. Los
Angeles: Freedom Publications). For a less partisan but nonetheless
disturbing account see J.-E. Meyer (1988) 'The fate of the mentally ill
in Germany during the Third Reich', Psychological Medicine, 18: 575--
81. 19. Quoted in Hoenig, 'Kurt Schneider', op. cit. 20. K. Schneider
(1959) Clinical Psychopathology. New York: Grune & Stratton, p. 135. 21.
R. E. Bourdillon, C. A. Clark and A. P. Ridges (1965) '"Pink spot" in
the urine of schizophrenics', Nature, 208: 453--5. 22. J. K. Wing, J. E.
Cooper and N. Sartorius (1974) The Measurement and Classification of
Psychiatric Symptoms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 23. Quoted
in Hoenig, 'Kurt Schneider', op. cit. 24. J. Kasanin (1933) 'The acute
schizoaffective psychoses', American Journal of Psychiatry, 90: 97--126.
See also F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison (1990) Manic-Depressive
Illness. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 25. B. T. Carroll (1998) 'Karl
Leonhard, 1904--1988', American Journal of Psychiatry, 155: 1309. 26.
See C. Perris (1995) 'Leonhard and the cycloid psychoses', in G. E.
Berrios and R. Porter (eds.), A History of Clinical Psychiatry, London:
Athlone Press. 27. K. Leonhard (1957/1979) The Classification of the
Endogenous Psychoses (trans. R. Berman). New York: Irvington. 28. See
Goodwin and Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness, op. cit. 29. S. Kety
(1980) 'The syndrome of schizophrenia: unresolved questions and
opportunities for research', British Journal of Psychiatry, 136:
421--36. 30. M. Boyle (1990) Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion.
London: Routledge.

31. For vivid descriptions of the disorder, see O. Sacks (1973)
Awakenings. London: Duckworth. 32. See R. Porter (1995) 'Parkinson's
disease (paralysis agitans)', in Berrios and Porter (eds.), A History,
op. cit.

Chapter 3 The Great Classification Crisis 1. R. E. Kendell (1975) The
Role of Diagnosis in Psychiatry. Oxford: Blackwell. 2. T. Kuhn (1970)
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd edn). Chicago: Chicago
University Press. 3. A. F. Chalmers (1976) What is This Thing Called
Science? Milton Keynes: Open University Press. 4. World Health
Organization (1992) ICD-10: International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems (10th revised edn). Geneva: World
Health Organization. 5. American Psychiatric Association (1994)
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th edn).
Washington, DC: APA. 6. My account of developments in standardized
classification is largely drawn from Kendell, The Role of Diagnosis, op.
cit. Other useful sources have been R. K. Blashfield (1984) The
Classification of Psychopathology: NeoKraepelinian and Quantitative
Approaches. New York: Plenum, and E. Shorter (1997) A History of
Psychiatry. New York: Wiley. 7. Shorter, A History of Psychiatry, op.
cit. 8. Blashfield, The Classification of Psychopathology, op. cit. 9.
J. H. Masserman and H. T. Carmichael (1938) 'Diagnosis and prognosis in
psychiatry: with a follow-up study of the results of short term general
hospital therapy in psychiatric cases', Journal of Mental Science, 84:
893--946. 10. W. A. Hunt, C. L. Wittson and E. B. Hunt (1953) 'A
theoretical and practical analysis of the diagnostic process', in P. H.
Hoch and J. Zubin (eds.), Current Problems of Psychiatric Diagnosis. New
York: Grune & Stratton.

11. P. Ash (1949) 'The reliability of psychiatric diagnosis', Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44: 272--6. 12. Detailed accounts are
given in Blashfield, The Classification of Psychopathology, op. cit. and
Kendell, The Role of Diagnosis, op. cit. 13. M. G. Sandifer, C. Pettus
and D. Quade (1964) 'A study of psychiatric diagnosis', Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 139: 350--6. 14. M. Kramer (1961) 'Some
problems of international research suggested by observations on
differences in first admission rates to the mental hospitals of England
and Wales and of the United States', in Proceedings of the Third World
Congress of Psychiatry, 3. Montreal: Toronto University Press,
pp. 153--60. 15. J. E. Cooper, R. E. Kendell, B. J. Gurland, L. Sharpe,
J. R. M. Copeland and R. Simon (1972) Psychiatric Diagnosis in New York
and London: Maudsley Monograph No. 20. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
16. World Health Organization (1973) International Pilot Study of
Schizophrenia. Geneva: WHO. 17. See S. Bloch (1984) 'The political
misuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union', in S. Bloch and P. Chodoff
(eds.), Psychiatric Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, and S.
Bloch and P. Reddaway (1977) Russia's Political Hospitals: The Abuse of
Psychiatry in the Soviet Union. New York: Basic Books.

Bloch seems to have assumed that psychiatric diagnosis is a relatively
uncontroversial procedure, so that the Russians were simply wrong to
assume that dissidents were mentally ill. For alternative perspectives,
see: R. P. Bentall (1990) 'Compulsory care', in D. Evans (ed.), Why
Should we Care? London: Macmillan; K. W. M. Fulford, A. Y. U. Smirnov
and E. Snow (1993) 'Concepts of disease and the abuse of psychiatry in
the USSR', British Journal of Psychiatry, 162; 801--10. 18. W. Reich
(1984) 'Psychiatric diagnosis as an ethical problem', in Bloch and
Chodoff (eds.), Psychiatric Ethics, op. cit. The italics are Reich's.
19. This brief account of Spitzer's career is taken from Blashfield, The
Classification of Psychopathology, op. cit.

20. This brief biography of Spitzer is taken from Blashfield, op. cit.
The article on DSM-II was R. L. Spitzer and P. T. Wilson (1968) 'A guide
to the American Psychiatric Association's new diagnostic nomenclature',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 124: 1619--29. 21. R. L. Spitzer and J.
L. Fliess (1974) 'A reanalysis of the reliability of psychiatric
diagnosis', British Journal of Psychiatry, 123: 341--7. 22. Sandifer,
Pettus and Quade, 'A study of psychiatric diagnosis', op. cit. 23. H.
Kutchins and S. A. Kirk (1997) Making us Crazy: DSM -- the Psychiatric
Bible and the Creation of Mental Disorders. New York: Free Press. 24. D.
Healy (1997) The Anti-depressant Era. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. 25. G. L. Klerman (1978) 'The evolution of a scientific
nosology', in J. C. Shershow (ed.), Schizophrenia: Science and Practice.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 26. J. P. Feighner, E. Robins,
S. B. Guze, R. A. Woodruff, G. Winokur and R. Munoz (1972) 'Diagnostic
criteria for use in psychiatric research', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 26: 57--63. 27. American Psychiatric Association (1980).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (3rd edn).
Washington, DC: APA. 28.. American Psychiatric Association (1987)
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (revised 3rd edn).
Washington, DC: APA. 29. R. E. Kendell (1991) 'Relationship between
DSM-IV and ICD-10', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100: 297--301. 30.
American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (4th edn). Washington, DC: APA. 31. M. B.
First (2002) 'The DSM series and experience with DSM-IV',
Psychopathology, 35: 67--71. 32. R. K. Blashfield (1996) 'Predicting
DSM-V', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184: 4--7.

33. S. Hyler, J. Williams and R. Spitzer (1982) 'Reliability in the
DSM-III field trials', Archives of General Psychiatry, 39: 1275--8. 34.
G. Klerman (1986) 'Historical perspectives on contemporary schools of
psychopathology', in T. Millon and G. Klerman (eds.), Contemporary
Directions in Psychopathology: Towards DSM-IV. New York: Guilford Press.
35. Kutchins and Kirk, Making us Crazy, op. cit. 36. J. B. Williams, M.
Gibbon, M. B. First, R. L. Spitzer, M. Davies, J. Borus, M. Howes, J.
Kane, H. G. Pope, B. Rounsaville and H.-U. Wittchen (1992) 'The
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R (SCID): II. Multi-site
test--retest reliability', Archives of General Psychiatry, 49: 630--6.
37. P. D. McGorry, C. Mihalopoulos, L. Henry, J. Dakis, H. J. Jackson,
M. Flaum, S. Harrigan, D. McKenzie, J. Kulkarni and R. Karoly (1995)
'Spurious precision: procedural validity of diagnostic assessment in
psychotic disorders', American Journal of Psychiatry, 152: 220--3. 38.
M. A. Taylor and R. Abrams (1978) 'The prevalence of schizophrenia: a
reassessment using modern criteria', American Journal of Psychiatry,
135: 945--8. 39. W. T. Carpenter, J. S. Strauss and J. J. Bartko (1973)
'Flexible system for the diagnosis of schizophrenia', Science, 182:
1275--8. 40. I. Brockington (1992) 'Schizophrenia: yesterday's concept',
European Psychiatry, 7: 203--7. 41. J. van Os, C. Gilvarry, R. Bale, E.
van Horn, T. Tattan, I. White and R. Murray (1999) 'A comparison of the
utility of dimensional and categorical representations of psychosis',
Psychological Medicine, 29: 595--606. 42. P. McGuffin, A. Farmer and I.
Harvey (1991) 'A polydiagnostic application of operational criteria in
studies of psychotic illness', Archives of General Psychiatry, 48:
764--70.

Chapter 4 Fool's Gold 1. From J. Borges (1960) 'El idioma analitico de
John Wilkins', in Otras inquisiciones, Buenos Aires: Emece. I am
indebted to Michael Dewey for translating this quotation and drawing it
to my attention.

2. G. H. Gallup and F. Newport (1991) 'Belief in paranormal phenomena
among adult Americans', Sceptical Inquirer, 15: 137--46. 3. R. E.
Kendell (1975) The Role of Diagnosis in Psychiatry. Oxford: Blackwell.
4. For a review of research on comorbidity, and other defects of the DSM
system, see L. A. Clark, D. Watson and S. Reynolds (1995) 'Diagnosis and
classification of psychopathology: challenges to the current system and
future directions', Annual Review of Psychology, 46: 121-- 53. 5. L. N.
Robins, B. Z. Locke and D. A. Reiger (1991) 'An overview of psychiatric
disorders in America', in L. N. Robins and B. Z. Locke (eds.),
Psychiatric Disorders in America. New York: Free Press. 6. ibid. 7.
Although mathematically complex, the principles behind the technique are
not difficult to understand. Symptom data from patients who have already
been diagnosed as suffering from either schizophrenia or manic
depression are fed into a computer. The computer program is also 'told'
the diagnosis assigned to each patient. The program then attempts to
determine which symptoms best discriminate between the two groups of
patients, calculating a mathematical weight for each symptom according
to how well it does this. (Symptoms assigned high values are found in
only one diagnostic group whereas those with weights close to zero are
found in both groups. Arbitrarily, positive weights are given to those
symptoms found mostly in one of the groups whereas negative weights are
given to the symptoms present mostly in the other group.) In this way,
the program attempts to discover the symptoms that most influenced the
clinicians to give one diagnosis or the other.

In a second phase of the analysis the computer constructs an equation,
which it uses to measure the balance of symptoms in each patient. This
equation, known as a discriminant function, consists of the sum of the
weights assigned to the symptoms experienced by the patient. A patient's
score on this function indicates the extent to which he or she is more
or less schizophrenic, more or less manic-depressive, or somewhere in
between. If the distinction between schizophrenia and manic depression
is a real one, most patients should fall at the two ends of this scale
(patients should have either mostly schizophrenia symptoms or mostly the
symptoms of manic depression) and few patients should have scores close
to zero. If, on the other hand, schizophrenia and manic depression are
not separate disorders,

most patients should have near zero scores, and should be located
towards the centre of the scale. For a more detailed but remarkably
clear non-mathematical account of this and other statistical methods I
describe in this chapter, together with their advantages and
disadvantages, see R. K. Blashfield (1984) The Classification of
Psycho-pathology: NeoKraepelinian and Quantitative Approaches. New York:
Plenum. For simplicity, I have not discussed a third technique, known as
cluster analysis, also described by Blashfield. However, readers of
Blashfield will discover that this technique has yielded results that
are even less supportive of Kraepelin's paradigm than the two approaches
discussed in this book. 8. R. E. Kendell and J. A. Gourlay (1970) 'The
clinical distinction between the affective psychoses and schizophrenia',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 117: 261--6. 9. A study by Robert
Cloninger and colleagues ('Diagnosis and prognosis in schizophrenia',
Archives of General Psychiatry, 42: 15--25, 1985) claimed to have
identified a separation between patients with four schizophrenic
features (persecutory delusions, delusions of control, mood-incongruent
delusions and auditory hallucinations) and other psychotic patients, but
this group was so tightly defined that many patients meeting most
definitions of schizophrenia would be excluded from it.

Ian Brockington and his colleagues ('Bipolar disorder, cycloid psychosis
and schizophrenia: a study using "lifetime" psychopathology ratings,
factor analysis and canonical variate analysis', European Psychiatry, 6:
223--36, 1991) found some evidence of a separation between schizophrenia
and mania, but not of a separation between schizophrenia and depression.
Indeed, the patients diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia according
to DSM-III criteria appeared to belong to a clinical spectrum in which
schizophrenia merged with schizoaffective disorder and schizoaffective
disorder merged with non-psychotic depression. 10. For a history of
factor analysis which focuses on its use in studies of intelligence, see
S. J. Gould (1984) The Mismeasure of Man. London: Penguin. 11. T. V.
Moore (1930) 'The empirical determination of certain syndromes
underlying praecox and manic-depressive psychoses', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 86: 719--38.

12. Extensive studies of psychotic symptoms were undertaken between the
early 1940s and the late 1960s, notably by American psychologists John
Wittenbourne, Maurice Lorr and John Overall (see R. K. Blashfield (1984)
The Classification of Psychopathology: NeoKraepelinian and Quantitative
Approaches. New York: Plenum). The work conducted by Overall culminated
in the creation of a standard instrument for measuring the severity of
psychotic illnesses, known as the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, which
provided detailed rules for rating symptoms, and which remains popular
among researchers today because it is reliable and relatively simple to
use. Factor analyses of BPRS ratings consistently revealed four main
symptom clusters. Over all and his colleagues ('Major psychiatric
disorders: a four-dimensional model', Archives of General Psychiatry,
16: 146--51, 1967) named these thinking disorder (consisting of
conceptual disorganization, hallucinations and unusual thought content),
anxious depression (anxiety, depression and guilt), hostile
suspiciousness (hostility, suspiciousness and uncooperativeness) and
withdrawal-retardation (emotional withdrawal, motor retardation and
blunted emotions). 13. T. J. Crow (1980) 'Molecular pathology of
schizophrenia: more than one disease process?' British Medical Journal,
280: 66--8. 14. P. F. Liddle (1987) 'The symptoms of chronic
schizophrenia: a reexamination of the positive--negative dichotomy',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 151: 145--51. 15. See N. C. Andreasen,
M.-A. Roy and M. Flaum (1995) 'Positive and negative symptoms', in S. R.
Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger (eds.), Schizophrenia, Oxford: Blackwell,
pp. 28--45.

An Australian group has re-analysed previous studies of schizophrenia
symptoms, also finding the three-factor solution. See S. Klimidis, G. W.
Stuart, I. H. Minas, D. L. Copolov and B. S. Singh (1993) 'Positive and
negative symptoms in psychoses: re-analysis of published SAPS and SANS
global ratings', Schizophrenia Research, 9: 11--18. 16. P. D. McGorry,
R. C. Bell, P. L. Dudgeon and H. J. Jackson (1998) 'The dimensional
structure of first episode psychosis: an exploratory factor analysis',
Psychological Medicine, 28: 935--47; V. Peralta, J. de Leon and M. J.
Cuesta (1992) 'Are there more than two syndromes in schizophrenia? A
critique of the positive--negative dichotomy', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 161: 335--43; J. van Os, C. Gilvarry, R. Bale, E. van Horn,
T. Tattan, I. White and R. Murray (1999) 'A comparison of the utility of
dimensional and categorical representations of psychosis', Psychological
Medicine, 29: 595--606. 17. R. Toomey, S. V. Faraone, J. C. Simpson and
M. T. Tsuang (1998) 'Negative, positive and disorganized symptom
dimensions in schizophrenia, major depression and bipolar disorder',
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186: 470--76.

For other studies finding that the three-factor solution applies to
nonschizophrenia patients see: S. Klimidis, G. W. Stuart, I. H. Minas,
D. L. Copolov and B. S. Singh (1993) 'Positive and negative symptoms in
psychoses: re-analysis of published SAPS and SANS global ratings',
Schizophrenia Research, 9: 11--18; M. Maziade, M. Roy, M. Martinez, D.
Cliche, J. Fournier, Y. Garveneau, L. Nicole, N. Montgrain, C. Dion, A.
Ponton, A. Potvin, J. Lavallee, A. Pires, S. Bouchard, P. Boutin, F.
Brisebois and C. Merette (1995) 'Negative, psychoticism, and
disorganized dimensions in patients with familial schizophrenia or
bipolar disorder: continuity and discontinuity between the major
psychoses', American Journal of Psychiatry, 152: 1458--63. 18. S. S.
Kety (1974) 'From rationalization to reason', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 131: 957--63. 19. S. Rose, L. J. Kamin and R. C. Lewontin
(1985) Not in Our Genes. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 20. See ibid. Detailed
discussions of the limitations of genetic research into schizophrenia
can befound in the following sources also: M. Boyle (1990)
Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion. London: Routledge; R. Marshall
(1990) 'The genetics of schizophrenia: axiom or hypothesis?' in R. P.
Bentall (ed.), Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London: Routledge. 21. S.
Kety, D. Rosenthal, P. H. Wender, F. Schulsinger and B. Jacobsen (1975)
'Mental illness in the biological and adoptive families of adopted
individuals who have become schizophrenic: a preliminary report based on
psychiatric interviews', in R. Fieve, D. Rosenthal and H. Brill (eds.),
Genetic Research in Psychiatry. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press; D. Rosenthal, P. H. Wender, S. S. Kety, J. Welner and F.
Schulsinger (1974) 'The adopted away offspring of schizophrenics', in S.
A. Mednick, F. Schulsinger, J. Higgins and B. Bell (eds.), Genetics,
Environment and Psychopathology. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Co.
22. Rose et al., Not in Our Genes, op. cit. 23. For a collection of
essays addressing these findings and their implications, see A. C.
Sandbank (ed.) (1999) Twin and Triplet Psychology: A Professional Guide
to Working with Multiples. London: Routledge. 24. Rose et al., Not in
Our Genes, op. cit.

25. K. S. Kendler, N. L. Pederesen, B. Y. Farahmand, and P.-G. Persson
(1996) 'The treated incidence of psychotic and affective illness in
twins compared with population expectation: a study in the Swedish twin
and psychiatric registries', Archives of General Psychiatry, 26: 1135--
44; C. M. Hultman, P. Sparen, N. Takei, R. M. Murray and S. Cnattingius
(1999) 'Prenatal and perinatal risk factors for schizophrenia, affective
psychosis, and reactive psychosis of early onset: case control study',
British Medical Journal, 318: 421--6. 26. Rosenthal and his colleagues
published many accounts of the Genain quadruplets. The account given
here is based on D. Rosenthal and O. W. Quinn (1977) 'Quadruplet
hallucinations: phenotypic variations of a schizophrenic genotype',
Archives of General Psychiatry, 34: 817--27. All quotations about the
Genains are from this paper. 27. A. F. Mirsky and O. W. Quinn (1988)
'The Genain quadruplets', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 14: 595--611. 28. A.
F. Mirsky, L. A. Bieliauskas, L. M. French, D. P. van Kammen, E. Jonsson
and G. Sedvall (2000) 'A 39-year follow-up of the Genain quadruplets',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26: 699--708. 29. Rosenthal and Quinn,
'Quadruplet hallucinations', op. cit. 30. E. F. Torrey, A. E. Bowler, E.
H. Taylor and I. I. Gottesman (1994) Schizophrenia and Manic-Depressive
Disorder. New York: Basic Books. 31. T. J. Crow (1986) 'The continuum of
psychosis and its implications for the structure of the gene', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 149: 419--29; T. Crow (1991) 'The failure of the
binary concept and the psychosis gene', in A. Kerr and H. McClelland
(eds.), Concepts of Mental Disorder: A Continuing Debate. London:
Gaskell. 32. M. A. Taylor (1992) 'Are schizophrenia and affective
disorders related? A selective literature review', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 149: 22--32. 33. For example, K. S. Kendler, A. M. Gruenberg
and M. T. Tsuang (1985) 'Psychiatric illness in first-degree relatives
of schizophrenic and surgical control patients: a family study using
DSM-III criteria', Archives of General Psychiatry, 42: 770--9. See
review by Taylor, 'Are schizophrenia and affective disorders related?'
op. cit., for further examples. 34. For example, M. T. Tsuang, G.
Winokur and R. R. Crowe (1980) 'Morbid
riskofschizophreniaandaffectivedisordersamongfirst-degreerelativesofpatients
with schizophrenia, mania, depression and surgical conditions', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 137: 497--504.

For a recent study finding the same result, see V. Valles, J. van Os, R.
Guillamat, B. Gutierrez, M. Campillo, P. Gento and L. Fananas (2000)
'Increased morbid risk for schizophrenia in families of in-patients with
bipolar illness', Schizophrenia Research, 42: 83--90. 35. J. Angst and
C. Scharfetter (1990) 'Schizoaffective psychosen', in E. Lungershausen,
W. P. Kascha and R. J. Witkowski (eds.), Affective Psychosen Kongress
Band DGPN. Stuttgart: Schattauer Verlag. Cited in Crow, 'The failure of
the binary concept', op. cit. 36. J. T. Dalby, D. Morgan and M. L. Lee
(1986) 'Schizophrenia and mania in identical twin brothers', Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 174: 304--8; J. B. Lohr and H. S. Bracha
(1992) 'A monozygotic mirror-image twin pair with discordant psychiatric
illness: a neuropsychiatric and neuro developmental evaluation',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 149: 1091--5; P. McGuffin, A. Reveley
and A. Holland (1982) 'Identical triplets: non-identical psychosis',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 140: 1--6. 37. A. E. Farmer, P. McGuffin
and I. I. Gottesman (1987) 'Twin concordance for DSM-III schizophrenia:
scrutinizing the validity of the definition', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 44: 634--41. 38. J. S. Strauss and W. T. Carpenter (1974)
'The prediction of outcome in schizophrenia: II. Relationships between
predictor and outcome variables', Archives of General Psychiatry, 31:
37--42. 39. J. S. Strauss (1992) 'The person -- key to understanding
mental illness: towards a new dynamic psychiatry III', British Journal
of Psychiatry, 161: 19--26. 40. M. Harrow, J. F. Goldberg, L. S.
Grossman and H. Y. Meltzer (1990) 'Outcome in manic disorders: a
naturalistic follow-up study', Archives of General Psychiatry, 47:
665--71. 41. F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison (1990) Manic-Depressive
Illness. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 42. M. Maj, R. Priozzi and F.
Starace (1989) 'Previous pattern of course of illness as a predictor of
response to lithium prophylaxis in bipolar patients', Journal of
Affective Disorders, 17: 237--41. 43. R. M. Post, D. R. Rubinow and J.
C. Ballenger (1986) 'Conditioning and sensitization in the longitudinal
course of affective illness', British Journal of Psychiatry, 149:
191--201.

44. L. Ciompi (1984) 'Is there really a schizophrenia? The long term
course of psychotic phenomena', British Journal of Psychiatry, 145:
636--40. 45. M. Bleuler (1978) The Schizophrenic Disorders. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press. 46. Goodwin and Jamison, Manic-Depressive
Illness, op. cit. 47. M. Tsuang, R. F. Woolson and J. A. Fleming (1979)
'Long-term outcome of major psychoses: I. Schizophrenia and affective
disorders compared with psychiatrically symptom-free surgical
conditions', Archives of General Psychiatry, 36: 1295--1301. 48. World
Health Organization (1979) Schizophrenia: An International Follow-up
Study. New York: Wiley. 49. Crow, 'The failure of the binary concept',
op. cit. 50. R. E. Kendell and I. F. Brockington (1980) 'The
identification of disease entities and the relationship between
schizophrenic and affective psychoses', British Journal of Psychiatry,
137:324--31. See also R. E. Kendell (1991) 'The major functional
psychoses: are they independent entities or part of a continuum?
Philosophical and conceptual issues underlying the debate', in Kerr and
McClelland (eds.), Concepts of Mental Disorder, op. cit. 51. For
fascinating accounts of the history of psychopharmacology, see David
Healy's books The Psychopharmacologists: Interviews with David Healy
(London: Chapman and Hall, 1996) and The Anti-Depressant Era (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1997). 52. E. Shorter (1997) A History of
Psychiatry. New York: Wiley. 53. E. Kraepelin (1899/1990) Psychiatry: A
Textbook for Students and Physicians, vol. 1: General Psychiatry.
Canton, MA: Watson Publishing International. 54. A. D. Smith, 'Henri
Laborit: in humanity's laboratory', Guardian, 14 June 1995. 55. E. C.
Johnstone, T. J. Crow, C. D. Frith and D. G. C. Owens (1988) 'The
Northwick Park "functional" psychosis study: diagnosis and treatment
response', Lancet, ii: 119--25. 56. G. E. Berrios and D. Beer (1995)
'Unitary psychosis concept', in G. E. Berrios and R. Porter (eds.), A
History of Clinical Psychiatry. London: Athlone Press. 57. Crow, 'The
failure of the binary concept', op. cit.

58. L. A. Clark, D. Watson and S. Reynolds (1995) 'Diagnosis and
classification of psychopathology: challenges to the current system and
future directions', Annual Review of Psychology, 46: 121--53. 59.
American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual for Mental Disorders (4th edition). Washington, DC: APA. 60. J.
van Os, C. Gilvarry, R. Bale, E. van Horn, T. Tattan, I. White and R.
Murray (1999) 'A comparison of the utility of dimensional and
categorical representations of psychosis', Psychological Medicine, 29,
595--606.

Chapter 5 The Boundaries of Madness 1. L. Wittgenstein (1980) Culture
and Value (trans. P. Winch). Oxford: Blackwell. 2. G. E. Berrios (1996)
The History of Mental Symptoms: Descriptive Psychopathology since the
Nineteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 3. H. A.
Sidgewick (1894) 'Report of the census on hallucinations', Proceedings
of the Society for Psychical Research, 26: 259--394. 4. D. J. West
(1948) 'A mass observation questionnaire on hallucinations', Journal of
the Society for Psychical Research, 34: 187--96. 5. T. B. Posey and M.
E. Losch (1983) 'Auditory hallucinations of hearing voices in 375 normal
subjects', Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 2: 99--113. 6. R. P.
Bentall and P. D. Slade (1985) 'Reliability of a measure of disposition
towards hallucinations', Personality and Individual Differences, 6:
527--9; H. F. Young, R. P. Bentall, P. D. Slade and M. E. Dewey (1986)
'Disposition towards hallucinations, gender and IQ score', Personality
and Individual Differences, 7: 247--9. 7. T. R. Barrett and J. B.
Etheridge (1992) 'Verbal hallucinations in normals: I. People who hear
voices', Applied Cognitive Psychology, 6: 379--87; T. R. Barrett and J.
B. Etheridge (1993) 'Verbal hallucinations in normals: II. Self-reported
imagery vividness', Personality and Individual Differences, 15:61--7; T.
R. Barrett and J. B. Etheridge (1994) 'Verbal hallucinations in normals:
III. Dysfunctional personality correlates', Personality and Individual
Differences, 16: 57--62.

8. A. Y. Tien (1991) 'Distribution of hallucinations in the population',
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 26: 287--92. 9. J. van
Os, M. Hanssen, R. V. Bijl and A. Ravelli (2000) 'Strauss (1969)
revisited: a psychosis continuum in the normal population?'
Schizophrenia Research, 45: 11--20. 10. R. Poulton, A. Caspi, T. E.
Moffitt, M. Cannon, R. Murray and H. Harrington (2000) 'Children's
self-reported psychotic symptoms and adult schizophreniform disorder: a
15-year longitudinal study', Archives of General Psychiatry, 57:
1053--8. 11. A. Jablensky (1995) 'Schizophrenia: the epidemiological
horizon', in S. R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger (eds.), Schizophrenia,
Oxford: Blackwell. 12. G. H. Gallup and F. Newport (1991) 'Belief in
paranormal phenomena among adult Americans', Sceptical Inquirer, 15:
137--46. 13. C. A. Ross and S. Joshi (1992) 'Paranormal experiences in
the general population', The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 180:
357--61. 14. A. Greeley (1975) The Sociology of the Paranormal: A
Reconnaissance. Beverly Hills: Sage. 15. Group for the Advancement of
Psychiatry (1976) Mysticism: Spiritual Quest or Psychotic Disorder? New
York: GAP Publications. 16. D. Lyons (2001) 'Soviet-style psychiatry is
alive and well in the People's Republic', British Journal of Psychiatry,
178: 380--1. 17. M. Jackson and K. W. M. Fulford (1997) 'Spiritual
experience and psychopathology', Philosophy, Psychiatry and Psychology,
1: 41--65. 18. G. Roberts (1991) 'Delusional belief systems and meaning
in life: a preferred reality?' British Journal of Psychiatry, 159,
Supplement 14: 19--28. 19. E. Peters, S. Day, J. McKenna and G. Orbach
(1999) 'Delusional ideation in religious and psychotic populations',
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38: 83--96. 20. See L. S. Newman
and R. F. Baumeister (1996) 'Towards an explanation of the UFO abduction
phenomenon: hypnotic elaboration, extraterrestrial sadomasochism, and
spurious memories', Psychological Inquiry, 7: 99--126.

21. J. E. Mack (1994) Abduction: Human Encounters with Aliens. New York:
Macmillan. 22. S. Appelle, S. J. Lynn and L. Newman (2000) 'Alien
abduction experiences', in E. Cardena, S. J. Lynn and S. Krippner
(eds.), Varieties of Anomalous Experience: Examining the Scientific
Evidence. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association,
pp. 253--82. 23. N. P. Spanos, P. A. Cross, K. Dickson and S. C.
DuBreuil (1993) 'Close encounters: an examination of UFO experiences',
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102: 624--32. 24. J.
Chequers, S. Joseph and D. Diduca (1997) 'Belief in extraterrestrial
life, UFO-related beliefs, and schizotypal personality', Personality and
Individual Differences, 23: 519--21. 25. van Os et al., 'Strauss (1969)
revisited', op. cit. 26. Poulton et al., 'Children's self-reported
psychotic symptoms', op. cit. 27. H. Verdoux, S. Maurice-Tison, B. Gay,
J. van Os, R. Salamon and M. L. Bourgeois (1998) 'A survey of delusional
ideation in primary-care patients', Psychological Medicine, 28: 127--34.
28. N. C. Andreasen (1979) 'Thought, language and communication
disorders: diagnostic significance', Archives of General Psychiatry, 36:
1325--30. 29. This study is reported in two books: D. J. Weeks and K.
Ward (1988) Eccentrics: The Scientific Investigation. Stirling: Stirling
University Press; and D. J. Weeks and J. James (1995) Eccentrics.
London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 30. Quoted in Weeks and James,
Eccentrics, op. cit. 31. T. S. Szasz (1993) 'Crazy talk: thought
disorder or psychiatric arrogance?', British Journal of Medical
Psychology, 66: 61--7. 32. J. Leff (1993) "'Crazy talk: thought disorder
or psychiatric arrogance?": Comment', British Journal of Medical
Psychology, 66: 77--8. 33. R. Littlewood and M. Lipsedge (1989) Aliens
and Alienists: Ethnic Minorities and Psychiatry (2nd edn). London: Unwin
Hyman. 34. Poulton et al., 'Children's self-reported psychotic
symptoms', op. cit.

35. R. A. Depue, J. F. Slater, H. Wolfstetter-Kausch, D. Klein, E.
Goplerud and D. Farr (1981) 'A behavioral paradigm for identifying
persons at risk for bipolar depressive disorder: a conceptual framework
and five validation studies', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 90: 381--
437. 36. W. Wicki and J. Angst (1991) 'The Zurich study. X: Hypomania in
a 28- to 30-year-old cohort', European Archives of Psychiatry and
Clinical Neuroscience, 240: 339--48. 37. J. Angst (1998) 'The emerging
epidemiology of hypomania and bipolar II disorder', Journal of Affective
Disorders, 50: 143--51. 38. H. S. Akiskal (1994) 'The temperamental
borders of affective disorders', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 89
(suppl. 379): 32--7. See also H. S. Akiskal, M. L. Bourgeois, J. Angst,
R. Post, H.-J. Moller and R. Hirschfeld (2000) 'Re-evaluating the
prevalence of and diagnostic composition within the broad clinical
spectrum of bipolar disorders', Journal of Affective Disorders, 59:
S5--S30. 39. E. Kretschmer (1925) Physique and Character (trans. W. J.
H. Sprott). London: Kegan, Trench & Trubner. 40. L. Rees (1973)
'Constitutional factors and abnormal behaviour', in H. J. Eysenck (ed.),
Handbook of Abnormal Psychology. San Diego, CA: Edits Publishers. 41.
One researcher who was influenced by Kretschmer was Hans Eysenck, one of
the most controversial psychologists of the twentieth century, who was
born in Germany but moved to Britain in the early 1930s in order to
escape Nazism. After working as a psychologist at the Mill Hill
Emergency Hospital during the Second World War, he became head of the
Department of Psychology at the University of London Institute of
Psychiatry. His controversial status arose from his views about racial
differences in innate intelligence. However, he was at least as well
known for his less contentious ideas about human personality.

It is impossible to do full justice to Eysenck's theory of personality
in a few paragraphs. Suffice it to say that, in his early work, he
proposed that ordinary people varied along two independent dimensions
which he believed to be largely influenced by genetic factors:
neuroticism (roughly, the extent to which the individual is easily
emotionally aroused) and introversion--extroversion (roughly, the extent
to which the individual is comfortable with and seeks out the company of
others). However, building on Kretschmer's ideas, in his later work with
his wife Sybil (H. J. Eysenck and S. B. G. Eysenck (1976) Psychoticism
as a Dimension of Personality. London: Hodder & Stoughton) he argued
that he had identified a third

dimension, which he called psychoticism. Eysenck believed that, as the
name implied, psychotic illness lay at the extreme end of this
dimension. Eysenck was able to develop questionnaire measures of his
three dimensions, which became known as the N, E and P scales. Although
his theory became one of the standard models of personality, his concept
of psychoticism has been criticized by clinicians for several reasons.
Inspection of items from the P scale (for example, 'Would being in debt
worry you?', 'Do you sometimes like teasing animals?', 'Do you enjoy
hurting people you love?') reveals that they assess impulsiveness and
indifference to the needs of others, rather than the kinds of
experiences reported by psychotic patients. Criminals often score at
least as high on P as psychotic patients. More importantly perhaps, and
consistent with the idea that emotional arousal plays an important role
in psychosis, recent studies suggest that psychotic patients score
highly on N rather than P (R. J. Gurrera, P. G. Nestor and B. F.
O'Donnell (2000) 'Personality traits in schizophrenia: comparison with a
community sample', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 188: 31--5).
In short, it seems doubtful that Eysenck's concept of psychoticism,
however valid as a measure of personality, measures traits that are
directly related to psychotic illness. 42. P. Meehl (1962) 'Schizotaxia,
schizotypia, schizophrenia', American Psychologist, 17: 827--38. For an
updated version of the theory, see P. Meehl (1989) 'Schizotaxia
revisited', Archives of General Psychiatry, 46: 935--44. 43. S. Kety, D.
Rosenthal, P. H. Wender, F. Schulsinger and B. Jacobsen (1975) 'Mental
illness in the biological and adoptive families of adopted individuals
who have become schizophrenic: a preliminary report based on psychiatric
interviews', in R. Fieve, D. Rosenthal and H. Brill (eds.), Genetic
Research in Psychiatry. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
44. R. L. Spitzer, J. Endicott and M. Gibbon (1979) 'Crossing the border
into borderline personality and borderline schizophrenia', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 36: 17--24. 45. G. Mellsop, F. Varghese, S. Joshua
and A. Hicks (1982) 'The reliability of Axis II of DSM-III', American
Journal of Psychiatry, 139: 1360--61. 46. For a review of this work, see
W. M. Grove (1982) 'Psychometric detection of schizotypy', Psychological
Bulletin, 92: 27--38.

47. L. J. Chapman, J. P. Chapman and M. L. Raulin (1976) 'Scales for
physical and social anhedonia', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 85:
374--82; L. J. Chapman, E. W. Edell and J. P. Chapman (1980) 'Physical
anhedonia, perceptual aberration and psychosis proneness', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 6: 639--53; M. Eckblad and L. J. Chapman (1983) 'Magical
ideation as an indicator of schizotypy', Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 51: 215--25; M. Eckblad and L. J. Chapman (1986)
'Development and validation of a scale for hypomanic personality',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95: 214--22. 48. G. S. Claridge and P.
Brocks (1984) 'Schizotypy and hemisphere function -- I. Theoretical
considerations and the measurement of schizotypy', Personality and
Individual Differences, 5: 633--48. 49. G. S. Claridge (1990) 'Can a
disease model of schizophrenia survive?' in R. P. Bentall (ed.),
Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London: Routledge, pp. 157--83. 50. L. J.
Chapman, J. P. Chapman, T. R. Kwapil, M. Eckblad and M. C. Zinser (1994)
'Putatively psychosis-prone subjects 10 years later', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 103: 171--83. 51. Akiskal, 'The temperamental
borders of affective disorders', op. cit. 52. Spitzer et al., 'Crossing
the border', op. cit. 53. R. P. Bentall, G. S. Claridge and P. D. Slade
(1989) 'The multidimensional nature of schizotypal traits: a
factor-analytic study with normal subjects', British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 28: 363--75. 54. G. S. Claridge and T. Beech (1995) 'Fully
and quasi-dimensional constructions of schizotypy', in A. Raine, T.
Lencz and S. A. Mednick (eds.), Schizotypal Personality. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; M. G. Vollema and R. J. van den Bosch (1995)
'The multidimensionality of schizotypy', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 21:
19--31. 55. G. Claridge, C. McCreery, O. Mason, R. P. Bentall, G. Boyle,
P. D. Slade and D. Popplewell (1996) 'The factor structure of
"schizotypal" traits: a large replication study', British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 35: 103--15. 56. C. A. Reynolds, A. Raine, K.
Mellingen, P. H. Venables and S. A. Mednick (2000) 'Three-factor model
of schizotypal personality: invariance across culture, gender, religious
affiliation, family adversity, and psychopathology', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 26: 603--18. 57. S. Nasar (1998) A Beautiful Mind. London:
Faber & Faber.

58. For a review of suicide in schizophrenia patients, see C. B.
Caldwell and I. I. Gottesman (1990) 'Schizophrenics kill themselves too:
a review of risk factors for suicide', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 16:
571--89. For similar data on bipolar patients, see F. K. Goodwin and K.
R. Jamison (1990) Manic-Depressive Illness. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. 59. Ö. Ödegaard (1980) 'Fertility of psychiatric first admissions
in Norway, 1936--75', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 62: 212--20; G.
Hutchinson, D. Bhugra, R. Mallett, R. Burnett, B. Corridan and J. P.
Leff (1999) 'Fertility and marital rates in first-onset schizophrenia',
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 34: 617--21. 60. J.
Huxley, E. Mayr, H. Osmond and A. Hoffer (1964) 'Schizophrenia as a
genetic morphism', Nature, 204: 220--1. 61. L. F. Jarvick and S. B.
Chadwick (1972) 'Schizophrenia and survival', in S. B. Hammer, K.
Salzinger and A. Sutton (eds.), Psychopathology. New York: Wiley. 62. A.
Stevens and J. Price (1996) Evolutionary Psychiatry. London: Routledge.
63. J. H. Brod (1997) 'Creativity and schizotypy, in G. S. Claridge
(ed.), Schizotypy: Implications for Illness and Health. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 64. D. K. Simonton (1994) Greatness: Who Makes History
and Why. New York: Guilford. 65. E. Regis (1989) Who Got Einstein's
Office?: Eccentricity and Genius at the Princeton Institute of Advanced
Study. London: Penguin. 66. Nasar, A Beautiful Mind, op. cit. 67. See
for example: A. M. Ludwig (1995) The Price of Greatness: Resolving the
Creativity and Madness Controversy. New York: Guilford; F. Post (1996)
'Verbal creativity, depression and alcoholism: an investigation of 100
American and British writers', British Journal of Psychiatry, 168:
545--55; G. S. Claridge (1998) 'Creativity and madness: clues from
modern psychiatric diagnosis', in A. Steptoe (ed.), Genius and the Mind.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 68. N. C. Andreasen (1987) 'Creativity
and mental illness: prevalence rates in writers and their first-degree
relatives', American Journal of Psychiatry, 144: 1288--92. 69. K. R.
Jamison (1989) 'Mood disorders and patterns of creativity in British
writers and artists', British Journal of Psychiatry, 52: 125--34.

70. J. L. Karlsson (1984) 'Creative intelligence in relatives of mental
patients', Hereditas, 100: 83--6. 71. R. Richards, D. Kinney, I. Lundy
and M. Benet (1988) 'Creativity in manic-depressives, cyclothymes, and
their normal first-degree relatives', Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
97: 281--8. 72. Some studies have attempted to demonstrate similar
styles of reasoning in psychotic patients and creative people. See, for
example: N. J. C. Andreasen and P. S. Powers (1975) 'Creativity and
psychosis: an examination of conceptual style', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 32: 70--3; M. Dykes and A. McGhie (1976) 'A comparative
study of attentional strategies in schizophrenic and highly creative
normal subjects', British Journal of Psychiatry, 128: 50--56; J. A.
Keefe and P. A. Magaro (1980) 'Creativity and schizophrenia: an
equivalence of cognitive processing', Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
89: 390--98; H. J. Eysenck (1993) 'Creativity and personality:
suggestions for a theory', Psychological Inquiry, 4: 147--78.

Other studies have demonstrated, in psychiatrically healthy individuals,
a positive correlation between scores on questionnaire measures of
schizotypy and psychological measures of creative thinking. Examples of
this kind of research can be found in: P. K. Chadwick (1997)
Schizophrenia: A Positive Perspective. London: Routledge; D. Schuldberg
(1990) 'Schizotypal and hypomanic traits, creativity and psychological
health', Creativity Research Journal, 3: 218--30; T. O'Reilly, R. Dunbar
and R. P. Bentall (2001) 'Schizotypy and creativity: an evolutionary
connection?', Personality and Individual Differences, 31: 1067--78. 73.
Claridge, 'Creativity and madness', op. cit. 74. S. Freud (1926/1959)
'The question of lay analysis: conversations with an impartial person',
in Collected Works. London: Hogarth Press. See also B. Bettelheim (1983)
Freud and Man's Soul. London: Hogarth Press. 75. E. Shorter (1997) A
History of Psychiatry. New York: Wiley. 76. R. D. Laing (1960) The
Divided Self. London: Tavistock Press; R. D. Laing (1961) The Self and
Others. London: Tavistock. 77. R. D. Laing and A. Esterson (1964)
Sanity, Madness and the Family: Families of Schizophrenics. London:
Tavistock; R. D. Laing (1967) The Politics of Experience and the Bird of
Paradise. London: Penguin Press.

78. For an account of Laing's life, see J. Clay (1996) R. D. Laing: A
Divided Self. London: Hodder & Stoughton. 79. T. S. Szasz (1960) 'The
myth of mental illness', American Psychologist, 15: 564--80; T. S. Szasz
(1979) Schizophrenia: The Sacred Symbol of Psychiatry. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6 Them and Us 1. 'We and They', from Rudyard Kipling: The
Complete Verse, London: Kyle Cathie Ltd. 2. S. Butler (1872/1970)
Erewhon, Or Over the Range. London: Penguin. For a discussion of the
social context of Butler's utopian fiction, see A. L. Morton (1969) The
English Utopia. London: Lawrence & Wishart. 3. H. Fabrega (1993) 'A
cultural analysis of human behavioral breakdowns: an approach to the
ontology and epistemology of psychiatric phenomena', Culture, Medicine
and Psychiatry, 17: 99--132. 4. J. H. Orley (1970) Culture and Mental
Illness. Kampala: Makerere Institute of Social Research. 5. E. Kraepelin
(1904/1974) 'Comparative psychiatry', in S. R. Hirsch and M. Shepherd
(eds.), Themes and Variations in European Psychiatry. Bristol: Wright,
pp. 3--6. 6. Quoted in H. Fabrega (1989) 'On the significance of the
anthropological approach to schizophrenia', Psychiatry, 52: 45--65. 7.
My account of the work of Carothers is drawn from Jock McCulloch's
fascinating book Colonial Psychiatry and 'the African Mind'. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1995. 8. World Health Organization (1973)
International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia. Geneva: WHO. 9. World Health
Organization (1979) Schizophrenia: An International Follow-up Study. New
York: Wiley. 10. A. Kleinman (1980) Patients and Healers in the Context
of Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press. 11. A. Jablensky,
N. Sartorius, G. Ernberg, M. Anker, A. Korten, J. E. Cooper, R. Day and
A. Bertelsen (1992) 'Schizophrenia: manifestations, incidence and course
in different cultures', Psychological Medicine, Supplement 20: 1--97.
12. To appreciate this point it is necessary to consider briefly the
purpose of statistical testing in studies of this sort. Such tests are
used to decide whether the differences observed

between the sites could be caused by random variations in the data. For
example, a very small difference (say, an annual incidence rate of 0.80
per 10,000 population at one site and a rate of 0.81 per 10,000 at
another) would not be interesting, because it would probably be the
result of chance processes (for example, random fluctuations in the
number of people becoming ill in different periods and at different
places). If statistical calculations show the probability that an
observed difference is due to chance is less than 1 in 20 (probability =
0.05) the convention is to assume that the difference is a real one.
However, this strategy creates a risk that a true difference will be
rejected as statistically non-significant. Studies that have
insufficient sample sizes to distinguish between large differences that
are genuine and similar sized differences that are due to chance factors
are said to be 'underpowered'. This is most likely to happen when, as in
the DOSMD, many different sites are compared, as the number of
participants required per site to achieve adequate power increases as
the number of sites increases. 13. A. Kleinman (1987) 'Anthropology and
psychiatry: the role of culture in cross-cultural research on illness',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 151: 447--54. 14. See E. F. Torrey (1987)
'Prevalence studies in schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry,
150: 598--608; and also J. Thakker and T. Ward (1998) 'Culture and
classification: the cross-cultural application of the DSM-IV', Clinical
Psychology Review, 18: 501--29. 15. J. S. Allen (1997) 'At issue: are
traditional societies schizophrenogenic?' Schizophrenia Bulletin, 23:
357--64. 16. L. Hemsi (1971) 'Psychiatric morbidity in West Indian
immigrants', Social Psychiatry, 2: 95--100; I. Carpenter and I.
Brockington (1980) 'A study of mental illness in Asians, West Indians
and Africans living in Manchester', British Journal of Psychiatry, 137:
201--5. 17. G. Kirov and R. M. Murray (1999) 'Ethnic differences in the
presentation of bipolar affective disorder', European Psychiatry, 14:
199--204; J. van Os, N. Takei, D. J. Castle and S. Wessely (1996) 'The
incidence of mania: time trends in relation to gender and ethnicity',
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 31: 129--36. 18. R.
Littlewood and M. Lipsedge (1989) Aliens and Alienists: Ethnic
Minorities and Psychiatry (2nd edn). London: Unwin Hyman. 19. F. W.
Hickling, K. McKenzie, R. Mullen and R. Murray (1999) 'A Jamaican
psychiatrist evaluates diagnoses at a London psychiatric hospital',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 175: 283-- 5. 20. D. Pilgrim and A.
Rogers (1993) A Sociology of Mental Health and Illness. Buckingham: Open
University Press.

21. G. Harrison, D. Owens, A. Holton, D. Neilson and D. Boot (1988) 'A
prospective study of severe mental disorder in Afro-Caribbean patients',
Psychological Medicine, 18: 643--57. 22. D. Bhugra, J. Leff, R. Mallett,
G. Der, B. Corridan and S. Rudge (1997) 'Incidence and outcome of
schizophrenia in Whites, African-Caribbeans and Asians in London',
Psychological Medicine, 27: 791--8. 23. D. Bhugra, M. Hilwig, B.
Hossein, H. Marceau, J. Neehall, J. P. Leff, R. Mallett and G. Der
(1996) 'First contact incidence rates of schizophrenia in Trinidad and
one-year follow-up', British Journal of Psychiatry, 169: 587--92. 24. D.
Bhugra, J. Leff, R. Mallett and G. E. Mahy (1999) 'First-contact
incidence rate of schizophrenia on Barbados', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 175: 28--33. 25. Harrison et al., 'A prospective study', op.
cit.; G. Hutchinson, N. Takei, T. A. Fahy, D. Bhugra, C. Gilvarry, O.
Moran, R. Mallett, P. Sham, J. Leff and R. M. Murray (1996) 'Morbid risk
of schizophrenia in first-degree relatives of white and Afro-Caribbean
patients with psychosis', British Journal of Psychiatry, 171: 776--80;
P. A. Sugarman and D. Crawford (1994) 'Schizophrenia in the
Afro-Caribbean community', British Journal of Psychiatry, 164: 474--80.
26. World Health Organization, Schizophrenia: An International Follow-up
Study, op. cit. 27. K. M. Lin and A. M. Kleinman (1988) 'Psychopathology
and clinical course of schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 14:
555--67. 28. E. Susser and J. Wanderling (1994) 'Epidemiology of
nonaffective acute remitting psychosis vs schizophrenia: sex and
sociocultural setting', Archives of General Psychiatry, 51: 294--301.
29. R. B. Edgerton and A. Cohen (1994) 'Culture and schizophrenia: the
DOSMD challenge', British Journal of Psychiatry, 164: 222--31. 30.
Fabrega, 'On the significance of the anthropological approach', op. cit.
31. I. Al-Issa (1978) 'Sociocultural factors in hallucinations',
International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 24: 167--76; I. Al-Issa
(1995) 'The illusion of reality or the reality of an illusion?:
hallucinations and culture', British Journal of Psychiatry, 166:
368--73. 32. D. M. Ndetei and A. Vadher (1984) 'Frequency and clinical
significance of delusions across cultures', Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 70: 73--6.

33. J. Mitchell and A. D. Vierkant (1989) 'Delusions and hallucinations
as a reflection of the subcultural milieu among psychotic patients of
the 1930s and 1980s', Journal of Psychology, 123: 269--74. 34. For
discussions of culture-bound syndromes, see C. Helman (1994) Culture,
Health and Illness. London: Butterworth & Heinemann; and M. MacLachlan
(1997) Culture and Health. London: Wiley. 35. For example, see A. Kiev
(1972) Transcultural Psychiatry. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 36. R.
Littlewood (1986) 'Russian dolls and Chinese boxes: an anthropological
approach to the implicit models of comparative psychiatry', in J. L. Cox
(ed.), Transcultural Psychiatry. Beckenham: Croom-Helm. 37. D. Sperber
(1982) On Anthropological Knowledge: Three Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. 38. Littlewood, 'Russian dolls and Chinese boxes', op.
cit. 39. Sperber, On Anthropological Knowledge, op. cit. 40. L. A. Sass
(1994) The Paradoxes of Delusion: Wittgenstein, Schreber and the
Schizophrenic Mind. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 41. American
Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for
Mental Disorders, 4th edn. Washington, DC: APA. 42. Littlewood and
Lipsedge, Aliens and Alienists, op. cit. 43. E. Bourguignon (1970)
'Hallucinations and trance: an anthropologist's perspective', in W. Keup
(ed.), Origins and Mechanisms of Hallucinations. New York: Plenum. 44.
Al-Issa, 'The illusion of reality', op. cit. 45. W. S. McDonald and C.
W. Oden (1977) 'Aumakua: behavior direction visions in Hawaiians',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86: 189--94. 46. Helman, Culture, Health
and Illness, op. cit.

47. R. B. Edgerton (1971) 'A traditional African psychiatrist',
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 27: 259--78. 48. A. Honig, M. A.
J. Romme, B. J. Ensink, S. Escher, M. H. A. Pennings and M. W. De Vries
(1998) 'Auditory hallucinations: a comparison between patients and
nonpatients', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186: 646--51. 49.
S. Krippner and J. Achterberg (2000) 'Anomalous healing experiences', in
E. Cardena, S. J. Lynn and S. Krippner (eds.), Varieties of Anomalous
Experience: Examining the Scientific Evidence. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, pp. 353--95. 50. J. M. Murphy (1976)
'Psychiatric labelling in cross-cultural perspective', Science, 191:
1019--28. 51. R. Noll (1983) 'Shamanism and schizophrenia', American
Ethnologist, 10: 443--59. 52. Fabrega, 'A cultural analysis', op. cit.
53. K. Kutchins and S. A. Kirk (1997) Making us Crazy: DSM -- the
Psychiatric Bible and the Creation of Mental Disorders. New York: Free
Press. 54. K. Hyams, F. S. Wignall and R. Roswell (1996) 'War syndromes
and their evaluation: from the U. S. Civil War to the Persian Gulf War',
Annals of Internal Medicine, 125: 402. See also P. Bracken (1998)
'Hidden agenda: deconstructing post traumatic stress disorder', in P. J.
Bracken and C. Petty (eds.), Rethinking the Trauma of War. London: Free
Association Books. 55. Kutchins and Kirk, Making us Crazy, op. cit. 56.
See M. Romme and S. Escher (eds.) (1993) Accepting Voices. London: MIND
Publications. 57. J. Jaynes (1979) The Origins of Consciousness in the
Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind. London: Penguin. 58. The main evidence
that Jaynes cites to support this unlikely hypothesis is from the
language of the Ancient Greeks as revealed in the Iliad. Apparently, the
Ancient Greeks made no reference to mental states as we would think of
them today. The late Professor Henry Blumenthal, a distinguished
classicist at the University of Liverpool, confirmed to me that Jaynes'
observation is correct, but doubted his explanation for it. However, my
colleague Ivan Leudar and his collaborator Phil Thomas (Voices of
Reason, Voices of Insanity: Studies of Verbal Hallucinations. London:
Routledge, 2000) have suggested that Jaynes may have misread the

Iliad, and that indirect evidence that the Greeks knew of their own
mental states can be inferred from the text.

In this context, it is helpful to note that some modern languages
represent mental states in ways which differ strikingly from English
(see K. Wilkes, '------, yishi, duh, um, and consciousness', in A. J.
Marcel and E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Society.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988). 59. M. Romme and A. Escher
(1989) 'Hearing voices', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15: 209--16; M. Romme
and A. Escher (1996) 'Empowering people who hear voices', in G. Haddock
and P. D. Slade (eds.), Cognitive Behavioural Interventions with
Psychotic Disorders. London: Routledge; Honig et al., 'Auditory
hallucinations', op. cit. 60. J. E. Mezzich, H. Fabrega and A. Kleinman
(1992) 'Cultural validity and DSM-IV', Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 180: 4. 61. S. R. Lopez and P. J. J. Guarnaccia (2000)
'Cultural psychopathology', Annual Review of Psychology, 51: 571--98.
62. A. Kleinman (1978) 'Concepts and a model for the comparison of
medical systems as cultural systems', Social Science and Medicine, 12:
85--93. 63. Social constructionists (sometimes called postmodernists)
argue that there is no such thing as a 'reality' beyond the descriptions
made by the observer. Scientific knowledge is thereby seen as nothing
more than a product of a particular cultural stance, and hence no more
valid than witchcraft. For an example of this kind of approach to
psychopathology, see I. Parker, E. Georgaca, D. Harper, T. McLaugh-lin
and M. Stowell-Smith (1995) Deconstructing Psychopathology. London:
Sage.

A thoughtful philosophical critique of social constructionist approaches
to psychology can be found in J. D. Greenwood's book Realism, Identity
and Emotion (London: Sage, 1994). Greenwood agrees with social
constructionists that it is important to examine the way that cultural
and historical forces have misshapen our scientific theories, but argues
that we should use the insights gained to improve our scientific
knowledge and develop better theories. The approach taken in this book
is consistent with his critical realist approach.

64. H. D. Ellis and K. W. de Pauw (1994) 'The cognitive neuropsychiatric
origins of the Capgras delusion', in A. S. David and J. C. Cutting
(eds.), The Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hove: Erlbaum,
pp. 317--35. 65. G. L. Klerman (1978) 'The evolution of a scientific
nosology', in J. C. Shershow (ed.), Schizophrenia: Science and Practice.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 66. D. Bannister (1968) 'The
logical requirements of research into schizophrenia', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 114: 181--8.

More recent papers and books advocating this approach include: C. G.
Costello (1992) 'Research on symptoms versus research on syndromes:
arguments in favour of allocating more research time to the study of
symptoms', British Journal of Psychiatry, 160: 304--8; C. D. Frith
(1992) The Cognitive Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum; J. Persons (1986) 'The advantages of studying
psychological phenomena rather than psychiatric diagnoses', American
Psychologist, 41: 1252--60; P. D. Slade and R. Cooper (1979) 'Some
conceptual difficulties with the term "schizophrenia": an alternative
model', British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 18: 309--17.
Earlier attempts by myself to outline the symptom-orientated strategy
include: R. P. Bentall, H. F. Jackson and D. Pilgrim (1988) 'Abandoning
the concept of schizophrenia: some implications of validity arguments
for psychological research into psychotic phenomena', British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 27: 303--24. R. P. Bentall (1990) 'The syndromes
and symptoms of psychosis: or why you can't play 20 questions with the
concept of schizophrenia and hope to win', in R. P. Bentall (ed.),
Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London: Routledge. 67. R. Mojtabai and R.
O. Rieder (1998) 'Limitations of the symptom-orientated approach to
psychiatric research', British Journal of Psychiatry, 173: 198--202. 68.
M. J. Muller and H. Wetzel (1998) 'Improvement of inter-rater
reliability of PANSS items and subscales by a standardized rater
training', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98: 135-- 9.

69. D. M. Carter, A. Mackinnon, S. Howard, T. Zeegers and D. L. Copolov
(1995) 'The development and reliability of the Mental Health Research
Institute Unusual Perceptions Schedule (MUPS): an instrument to record
auditory hallucinatory experiences', Schizophrenia Research, 16:
157--65. 70. G. Haddock, J. McCarron and N. Tarrier (1999) 'Scalesto
measure dimensions of hallucinations and delusions: the Psychotic
Symptom Rating Scale (PSYR-ATS)', Psychological Medicine, 29: 879--89.
71. N. C. Andreasen (1979) 'The clinical assessment of thought, language
and communication disorders', Archives of General Psychiatry, 36:
1315--21. 72. N. M. Docherty, J. P. Rhinewine, R. P. Labhart and S.
Gordinier (1998) 'Communication disturbance and family psychiatric
history in parents of schizophrenic patients', Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 186: 761--8.

Chapter 7 The Significance of Biology 1. Quoted in A. Hodges (1983) Alan
Turing: The Enigma of Intelligence. London: Burnette Books. 2. Quoted in
E. Shorter (1997) A History of Psychiatry. New York: Wiley. 3. R. Hunter
and I. MacAlpine (1963) Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry. London:
Hogarth Press. 4. W. Mayer-Gross, E. Slater and M. Roth (1975) Clinical
Psychiatry. London: Cassell. 5. S. Guze (1989) 'Biological psychiatry:
is there any other kind?', Psychological Medicine, 19: 315--23. 6. T. S.
Szasz (1960) 'The myth of mental illness', American Psychologist, 15:
564--80. 7. T. S. Szasz (1992) 'The United States v. drugs', in J. K.
Zeig (ed.), The Evolution of Psychotherapy: The Second Conference. New
York: Brunner/Mazel Inc., pp. 300--12. 8. T. S. Szasz (1999) Fatal
Freedom: The Ethics and Politics of Suicide. Westport, CT: Praeger.

9. This quote is from Thomas Szasz's summary statement and manifesto,
which can be found on the website of the Thomas S. Szasz MD Cybercenter
for Liberty and Responsibility. 10. T. S. Szasz (1979) Schizophrenia:
The Sacred Symbol of Psychiatry. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 11. F.
G. Glaser (1965) 'The dichotomy game: a further consideration of the
writings of Dr Thomas Szasz', American Journal of Psychiatry, 121:
1069--74. 12. M. Roth (1973) 'Psychiatry and its critics', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 122: 374. 13. S. Finger (2000) Minds Behind the
Brain: A History of the Pioneers and their Discoveries. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 14. D. Healy (1997) The Anti-Depressant Era.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 15. E. Kraepelin (1907)
Textbook of Psychiatry, 7th edn (trans. A. R. Diefendorf) London:
Macmillan. 16. P. J. McKenna (1994) Schizophrenia and Related Syndromes.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 17. G. W. Roberts (1991)
'Schizophrenia: a neuropathological perspective', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 158: 8--17. 18. P. J. Harrison (1999) 'The neuropathology of
schizophrenia: a critical review of the data and their interpretation',
Brain and Language, 122: 593--624. 19. See E. H. Burrows (1996) 'A brief
history of brain imaging', in S. Lewis and N. Higgins (eds.), Brain
Imaging in Psychiatry. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 1--13. 20. E. C.
Johnstone, T. J. Crow, C. D. Frith, J. Husband and L. Kreel (1976)
'Cerebral ventricular size and cognitive impairment in chronic
schizophrenia', Lancet, ii: 924--6. 21. P. W. R. Woodruff and S. Lewis
(1996) 'Structural brain imaging in schizophrenia', in Lewis and Higgins
(eds.), Brain Imaging in Psychiatry, op. cit., pp. 188--214. 22. See,
for example, D. Fannon, X. Chitnis, V. Doku, L. Tennakoon, S.
O'Ceallaigh, W. Soni, A. Sumich, J. Lowe, M. Santamaria and T. Sharma
(2000) 'Features of structural brain

abnormality detected in first-episode psychosis', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 157: 1829-- 34. 23. Harrison, 'The neuropathology of
schizophrenia', op. cit. 24. For systematic reviews of CT and structural
MRI studies of schizophrenia, see: S. W. Lewis (1990) 'Computed
tomography in schizophrenia, 15 years on', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 157 (Supplement 9): 16--24 (in this review, significant
ventricular enlargement was reported in only nine out of twenty-one
studies, and enlargement was marginal in a further three); Woodruff and
Lewis, 'Structural brain imaging in schizophrenia', op. cit.,
pp. 188--214 (in this review, it is reported that ventricular
enlargement was observed in the majority of studies, although the
differences between the schizophrenia patients and the controls was
statistically significant in only the minority). 25. R. J. Dolan and G.
M. Goodwin (1996) 'Brain imaging in affective disorders', in Lewis and
Higgins (eds.), Brain Imaging in Psychiatry, op. cit., pp. 227--43. 26.
S. Raz and N. Raz (1990) 'Structural brain abnormalities in the major
psychoses: a quantitative review of the evidence', Psychological
Bulletin, 108: 93--108.

For two recent studies which have compared and failed to find a
difference between schizophrenia and bipolar patients, one using CT and
the other using MRI, see: J. Danckert, D. Velakoulis, P. McGorry, N.
Bridle, A. Kelman, A. Hoberton and P. Pantelis (1998) 'A CT study of
ventricular size in first episode psychosis', Schizophrenia Research,
29: 75; S. C. Schulz, L. Friedman, R. Findling, J. Kenny, T. Swales and
A. Wise (1998) 'Both schizophrenic and bipolar adolescents differ from
controls on MRI measures', Schizophrenia Research, 29: 81. 27. G. N.
Smith and W. G. Iacano (1986) 'Lateral ventricular enlargement in
schizophrenia and choice of control group', Lancet, i: 1450. 28. J. D.
van Horn and I. C. McManus (1992) 'Ventricular enlargement in
schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of studies of ventricular:brain ratio',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 160: 687--97; P. J. McKenna (1994)
Schizophrenia and Related Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
29. Woodruff and Lewis, 'Structural brain imaging in schizophrenia', op.
cit., pp. 188--214. 30. B. K. Piri, N. Saeed, A. Oatridge, J. V. Hajnal,
S. B. Hutton, L.-J. Duncan, M. J. Chapman, T. R. E. Barnes, G. M. Bydder
and E. M. Joyce (1998) 'A longitudinal MRI study of

first-episode schizophrenia: assessment of cerebral changes and
quantification of ventricular changes', Schizophrenia Research, 29: 76.
31. For example, in most people the two cerebral hemispheres are not
quite symmetrical, and the left frontal and right temporal lobes are
slightly larger than their opposing anatomical structures. In a recent
study (T. M. Sharma, E. Lancaster, T. Sigmundsson et al. (1999) 'Lack of
cerebral asymmetry in familial schizophrenic patients and their
relatives: the Maudsley family study', Schizophrenia Research, 40:
111--20) it was observed that this skew is less marked or is even absent
in some schizophrenia patients.

A number of studies have also revealed evidence that the area of the
corpus callosum -- the large bundle of nerve fibres that connects the
two hemispheres -- is reduced in schizophrenia patients compared with
normal controls (see P. W. R. Woodruff, I. C. McManus and A. S. David
(1995) 'Meta-analysis of corpus callosum size in schizophrenia', Journal
of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 58: 457--61). 32. See S. Rose
(1993) The Making of Memory: From Molecules to Mind. London: Bantam. 33.
See J. D. Bremner, P. Randall, T. M. Scott, R. A. Bronen, J. P. Seibyl,
S. M. Southwick, R. C. Delaney, G. McCarthy, D. S. Charney and R. D.
Innis (1995) 'MRI-based measurement of hippocampal volume in patients
with combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 152: 973--81; and also M. B. Stein, C. Koverola, C. Hanna,
M. G. Torchia and B. McClarty (1997) 'Hippocampal volume in women
victimized by child sexual abuse', Psychological Medicine, 27: 951--9.
34. M. H. Teicher (2000) 'Brain abnormalities common in survivors of
childhood abuse', Cerebrum, 2: 50--67. 35. E. A. Maguire, D. G. Gadian,
I. S. Johnsrude, C. D. Good, J. Ashburner, R. S. J. Frackowiak and C. D.
Frith (2000) 'Navigation-related structural changes in the hippocampi of
taxi drivers', Proceedings of the National Academy of Science. 36. My
account of the work by Mosso is taken from M. Posner and M. E. Raichle
(1994) Images of Mind. New York: Scientific American Library. 37. S. W.
Lewis (1996) 'Functional brain imaging', in Lewis and Higgins (eds.),
Brain Imaging in Psychiatry, op. cit., pp. 108--15. 38. M. S. Keshavan
and J. D. Cohen (1996) 'Magnetic resonance spectroscopy and functional
MRI', in Lewis and Higgins (eds.), Brain Imaging in Psychiatry, op.
cit., pp. 116--37.

39. P. Flor-Henry (1969) 'Psychosis and temporal lobe epilepsy: a
controlled investigation', Epilepsia, 10: 365--95. 40. P. Green (1978)
'Interhemispheric transfer in schizophrenia: recent developments',
Behavioural Psychotherapy, 6: 105--10. 41. T. Crow (1991) 'The origins
of psychosis and "The descent of man" ', British Journal of Psychiatry,
159 (Supplement 14):76--82; T. Crow (1995) 'A Darwinian approach to the
origins of psychosis', British Journal of Psychiatry, 167: 12--25. 42.
T. J. Crow (1998) 'Nuclear schizophrenic symptoms as the key to the
evolution of modern homo sapiens', in S. Rose (ed.), From Brains to
Consciousness: Essays on the New Sciences of the Mind. London: Penguin,
pp. 137--53. 43. P. Satz and M. F. Green (1999) 'Atypical handedness in
schizophrenia: some methodological and theoretical issues',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25: 63--78. 44. Sharma et al., 'Lack of cerebral
asymmetry', op. cit. 45. R. E. Gur (1999) 'Is schizophrenia a
lateralized brain disorder?: Editor's introduction', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 25: 7--9. 46. J. H. Gruzelier (1999) 'Functional
neuropsychological asymmetry in schizophrenia: a review and
reorientation', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25: 91--120. 47. D. H. Ingvar
and G. Franzen (1974) 'Abnormalities of cerebral blood flow distribution
in patients with chronic schizophrenia', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
50: 425--62. 48. P. F. Liddle (1996) 'Functional imaging in
schizophrenia', in Lewis and Higgins (eds.), Brain Imaging in
Psychiatry, op. cit., pp. 215--26. 49. D. R. Weinberger, K. F. Berman
and R. F. Zec (1986) 'Physiologic dysfunction of dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex in schizophrenia: I. Regional blood flow evidence', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 45: 609--15. 50. R. Erkwoh, O. Sabri, K. Willmes, E.
M. Steinmeyer, U. Buell and H. Sass (1999) 'Active and remitted
schizophrenia: psychopathological and regional cerebral blood flow
findings', Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 90: 17--30; S. A. Spence,
S. R. Hirsch, D. J. Brooks and P. M. Grasby (1998) 'Prefrontal cortex
activity in people with schizophrenia and control subjects: evidence
from positron emission tomography for remission of "hypofrontality" with
recovery from acute schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry, 172:
316--23.

51. G. D. Pearlson (1999) 'Structural and functional brain changes in
bipolar disorder: a selective review', Schizophrenia Research, 39:
133--40. 52. R. Penades, T. Boget, F. Lomena, M. Bernardo, J. J. Mateos,
C. Laterza, J. Pavia and M. Salamero (2000) 'Brain perfusion and
neuropsychological changes in schizophrenia patients after cognitive
rehabilitation', Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 98: 127--32. 53. M.
H. Teicher (2000) 'Brain abnormalities common in survivors of childhood
abuse', Cerebrum, 2: 50--67. 54. M. Trimble (1996) Biological Psychiatry
(2nd edn). Chichester: Wiley. 55. Quoted in R. M. Julien (1975) A Primer
of Drug Action. San Francisco, CA: Freeman. 56. D. E. Wooley and E. Shaw
(1954) 'A biochemical and pharmacological suggestion about certain
mental disorders', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
40: 228--31. 57. A. Friedhoff and E. van Winkle (1962) 'The
characteristics of an amine found in the urine of schizophrenic
patients', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 135: 550. 58. G. S.
Claridge (1978) 'Animal models of schizophrenia: the case for LSD-25',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 4: 186--209. Interestingly, there has recently
been a revival of interest in the role of serotonin in the symptoms of
schizophrenia, probably because of persisting lack of evidence in favour
of the dopamine hypothesis. For example, it has been reported that there
is an unusual distribution of serotonin receptors in the frontal cortex
of some psychotic patients (see F. Owen and M. D. C. Simpson (1995) 'The
neurochemistry of schizophrenia', in S. R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger
(eds.), Schizophrenia. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 358--78). 59. R. K. Siegel
and M. E. Jarvick (1975) 'Drug-induced hallucinations in animals and
man', in R. K. Siegel and L. J. West (eds.), Hallucinations: Behavior,
Experience and Theory. New York: Wiley. 60. A. Carlsson and M. Lindqvist
(1963) 'Effect of chlorpromazine or haloperidol on formation of
3-methoxytyramine and normetanephrine in mouse brain', Acta
Pharmacologica et Toxicologica, 20: 140--4. 61. For details of these and
other milestones in the development of the dopamine hypothesis, see P.
J. McKenna (1994) Schizophrenia and Related Syndromes. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

62. P. Connell (1958) Amphetamine Psychosis. London: Chapman & Hall. For
a recent study which has reported similar observations, see D. Harris
and S. L. Bakti (2000) 'Stimulant psychosis: symptom profile and acute
clinical course', American Journal of Addictions, 9: 28-- 37. 63. B. M.
Angrist and S. Gershon (1970) 'The phenomenology of experimentally
induced amphetamine psychosis: preliminary observations', Biological
Psychiatry, 2: 95--107. 64. A. Carlsson (1995) 'The dopamine theory
revisited', in Hirsch and Weinberger (eds.), Schizophrenia, op. cit. 65.
Trimble, Biological Psychiatry, op. cit. 66. W. A. Brown and L. R. Herz
(1989) 'Response to neuroleptic drugs as a device for classifying
schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15: 123--8. 67. H. J. Coppens,
C. J. Sloof, A. M. J. Paans, T. Wiegman, W. Vaalburg and J. Korf (1991)
'High central D2-dopamine receptor occupancy as assessed with positron
emission tomography in medicated but therapy-resistant patients',
Biological Psychiatry, 29: 629--34. 68. The first and most extensively
researched of these is clozapine, which is thought to have a low
affinity for the DA2 receptor. Whether or not it has sufficient affinity
to account for its anti-psychotic effects is a matter of controversy,
and is discussed in McKenna, Schizophrenia and Related Syndromes, op.
cit.

For a recent study demonstrating low DA2 receptor affinity of another
atypical neuroleptic, quetiapine, see S. Kapur, R. Zipursky, C. Jones,
C. S. Shammi, G. Remington and P. Seeman (2000) 'A positron emission
tomography study of quetiapine in schizophrenia: a preliminary finding
of an antipsychotic effect with only transiently high dopamine D-sub-2
receptor occupancy', Archives of General Psychiatry, 57: 553--9. 69.
McKenna, Schizophrenia and Related Syndromes, op. cit. 70. A. Clow, P.
Jenner, A. Theodorou and C. D. Marsden (1979) 'Neuroleptic drugs and the
dopamine hypothesis', Lancet, i: 934. 71. McKenna, Schizophrenia and
Related Syndromes, op. cit.

72. D. F. Wong, H. N. Wagner, L. E. Tune, R. F. Dannals, G. D. Pearlson
and J. M. Links (1986) 'Positron emission tomography reveals elevated D2
dopamine receptors in drug-naive schizophrenics', Science, 234:
1558--63. 73. L. Fadre, F. A. Wiesel, H. Hall, C. Halldin, S.
Stone-Elander and G. Sedvall (1987) 'No D2 receptor increase in PET
study of schizophrenia', Archives of General Psychiatry, 44: 671-- 2.
74. G. D. Pearlson, D. F. Wong, L. E. Tune, C. A. Ross, G. A. Chase, J.
M. Links, R. F. Dannals, A. A. Wilson, H. Ravert, H. N. Wagner and J. R.
DePaulo (1995) 'In vivo D-sub-2 dopamine receptor density in psychotic
and nonpsychotic patients with bipolar disorder', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 52: 471--7. 75. E. K. G. Syvaelahti, V. Raekkoelaeinen, J.
Aaltonen, V. Lehtinen and J. Hietala (2000) 'Striatal D-sub-2 dopamine
receptor density and psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia: a longitudinal
study', Schizophrenia Research, 43: 159--61. 76. Trimble, Biological
Psychiatry, op. cit. 77. S. Rose (1984) 'Disordered molecules and
diseased minds', Journal of Psychiatric Research, 18: 351--60. 78. M.
Laruelle and A. Abi-Dargham (1999) 'Dopamine as the wind in the
psychotic fire: new evidence from brain imaging studies', Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 13: 358--71; M. Laruelle, A. Abi-Dargham, R. Gil, L.
Kegeles and R. Innis (1999) 'Increased dopamine transmission in
schizophrenia: relationship to illness phases', Biological Psychiatry,
46: 56--72. 79. M. B. Hamner and P. B. Gold (1998) 'Plasma dopamine
beta-hydroxylase activity in psychotic and non-psychotic post-traumatic
stress disorder', Psychiatry Research, 77: 175--81. 80. P. Sedgwick
(1982) Psychopolitics. London: Pluto Press. 81. K. W. M. Fulford (2002)
'Values in psychiatric diagnosis: executive summary of a report to the
chair of the ICD-12/DSM-VI coordination taskforce (dateline 2010)',
Psychopathology, 35: 132--8. 82. T. L. Beauchamp and J. F. Childress
(1979) Principles of Biomedical Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
R. Gillon (1985) Philsophical Medical Ethics. London: Wiley.

Chapter 8 Mental Life and Human Nature

1. L. Wittgenstein (1980) Culture and Value (trans. P. Winch). Oxford:
Blackwell. 2. D. Shakow and P. E. Huston (1936) 'Studies of motor
function in schizophrenia: I. Speed of tapping', Journal of General
Psychology, 15: 63--108. 3. A. J. W. van der Does and R. J. van den
Bosch (1992) 'What determines Wisconsin Card Sorting performance in
schizophrenia?', Clinical Psychology Review, 12: 567--83. 4. W.-C. C.
Tam, K. W. Sewell and H.-W. Deng (1998) 'Information processing in
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: a discriminant analysis', Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 186: 597--603. 5. A. S. Bellack, K. T.
Mueser, R. L. Morrison, A. Tierney and K. Podell (1990) 'Remediation of
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia', American Journal of Psychiatry,
147: 1650--5; M. F. Green, P. Satz, S. Ganzell and J. F. Vaclav (1992)
'Wisconsin Card Sorting Test performance in schizophrenia: remediation
of a stubborn deficit', American Journal of Psychiatry, 149:62--7; H.
Nisbet, R. Siegert, M. Hunt and N. Fairley (1996) 'Improving
schizophrenic in-patients' Wisconsin card-sorting performance', British
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 35: 631--3. 6. H. E. Spohn and M. E.
Strauss (1989) 'Relation of neuroleptic and anticholinergic medication
to cognitive functions in schizophrenia', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 98: 367-- 80. 7. L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman (1973)
Disordered Thought in Schizophrenia. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall. 8. R. P. Bentall (1992) 'Psychological deficits and
biases in psychiatric disorders', Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 5:
825--30. 9. E. Kraepelin (1899/1990) Psychiatry: A Textbook for Students
and Physicians. Vol. 1: General Psychiatry. Canton, MA: Watson
Publishing International, p. 89. 10. A. McGhie and J. Chapman (1961)
'Disorders of attention and perception in early schizophrenia', British
Journal of Medical Psychology, 34: 103--16. 11. See, for example,
Chapman and Chapman, Disordered Thought, op. cit. 12. T. F. Oltmanns and
J. M. Neale (1978) 'Distractability in relation to other aspects of
schizophrenic disorder', in S. Schwartz (ed.), Language and Cognition in
Schizophrenia. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

13. M. R. Serper, M. Davidson and P. Harvey (1994) 'Attentional
predictors of clinical change during neuroleptic treatment in
schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Research, 13: 65--71. 14. M. F. Green
(1992) 'Information processing in schizophrenia', in D. J. Kavanagh
(ed.), Schizophrenia: An Overview and Practical Handbook. London:
Chapman and Hall. 15. K. H. Nuechterlein, R. Parasuraman and Q. Jiang
(1983) 'Visual sustained attention: image degradation produces rapid
sensitivity decrement over time', Science, 220: 327--9. See also K. H.
Nuechterlein (1991) 'Vigilance in schizophrenia and related disorders',
in S. R. Steinhauer, J. H. Gruzelier and J. Zubin (eds.), Handbook of
Schizophrenia, Vol. 5: Neuropsychology, Psychophysiology, and
Information Processing. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 16. K. H. Nuechterlein, W.
S. Edell, M. Norris and M. E. Dawson (1986) 'Attentional vulnerability
indicators, thought disorder and negative symptoms', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 12: 408--26; R. W. Buchanan, M. E. Strauss, A. Breier, B.
Kirkpatrick and W. T. Carpenter (1997) 'Attentional impairments in
deficit and nondeficit forms of schizophrenia', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154: 363--70. 17. Green, 'Information processing in
schizophrenia', op. cit. 18. D. P. Saccuzzo and D. L. Braff (1981)
'Early information processing deficit in schizophrenia', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 38: 175--9. 19. D. L. Braff and D. P. Saccuzzo
(1982) 'Effect of antipsychotic medication on speed of information
processing in schizophrenia patients', American Journal of Psychiatry,
139: 1127-- 30. 20. K. H. Nuechterlein and K. L. Subotnik (1998) 'The
cognitive origins of schizophrenia and prospects for intervention', in
T. Wykes, N. Tarrier and S. Lewis (eds.), Outcome and Innovation in
Psychological Treatment of Schizophrenia. Chichester: Wiley. 21. T. F.
Oltmanns (1978) 'Selective attention in schizophrenic and manic
psychoses: the effect of distraction on information processing', Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 87: 212--25. 22. K. Fleming and M. F. Green
(1995) 'Backward masking performance during and after manic episodes',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104: 63--8. 23. M. R. Serper (1993)
'Visual controlled information processing resources and formal thought
disorder in schizophrenia and mania', Schizophrenia Research, 9: 59--66;
J. McGrath, B. Chapple and M. Wright (1998) 'Working memory in
schizophrenia and mania: acute and subacute phases', Schizophrenia
Research, 29: 48.

24. K. Nuechterlein, M. Dawson, J. Ventura, D. Miklowitz and G. Konishi
(1991) 'Information processing abnormalities in the early course of
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder', Schizophrenia Research, 5:195--6;
K. W. Sax, S. M. Strakowski, S. L. McElroy, P. E. Keck and S. A. West
(1995) 'Attention and formal thought disorder in mixed and pure mania',
Biological Psychiatry, 37: 420--23. 25. E. B. Nelson, K. W. Sax and S.
M. Strakowski (1998) 'Attentional performance in patients with psychotic
and nonpsychotic major depression and schizophrenia', American Journal
of Psychiatry, 155: 137--9. 26. M. F. Green (1998) Schizophrenia from a
Neurocognitive Perspective: Probing the Impenetrable Darkness. Boston:
Allyn & Bacon. 27. H. J. Jerison (1985) 'On the evolution of mind', in
D. A. Oakley (ed.), Brain and Mind. London: Methuen. 28. R. I. M. Dunbar
(1993) 'Coevolution of neocortical size, group size and language in
humans', Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16: 681--735. 29. L. Brothers
(1997) Friday's Footprint: How Society Shapes the Human Mind. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 30. J. Le Doux (1996) The Emotional Brain: The
Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life. New York: Simon & Schuster.
31. J. Piaget and B. Inhelder (1956) The Child's Conception of Space.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 32. M. Donaldson (1978) Children's
Minds. London: Fontana. 33. F. Happé (1994) Autism: An Introduction to
Psychological Theory. London: University College London Press. 34. S.
Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg and D. J. Cohen (1993) Understanding
Other Minds: Perspectives from Autism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
35. P. Hobson (2002) The Cradle of Thought. London: Macmillan. 36. M.
Boyes, R. Giorano and M. Pool (1997) 'Internalization of social
discourse: a Vygotskian account of the development of young children's
theories of mind', in B. D. Cox and

C. Lightfoot (eds.), Sociogenetic Perspectives on Internalization.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 37. Happé, Autism, op. cit. 38. S. Baron-Cohen
(1995) Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. 39. J. A. Fodor (1983) The Modularity of Mind: An Essay
on Faculty Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 40. P. Nichelli, J.
Grafman, P. Pietrini, D. Alway, J. C. Carton and R. Miletich (1994)
'Brain activity in chess playing', Nature, 369: 191. 41. J. L. Elman, E.
A. Bates, M. H. Johnson, A. Karmiloff-Smith, D. Parisi and K. Plunkett
(1999) Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on
Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 42. D. Bickerton (1995) Language
and Human Behaviour. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press. 43. E.
Hoff (2000) Language Development (2nd edn). London: Wadsworth. 44. S.
Pinker (1994) The Language Instinct. London: Penguin. 45. R. I. M.
Dunbar (1997) Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language. London:
Faber & Faber. 46. S. Pinker and P. Bloom (1990) 'Natural language and
natural selection', Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 13: 707--84. 47. L.
S. V. Vygotsky (1962) Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
48. J. V. Wetsch and C. A. Stone (1985) 'The concept of internalization
in Vygotsky's account of the genesis of internal mental functions', in
J. V. Wertsch (ed.), Culture, Communication and Cognition: Vygotskyian
Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 162--79. 49. J.
Piaget (1926) The Language and Thought of the Child. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.

50. R. M. Diaz and L. E. Berk (eds.) (1992) Private Speech: From Social
Integration to SelfRegulation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 51. L. E. Berk
(1994) 'Why children talk to themselves', Scientific American, November:
61--5. 52. K. A. Ericsson and H. A. Simon (1998) 'How to study thinking
in everyday life: contrasting think-aloud protocols with descriptions
and explanations of thinking', Mind, Culture and Activity, 5: 178--86.
53. R. J. Korba (1990) 'The rate of inner speech', Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 71: 1043--52. 54. A. Morin and J. Everett (1990) 'Inner speech
as a mediator of self-awareness, selfconsciousness and self-knowledge:
an hypothesis', New Ideas in Psychology, 8: 337--56. 55. I have been
unable to find recent reviews of the subvocalization literature, which
has been largely ignored by modern cognitive psychologists. However, for
a detailed account of the large volume of research conducted on this
topic before the mid-1970s, see F. J. McGuigan (1978) Cognitive
Psychophysiology: Principles of Covert Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall. 56. F. J. McGuigan (1971) 'Covert linguistic behavior in
deaf subjects during thinking', Journal of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology, 75: 417--20. 57. J. T. Cacioppo (1982) 'Social
psychophysiology: a classic perspective and contemporary approach',
Psychophysiology, 19: 241--51; J. T. Cacioppo and R. E. Petty (1981)
'Electromyograms as measures of extent of affectivity and information
processing', American Psychologist, 36: 441--56. 58. R. F. Baumeister
(1999) 'The nature and structure of the self: an overview', in R. F.
Baumeister (ed.), The Self in Social Psychology. Philadelphia, PA:
Psychology Press, pp. 1--20. 59. D. C. Dennett (1991) Consciousness
Explained. London: Allen Lane. 60. S. T. Fiske and S. E. Taylor (1991).
Social Cognition. New York: McGraw-Hill. 61. C. Trevarthen (1993) 'The
self born in intersubjectivity: the psychology of an infant
communicating', in U. Neisser (ed.), The Perceived Self: Ecological and
Interpersonal Sources of Self-Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

62. R. F. Baumeister (1987) 'How the self became a problem: a
psychological review of historical research', Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 52: 163--76. 63. A. P. Cohen (1994) Self-Conscious:
An Alternative Anthropology of Identity. London: Routledge. 64. H.
Markus and S. Kitayama (1991) 'Culture and the self: implications for
cognition, emotion, and motivation', Psychological Review, 98: 224--53.
65. T. T. J. Kircher, C. Senior, M. Phillips, P. J. Benson, E. T.
Bullmore, M. Brammer, A. Simmons, S. C. R. Williams and A. S. David
(2000) 'Towards a functional neuroanatomy of self-processing effects of
faces and words', Cognition and Brain Research, 10: 133--44; T. T. J.
Kircher, C. Senior, M. Phillips, S. Rabe-Hesketh, P. J. Benson, E. T.
Bullmore, M. Brammer, A. Simmons, M. Bartels and A. S. David (2000)
'Recognizing one's own face', Cognition, 78: B1-- B15. 66. T. J. Crow
(1998) 'Nuclear schizophrenic symptoms as the key to the evolution of
modern homo sapiens', in S. Rose (ed.), From Brains to Consciousness:
Essays on the New Sciences of the Mind. London: Penguin, pp. 137--53.
67. For a review, see D. L. Penn, P. W. Corrigan, R. P. Bentall, J. M.
Racenstein and L. Newman (1997) 'Social cognition in schizophrenia',
Psychological Bulletin, 121: 114--32. 68. M. Musalek, P. Berner and H.
Katschnig (1989) 'Delusional theme, sex and age', Psychopathology, 22:
260--7.

Chapter 9 Madness and Emotion 1. D. Hume (1739--40/1888) A Treatise of
Human Nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2. D. Goldberg and P.
Huxley (1992) Common Mental Disorders: A Bio-social Model. London:
Routledge. 3. S. G. Siris (1995) 'Depression and schizophrenia', in S.
R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger (eds.), Schizophrenia. Oxford: Blackwell.
4. J. D. Huppert and T. E. Smith (2001) 'Longitudinal analysis of
subjective quality of life in schizophrenia: anxiety as the best symptom
predictor', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 189: 669--75; R.
Emsley, P. Oosthuizen, D. Niehaus and D. Stein (2001) 'Anxiety symptoms
in schizophrenia: the need for heightened clinical awareness', Primary
Care Psychiatry, 7: 25--9.

5. R. M. G. Norman and A. K. Malla (1991) 'Dysphoric mood and
symptomatology in schizophrenia', Psychological Medicine, 21: 897--903.
6. M. I. Herz and C. Melville (1980) 'Relapse in schizophrenia',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 127: 801--12. 7. M. Birchwood, J. Smith,
F. Macmillan, B. Hogg, R. Prasad, C. Harvey and S. Bering (1989)
'Predicting relapse in schizophrenia: the development and implementation
of an early signs monitoring system using patients and families as
observers', Psychological Medicine, 19: 649--56. 8. N. M. Docherty
(1996) 'Affective reactivity of symptoms as a process discriminator in
schizophrenia', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184: 535--41. 9.
M. Power and T. Dalgleish (1996) Cognition and Emotion: From Order to
Disorder. London: Psychology Press. 10. R. Zajonc (1980) 'Feeling and
thinking: preferences need no inferences', American Psychologist, 35:
151--75. 11. R. S. Lazarus (1984) 'On the primacy of cognition',
American Psychologist, 39: 124--9. 12. A. Sloman (1987) 'Motives,
mechanisms and emotions', Cognition and Emotion, 1: 217--33. 13. A.
Mellers, A. Schwartz, K. Ho and I. Ritov (1997) 'Decision affect theory:
emotional reactions to outcomes of risky options', Psychological
Science, 8: 423--9. 14. L. C. Charland (1998) 'Is Mr. Spock mentally
competent?' Philosophy, Psychiatry and Psychology, 5: 67--80. 15. J.
Tooby and L. Cosmides (1990) 'The past explains the present: emotional
adaptations and the structure of ancestral environments', Ethology and
Sociobiology, 11: 375--424. 16. P. Gilbert (1992) Depression: The
Evolution of Powerlessness. Hove: Erlbaum. 17. See, for example, I.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt (1970) Ethology: The Biology of Behavior. New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston; or P. Ekman (1992) 'An argument for basic
emotions', Cognition and Emotion, 6: 169--200.

18. See, for example, Ekman, 'An argument for basic emotions', op. cit.;
and also P. Ekman (1994) 'Strong evidence for universals in facial
expression: a reply to Russell's mistaken critique', Psychological
Bulletin, 115: 268--87. 19. J. A. Russell (1994) 'Is there universal
recognition of emotion from facial expression? A review of the
cross-cultural studies', Psychological Bulletin, 115: 102--41. 20. B. F.
Skinner (1945) 'The operational analysis of psychological terms',
Psychological Review, 52: 270--7. 21. W. James (1890) The Principles of
Psychology (2 vols). New York: George Holt. 22. D. Zillman, R. C.
Johnson and K. D. Day (1974) 'Attribution of apparent arousal and
proficiency of recovery from sympathetic activation affecting excitation
transfer to aggressive behavior', Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 10: 503--15. 23. W. Winton (1986) 'The role of facial
response in self-reports of emotion: a critique of Laird', Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 50: 808--12. 24. R. B. Zajonc, S. T.
Murphy and M. Ingelhart (1989) 'Feeling and facial efference:
implications of the vascular feeling of emotion', Psychological Review,
96: 395--416. 25. See, for example, Power and Dalgleish, Cognition and
Emotion, op. cit. 26. L. Wittgenstein (1953) Philosophical
Investigations. London: Blackwell. See also D. Bloor (1983)
Wittgenstein: A Social Theory of Knowledge. London: Macmillan
(especially Chapter 4) for a very clear exposition of Wittgenstein's
approach to private stimuli. 27. Skinner, 'The operational analysis of
psychological terms', op. cit. 28. G. Richards (1989) On Psychological
Language and the Physiomorphic Basis of Human Nature. London: Routledge.
29. G. E. Berrios (1995) 'Mood disorders', in G. E. Berrios and R.
Porter (eds.), A History of Clinical Psychiatry. London: Athlone Press.
30. J. A. Russell (1991) 'Culture and categorization of emotions',
Psychological Bulletin, 110: 426--50.

31. J. A. Russell and J. M. Carroll (1999) 'On the bipolarity of
positive and negative affect', Psychological Bulletin, 125: 3--30. 32.
D. Watson and A. Tellegren (1985) 'Towards a consensual structure of
mood', Psychological Bulletin, 98: 219--35. 33. J. T. Cacioppo and W. L.
Gardner (1999) 'Emotion', Annual Review of Psychology, 50: 191--214. 34.
B. Parkinson, P. Totterdell, R. B. Briner and S. Reynolds (1996)
Changing Moods: The Psychology of Mood and Mood Regulation. Harlow:
Longman. 35. J. T. Larsen, A. P. McGraw and J. T. Cacioppo (2001) 'Can
people feel happy and sad at the same time?' Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81: 684--96. 36. See, for example, L. A. Clark, D.
Watson and S. Reynolds (1995) 'Diagnosis and classification of
psychopathology: challenges to the current system and future
directions', Annual Review of Psychology, 46: 121--53; also, Goldberg
and Huxley, Common Mental Disorders, op. cit.; and P. Tyrer (1990) 'The
division of neurosis: a failed classification', Journal of the Royal
Society of Medicine, 83: 614--16. 37. W. Eaton and C. Ritter (1988)
'Distinguishing anxiety from depression with field survey data',
Psychological Medicine, 18: 155--66. 38. Goldberg and Huxley, Common
Mental Disorders, op. cit. 39. J. Angst (1990) 'Depression and anxiety:
a review of studies in the community and in primary care', in N.
Sartorius, D. Goldberg, G. de Girolmano, J. Costa e Silva, Y. LeCrubier
and H.-U. Wittchen (eds.), Psychological Disorders in General Medical
Settings. Bern: HuberHogrefe. 40. Clark, Watson and Reynolds, 'Diagnosis
and classification of psychopathology', op. cit. 41. D. Watson, L. A.
Clark, K. Weber, J. S. Assenheimer, M. E. Strauss and R. A. McCormick
(1995) 'Testing a tripartite model: II. Exploring the symptom structure
of anxiety and depression in student, adult, and patient samples',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104: 15--25; and idem, (1995) 'Testing a
tripartite model: I. Evaluating the convergent and discriminant validity
of anxiety and depression symptom scales', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 104: 3--14. 42. N. C. Andreasen (1989) 'Scale for the
Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS)', British Journal of Psychiatry,
155 (Supplement 7), 53--8.

43. L. J. Chapman, J. P. Chapman and M. L. Raulin (1976) 'Scales for
physical and social anhedonia', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 85:
374--82. 44. J. K. Wing and G. W. Brown (1970) Institutionalism and
Schizophrenia. London: Cambridge University Press. 45. P. Barham and R.
Hayward (1990) 'Schizophrenia as a life process', in R. P. Bentall
(ed.), Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London: Routledge. 46. R. Warner
(1985) Recovery from Schizophrenia: Psychiatry and Political Economy.
New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 47. E. C. Johnstone, D. G. C. Owens,
A. Gold, T. Crow and J. F. MacMillan (1981) 'Institutionalization and
the defects of schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry, 139: 195--
203. 48. T. Lewander (1994) 'Neuroleptics and the neuroleptic-induced
deficit syndrome', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 89: 8--13; N. R.
Schooler (1994) 'Deficit symptoms in schizophrenia: negative symptoms
versus neuroleptic-induced deficits', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
89: 21--6. 49. M. Harrow, C. A. Yonan, J. R. Sands and J. Marengo (1994)
'Depression in schizophrenia: are neuroleptics, akinesia or anhedonia
involved?' Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20: 327--38. 50. Norman and Malla,
'Dysphoric mood and symptomatology', op. cit. 51. S. R. Hirsch, A. G.
Jolley, T. E. Barnes, P. F. Liddle, D. A. Curson, A. Patel, A. York, S.
Bercu and M. Patel (1989) 'Dysphoric and depressive symptoms in
schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Research, 2: 259--64. 52. M. F.
Pogue-Geile and M. Harrow (1987) 'Negative symptoms in schizophrenia:
longitudinal characteristics and etiological hypotheses', in P. D.
Harvey and E. F. Walker (eds.), Positive and Negative Symptoms of
Psychosis: Description, Research and Future Directions. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum. 53. W. T. Carpenter, D. W. Heinrichs and A. M. I. Wagman (1988)
'Deficit and nondeficit forms of schizophrenia', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 145: 578--83. 54. B. Kirkpatrick, R. W. Buchanan, P. D.
McKenney, L. D. Alphs and W. T. Carpenter (1989) 'The Schedule for the
Deficit Syndrome: an instrument for research in schizophrenia',

Psychiatry Research, 30: 119--23. 55. J. K. Bouricius (1989) 'Negative
symptoms and schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15: 201--7. 56. H.
Berenbaum and T. F. Oltmanns (1992) 'Emotional experience and expression
in schizophrenia and depression', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101:
37--44. 57. A. M. Kring, S. L. Kerr, D. A. Smith and J. M. Neale (1993)
'Flat affect does not reflect diminished subjective experience of
emotion', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102: 507--17. 58. I.
Myin-Germeys, P. A. E. G. Delespaul and M. W. deVries (2000)
'Schizophrenia patients are more emotionally active than is assumed
based on their behaviour', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26: 847--53. 59. C.
E. Sison, M. Alpert, R. Fudge and R. M. Stern (1996) 'Constricted
expressiveness and psychological reactivity in schizophrenia', Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184: 589--97. 60. M. Mayer, M. Alpert, P.
Stastny, D. Perlick and M. Empfield (1985) 'Multiple contributions to
clinical presentation of flat affect in schizophrenia', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 11: 420--6. 61. J. J. Blanchard, A. Kring, J. M. Neale (1994)
'Flat affect and deficits in affective expression in schizophrenia: a
test of neuropsychological models', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20: 311--25.
62. For a summary of this work, see H. Ellgring and S. Smith (1998)
'Affect regulation during psychosis', in F. W. Flack and D. J. Laird
(eds.), Emotions in Psychopathology: Theory and Research. New York:
Oxford University Press. 63. S. Rado (1956) Psychoanalysis of Behaviour:
Collected Papers (2 vols). New York: Grune & Stratton. 64. P. Meehl
(1962) 'Schizotaxia, schizotypia, schizophrenia', American Psychologist,
17: 827--38. 65. M. Harrow, R. R. Grinker, P. S. Holzman and L. Kayton
(1977) 'Anhedonia and schizophrenia', American Journal of Psychiatry,
134: 794--7.

66. J. Katsanis, W. G. Iacono and M. Beiser (1990) 'Anhedonia and
perceptual aberration in first-episode psychotic patients and their
relatives', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 99: 202-- 6. 67. J. J.
Blanchard, A. S. Bellack and K. T. Mueser (1994) 'Affective and social
correlates of physical and social anhedonia in schizophrenia', Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 103: 719--28. 68. J. Katsanis, W. G. Iacono, M.
Beiser and L. Lacey (1992) 'Clinical correlates of anhedonia and
perceptual aberration in first-episode patients with schizophrenia and
affective disorders', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101: 184--91. 69.
J. J. Blanchard, K. T. Mueser and A. S. Bellack (1998) 'Anhedonia,
positive and negative affect and social functioning in schizophrenia',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24: 413--24. 70. L. Ciompi (1988) The Psyche and
Schizophrenia: The Bond between Affect and Logic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press; L. Ciompi (1998) 'Is schizophrenia an affective
disease?' in W. F. Flack and J. D. Laird (eds.), Emotions in
Psychopathology, New York: Oxford University Press.

Chapter 10 Depression and the Pathology of Self 1. D. L. Rosenhan and M.
E. P. Seligman (1989) Abnormal Psychology (2nd edn). New York: W. W.
Norton. 2. A. Kleinman (1988) Rethinking Psychiatry. New York: Free
Press. 3. R. A. Shweder (1991) Thinking through Cultures: Expeditions in
Cultural Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 4. M.
MacLachlan (1997) Culture and Health. London: Wiley. 5. P. Snaith (1995)
'Depression: a need for new directions in practice and research',
Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 39: 943--7; D. Pilgrim and R. P.
Bentall (1999) 'The medicalisation of misery: a critical realist
analysis of the concept of depression', Journal of Mental Health, 8:
261--74. 6. H. Kuhs (1991) 'Depressive delusion', Psychopathology, 24:
106--14. E. Lattuada, A. Serretti, C. Cusin, M. Gasperini and E.
Smeraldi (1999) 'Symptomatologic analysis of psychotic and non-psychotic
depression', Journal of Affective Disorders, 54: 183--7. See also M.
Thakur,

J. Hays, K. Krishnan and R. Rangar (1999) 'Clinical, demographic and
social characteristics of psychotic depression', Psychiatry Research,
86: 99--106. 7. F. Benazzi (1999) 'Bipolar versus psychotic outpatient
depression', Journal of Affective Disorders, 55: 63--6. 8. A. T. Beck
(1976) Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New York:
International Universities Press; A. T. Beck, A. J. Rush, B. F. Shaw and
G. Emery (1979) Cognitive Therapy of Depression. New York: Guilford
Press. 9. L. Y. Abramson, M. E. P. Seligman and J. D. Teasdale (1978)
'Learned helplessness in humans: critique and reformulation', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 78: 40--74. 10. F. Heider (1958) The Psychology of
Interpersonal Relations. New York: Wiley. 11. H. M. Zullow, G.
Oettingen, C. Peterson and M. E. P. Seligman (1988) 'Pessimistic
explanatory style in the historical record: CAVEing LBJ, Presidential
candidates, and East versus West Berlin', American Psychologist, 43:
673--82. 12. For a recent discussion of these problems, see K. Reivich
(1995) 'The measurement of explanatory style', in G. M. Buchanan and M.
E. P. Seligman (eds.), Explanatory Style. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum. 13. C. Peterson, L. Luborsky and M. E. P. Seligman (1983)
'Attributions and depressive mood shifts: a case study using the
symptom-context method', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 92: 93--103.
14. H. M. Zullow (1995) 'Pessimistic rumination in American politics and
society', in Buchanan and Seligman (eds.), Explanatory Style, op. cit.
15. Zullow et al., 'Pessimistic explanatory style in the historical
record', op. cit. 16. P. Sweeny, K. Anderson and S. Bailey (1986)
'Attributional style and depression: a meta-analytic review', Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 50: 774--91. 17. C. J. Robins and A.
H. Hayes (1995) 'The role of causal attributions in the prediction of
depression', in Buchanan and Seligman (eds.), Explanatory Style, op.
cit. 18. H. Lyon, M. Startup and R. P. Bentall (1999) 'Social cognition
and the manic defense', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108: 273--82.

19. W. K. Campbell and C. Sedikides (1999) 'Self-threat magnifies the
self-serving bias: a meta-analytic integration', Review of General
Psychology, 3: 23--43. 20. See S. E. Taylor (1988) Positive Illusions.
New York: Basic Books. 21. S. Mineka, C. L. Pury and A. G. Luten (1995)
'Explanatory style in anxiety and depression', in Buchanan and Seligman
(eds.), Explanatory Style, op. cit. 22. G. I. Metalsky, L. J.
Halberstadt and L. Y. Abramson (1987) 'Vulnerability to depressive mood
reactions: towards a more powerful test of the diathesis/stress and
causal mediation components of the reformulated theory of depression',
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52: 386--93. 23. Robins
and Hayes, 'The role of causal attributions', op. cit. 24. L. B. Alloy,
L. Y. Abramson, W. G. Whitehouse, M. E. Hogan, N. A. Tashman, D. L.
Steinberg, D. T. Rose and P. Donovan (1999) 'Depressogenic cognitive
styles: predictive validity, information processing and personality
characteristics, and developmental origins', Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 37: 503--31. 25. L. Y. Abramson, G. I. Metalsky and L. B. Alloy
(1989) 'Hopelessness depression: a theory-based subtype of depression',
Psychological Review, 96: 358--72. 26. A. T. Beck, R. A. Steer, M.
Kovacs and B. Garrison (1985) 'Hopelessness and eventual suicide: a
ten-year prospective study of patients hospitalized with suicidal
ideation', American Journal of Psychiatry, 142: 559--63; M. E. Weishaar
and A. T. Beck (1990) 'The suicidal patient: how should the therapist
respond?', in K. Hawton and P. Cowen (eds.), Dilemmas and Difficulties
in the Management of Psychiatric Patients. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. 27. R. Drake and P. G. Cotton (1986) 'Depression, hopelessness
and suicide in chronic schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry,
148: 554--9. 28. H. Tennen and S. Herzenberger (1987) 'Depression,
self-esteem and the absence of selfprotective attributional biases',
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52: 72--80; H. Tennen, S.
Herzenberger and H. F. Nelson (1987) 'Depressive attributional style:
the role of self-esteem', Journal of Personality, 55: 631--60. 29. D. M.
Romney (1994) 'Cross-validating a causal model relating attributional
style, selfesteem, and depression: an heuristic study', Psychological
Reports, 74: 203--7. 30. P. Robson (1989) 'Development of a new
self-report measure of self-esteem', Psychological Medicine, 19:
513--18.

31. G. W. Brown, A. T. Bifulco and B. Andrews (1990) 'Self-esteem and
depression: IV. Effect on course and recovery', Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 25: 244--9; G. W. Brown, A. T. Bifulco, H. O.
Veiel and B. Andrews (1990) 'Self-esteem and depression: II. Social
correlates of self-esteem', Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 25: 225--34. 32. J. D. Campbell (1990) 'Self-esteem and
the clarity of the self-concept', Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59: 538--49. 33. J. Dent and J. D. Teasdale (1988) 'Negative
cognition and the persistence of depression', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 97: 29--34; C. Hammen, D. G. Dyke and D. J. Micklovitch
(1986) 'Stability and severity parameters of depressive self-schema
responding', Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 4: 23--45; C.
Hammen, T. Marks, A. Mayall and R. de Mayo (1985) 'Depressive
self-schemas, life stress and vulnerability to depression', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 94: 308--19; J. M. G. Williams, D. Healy, J. D.
Teasdale, W. White and E. S. Paykel (1990) 'Dysfunctional attitudes and
vulnerability to persistent depression', Psychological Medicine, 20:
375--81. 34. Lyon, Startup, Bentall, 'Social cognition and the manic
defense', op. cit. 35. K. D. Greenier, M. H. Kernis and S. B. Waschull
(1995) 'Not all high (or low) selfesteem people are the same: theory and
research on stability of self-esteem', in M. H. Kernis (ed.), Efficacy,
Agency, and Self-Esteem. New York: Plenum; M. H. Kernis (1993) 'The role
of stability and level of self-esteem in psychological functioning', in
R. F. Baumeister (ed.), SelfEsteem: The Puzzle of Low Self-Regard. New
York: Plenum; M. H. Kernis, D. P. Cornell, C. R. Sun, A. Berry and T.
Harlow (1993) 'There's more to self-esteem than whether it is high or
low: the importance of stability of self-esteem', Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 65: 1190--204. 36. K. D. Greenier, M. H. Kernis,
C. W. McNamara, S. B. Waschull, A. J. Berry, C. E. Herlocker and T. A.
Abend (1999) 'Individual differences in reactivity to events:
re-examining the roles of stability and level of self-esteem', Journal
of Personality, 67: 185--208. 37. Beck, Cognitive Therapy and the
Emotional Disorders, op. cit. 38. G. W. Lloyd and W. A. Lishman (1975)
'Effects of depression on the speed of recall of pleasant and unpleasant
experiences', Psychological Medicine, 5:173--80. 39. J. D. Teasdale and
S. J. Fogarty (1979) 'Differential effects of induced mood on retrieval
of pleasant and unpleasant events from episodic memory', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 3: 248--57.

40. J. Glover (1999) Humanity: A Moral History of the Twentieth Century.
London: Jonathan Cape. 41. E. T. Higgins (1987) 'Self-discrepancy: a
theory relating self and affect', Psychological Review, 94: 319--40; E.
T. Higgins, R. Bond, R. Klein and T. J. Strauman (1986)
'Selfdiscrepancies and emotional vulnerability: how magnitude,
accessibility and type of discrepancy influence affect', Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 41: 1--15. 42. T. J. Strauman (1989)
'Self-discrepancies in clinical depression and social phobia: cognitive
structures that underline emotional disorders?' Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 98: 14--22. 43. For a detailed discussion of this issue, see
J. Boldero and J. Francis (1999) 'Ideals, oughts, and self-regulation:
are there qualitatively distinct self-guides?' Asian Journal of Social
Psychology, 2: 343--55. 44. T. J. Strauman and E. T. Higgins (1987)
'Automatic activation of self-discrepancies and emotional syndromes:
when cognitive structures influence affect', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 98: 14--22; T. J. Strauman, A. M. Lemieux and C. L. Coe
(1993) 'Self-discrepancy and natural killer cell activity: immunological
consequences of negative self-evaluation', Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 64: 1042--52. 45. R. P. Bentall, P. Kinderman and K.
Manson (in submission) 'Self-discrepancies in bipolar-affective
disorder'. 46. For an empirical demonstration that Higgins's self-guide
and Beck's self-schema concepts are highly correlated, see N. Fair
brother and M. Moretti (1998) 'Sociotropy, autonomy and
self-discrepancy: status in depressed, remitted depressed, and control
participants', Cognitive Therapy and Research, 22: 279--96. 47. A. N.
Weissman and A. T. Beck (1978) 'Development and validation of the
Dysfunctional Attitude Scale', paper presented at the Annual Meeting of
the Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy, Chicago. For a
review of the scale's advantages and disadvantages, see J. M. G.
Williams (1992) The Psychological Treatment of Depression (2nd edn).
London: Routledge. 48. Z. V. Segal and R. E. Ingram (1994) 'Mood priming
and construct activation in tests of cognitive vulnerability to unipolar
depression', Clinical Psychology Review, 14: 663--95. 49. Williams et
al., 'Dysfunctional attitudes', op. cit. 50. Alloy et al.,
'Depressogenic cognitive styles', op. cit.

51. A. T. Beck (1983) 'Cognitive therapy of depression: new
perspectives', in P. J. Clayton and J. E. Barrett (eds.), Treatment of
Depression: Old Controversies and New Approaches. New York: Raven Press.
52. S. J. Blatt, D. Quinlan, E. Chevron, C. McDonald and D. Zurroff
(1982) 'Dependency and self-criticism: psychological dimensions of
depression', Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 50: 113--24.
53. I. H. Gotlib and C. L. Hammen (1992) Psychological Aspects of
Depression: Towards a Cognitive-Interpersonal Integration. Chichester:
Wiley. 54. H. H. Kelley (1967) 'Attribution theory in social
psychology', in D. Levine (ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation,
vol. 15. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, pp. 192-- 240. 55.
Quoted in M. Gilbert (1996) The Boys: Triumph over Adversity. London:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 56. G. L. Flett, P. Pliner and K. R. Blankstein
(1995) 'Preattributional dimensions in selfesteem and depressive
symptomatology', Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 10: 101--
22. 57. W. Ickes and M. A. Layden (1978) 'Attributional styles', in J.
H. Harvey, W. Ickes and R. F. Kidd (eds.), New Directions in Attribution
Research, vol. 2. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 119--92. 58. R.
P. Bentall, P. Kinderman and K. Bowen-Jones (1999) 'Response latencies
for the causal attributions of depressed, paranoid and normal
individuals: availability of selfrepresentations', Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry, 4: 107--18. 59. J. P. Forgas, G. H. Bower and S. J.
Moylan (1990) 'Praise or blame? Affective influences on attributions for
achievement', Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59: 809--19.
60. R. P. Bentall and S. Kaney (in submission) 'Attributional lability
in depression and paranoia: psychopathology and the
attribution--self-representation cycle'. 61. Zullow et al., 'Pessimistic
explanatory style in the historical record', op. cit. 62. Peterson et
al., 'Attributions and depressive mood shifts', op. cit.

63. Kernis, 'The role of stability and level of self-esteem', op. cit.
64. Taylor, Positive Illusions, op. cit. 65. Campbell and Sedikides,
'Self-threat magnifies the self-serving bias', op. cit.; S. E. Taylor,
E. Neter and H. A. Wayment (1995) 'Self-evaluation processes',
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21: 1278--87. 66. D.
Dunning, A. Leuenberger and D. A. Sherman (1995) 'A new look at
motivated inference: are self-serving theories of success a product of
motivational forces?' Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69:
58--68. 67. C. Sedikides, W. K. Campbell, G. D. Reeder and A. J. Elliot
(1998) 'The self-serving bias in relational context', Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74: 378--86. 68. S. Nolen-Hoeksema
(1991) 'Responses to depression and their effects on the duration of
depressed mood', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100: 569--82. 69. J.
Scott, B. Stanton, A. Garland and N. Ferrier (2000) 'Cognitive
vulnerability in patients with bipolar disorder', Psychological
Medicine, 30: 467--72; J. A. Sweeney, J. A. Kmiec and D. J. Kupfer
(2000) 'Neuropsychologic impairments in bipolar and unipolar mood
disorders on the CANTAB neurocognitive battery', Biological Psychiatry,
48: 674--84. 70. S. Lyubomirsky, N. D. Caldwell and S. Nolen-Hoeksema
(1998) 'Effects of ruminative and distracting responses to depressed
mood on retrieval of autobiographical memories', Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 75: 166--77. 71. S. Lyubomirsky and S.
Nolen-Hoeksema (1995) 'Effects of self-focused rumination on negative
thinking and interpersonal problem solving', Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 69: 176--90. 72. S. Nolen-Hoeksema and J. Morrow
(1991) 'A prospective study of depression and posttraumatic stress
symptoms after a natural disaster: the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake',
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61: 115--21. 73. N. Just
and L. B. Alloy (1997) 'The response styles theory of depression: tests
and an extension of the theory', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106:
221--9. 74. S. Nolen-Hoeksema, A. McBride and J. Larson (1997)
'Rumination and psychological distress among bereaved partners', Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 72: 855--62.

75. S. Nolen-Hoeksema, L. E. Parker and J. Larson (1994) 'Ruminative
coping with depressed mood following loss', Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 67: 92--104. 76. C. L. Rusting and S. Nolen-Hoeksema
(1998) 'Regulating responses to anger: effects of rumination and
distraction on angry mood', Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74: 790--803. 77. S. Nolen-Hoeksema (2000) 'The role of
rumination in depressive disorders and mixed anxiety/depressive
symptoms', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109: 504--11. 78. R. J.
Davidson (1999) 'Neuropsychological perspectives on affective styles and
their cognitive consequences', in T. Dalgleish and M. Power (eds.),
Handbook of Cognition and Emotion. London: Wiley, pp. 103--23. 79.
Described in I. H. Gotlib and L. Y. Abramson (1999) 'Attributional
theories of emotion', in Dalgleish and Power (eds.), Handbook, op. cit.,
pp. 615--36. 80. D. Healy (1987) 'Rhythm and blues: neurochemical,
neuropharmacological and neuropsychological implications of a hypothesis
of circadian rhythm dysfunction in the affective disorders',
Psychopharmacology, 93: 271--85. 81. D. Healy (1997) The Anti-Depressant
Era. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 82. T. H. Monk, D. J.
Kupfer, E. Frank and A. Ritenour (1991) 'The social rhythm metric (SRM):
measuring daily social rhythms over 12 weeks', Psychiatry Research, 36:
195--207; M. P. Szuba, A. Yager, B. Guze, E. Allen and L. R. Baxter
(1992) 'Disruption of social circadian rhythms in major depression: a
preliminary report', Psychiatry Research, 42: 221--30. 83. D. Healy and
J. M. Waterhouse (1995) 'The circadian system and the therapeutics of
affective disorders', Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 65: 241--63.

Chapter 11 A Colourful Malady 1. V. Woolf (1978) The Letters of Virginia
Woolf, Vol. 4: 1929--1931, ed. N. Nicholson and J. Trautmann. London:
Hogarth Press. 2. K. R. Jamison (1996) An Unquiet Mind. London: Picador.

3. A. H. Weingartner, H. Miller and D. L. Murphy (1977)
'Mood-state-dependent retrieval of verbal associations', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 86: 276--84. 4. J. M. G. Williams and H. Markar
(1991) 'Money hidden and rediscovered in subsequent manic phases: a case
of state-dependent re-enactment', British Journal of Psychiatry, 159:
579-- 81. 5. G. M. Davidson (1957) 'Manic-depressive psychosis: theory
and practice', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 125: 87--95. 6. F.
K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison (1990) Manic-Depressive Illness. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 7. S. L. McElroy, P. E. Keck, H. G. Pope, J. I.
Hudson, G. L. Faedda and A. C. Swann (1992) 'Clinical and research
implications of the diagnosis of dysphoric or mixed mania or hypomania',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 149: 1633--44. 8. G. A. Carlson and F.
K. Goodwin (1973) 'The stages of mania', Archives of General Psychiatry,
28: 221--8. 9. F. Cassidy, K. Forest, M. Murry and B. J. Carroll (1998)
'A factor analysis of the signs and symptoms of mania', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 55: 27--32. 10. N. C. Andreasen (1979) 'Thought,
language and communication disorders: diagnostic significance', Archives
of General Psychiatry, 36: 1325--30. 11. E. Jones (1962) The Life and
Work of Sigmund Freud (abridged edition). London: Hogarth Press. 12. K.
Abraham (1911/1927) 'Notes on the psychoanalytic investigation and
treatment of manic-depressive insanity and allied conditions', in E.
Jones (ed.), Selected Papers of Karl Abraham. London: Hogarth. 13. S.
Rado (1928) 'The problem of melancholia', International Journal of
Psychoanalysis, 9: 420--38. 14. This position was taken, for example, by
H. J. Eysenck in a series of books and papers published throughout his
career, including H. J. Eysenck and G. D. Wilson (eds.) (1973) The
Experimental Study of Freudian Theories. London: Methuen; and H. J.
Eysenck (1985) The Decline and Fall of the Freudian Empire.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.

15. J. M. Neale (1988) 'Defensive function of manic episodes', in T. F.
Oltmanns and B. A. Maher (eds.), Delusional Beliefs. New York: Wiley.
16. D. Lam and G. Wong (1997) 'Prodromes, coping strategies, insight and
social functioning in bipolar affective disorder', Psychological
Medicine, 27: 1091--100; J. A. Smith and N. Tarrier (1992) 'Prodromal
symptoms in manic depressive psychosis', Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 27: 245--8; G. Wong and D. Lam (1999) 'The
development and validation of the coping inventory for prodromes of
mania', Journal of Affective Disorders, 53: 57--65. 17. G. Fava (1999)
'Subclinical symptoms in mood disorders', Psychological Medicine, 29:
47--61; G. I. Keitner, D. A. Solomon, C. E. Ryan, I. W. Miller and A.
Mallinger (1996) 'Prodromal and residual symptoms in bipolar I
disorder', Comprehensive Psychiatry, 37: 362--7. 18. K. C. Winters and
J. M. Neale (1985) 'Mania and low self-esteem', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 94: 282--90. 19. D. P. Crowne and D. Marlowe (1960) 'A new
scale of social desirability independent of psychopathology', Journal of
Consulting Psychology, 24: 349--54. 20. J. Scott, B. Stanton, A. Garland
and N. Ferrier (2000) 'Cognitive vulnerability in patients with bipolar
disorder', Psychological Medicine, 30: 467--72. 21. J. R. Stroop (1935)
'Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions', Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 18: 643--62. 22. I. H. Gotlib and C. D. McCann
(1984) 'Construct accessibility and depression', Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 47: 427--39; J. M. G. Williams and K. Broadbent
(1986) 'Distraction by emotional stimuli: use of a Stroop task with
suicide attempters', British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 25:
101--10. 23. S. Channon, D. R. Hemsley and P. de Silva (1988) 'Selective
processing of food words in anorexia nervosa', British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 27: 259--60. 24. A. M. Mathews and C. MacLeod
(1985) 'Selective processing of threat cues in anxiety states',
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23: 563--9. 25. R. P. Bentall and M.
Thompson (1990) 'Emotional Stroop performance and the manic defence',
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 29: 235--7. 26. C. C. French, A.
Richards and E. J. C. Scholfield (1996) 'Hypomania, anxiety and the
emotional Stroop', British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 35: 617--26.

27. R. P. Bentall, J. Highfield and T. Woodnut (in preparation)
'Self-esteem fluctuations and vulnerability to bipolar symptoms'. 28. M.
H. Kernis (1993) 'The role of stability and level of self-esteem in
psychological functioning', in R. F. Baumeister (ed.), Self-Esteem: The
Puzzle of Low Self-Regard. New York: Plenum, pp. 167--82. 29. N. A.
Reilly-Harrington, L. B. Alloy, D. M. Fresco and W. G. Whitehouse (1999)
'Cognitive style and life events interact to predict bipolar and
unipolar symptomatology', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108: 567--78.
30. S. L. Johnson, B. Meyer, C. Winett and J. Small (2000) 'Social
support and self-esteem predict changes in bipolar depression but not
mania', Journal of Affective Disorders, 58: 79--86. 31. Personal
communication from J. Scott. 32. H. Lyon, M. Startup and R. P. Bentall
(1999) 'Social cognition and the manic defense', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 108: 273--82. 33. C. M. Ashworth, I. M. Blackburn and F. M.
McPherson (1982) 'The performance of depressed and manic patients on
some repertory grid measures', British Journal of Medical Psychology,
55: 247--55; S. E. Owen and B. Nurcombe (1970) 'The application of the
Semantic Differential Test in a case of manic-depressive psychosis',
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 4: 148--54. 34. C. R.
Hammen, T. Marks, A. Mayall and R. de Mayo (1985) 'Depressive
self-schemas, life stress and vulnerability to depression', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 94: 308--19; J. Dent and J. D. Teasdale (1988)
'Negative cognition and the persistence of depression', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 97: 29--34; J. M. G. Williams, D. Healy, J. D.
Teasdale, W. White and E. S. Paykel (1990) 'Dysfunctional attitudes and
vulnerability to persistent depression', Psychological Medicine, 20:
375--81. 35. R. A. Depue, P. F. Collins and M. Luciana (1996) 'A model
of neurobiology: environment interaction in developmental
psychopathology', in M. F. Lenzenweger and J. J. Haugaard (eds.),
Frontiers of Developmental Psychopathology. New York: Oxford University
Press, pp. 44--76; R. A. Depue and W. G. Iacano (1989) 'Neurobehavioural
aspects of affective disorders', Annual Review of Psychology, 40:
457--92. 36. J. Gray (1994) 'Three fundamental emotion systems', in P.
Ekman and R. J. Davidson (eds.), The Nature of Emotion: Fundamental
Questions. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 243--7.

37. B. Meyer, S. Johnson and C. Carver (1999) 'Exploring behavioural
activation and inhibition sensitivities among college students at-risk
for mood disorders', Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 21: 275--92. 38. S. L. Johnson, D. Sandow, B. Meyer, R.
Winters, I. Miller, D. Solomon and G. Keitner (2000) 'Increases in manic
symptoms after life events involving goal attainment', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 109: 721--7. 39. D. Healy (1987) 'Rhythm and blues:
neurochemical, neuropharmacological and neuropsychological implications
of a hypothesis of circadian rhythm dysfunction in the affective
disorders', Psychopharmacology, 93: 271--85. See also P. C. Whybrow
(1998) A Mood Apart: A Thinker's Guide to Emotion and its Disorder.
London: Picador. 40. C. L. Raison, H. M. Klein and M. Steckler (1999)
'The moon and madness reconsidered', Journal of Affective Disorders, 53:
99--106. 41. Goodwin and Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness, op. cit. 42.
T. Wehr, D. A. Sack and N. E. Rosenthal (1987) 'Sleep production as a
final common pathway in the genesis of mania', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 144: 201--4; T. A. Wehr (1991) 'Sleep-loss as a possible
mediator of diverse causes of mania', British Journal of Psychiatry,
159: 576--8. See also J. B. Wright (1993) 'Mania following sleep
deprivation', British Journal of Psychiatry, 163: 679--80. 43. J. I.
Hudson, J. F. Lipinski, P. E. Keck, H. G. Aizley, S. E. Lukas, A. J.
Rothschild, C. M. Waternaux and D. J. Kupfer (1992) 'Polysomnographic
characteristics of young manic patients: comparisons with unipolar
depressed patients and normal control subjects', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 49: 378--83. 44. B. Barbini, S. Bertelli, C. Colombo and E.
Smeralsi (1996) 'Sleep loss as a possible factor in augmenting manic
episodes', Psychiatry Research, 65: 121--5. 45. E. Leibenluft, P. S.
Albert, N. E. Rosenthal and T. A. Wehr (1996) 'Relationship between
sleep and mood in patients with rapid-cycling bipolar disorder',
Psychiatry Research, 63: 161-- 8. 46. S. Malkoff-Schwartz, E. Frank, B.
Anderson, J. T. Sherrill, L. Siegel, D. Patterson and D. J. Kupfer
(1998) 'Stressful life events and social rhythm disruption in the onset
of manic and depressive episodes of bipolar disorder', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 55: 702--7; S. Malkoff-Schwartz, E. Frank, B. P.
Anderson, S. A. Hlastala, J. F. Luther, J. T. Sherrill and D. J. Kupfer
(2000) 'Social rhythm disruption and stressful life events in the onset
of bipolar and unipolar episodes', Psychological Medicine, 30: 1005--16.

47. C. Colombo, F. Benedetti, B. Barbini, E. Campori and E. Smeraldi
(1999) 'Rate of switch from depression to mania after therapeutic sleep
deprivation in bipolar depression', Psychiatry Research, 86: 267--70.
48. S. Nolen-Hoeksema (1991) 'Responses to depression and their effects
on the duration of depressed mood', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100:
569--82. See also the detailed discussion of Nolen-Hoeksema's work in
the previous chapter. 49. J. Thomas and R. P. Bentall (2002) 'Hypomanic
traits and response styles to depression', British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 41: 309--13. 50. Lam and Wong, 'Prodromes, coping
strategies, insight and social functioning', op. cit.

Chapter 12 Abnormal Attitudes 1. D. Schreber (1903/1955) Memoirs of my
Nervous Illness (trans. I. Macalpine and R. A. Hunter). London: Dawsons.
2. S. Freud (1911/1950) 'Psychoanalytic notes upon an autobiographical
account of a case of paranoia (Dementia Paranoides)', Collected Papers
(vol. III). London: Hogarth Press. 3. M. Stone (1997) Healing the Mind:
A History of Psychiatry from Antiquity to the Present. New York: Norton.
4. Schreber, Memoirs of my Nervous Illness, op. cit. 5. I. Macalpine and
R. A. Hunter (1955) 'Preface', in D. Schreber (1903/1955) Memoirs, op.
cit. 6. Freud, 'Psychoanalytic notes', op. cit. 7. E. Bleuler
(1911/1950) Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias (trans. E.
Zinkin). New York: International Universities Press. 8. K. Colby, S.
Weber and F. D. Hilf (1971) 'Artificial paranoia', Artificial
Intelligence, 2: 1--25; K. M. Colby (1977) 'Appraisal of four
psychological theories of paranoid phenomena', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 86: 54--9; K. M. Colby, W. S. Faught and R. C. Parkinson
(1979) 'Cognitive therapy of paranoid conditions: heuristic suggestions
based on a computer simulation', Cognitive Therapy and Research, 3:
55--60.

9. M. Rokeach (1964) The Three Christs of Ypsilanti: A Narrative Study
of Three Lost Men. New York: Vintage Books. 10. P. Jorgensen and J.
Jensen (1994) 'Delusional beliefs in first admitters', Psychopathology,
27: 100--12. 11. P. Trower and P. Chadwick (1995) 'Pathways to defense
of the self: a theory of two types of paranoia', Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 2: 263--78. 12. H. Haltenh of, H. Ulrich and W.
Blanenburg (1999) 'Themes of delusion in 84 patients with unipolar
depression', Krankenhauspsychiatrie, 10: 87--90; H. Kuhs (1991)
'Depressive delusion', Psychopathology, 24: 106--14. 13. J. P. Leff, M.
Fisher and A. C. Bertelsen (1976) 'Across-national epidemiological study
of mania', British Journal of Psychiatry, 129: 428--42. 14. For good
descriptive accounts of many of these types of delusions, see: M. D.
Enoch and W. H. Trethowan (1979) Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes (2nd
edn). Bristol: Wright; and L. Franzini and J. M. Grossberg (1995)
Eccentric and Bizarre Behaviors. New York: John Wiley. 15. P. K.
Chadwick (1992) Borderline: A Psychological Study of Paranoia and
Delusional Thinking. London: Routledge. 16. I. McGilchrist and J.
Cutting (1995) 'Somatic delusions in schizophrenia and the affective
psychoses', British Journal of Psychiatry, 167: 350--61. 17. M. Musalek,
M. Bach, V. Passweg and S. Jaeger (1990) 'The position of delusional
parasitosis in psychiatric nosology and classification',
Psychopathology, 23: 115--24; M. Musalek, S. Zadro-Jaeger, O. M. Lesch
and H. Walter (1992) 'Traumatic events and traumatizing life conditions
in delusional parasitosis: the significance of social isolation and
tactile sensations in the pathogenesis of delusional parasitosis',
Psychiatrica Fennica, 23 (Supplement): 162--70. 18. J. H. Segal (1989)
'Erotomania revisited: from Kraepelin to DSM-III-R', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 146: 1261--6. 19. D. Enoch (1991) 'Delusional jealousy and
awareness of reality', British Journal of Psychiatry, 159 (Supplement
14): 52--6. 20. M. Hamilton (ed.) (1983) Fish's Psychopathology.
Bristol: Wright.

21. A. Young and K. Leaf head (1996) 'Betwixt life and death: case
studies of the Cotard delusion', in P. W. Halligan and J. C. Marshall
(eds.), Method in Madness: Case Studies in Cognitive Neuropsychiatry.
Hove: Psychology Press, pp. 147--71. 22. G. E. Berrios and R. Luque
(1995) 'Cotard's syndrome: analysis of 100 cases', Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 91: 185--8. 23. J. Capgras and J. Reboul-Lachaux
(1923/1994) 'L'illusion des "sosies" dans un délire systématise
chronique', History of Psychiatry, 5: 117--30. 24. P. Coubon and G. Fail
(1927/1994) 'Syndrome d'illusion de Frégoli et schizophrénie', History
of Psychiatry, 5: 134--8. 25. D. N. Anderson (1988) 'The delusion of
inanimate doubles', British Journal of Psychiatry, 153: 694--9. 26. K.
Schneider (1949/1974) 'The concept of delusion', in S. R. Hirsch and M.
Shepherd (eds.), Themes and Variations in European Psychiatry. Bristol:
John Wright & Sons, pp.33--9. 27. P. A. Garety, B. S. Everitt and D. R.
Hemsley (1988) 'The characteristics of delusions: a cluster analysis of
deluded subjects', European Archives of Psychiatry and Neurological
Sciences, 237: 112--14. 28. D. M. Ndetei and A. Vadher (1984) 'Frequency
and clinical significance of delusions across cultures', Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 70: 73--6. For a more recent study, comparing
delusional themes in Austria and Pakistan, which found persecutory
delusions to be the most common in both countries, see T. Stompe, A.
Friedman, G. Ortwein, R. Strobl, H. R. Chaudhry, N. Najam and M. R.
Chaudhry (1999) 'Comparisons of delusions among schizophrenics in
Austria and Pakistan', Psychopathology, 32: 225--34. 29. M. F. Sendiony
(1976) 'Cultural aspects of delusions: a psychiatric study of Egypt',
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 10: 201--7. 30. K.
Kim, D. Li, Z. Jiang and X. Cui (1993) 'Schizophenic delusions among
Koreans, Korean-Chinese and Chinese: a transcultural study',
International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 39: 190--9. 31. J. Mitchell
and A.D. Vierkant (1989) 'Delusions and hallucinations as a reflection
of the subcultural milieu among psychotic patients of the 1930s and
1980s', Journal of Psychology, 123: 269--74.

32. American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual for Mental Disorders (4th edition). Washington, DC: APA. 33. D.
J. Harper (1992) 'Defining delusions and the serving of professional
interest: the case of "paranoia" ', British Journal of Medical
Psychology, 65: 357--69. See also D. Harper (1994) 'Histories of
suspicion in a time of conspiracy: a reflection on Aubrey Lewis's
history of paranoia', History of the Human Sciences, 7: 89--109. 34.
See, for example, K. S. Kendler, W. Glazer and H. Morgenstern (1983)
'Dimensions of delusional experience', American Journal of Psychiatry,
140: 466--9; P. A. Garety and D. R. Hemsley (1987) 'The characteristics
of delusional experience', European Archives of Psychiatry and
Neurological Sciences, 236: 294--8. 35. M. Harrow, A. W. MacDonald, J.
R. Sands and M. L. Silverstein (1995) 'Vulnerability to delusions over
time in schizophrenia and affective disorders', Schizophrenia Bulletin,
21:95-- 109; M. Harrow, F. Rattenbury and F. Stoll (1988) 'Schizophrenic
delusions: an analysis of their persistence, of related premorbid ideas
and three major dimensions', in T. F. Oltmanns and B. A. Maher (eds.),
Delusional Beliefs. New York: John Wiley, pp. 184--211. 36. P. A. Garety
(1985) 'Delusions: problems in definitions and measurement', British
Journal of Medical Psychology, 58: 25--34. 37. G. E. Berrios (1991)
'Delusions as "wrong beliefs": a conceptual history', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 159 (Supplement 14): 6--13. 38. I got this quote from 5,000
Gems of Wit and Wisdom, by L. Peter, London: Treasure Press. My efforts
to find the original source failed, but it was too good to pass up. 39.
S. G. Brush (1974) 'Should the history of science be rated X?' Science,
183: 1164--72. 40. G. N. Gilbert and M. Mulkay (1984) Opening Pandora's
Box: A Sociological Analysis of Scientists' Discourse. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. 41. G. Kelly (1955) The Psychology of
Personal Constructs (Vol. 1). New York: Norton. 42. R. P. Bentall (1990)
'The syndromes and symptoms of psychosis: or why you can't play 20
questions with the concept of schizophrenia and hope to win', in R. P.
Bentall (ed.), Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London: Routledge,
pp. 23--60. 43. K. Popper (1963) Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth
of Scientific Knowledge. London: Routledge.

44. J. S. B. T. Evans (1989) Bias in Human Reasoning: Causes and
Consequences. Hove: Erlbaum; R. S. Nickerson (1998) 'Confirmation bias:
a ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises', Review of General Psychology,
2: 175--220. 45. K. Moser, V. Gadenne and J. Schroeder (1988) 'Under
what conditions does confirmation seeking obstruct scientific progress?'
Psychological Review, 95: 572--4. 46. S. Schneider (1998) 'Peace and
paranoia', in J. H. Berke, S. Pierides, A. Sabbadini and S. Schneider
(eds.), Even Paranoids have Enemies: New Perspectives on Paranoia and
Persecution. London: Routledge, pp. 203--18. 47. D. Mayerhoff, D. Pelta,
C. Valentino and M. Chakos (1991) 'Real-life basis for a patient's
paranoia', American Journal of Psychiatry, 148: 682--3. 48. W. G.
Niederland (1959) 'Schreber: father and son', Psychoanalytic Quarterly,
28: 151-- 69; and Niederland (1960) 'Schreber's father', Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association, 8:492--9. See also M. Schatzman
(1973) Soul Murder: Persecution in the Family. London: Penguin Books.
49. Z. Lothane (1992) In Defense of Schreber: Soul Murder and
Psychiatry. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press. 50. J. Mirowsky and C. E.
Ross (1983) 'Paranoia and the structure of powerlessness', American
Sociological Review, 48: 228--39. 51. T. Harris (1987) 'Recent
developments in the study of life events in relation to psychiatric and
physical disorders', in B. Cooper (ed.), Psychiatric Epidemiology:
Progress and Prospects, London: Croom Helm, pp. 81--102. 52. R. Day, J.
A. Neilsen, A. Korten, G. Ernberg, K. C. Dube, J. Gebhart, A. Jablensky,
C. Leon, A. Marsella, M. Olatawura, N. Sartorius, E. Stromgren, R.
Takahashi, N. Wig and L. C. Wynne (1987) 'Stressful life events
preceding the onset of acute schizophrenia: a cross-national study from
the World Health Organization', Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 11:
123--206. 53. T. Fuchs (1999) 'Life events in late paraphrenia and
depression', Psychopathology, 32: 60--9. 54. D. Bhugra, J. Leff, R.
Mallett, G. Der, B. Corridan and S. Rudge (1997) 'Incidence and outcome
of schizophrenia in Whites, African-Caribbeans and Asians in London',
Psychological Medicine, 27: 791--8; G. Harrison, D. Owens, A. Holton, D.
Neilsen and D. Boot (1988) 'A

prospective study of severe mental disorder in Afro-Caribbean patients',
Psychological Medicine, 18: 643--57. 55. B. A. Maher (1974) 'Delusional
thinking and perceptual disorder', Journal of Individual Psychology, 30:
98--113; B. A. Maher (1988) 'Anomalous experience and delusional
thinking: the logic of explanations', in Oltmanns and Maher (eds.),
Delusional Beliefs, op. cit.; B. A. Maher (1992) 'Models and methods for
the study of reasoning in delusions', Revue Européenne de Psychologie
Appliquée, 42: 97--102. 56. B. A. Maher and J. S. Ross (1984)
'Delusions', in H. E. Adams and P. Suther (eds.), Comprehensive Handbook
of Psychopathology. New York: Plenum. 57. A. F. Cooper and A.R. Curry
(1976) 'The pathology of deafness in the paranoid and affective
psychoses of later life', Journal of Psychosomatic Medicine, 20:
97--105; A. F. Cooper, R. F. Garside and D. W. Kay (1976) 'A comparison
of deaf and non-deaf patients with paranoid and affective psychoses',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 129: 532--8; D. W. Kay, A. F. Cooper, R.
F. Garside and M. Roth (1976) 'The differentiation of paranoid from
affective psychoses by patients' premorbid characteristics', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 129: 207--15. 58. P. G. Zimbardo, S. M. Andersen
and L. G. Kabat (1981) 'Induced hearing deficit generates experimental
paranoia', Science, 212: 1529--31. 59. N. C. Moore (1981) 'Is paranoid
illness associated with sensory defects in the elderly?' Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 25: 69--74; J. A. G. Watt (1985) 'Hearing and
premorbid personality in paranoid states', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 142: 1453--5. 60. Capgras and Reboul-Lachaux, 'L'illusion
des "sosies" ', op. cit. 61. See, for example, Enoch and Trethowan,
Uncommon Psychiatric Syndromes, op. cit. 62. H. D. Ellis and K. W. Pauw
(1994) 'The cognitive neuropsychiatric origins of the capgras delusion',
in A.S. David and J.C. Cutting (eds.), The Neuropsychology of
Schizophrenia. Hove: Erlbaum. 63. H. D. Ellis and A. W. Young (1990)
'Accounting for delusional misidentifications', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 157: 239--48. 64. H. D. Ellis and M. B. Lewis (2001)
'Capgras delusion: a window on face recognition', Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5: 149--56. 65. H. D. Ellis, A. W. Young, A. H. Quale and K.
W. de Paul (1997) 'Reduced autonomic responses to faces in Capgras
delusion', Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 264:

1085--92. See, also, a more detailed study of face recognition in a
single case of Capgras syndrome, reported in H. D. Ellis, M. B. Lewis,
H. F. Moselhy, and A. W. Young (2000) 'Automatic without autonomic
responses to familiar faces: differential components of covert face
recognition in a case of Capgras delusion', Cognitive Neuropsychiatry,
5: 255--69. For an independent replication of this finding, see W.
Hirstein and V. S. Ramachandran (1997) 'Capgras syndrome: a novel probe
for understanding neural representation of identity and familiarity of
persons', Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 264: 437--44. 66.
A. W. Young (1994) 'Recognition and reality', in E. M. R. Critchley
(ed.), The Neurological Boundaries of Reality. London: Farrand Press.
67. L. LaRusso (1978) 'Sensitivity of paranoid patients to nonverbal
cues', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87: 463--71. 68. P. J. Davis and
M. G. Gibson (2000) 'Recognition of posed and genuine facial expressions
of emotion in paranoid and nonparanoid schizophrenia', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 109: 445--50. 69. W. G. Johnson, J. M. Ross and M.
A. Mastria (1977) 'Delusional behavior: an attributional analysis of
development and modification', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86:
421--6. 70. L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman (1988) 'The genesis of
delusions', in Oltmanns and Maher (eds.), Delusional Beliefs, op. cit.
71. S. Escher, M. Romme, A. Buiks, P. Delespaul and J. van Os (2002)
'Formation of delusional ideation in adolescents hearing voices: a
prospective study', American Journal of Medical Genetics
(Neuropsychiatric Genetics), 14: 913--20. 72. L. P. Ullmann and L.
Krasner (1969) A Psychological Approach to Abnormal Behavior. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 73. R. P. Bentall and S. Kaney (1989)
'Content-specific information processing and persecutory delusions: an
investigation using the emotional Stroop test', British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 62: 355--64. For replications of this finding, see:
C. F. Fear, H. Sharp and D. Healy (1996) 'Cognitive processes in
delusional disorder', British Journal of Psychiatry, 168: 61--7; and P.
Kinderman (1994) 'Attentional bias, persecutory delusions and the self
concept', British Journal of Medical Psychology, 67: 53--66. 74. J. M.
G. Williams, A. Mathews and C. MacLeod (1996) 'The emotional Stroop task
and psychopathology', Psychological Bulletin, 120: 3--24.

75. K. M. Leafhead, A. W. Young and T. K. Szulecka (1996) 'Delusions
demand attention', Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 1: 5--16. 76. S. Kaney, M.
Wolfenden, M. E. Dewey and R. P. Bentall (1992) 'Persecutory delusions
and the recall of threatening and non-threatening propositions', British
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 31: 85--7. See also R. P. Bentall, S.
Kaney and K. Bowen-Jones(1995)'Persecutory delusions and recall of
threat-related, depression-related and neutral words', Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 19: 331--43. 77. M. Phillips and A. S. David (1997)
'Abnormal visual scan paths: a psychophysiological marker of delusions
in schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Research, 29: 235--54; M. Phillips and
A. S. David (1997) 'Visual scan paths are abnormal in deluded
schizophrenics', Neuropsychologia, 35: 99--105. 78. C. D. Frith (1994)
'Theory of mind in schizophrenia', in David and Cutting (eds.), The
Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia, op. cit., pp. 147--61; C. D. Frith
(1992) The Cognitive Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum. 79. C. D. Frith and R. Corcoran (1996) 'Exploring
"theory of mind" in people with schizophrenia', Psychological Medicine,
26: 521--30. 80. R. Corcoran, C. D. Frith and G. Mercer (1995)
'Schizophrenia, symptomatology and social inference: investigating
"theory of mind" in people with schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Research,
17: 5--13. See also R. Corcoran, C. Cahill and C. D. Frith (1997) 'The
appreciation of visual jokes in people with schizophrenia: a study of
"mentalizing" ability', Schizophrenia Research, 24: 319--27.

OceanofPDF.com

81. Y. Sarfati, M.C. Hardy-Bayle, C. Besche and D. Widlocher (1997)
'Attributions of intentions to others in people with schizophrenia: a
non-verbal exploration with comic strips', Schizophrenia Research, 25:
199--209; Y. Sarfati, M. C. Hardy-Bayle, E. Brunet and D. Widlocher
(1999) 'Investigating theory of mind in schizophrenia: influence of
verbalization in disorganized and non-disorganized patients',
Schizophrenia Research, 37: 183--90; Y. Sarfati, J. Nadel, J. F.
Chevalier and D. Widlocher (1997) 'Attribution of mental states to
others by schizophrenic patients', Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 2: 1--17.
82. R. Langdon, P. Michie, P. B. Ward, N. McConaghy, S. V. Catts and M.
Coltheart (1997) 'Defective self and/or other mentalising in
schizophrenia: a cognitive neuropsychological approach', Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry, 2: 167--93. 83. V. M. Drury, E. J. Robinson and M.
Birchwood (1998) '"Theory of mind" skills during an acute episode of
psychosis and following recovery', Psychological Medicine, 28: 1101--12.
84. D. Murphy (1998) 'Theory of mind in a sample of men with
schizophrenia detained in a special hospital: its relationship to
symptom profiles and neuropsychological tests', Criminal Behaviour and
Mental Health, 8: 13--26; F. Walston, R. C. Blennerhassett and B. G.
Charlton (2000) '"Theory of mind", persecutory delusions and the somatic
marker hypothesis', Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 5: 161--74. 85. N. Kerr,
R. I. M. Dunbar and R. P. Bentall (2003) 'Theory of mind in bipolar
affective disorder', Journal of Affective Disorders, 73: 253--9. 86. S.
Kaney and R. P. Bentall (1989) 'Persecutory delusions and attributional
style', British Journal of Medical Psychology, 62: 191--8. 87. Fear,
Sharp and Healy, 'Cognitive processes', op. cit. 88. C. L. Candido and
D. M. Romney (1990) 'Attributional style in paranoid vs depressed
patients', British Journal of Medical Psychology, 63: 355--63. 89. H.
Kristev, H. Jackson and D. Maude (1999) 'An investigation of
attributional style in first-episode psychosis', British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 88: 181--94. 90. H. J. Lee and H. T. Won (1998)
'The self-concepts, the other-concepts, and attributional style in
paranoia and depression', Korean Journal of Clinical Psychology, 17:
105--25; H. T. Won and H. J. Lee (1997) 'The self-concept and
attributional style in a paranoid group', Korean Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 16: 173--82. 91. H. M. Sharp, C. F. Fear and D. Healy (1997)
'Attributional style and delusions: an investigation based on delusional
content', European Psychiatry, 12: 1--7.

92. S. Kaney and R. P. Bentall (1992) 'Persecutory delusions and the
self-serving bias', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 180: 773--80.
93. P. A. White (1991) 'Ambiguity in the internal/external distinction
in causal attribution', Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 27:
259--70. 94. See, for example, K. Reivich (1995) 'The measurement of
explanatory style', in G. M. Buchanan and M. E. P. Seligman (eds.),
Explanatory Style. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. In general, studies
have shown that the Attributional Style Questionnaire has extremely poor
psychometric properties and, in particular, that scores on individual
items show poor consistency. It has continued to be the most widely used
attributional measure mainly because of the lack of aviable alternative.
95. P. Kinderman and R. P. Bentall (1996) 'The development of a novel
measure of causal attributions: the Internal Personal and Situational
Attributions Questionnaire', Personality and Individual Differences, 20:
261--4. See also L. Day and J. Maltby (2000) 'Can Kinderman and
Bentall's suggestion for a personal and situational attributions
questionnaire be used to examine all aspects of attributional style?'
Personality and Individual Differences, 29: 1047--55. 96. D. R. Hemsley
and P. A. Garety (1986) 'The formation and maintenance of delusions: a
Bayesian analysis', British Journal of Psychiatry, 149: 51--6. 97. S. F.
Huq, P. A. Garety and D. R. Hemsley (1988) 'Probabilistic judgements in
deluded and nondeluded subjects', Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 40A: 801--12. 98. P. A. Garety, D. R. Hemsley and S. Wessely
(1991) 'Reasoning in deluded schizophrenic and paranoid patients',
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 179: 194--201. 99. Y. Linney, E.
Peters and P. Ayton (1998) 'Reasoning biases in delusion-prone
individuals', British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 37: 285--302. 100.
C. H. John and G. Dodgson (1994) 'Inductive reasoning in delusional
thought', Journal of Mental Health, 3: 31--49; see also H. F. Young and
R. P. Bentall (1995) 'Hypothesis testing inpatients with persecutory
delusions: comparison with depressed and normal subjects', British
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 34: 353--69. 101. R. E. J. Dudley, C. H.
John, A. W. Young and D. E. Over (1997) 'The effect of selfreferent
material on the reasoning of people with delusions', British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 36: 575--84.

102. H. F. Young and R. P. Bentall (1997) 'Probabilistic reasoning in
deluded, depressed and normal subjects: effects of task difficulty and
meaningful versus nonmeaningful materials', Psychological Medicine, 27:
455--65. 103. K. Salzinger (1984) 'The immediacy hypothesis in a theory
of schizophrenia', in D. Spaulding and J. K. Cole (eds.), Theories of
Schizophrenia and Psychosis: Nebraska Symposium on Motivation. Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press. 104. R. E. J. Dudley, C. H. John, A. W.
Young and D. E. Over (1997) 'Normal and abnormal reasoning in people
with delusions', British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 36: 243--58.
105. Young and Bentall, 'Probabilistic reasoning', op. cit. 106. Popper,
Conjectures and Refutations, op. cit. 107. H. H. Farris and R. Revlin
(1989) 'Sensible reasoning in two tasks: rule discovery and hypothesis
evaluation', Memory and Cognition, 17: 221--32; J. E. Tschirgi (1980)
'Sensible reasoning: a hypothesis about hypotheses', Child Development,
51: 1--10. 108. R. P. Bentall and H. F. Young (1996)
'Sensible-hypothesis-testing in deluded, depressed and normal subjects',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 168: 372--5. 109. A. W. Kruglanski and D.
M. Webster (1996) 'Motivated closing of the mind: "seizing" and
"freezing" ', Psychological Review, 103: 263--83. 110. G. Roberts (1991)
'Delusional belief systems and meaning in life: a preferred reality?'
British Journal of Psychiatry, 159 (Supplement 14): 19--28. 111. R. P.
Bentall and R. Swarbrick (in press) 'The best laid schemas of paranoid
patients', Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice
112. S. M. Colbert and E. R. Peters (2002) 'Need for closure and
jumping-to-conclusions in delusion-prone individuals', Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 190: 27--31. 113. A.P. Morrison (1998)
'Cognitive behaviour therapy for psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia',
in N. Tarrier, A. Wells and G. Haddock (eds.), Treating Complex Cases:
The Cognitive Behavioural Therapy Approach. London: Wiley, pp. 195--216.
114. D. Freeman, P. A. Garety and E. Kuipers (2001) 'Persecutory
delusions: developing the understanding of belief maintenance and
emotional distress', Psychological Medicine, 31: 1293--306.

115. J. C. Rosen (1995) 'The nature of body dysmorphobic disorder and
treatment with cognitive behavior therapy', Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 2: 143--66.

Chapter 13 On the Paranoid World View 1. Quoted in J. Ronson (2001)
Them: Adventures with Extremists. London: Picador. 2. Andrew Grove,
Chief Executive Officer of the Intel Corporation, quoted in the New York
Times, 18 December 1994. 3. For a full account, see R. P. Bentall, R.
Corcoran, R. Howard, R. Blackwood and P. Kinderman (2001) 'Persecutory
delusions: a review and theoretical integration', Clinical Psychology
Review, 21: 1143--92. 4. Readers of a particularly obsessional bent will
find these earlier versions (models 1.1, 2.1 and 3.1 respectively)
described in the following publications: R. P. Bentall (1994) 'Cognitive
biases and abnormal beliefs: towards a model of persecutory delusions',
in A. S. David and J. Cutting (eds.), The Neuropsychology of
Schizophrenia. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 337--60; R. P. Bentall, P.
Kinderman and S. Kaney (1994) 'The self, attributional processes and
abnormal beliefs: towards a model of persecutory delusions', Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 32: 331-- 41; R. P. Bentall and P. Kinderman
(1998) 'Psychological processes and delusional beliefs: implications for
the treatment of paranoid states', in S. Lewis, N. Tarrier and T. Wykes
(eds.), Outcome and Innovation in the Psychological Treatment of
Schizophrenia. Chichester: Wiley, pp. 119--44. 5. The assumption that
delusions reflect attempts to explain troubling experiences is apparent,
for example, in Brendan Maher's anomalous perception theory, in Chris
Frith and Rhiannon Corcoran's ideas about the role of theory-of-mind
deficits in persecutory delusions, in the work that Sue Kaney, Peter
Kinderman and I have conducted on paranoia, and also in Philippa Garety
and David Hemsley's studies of the way in which deluded patients reason
about hypotheses. 6. K. M. Colby, S. Weber and F. D. Hilf (1971)
'Artificial paranoia', Artificial Intelligence, 2:1--25;K. M. Colby
(1977) 'Appraisal of four psychological theories of paranoid phenomena',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86: 54--9; K. M. Colby, W. S. Faught and
R. C. Parkinson (1979) 'Cognitive therapy of paranoid conditions:
heuristic suggestions based on a computer simulation', Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 3: 55--60. 7. D. Freeman, P. Garety, D. Fowler, E.
Kuipers, G. Dunn, P. Bebbington and C. Hadley (1998) 'The London--East
Anglia randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behaviour therapy for

psychosis. IV: Self-esteem and persecutory delusions', British Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 37: 415--30. 8. B. Bowins and G. Shugar (1998)
'Delusions and self-esteem', Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 43: 154--8.
9. C. Barrowclough, N. Tarrier, L. Humphreys, J. Ward, L. Gregg and B.
Andrews (in press) 'Self-esteem in schizophrenia: the relationship
between self-evaluation, family attitudes and symptomatology', Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 10. C. L. Candido and D. M.
Romney (1990) 'Attributional style in paranoid vs depressed patients',
British Journal of Medical Psychology, 63: 355--63. 11. H. M. Lyon, S.
Kaney and R. P. Bentall (1994) 'The defensive function of persecutory
delusions: evidence from attribution tasks', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 164: 637--46. 12. T. E. Oxman, S. D. Rosenberg, P. P.
Schnurr and G. Tucker (1988) 'Somatization, paranoia and language',
Journal of Communication Disorders, 21: 33--50. 13. P. Kinderman and R.
P. Bentall (1996) 'Self-discrepancies and persecutory delusions:
evidence for a defensive model of paranoid ideation', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 105: 106--14. 14. P. Kinderman (1994) 'Attentional
bias, persecutory delusions and the self concept', British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 67: 53--66. 15. H. J. Lee (2000) 'Attentional bias,
memory bias and the self-concept in paranoia', Psychological Science, 9:
77--99. 16. Lyon, Kaney and Bentall, 'The defensive function of
persecutory delusions', op. cit. 17. R. P. Bentall and S. Kaney (1996)
'Abnormalities of self-representation and persecutory delusions',
Psychological Medicine, 26: 1231--7. Another type of implicit
self-measure, based on the self-referent encoding effect, was used in
this study but produced more equivocal results. For simplicity, I have
not described it in the main text. 18. C. F. Fear, H. Sharp and D. Healy
(1996) 'Cognitive processes in delusional disorder', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 168: 61--7. 19. P. Kinderman and R. P. Bentall (2000)
'Self-discrepancies and causal attributions: studies of hypothesized
relationships', British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 39: 255--73.

20. P. Trower and P. Chadwick (1995) 'Pathways to defense of the self: a
theory of two types of paranoia', Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 2: 263--78. 21. J. Gleick (1988) Chaos: Making a New Science.
London: Heinemann. 22. R. P. Bentall and S. Kaney (1989)
'Content-specific information processing and persecutory delusions: an
investigation using the emotional Stroop test', British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 62: 355--64; Fear, Sharp and Healy, 'Cognitive
processes in delusional disorder', op. cit. 23. R. P. Bentall, S. Kaney
and K. Bowen-Jones (1995) 'Persecutory delusions and recall of
threat-related, depression-related and neutral words', Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 19: 331-- 43; S. Kaney, M. Wolfenden, M. E. Dewey and R.P.
Bentall (1992) 'Persecutory delusions and the recall of threatening and
non-threatening propositions', British Journal of Clinical Psychology,
31: 85--7. 24. P. J. Davis and M. G. Gibson (2000) 'Recognition of posed
and genuine facial expressions of emotion in paranoid and nonparanoid
schizophrenia', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109: 445--50; L. LaRusso
(1978) 'Sensitivity of paranoid patients to nonverbal cues', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 87: 463--71. 25. E. Bodner and M. Mikulincer (1998)
'Learned helplessness and the occurrence of depressive-like and
paranoid-like responses: the role of attentional focus', Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74: 1010--23. 26. D. T. Gilbert, B.
W. Pelham and D. S. Krull (1988) 'On cognitive busyness: when person
perceivers meet persons perceived', Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54: 733--40; D. T. Gilbert (1991) 'How mental systems
believe', American Psychologist, 46: 107--19; D. T. Gilbert, S. E.
McNutty, T. A. Giuliano and J. E. Benson (1992) 'Blurry words and fuzzy
deeds: the attribution of obscure behavior', Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62: 18--25. 27. C. Frith (1994) 'Theory of mind in
schizophrenia', in David and Cutting (eds.), The Neuropsychology of
Schizophrenia, op. cit., pp. 147--61; C. D. Frith (1992) The Cognitive
Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 28.
P. Kinderman, R. I. M. Dunbar and R. P. Bentall (1998) 'Theory of mind
deficits and causal attributions', British Journal of Psychology, 71:
339--49. 29. J. Taylor and P. Kinderman (2002) 'An analogue study of
attributional complexity, theory of mind deficits and paranoia', British
Journal of Psychology, 93: 137--40.

30. O. Sabri, R. Erkwoh, M. Schreckenberger, A. Owega, H. Sass and U.
Buell (1997) 'Correlation of positive symptoms exclusively to
hyperperfusion or hypoperfusion of cerebral cortex in never-treated
schizophrenics', Lancet, 349: 1735--9. 31. K. P. Ebmeir, D. H. R.
Blackwood, C. Murray, V. Souza, M. Walker, N. Dougall, A. P. R. Moffoot,
R. E. O'Carroll and G. M. Goodwin (1993) 'Single photon emission
computed tomography with 99m Tc-Exametazine in unmedicated schizophrenic
patients', Biological Psychiatry, 33: 487--95; R. D. Kaplan, H.
Szechtman, S. Franco, B. Szechtman, C. Nahmias, E. S. Garnett, S. List
and J. M. Cleghorn (1993) '3 clinical syndromes of schizophrenia in
untreated subjects: relation to brain glucose activity measured by PET',
Schizophrenia Research, 11: 47--54; P. F. Liddle, K. J. Friston, C. D.
Frith, S. R. Hirsch, T. Jones and R. S. Frackowiak (1992) 'Patterns of
cerebral blood flow in schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry,
160: 179--86. 32. N. Blackwood, R. J. Howard, D. H. ffytche, A. Simmons,
R. P. Bentall and R. M. Murray (2000) 'Imaging attentional and
attributional biases: an fMRI approach to paranoid delusions',
Psychological Medicine, 30: 873--83. 33. B. Kirkpatrick and X. F. Amador
(1995) 'The study of paranoia and suspiciousness', Biological
Psychiatry, 38: 496--7. 34. W. Maier, D. Lichtermann, J. Minges and R.
Heun (1993) 'Personality disorders among the relatives of schizophrenia
patients', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20: 481--93; E. Squires-Wheeler, A.
E. Skodol, A. Bassett and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling (1989) 'DSM-III-R
schizotypal personality traits in offspring of schizophrenic disorder,
affective disorder, and normal control parents', Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 23: 229--39. 35. H. Schanda, P. Berner, E. Gabriel, M. L.
Kronberger and B. Kufferle (1983) 'The genetics of delusional
psychoses', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 9: 563--70. 36. E. Zigler and M.
Glick (1988) 'Is paranoid schizophrenia really camouflaged depression?',
American Psychologist, 43: 284--90.

Chapter 14 The Illusion of Reality 1. Brian's case is described in more
detail in my earlier book with Peter Slade (P. D. Slade and R. P.
Bentall (1988) Sensory Deception: A Scientific Analysis of
Hallucination. London: Croom-Helm). 2. G. E. Berrios (1996) The History
of Mental Symptoms: Descriptive Psychopathology since the Nineteenth
Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

3. J. Jaynes (1979) The Origins of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the
Bicameral Mind. London: Penguin. 4. I. Leudar and P. Thomas (2000)
Voices of Reason, Voices of Insanity: Studies of Verbal Hallucinations.
London: Routledge. 5. J. Preuss (1975) 'Mental disorders in the Bible
and Talmud', Israeli Annals of Psychiatry and Related Disciplines, 13:
221--38. 6. T. R. Sarbin and J. B. Juhasz (1967) 'The historical
background of the concept of hallucination', Journal of the History of
the Behavioral Sciences, 5: 339--58. 7. J.-E. D. Esquirol (1832) 'Sur
les illusions des sens chez aliénés', Archives Générales de Médecine, 2:
5--23. 8. American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (4th edn). Washington, DC: APA.
9. Slade and Bentall, Sensory Deception, op. cit. 10. K. Jaspers
(1913/1963) General Psychopathology (trans. J. Hoenig and M. W.
Hamilton). Manchester: Manchester University Press. 11. C. H. Mellor
(1970) 'First-rank symptoms of schizophrenia', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 117: 15--23. 12. P. M. Salkovskis (1985)
'Obsessional-compulsive problems: a cognitive behavioural analysis',
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23: 571--83. 13. K. Schneider (1959)
Clinical Psychopathology. New York: Grune & Stratton. 14. N. Sartorius,
R. Shapiro and A. Jablensky (1974) 'The international pilot study of
schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 1: 21--5. 15. G. Asaad and B.
Shapiro (1986) 'Hallucinations: theoretical and clinical overview',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 143: 1088--97. 16. L. J. Miller, E.
O'Connor and T. DiPasquale (1993) 'Patients' attitudes to
hallucinations', American Journal of Psychiatry, 150: 584--8.

17. I. Al-Issa (1978) 'Sociocultural factors in hallucinations',
International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 24: 167--76; I. Al-Issa
(1995) 'The illusion of reality or the reality of an illusion:
hallucinations and culture', British Journal of Psychiatry, 166:
368--73; A. Jablensky, N. Sartorius, G. Ernberg, M. Anker, A. Korten, J.
E. Cooper, R. Day and A. Bertelsen (1992) 'Schizophrenia:
manifestations, incidence and course in different cultures',
Psychological Medicine (Supplement 20): 1--97. 18. W. Pryse-Phillips
(1971) 'An olfactory reference syndrome', Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 47: 484--509. 19. J. S. Strauss (1969) 'Hallucinations and
delusions as points on continua function: rating scale evidence',
Archives of General Psychiatry, 21: 581--6. 20. M. Romme and S. Escher
(eds.) (1993) Accepting Voices. London: MIND Publications. 21. For
reviews of the medical evidence, see Asaad and Shapiro,
'Hallucinations', op. cit., and Slade and Bentall, Sensory Deception,
op. cit. 22. R. K. Siegel and M. E. Jarvick (1975) 'Drug-induced
hallucinations in animals and man', in R. K. Siegel and L. J. West
(eds.), Hallucinations: Behavior, Experience and Theory. New York:
Wiley. 23. E. C. Johnstone, J. F. MacMillan and T. J. Crow (1987) 'The
occurrence of organic disease of possible or probable aetiological
significance in a population of 268 cases of first episode
schizophrenia', Psychological Medicine, 17: 371--9. 24. J. R. Cornelius,
J. Mezzich, H. Fabrega, M. D. Cornelius, J. Myers and R. F. Ulrich
(1991) 'Characterizing organic hallucinosis', Comprehensive Psychiatry,
32: 338--44. 25. M. Pennings and M. Romme (1996) 'Stemmen horen bij
schizofrenie patienten, patienten met een dissociatieve stoornis en bij
niet patienten', in M. de Hert, E. Thijs, I. Peuskens, D. Petri and B.
van Raay (eds.), Zin in waanzin: De wereld van schizofrenie. Antwerp:
EPO, pp. 137--50. 26. I. Leudar, P. Thomas, D. McNally and A. Glinsky
(1997) 'What voices can do with words: pragmatics of verbal
hallucinations', Psychological Medicine, 27: 885--98. 27. P. Chadwick
and M. Birchwood (1994) 'The omnipotence of voices: a cognitive approach
to auditory hallucinations', British Journal of Psychiatry, 164:
190--201; P. Chadwick and M. Birchwood (1995) 'The omnipotence of voices
II: The beliefs about voices questionnaire (BAVQ)', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 166: 773--6.

28. M. Birchwood, A. Meaden, P. Trower, P. Gilbert and J. Plaistow
(2000) 'The power and omnipotence of voices: subordination and
entrapment by voices and significant others', Psychological Medicine,
30: 337--44. 29. A. P. Morrison (2001) 'The interpretation of intrusions
in psychosis: an integrative cognitive approach to hallucinations and
delusions', Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 29: 257--76. See
also A. P. Morrison, A. Wells and S. Nothard (2000) 'Cognitive factors
in predisposition to auditory and visual hallucinations', British
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 39: 67--78. 30. A. P. Morrison and A.
Wells (in press) 'A comparison of metacognitions in patients with
hallucinations, delusions, panic disorder, and non-patient controls',
Behaviour Research and Therapy. 31. Al-Issa, 'The illusion of reality or
the reality of an illusion?', op. cit. 32. Jablensky et al.,
'Schizophrenia', op. cit. 33. H. L. Lenz (1964) Verleichende
Psychiatrie: Ein Studie über die Beziehung von Kultur, Sociologie und
Psychopathologie. Vienna: Wilhelm Mandrich. 34. J. Kroll and B. Bachrach
(1982) 'Visions and psychopathology in the Middle Ages', Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 170: 41--9. 35. T. X. Barber and D. S.
Calverley (1964) 'An experimental study of "hypnotic" (auditory and
visual) hallucinations', Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63:
13--20. 36. S. Mintz and M. Alpert (1972) 'Imagery vividness, reality
testing and schizophrenic hallucinations', Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 19: 310--16. 37. H. F. Young, R. P. Bentall, P. D.
Slade and M. E. Dewey (1987) 'The role of brief instructions and
suggestibility in the elicitation of hallucinations in normal and
psychiatric subjects', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175:
41--8. For a more complex experiment demonstrating that hallucinating
patients are excessively suggestible in the auditory modality, see G.
Haddock, P. D. Slade and R. P. Bentall (1995) 'Auditory hallucinations
and the verbal transformation effect: the role of suggestions',
Personality and Individual Differences, 19: 301-- 6. 38. A. Margo, D. R.
Hemsley and P. D. Slade (1981) 'The effects of varying auditory input on
schizophrenic hallucinations', British Journal of Psychiatry, 139:
122--7.

39. A. G. Gallagher, T. G. Dinin and L. V. J. Baker (1994) 'The effects
of varying auditory input on schizophrenic hallucinations: a
replication', British Journal of Medical Psychology, 67: 67--76. 40. G.
L. Belenky (1979) 'Unusual visual experiences reported by subjects in
the British Army study of sustained operations, Exercise Early Call',
Military Medicine, 144: 695--6. 41. N. L. Comer, L. Madow and J. J.
Dixon (1967) 'Observations of sensory deprivation in a life-threatening
situation', American Journal of Psychiatry, 124: 164--9. 42. R.K. Siegel
(1984) 'Hostage hallucinations: visual imagery induced by isolation and
lifethreatening stress', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 172:
264--72. 43. W. D. Reese (1971) 'The hallucinations of widowhood',
British Medical Journal, 210: 37--41. 44. A. Grimby (1993) 'Bereavement
among elderly people: grief reactions, postbereavement hallucinations
and quality of life', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 87: 72--80. 45. A.
Grimby (1998) 'Hallucinations following the loss of a spouse: common and
normal events among the elderly', Journal of Clinical Geropsychology, 4:
65--74. 46. R. Lange, J. Houran, T. M. Harte and R. A. Haves (1996)
'Contextual mediation of perceptions in hauntings and poltergeist-like
experiences', Perceptual and Motor Skills, 82: 755--62. 47. B. K. Toone,
E. Cooke and M. H. Lader (1981) 'Electrodermal activity in the affective
disorders and schizophrenia', Psychological Medicine, 11: 497--508. 48.
R. Cooklin, D. Sturgeon and J. P. Leff (1983) 'The relationship between
auditory hallucinations and spontaneous fluctuations of skin conductance
in schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry, 142: 47--52. 49.
Leudar et al., 'What voices can do with words', op. cit. 50. L. N. Gould
(1948) 'Verbal hallucinations and activity of vocal musculature',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 105: 367--72;L.N. Gould (1950) 'Verbal
hallucinations and automatic speech', American Journal of Psychiatry,
107: 110--19. 51. T. Inouye and A. Shimizu (1970) 'The electromyographic
study of verbal hallucination', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
151: 415--22.

For other demonstrations of subvocalization in patients suffering from
auditory hallucinations, see: F. J. McGuigan (1966) 'Covert oral
behavior and auditory hallucinations', Psychophysiology, 3: 73--80; and
M. F. Green and M. Kinsbourne (1990) 'Subvocal activity and auditory
hallucinations: clues for behavioral treatments', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 16: 617--25. 52. L. N. Gould (1949) 'Auditory hallucinations
and subvocal speech', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 109:
418--27. 53. P. Green and M. Preston (1981) 'Reinforcement of vocal
correlates of auditory hallucinations by auditory feedback: a case
study', British Journal of Psychiatry, 139: 204--8. 54. J. R. Stevens
and A. Livermore (1982) 'Telemetered EEG in schizophrenia: spectral
analysis during abnormal behaviour episodes', Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 45: 385--95. 55. P. K. McGuire, G. M. Shah
and R. M. Murray (1993) 'Increased blood flow in Broca's area during
auditory hallucinations', Lancet, 342: 703--6. 56. D. A. Silbersweig, E.
Stern, C. Frith, C. Cahill, A. Holmes, S. Grootoonk, J. Seaward, P.
McKenna, S. E. Chua, L. Schnorr, T. Jones and R. S. J. Frackowiak (1995)
'A functional neuroanatomy of hallucinations in schizophrenia', Nature,
378: 176--9. 57. R. E. Hoffman (1986) 'Verbal hallucinations and
language production processes in schizophrenia', Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 9: 503--48. 58. K. Akins and D. Dennett (1986) 'Who may I say
is calling?' Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 9: 517--18. 59. G. L.
Stephens and G. Graham (2000) When Self-Consciousness Breaks: Alien
Voices and Inserted Thoughts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 60. M. K.
Johnson, S. Hashtroudi and D. S. Lindsay (1993) 'Source monitoring',
Psychological Bulletin, 114 (1): 3--28; M. K. Johnson and C. L. Raye
(1981) 'Reality monitoring', Psychological Review, 88: 67--85. 61. B.
Miles (1998) Paul McCartney: Many Years from Now. London: Vintage.

62. A. B. Heilbrun (1980) 'Impaired recognition of self-expressed
thought in patients with auditory hallucinations', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 89: 728--36. 63. A. B. Heilbrun, N. A. Blum and M. Haas
(1983) 'Cognitive vulnerability to auditory hallucinations: preferred
imagery mode and spatial location of sounds', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 143: 294--9; R. P. Bentall, G. A. Baker and S. Havers (1991)
'Reality monitoring and psychotic hallucinations', British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 30: 213--22. 64. P. Rankin and P. O'Carrol (1995)
'Reality monitoring and signal detection in individuals prone to
hallucinations', British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 34: 517--28.
65. Bentall et al., 'Reality monitoring', op. cit. 66. M. L. Seal, S. F.
Crowe and P. Cheung (1997) 'Deficits in source monitoring in subjects
with auditory hallucinations may be due to differences in verbal
intelligence and verbal memory', Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 2: 273--90.
67. G. Brebion, X. Amador, A. David, D. Malaspina and Z. Sharif (2000)
'Positive symptomatology and source monitoring failure in schizophrenia:
an analysis of symptomspecific effects', Psychiatry Research, 95:
119--31. Foraslightly different kind of sourcemonitoring experiment
which produced results that are consistent with the argument I am making
in this chapter, see N. Franck, P. Rouby, E. Daprati, J. Dalery, M.
Marie-Cardine and N. Georgieff (2000) 'Confusion between silent and
overt reading in schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Research, 41: 357--68.
68. R. P. Bentall and P.D. Slade (1985) 'Reality testing and auditory
hallucinations: a signaldetection analysis', British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 24: 159--69. 69. Rankin and O'Carrol, 'Reality monitoring
and signal detection', op. cit. 70. G. Brebion, M. J. Smith, X. Amador,
D. Malaspina and J. M. Gorman (1998) 'Word recognition, discrimination
accuracy, and decision bias in schizophrenia: association with positive
symptomatology and depressive symptomatology', Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 186: 604--9. 71. C. A. Baker and A. P. Morrison (1998)
'Cognitive processes in auditory hallucinations: attributional biases
and metacognition', Psychological Medicine, 28:1199--208; A.P. Morrison
and G. Haddock (1997) 'Cognitive factors in source monitoring and
auditory hallucinations', Psychological Medicine, 27: 669--79. 72. I.
Ensum and A. P. Morrison (in press) 'The effects of focus of attention
on attributional bias in patients experiencing auditory hallucinations',
Behaviour Research and Therapy.

73. L. C. Johns and P. K. McGuire (1999) 'Verbal self-monitoring and
auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia', Lancet, 353: 469--70; L. C.
Johns, S. Rossell, C. Frith, F. Ahmad, D. Hemsley, E. Kuipers and P. K.
McGuire (2001) 'Verbal self-monitoring and auditory hallucinations in
people with schizophrenia', Psychological Medicine, 31: 705--15. 74. H.
Szechtman, E. Woody, K. S. Bowers and C. Nahmias (1998) 'Where the
imaginal appears real: a positron emission tomography study of auditory
hallucinations', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA,
95: 1956--60. 75. Leudar and Thomas, Voices of Reason, Voices of
Insanity, op. cit. 76. G.L. Stephens and G. Graham (2000) When
Self-Consciousness Breaks, op. cit. 77. A. P. Morrison and C. A. Baker
(2000) 'Intrusive thoughts and auditory hallucinations: a comparative
study of intrusions in psychosis', Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38:
1097--106. 78. A. P. Morrison (2001) 'The interpretation of intrusions
in psychosis: an integrative cognitive approach to hallucinations and
delusions', Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 29: 257--76. 79. D.
M. Wegner (1994) White Bears and Other Unwanted Thoughts: Suppression,
Obsession and the Psychology of Mental Control. New York: Guilford. 80.
L. Sass (1992) Madness and Modernism: Insanity in the Light of Modern
Art, Literature, and Thought. New York: Basic Books.

Chapter 15 The Language of Madness 1. Source unknown. 2. E. Kraepelin
(1905) Lectures in Clinical Psychiatry (revised 2nd edn). London:
Baillière, Tindall and Cox. 3. ibid. The quotation is as given in R. D.
Laing's The Divided Self (London: Tavistock Press, 1960) with Laing's
italics. 4. E. Bleuler (1911/1950) Dementia Praecox or the Group of
Schizophrenias (trans. E. Zinkin). New York: International Universities
Press.

5. E. von Domarus (1944) 'The specific laws of logic in schizophrenia',
in J. S. Kasanin (ed.), Language and Thought in Schizophrenia. New York:
Norton. 6. L. S. Vygotsky (1934) 'Thought in schizophrenia', Archives of
Neurological Psychiatry, 31: 1063--77. 7. K. Goldstein (1944)
'Methodological approach to the study of schizophrenic thought
disorder', in Kasanin (ed.), Language and Thought, op. cit. 8. N.
Cameron (1944) 'Experimental analysis of schizophrenic thinking', in
Kasanin (ed.), Language and Thought, op. cit. 9. N. Cameron (1947) The
Psychology of Behavior Disorders. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. For a
detailed account of Cameron's work, see L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman
(1973). Disordered Thought in Schizophrenia. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall. 10. Chapman and Chapman, Disordered Thought, op. cit. 11.
S. Rochester and J. R. Martin (1979) Crazy Talk: A Study of the
Discourse of Psychotic Speakers. New York: Plenum. 12. N. C. Andreasen
(1982) 'Should the term "thought disorder" be revised?' Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 23: 291--9. 13. N. C. Andreasen (1979) 'The clinical
assessment of thought, language and communication disorders', Archives
of General Psychiatry, 36: 1315--21. 14. N. C. Andreasen (1979)
'Thought, language and communication disorders: diagnostic
significance', Archives of General Psychiatry, 36: 1325--30. 15. For
replications of this finding, see: P. D. Harvey, E. A. Earle-Boyer and
M. S. Wielgus (1984). 'The consistency of thought disorder in mania and
schizophrenia: an assessment of acute psychotics', Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 172: 458--63; and L. S. Grossman and M. Harrow
(1991) 'Thought disorder and cognitive processes in mania', in
P.A.Magaro (ed.), Annual Review of Psychopathology, Newbury Park, CA:
Sage. 16. R. D. Laing (1960) The Divided Self. London: Tavistock Press.
17. M. Harrow and M. Prosen (1978) 'Intermingling and the disordered
logic as influences on schizophrenic thought', Archives of General
Psychiatry,35:1213--18; M. Harrow and M.

Prosen (1979) 'Schizophrenic thought disorders: bizarre associations and
intermingling', American Journal of Psychiatry, 136: 293--6. 18. For a
review, see Chapter 11 of Chapman and Chapman, Disordered Thought in
Schizophrenia, op cit. 19. L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman (1974)
'Schizophrenic response to affectivity in word definition', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 83: 616--22. 20. A. Shimkunas (1972) 'Demand for
intimate self-disclosure and pathological verbalizations in
schizophrenia', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 80: 197--205. 21. G.
Haddock, M. Wolfenden, I. Lowens, N. Tarrier and R. P. Bentall (1995)
'The effect of emotional salience on the thought disorder of patients
with a diagnosis of schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry, 167:
618--20. 22. N. M. Docherty, I. M. Evans, W. H. Sledge, J. P. Seibyl and
J. H. Krystal (1994) 'Affective reactivity of language in
schizophrenia', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 182: 98--102; N.
M. Docherty and A. S. Hebert (1997) 'Comparative affective reactivity of
different types of communication disturbances in schizophrenia', Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 106: 325--30. 23. S. Tai, G. Haddock and R. P.
Bentall (in submission) 'The effects of emotional salience on thought
disorder in patients with bipolar affective disorder'. 24. W. M. Grove
and N. C. Andreasen (1985) 'Language and thinking in psychosis',
Archives of General Psychiatry, 42: 26--32. 25. M. Harrow and J. G.
Miller (1980) 'Schizophrenic thought disorders and impaired
perspective', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 89: 717--27. 26. Rochester
and Martin, Crazy Talk, op. cit. 27. B. A. Maher, K. O. McKean and B.
McLaughlin (1966) 'Studies in psychotic language', in P. J. Stone, R. F.
Bales, Z. Namenworth and D. M. Ogilvie (eds.), The General Inquirer: A
Computer Approach to Content Analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 28.
Quoted in Rochester and Martin, Crazy Talk, op. cit. 29. P. D. Harvey
and J. M. Neale (1983) 'The specificity of thought disorder to
schizophrenia: research methods in their historical perspective', in B.
A. Maher and W. B.

Maher (eds.), Progress in Experimental Personality Research. New York:
Academic Press. 30. T. Wykes and J. Leff (1982) 'Disordered speech:
differences between manics and schizophrenics', Brain and Language, 15:
117--24. 31. P. D. Harvey (1983) 'Speech competence in manic and
schizophrenic psychosis: the association between clinically rated
thought disorder and cohesion and reference performance', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 92: 368--77. For similar findings, see: A. B. Ragin
and T. F. Oltmanns (1986) 'Lexical cohesion and formal thought disorder
during and after psychotic episodes', Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
95: 181--3. 32. Elaine Chaika of Providence College in Rhode Island
(Understanding Psychotic Speech: Beyond Freud and Chomsky. Springfield,
IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1990; see also 'On analysing psychotic speech:
what model should we use?', in A. Sims (ed.) (1995) Speech and Language
Disorders in Psychiatry. London: Gaskell) has questioned aspects of
Halliday and Hasan's theory of cohesion, arguing that some speech can
have ample cohesive ties but still remain incoherent. An example of such
speech from a schizophrenia patient she studied was as follows:

Her parents that she's so proud of she goes out, leaves the ice cream
and eats it and on the way and we don't know what happens the fact. You
can interpolate and say that she ate the ice cream and brought it home.
In her own research, Chaika asked schizophrenia patients and ordinary
people to watch and then talk about a short film, 'The Ice Cream
Stories', concerning a young girl who is refused cash for ice cream from
her mother but who manages to persuade her father to supply the
necessary money. Using an analysis similar to that employed by Rochester
and Martin, she found no evidence of abnormal cohesive ties, although
there was evidence of excessive exophoria. Chaika's findings certainly
did not imply that the speech of thoughtdisordered patients is normal.
They often had difficulty constructing narratives that followed the
temporal ordering of the events in the story. When the normal
participants misperceived some aspect of the story, their misperception
generally fitted in with the story line (for example, they mistook the
flavour of the ice cream bought by the girl) whereas the misperceptions
of the schizophrenia patients sometimes deviated from the story line
significantly (for example, one patient reported that the girl in the

story moved a shop counter rather than leaned against it). Sometimes the
schizophrenia patients veered off the story line and never returned to
it. 33. N. M. Docherty, M. DeRosa and N. C. Andreasen (1996)
'Communication disturbances in schizophrenia and mania', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 53: 358--64. 34. Docherty and Hebert, 'Comparative
affective reactivity', op. cit. 35. R. E. Hoffman, L. Kirstein, S.
Stopek and D. V. Cicchetti (1982) 'Apprehending schizophrenic discourse:
a structural analysis of the listener's task', Brain and Language, 15:
207--33. 36. R. E. Hoffman, S. Stopek and N. C. Andreasen (1986) 'A
comparative study of manic vsschizophrenic speech disorganization',
Archives of General Psychiatry, 43: 831--5. 37. A. W. Beveridge and K.
Brown (1985) 'A critique of Hoffman's analysis of schizophrenic speech',
Brain and Language, 24: 174--81. 38. D. M. Barch and H. Berenbaum (1996)
'Language production and thought disorder in schizophrenia', Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 105: 81--8. 39. Chaika, 'On analysing psychotic
speech', op. cit. 40. P. D. Harvey (1985) 'Reality monitoring in mania
and schizophrenia: the association between thought disorder and
performance', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 92: 368--77; P. D. Harvey
(1988) 'Cognitive deficits and thought disorder: a retest study',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 14: 57--66; P. D. Harvey and M. Serper (1990)
'Linguistic and cognitive failures in schizophrenia: a multivariate
analysis', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 178: 487--94. 41. Y.
Sarfati, M. C. Hardy-Bayle, C. Besche and D. Widlocher (1997)
'Attributions of intentions to others in people with schizophrenia: a
nonverbal exploration with comic strips', Schizophrenia Research, 25:
199--209; Y. Sarfati and M. C. Hardy-Bayle (1999) 'How do people with
schizophrenia explain the behaviour of others? A study of theory of mind
and its relationship to thought and speech disorganization
inschizophrenia', Psychological Medicine, 29: 613--20;Y. Sarfati, M. C.
Hardy-Bayle, E. Brunet and D. Widlocher (1999) 'Investigating theory of
mind in schizophrenia: influence of verbalization in disorganized and
nondisorganized patients', Schizophrenia Research, 37: 183--90; Y.
Sarfati, C. Passerieux and M. C. Hardy-Bayle (2000) 'Can verbalization
remedy the theory of mind deficit in schizophrenia?' Psychopathology,
33: 246--51; Y. H. B. Sarfati, J. Nadel, J. F. Chevalier and D.
Widlocher (1997) 'Attribution of mental states to others by
schizophrenic patients,' Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 2: 1--17.

42. T. F. Oltmanns and J. M. Neale (1978) 'Distractability in relation
to other aspects of schizophrenic disorder', in S. Schwartz (ed.),
Language and Cognition in Schizophrenia. Hillsdale, NJ. Erlbaum. 43.
See, for example, P. D. Harvey, E. A. Earle-Boyer and J. C. Levinson
(1986) 'Distractability and discourse failure: their association in
mania and schizophrenia', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 174:
274--9. 44. D. Barch and H. Berenbaum (1994) 'The relationship between
information processing and language production', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 103: 241--50. 45. C. M. Adler, T. E. Goldberg, A. K.
Malhotra, D. Pickar and A. Breier (1998) 'Effects of ketamine on thought
disorder, working memory, and semantic memory in healthy volunteers',
Biological Psychiatry, 43: 811--16. 46. T. E. Goldberg and D. R.
Weinberger (2000) 'Thought disorder in schizophrenia: a reappraisal of
older formulations and an overview of some recent studies', Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry, 5: 1--19. 47. For a discussion of these effects and
their relevance to psychiatric disorders, see: E. Chen, P. McKenna and
A. Wilkins (1995) 'Semantic processing and categorisation in
schizophrenia', in A. Sims (ed.), Speech and Language Disorders in
Psychiatry. London: Gaskell; and M. Spitzer (1997) 'A cognitive
neuroscience view of schizophrenic thought disorder', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 23: 29--50. 48. See, for example: L. Clare, P. J. McKenna, A.
M. Mortimer and A. D. Baddeley (1993) 'Memory in schizophrenia: what is
impaired and what is preserved?' Neuropsychologia, 31: 1225--41; and P.
J. McKenna, A. M. Mortimer and J. R. Hodges (1994) 'Semantic memory and
schizophrenia', in A. S. David and J. C. Cutting (eds.), The
Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hove: Erlbaum. 49. Spitzer, 'A
cognitive neuroscience view', op. cit. 50. T. E. Goldberg, M. Aloia, M.
L. Gourovitch, D. Missar, D. Pickar and D. R. Weinberger (1998)
'Cognitive substrates of thought disorder, I: The semantic system',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155: 1671--6. 51. Goldberg and
Weinberger, 'Thought disorder in schizophrenia', op. cit. 52. B. A.
Maher, T. C. Manschreck, T. M. Hoover and C. C. Weisstein (1987)
'Thought disorder and measured features of language production in
schizophrenia', in P. D. Harvey and E. Walker (eds.), Positive and
Negative Symptoms in Psychosis: Description, Research and Future
Directions. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; T. C. Manschreck, B. A. Maher, J. J.
Milavetz, D. Ames, C.

C. Weisstein and M. L. Schneyer (1988) 'Semantic priming in thought
disordered schizophrenic patients', Schizophrenia Research, 1: 61--6.
53. Spitzer, 'A cognitive neuroscience view', op. cit. 54. M. Spitzer,
U. Braun, L. Hermie and S. Maier (1993) 'Associative semantic network
dysfunction in thought disordered schizophrenic patients', Biological
Psychiatry, 34: 864--77. 55. M. Aloia, M. L. Gourovitch, D. Missar, D.
Pickar, D. R. Weinberger and T. E. Goldberg (1998) 'Cognitive substrates
of thought disorder, II: specifying a candidate cognitive mechanism',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155: 1677--84. See also D. M. Barch, J.
D. Cohen, D. Servan-Schreiber, S. Steingard, S. Steinhauer and D.P.van
Kammen (1996) 'Semantic priming in schizophrenia: anexamination of
spreading activation using word pronounciation and multiple SOAs',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105: 592--601. 56. D. M. Barch and H.
Berenbaum (1996) 'Language production and thought disorder in
schizophrenia', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105: 81--8. 57. Grossman
and Harrow, 'Thought disorder and cognitive processes in mania', op.
cit.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 16 Things are Much More Complex than they Seem 1. J. B. S.
Haldane (1923) Daedalus, or Science and the Future. London: Kegan Paul.
2. R. Mojtabai and R. O. Rieder (1998) 'Limitations of the
symptom-orientated approach to psychiatric research', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 173: 198--202. 3. See, for example, his comments about
delusions in G. E. Berrios (1991) 'Delusions as "wrong beliefs": a
conceptual history', British Journal of Psychiatry, 159: 6--13. 4. T.
Honderich (1993) How Free are You?: The Determinism Problem. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 5. R. Warner (1985) Recovery from
Schizophrenia: Psychiatry and Political Economy. New York: Routledge &
Kegan Paul. 6. P. Sturmey (1996) Functional Analysis in Clinical
Psychology. Chichester: Wiley. 7. B. A. Maher (1974) 'Delusional
thinking and perceptual disorder', Journal of Individual Psychology, 30:
98--113. 8. S. Escher, M. Romme, A. Buiks, P. Delespaul and J. van Os
(2002) 'Formation of delusional ideationinadolescents hearing voices: a
prospective study', American Journal of Medical Genetics
(Neuropsychiatric Genetics), 114: 913--20. 9. G. Haddock, P. D. Slade
and R. P. Bentall (1995) 'Auditory hallucinations and the verbal
transformation effect: the role of suggestions', Personality and
Individual Differences, 19: 301-- 6; S. Mintz and M. Alpert (1972)
'Imagery vividness, reality testing and schizophrenic hallucinations',
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 19: 310--16; H. F. Young, R.
P. Bentall, P. D. Slade and M. E. Dewey (1987) 'The role of brief
instructions and suggestibility in the elicitation of hallucinations in
normal and psychiatric subjects', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
175: 41--8. 10. M. Birchwood, Z. Iqbal, P. Chadwick and P. Trower (2000)
'Cognitive approach to depression and suicidal thinking in psychosis: 1.
Ontogeny of post-psychotic depression', British Journal of Psychiatry,
177: 516--21.

11. Z. Iqbal, M. Birchwood, P. Chadwick and P. Trower (2000) 'Cognitive
approach to depression and suicidal thinking in psychosis: 2. Testing
the validity of a social rank model', British Journal of Psychiatry,
177: 522--8. 12. D. H. Erickson, M. Beiser and W. G. Iacono (1998)
'Social support predicts 5-year outcome in first-episode schizophrenia',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107: 681--5. 13. P. Meehl (1962)
'Schizotaxia, schizotypia, schizophrenia', American Psychologist, 17:
827--38. See Chapter 5 of this book for more details. 14. G. S. Claridge
(1990) 'Can a disease model of schizophrenia survive?', in R. P. Bentall
(ed.), Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London: Routledge. 15. K. H.
Nuechterlein and K. L. Subotnik (1998) 'The cognitive origins of
schizophrenia and prospects for intervention', in T. Wykes, N. Tarrier
and S. Lewis (eds.), Outcome and Innovation in Psychological Treatment
of Schizophrenia. Chichester: Wiley. 16. L. Y. Abramson, G. I. Metalsky
and L. B. Alloy (1989) 'Hopelessness depression: a theory-based subtype
of depression', Psychological Review, 96: 358--72; L. Y. Abramson, M. E.
P. Seligman and J. D. Teasdale (1978) 'Learned helplessness in humans:
critique and reformulation', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 78: 40--74.
17. M. H. Kernis (1993) 'The role of stability and level of self-esteem
in psychological functioning', in R. F. Baumeister (ed.), Self-Esteem:
The Puzzle of Low Self-Regard. New York: Plenum, pp. 167--82; M. H.
Kernis, D. P. Cornell, C. R. Sun, A. Berry and T. Harlow (1993) 'There's
more to self-esteem than whether it is high or low: the importance of
stability of selfesteem', Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
65: 1190--204. 18. K. D. Greenier, M. H. Kernis, C. W. McNamara, S. B.
Waschull, A. J. Berry, C. E. Herlocker and T. A. Abend (1999)
'Individual differences in reactivity to events: re-examining the roles
of stability and level of self-esteem', Journal of Personality, 67:
185--208. 19. A. Gottschalk, M. S. Bauer and P. C. Whybrow (1995)
'Evidence of chaotic mood variation in bipolar disorder', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 52: 947--59. 20. J. Gleick (1988) Chaos: Making a
New Science. London: Heinemann. 21. I. Myin-Germeys, J. van Os, J. E.
Schwartz, A. Stone and P. Delespaul (2001) 'Emotional reactivity to
daily stress in psychosis', Archives of General Psychiatry, 58:
1137--44. 22. I. Myin-Germeys, L. Krabbendam, J. Jolles, P. A. E. G.
Delespaul and J. van Os (2002) 'Are cognitive impairments associated
with sensitivity to stress in schizophrenia? An experience

sampling study', American Journal of Psychiatry, 159: 443--9. 23. W.
Tschacher (1996) 'The dynamics of psychosocial crises: time courses and
causal models', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184: 172--9. See
also W. Tschacher, C. Scheier and Y. Hashimoto (1997) 'Dynamical
analysis of schizophrenia courses', Biological Psychiatry, 41: 428--37.
24. A. Gumley, C. A. White and K. Power (1999) 'An interacting cognitive
subsystems model of relapse and the course of psychosis', Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 6: 261-- 78. 25. J. A. Smith and N.
Tarrier (1992) 'Prodromal symptoms in manic depressive psychosis',
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 27: 245--8. 26. M.
Birchwood (1996) 'Early intervention in psychotic relapse: cognitive
approaches to detection and management', in G. Haddock and P. D. Slade
(eds.), Cognitive-Behavioural Interventions with Psychotic Disorders.
London: Rout-ledge, pp. 171--211. 27. G. W. Brown (1984) 'The discovery
of expressed emotion: induction or deduction?', in J. Leff and C. Vaughn
(eds.) Expressed Emotion in Families: Its Significance for Mental
Health. New York: Guilford, pp. 7--25. 28. G. W. Brown, M. Carstairs and
G. Topping (1958) 'Post-hospital adjustment of chronic mental patients',
Lancet, ii: 685--9. 29. G. W. Brown, E. M. Monck, G. M. Carstairs and J.
K. Wing (1962) 'Influence of family life on the course of schizophrenia
disorders', British Journal of Preventative and Social Medicine, 16:
55--68. 30. G. W. Brown and M. Rutter (1966) 'The measurement of family
activities and relationships: a methodological study', Human Relations,
19: 241--63. 31. The only widely used alternative to the Camberwell
Family Interview is the Five Minute Speech Sample, which (as the name
suggests) is based on the analysis of five minutes of speech in which
the relative talks about the patient. See A. B. Magana, M. J. Goldstein,
M. Karno, D. J. Miklowitz, J. Jenkins and I. R. H. Falloon (1986) 'A
brief method of assessing expressed emotion in relatives of psychiatric
patients', Psychiatry Research, 17: 203--12. 32. P. E. Bebbington and E.
Kuipers (1994) 'The predictive utility of expressed emotion in
schizophrenia', Psychological Medicine, 24: 707--18. For a more recent
meta-analysis that reached essentially the same conclusions, see R. L.
Butzlaff and J. M. Hooley (1998) 'Expressed emotion and psychiatric
relapse', Archives of General Psychiatry, 55: 547--52.

33. C. E. Vaughn and J. Leff (1976) 'The influence of family and social
factors on the course of psychiatric illness: a comparison of
schizophrenic and depressed neurotic patients', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 129: 125--37. 34. J. P. Leff and C. Vaughn (1980) 'The
interaction of life-events and relatives' expressed emotion in
schizophrenia and depressive neurosis', British Journal of Psychiatry,
136: 146--53. 35. J. M. Hooley, J. Orley and J. D. Teasdale (1989)
'Predictors of relapse in unipolar depressives: expressed emotion,
marital distress and perceived criticism', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 98: 229--37. 36. D. J. Miklowitz, M. J. Goldstein, K. H.
Nuechterlein, K. S. Snyder and J. Mintz (1988) 'Family factors and the
course of bipolar affective disorder', Archives of General Psychiatry,
45: 225--31. 37. N. Tarrier and G. Turpin (1992) 'Psychosocial factors,
arousal and schizophrenic relapse: the physiological data', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 161: 3--11. 38. M. Goldstein, I. Rosenfarb, S.
Woo and K. Nuechterlein (1994) 'Intrafamilial relationships and the
course of schizophrenia', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 90 (Supplement
384): 60--6. 39. C. Barrowclough, N. Tarrier, L. Humphreys, J. Ward, L.
Gregg and B. Andrews (in press) 'Self-esteem in schizophrenia: the
relationship between self-evaluation, family attitudes and
symptomatology', Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 40. D.
J. Miklowitz, M. J. Goldstein, I. R. Falloon and J. A. Doane (1984)
'Interactional correlates of expressed emotion in the families of
schizophrenics', British Journal of Psychiatry, 144: 482--7. 41. D. J.
Miklowitz (1994) 'Family risk indicators in schizophrenia',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20: 137--49. 42. C. R. Brewin, B. MacCarthy, K.
Duda and C. E. Vaughn (1991) 'Attribution and expressed emotion in the
relatives of patients with schizophrenia', Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 100: 546--54. 43. C. Barrowclough, M. Johnston and N.
Tarrier (1994) 'Attributions, expressed emotion and patient relapse: an
attributional model of relatives' response to schizophrenic illness',
Behavior Therapy, 25: 67--88.

44. G. Fadden, P. E. Bebbington and L. Kuipers (1987) 'The impact of
functional psychiatric illness on the patient's family', British Journal
of Psychiatry, 150: 285--92. 45. E. Kuipers and D. Raune (2000) 'The
early development of expressed emotion and burden in the families of
first-onset psychosis', in M. Birchwood, D. Fowler and C. Jackson
(eds.), Early Intervention in Psychosis. London: Wiley, pp. 128--40. 46.
D. Diamond and J. Doane (1994) 'Disturbed attachment and negative
affective style: an intergenerational spiral', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 164: 770--81. 47. G. Paley, D. A. Shapiro and A.
Worrall-Davies (2000) 'Familial origins of expressed emotion in
relatives of people with schizophrenia', Journal of Mental Health, 9:
655--63. 48. E. Kuipers and E. Moore (1995) 'Expressed emotion and
staff--client relationships: implications for community care of the
severely mentally ill', International Journal of Mental Health, 24:
13--26; E. Moore, R. A. Ball and L. Kuipers (1992) 'Expressed emotion in
staff working with the long-term adult mentally ill', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 161: 802--8; E. Moore and E. Kuipers (1999) 'The measurement
of expressed emotion in relationships between staff and service users:
the use of short speech samples', British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 38: 345--56; N. Oliver and E. Kuipers (1996) 'Stress and its
relationship to expressed emotion in community mental health workers',
International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 42: 150--9. 49. R. A. Ball,
E. Moore and L. Kuipers (1992) 'Expressed emotion in community care
staff: a comparison of patient outcome in a nine month follow-up of two
hostels', Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 27: 35--9. 50.
K. S. Snyder, C. J. Wallace, K. Moe and R. P. Liberman (1994) 'Expressed
emotion by residential care workers and residents' symptoms and quality
of life', Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 45: 1141--3. 51. P. E.
Bebbington, J. Bowen, S. R. Hirsch and E. A. Kuipers (1995)
'Schizophrenia and psychosocial stresses', in S. R. Hirsch and D. R.
Weinberger (eds.), Schizophrenia. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 587--604. 52.
G. W. Brown and T. Harris (1978) Social Origins of Depression. New York:
Free Press. 53. G. W. Brown and P. Moran (1998) 'Emotion and the
etiology of depressive disorders', in W. F. Flack and J. D. Laird
(eds.), Emotions in Psychopathology: Theory and Research. New York:
Oxford University Press, pp. 171--84. 54. G. W. Brown and R. Prudo
(1981) 'Psychiatric disorders in a rural and an urban population: 1.
Aetiology of depression', Psychological Medicine, 11: 581--99.

55. G. W. Brown and J. L. T. Birley (1968) 'Crises and life changes and
the onset of schizophrenia', Journal of Health and Social Behaviour, 9:
203--14. 56. Bebbington et al., 'Schizophrenia and psychosocial
stresses', op. cit. 57. S. Hirsch, J. Bowen, J. Emami, P. Cramer, A.
Jolley, C. Haw and M. Dickinson (1996) 'A one year prospective study of
the effect of life events and medication in the aetiology of
schizophrenic relapse', British Journal of Psychiatry, 168: 49--56. 58.
S. L. Johnson and J. E. Roberts (1995) 'Life events and bipolar
disorder: implications from biological theories', Psychological
Bulletin, 117: 434--49. 59. S. L. Johnson and I. Miller (1997) 'Negative
life events and time to recovery from episodes of bipolar disorder',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106: 449--57. 60. R. Finlay-Jones and G.
W. Brown (1981) 'Types of stressful life events and the onset of anxiety
and depressive disorders', Psychological Medicine, 11: 803--15. 61.
Brown and Moran, 'Emotion and the etiology of depressive disorders', op.
cit. 62. T. Harris (1987) 'Recent developments in the study of life
events in relation to psychiatric and physical disorders', in B. Cooper
(ed.), Psychiatric Epidemiology: Progress and Prospects. London: Croom
Helm, pp. 81--102. 63. R. Day, J. A. Neilsen, A. Korten, G. Ernberg, K.
C. Dube, J. Gebhart, A. Jablensky, C. Leon, A. Marsella, M. Olatawura,
N. Sartorius, E. Stromgren, R. Takahashi, N. Wig and L. C. Wynne (1987)
'Stressful life events preceding the onset of acute schizophrenia: a
cross-national study from the World Health Organization', Culture,
Medicine and Psychiatry, 11: 123--206; T. Fuchs (1999) 'Life events in
late paraphrenia and depression', Psychopathology, 32: 60--9. 64. S.
Malkoff-Schwartz, E. Frank, B. Anderson, J. T. Sherrill, L. Siegel, D.
Patterson and D.J. Kupfer (1998) 'Stressful lifeevents andsocial rhythm
disruption in the onset of manic and depressive episodes of bipolar
disorder', Archives of General Psychiatry, 55: 702--7. 65. S. L.
Johnson, D. Sandow, B. Meyer, R. Winters, I. Miller, D. Solomon and G.
Keitner (2000) 'Increases in manic symptoms after life events involving
goal attainment', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109: 721--7. 66.
Bebbington et al., 'Schizophrenia and psychosocial stresses', op. cit.

67. M. Bowers, N. Boutros, D. C. D'Souza and S. Madonick (2001)
'Substance abuse as a risk factor for schizophrenia and related
disorders', International Journal of Mental Health, 30: 33--57; A. Johns
(2001) 'Psychiatric effects of cannabis', British Journal of Psychiatry,
178: 116--22. 68. S. M. Stakowski, M. P. DelBello, D. E. Fleck and S.
Arndt (2000) 'The impact of substance abuse on the course of bipolar
disorder', Biological Psychiatry, 48: 477--85. 69. E. S. Brown, T.
Suppes, B. Adinoff and N. R. Thomas (2001) 'Drug abuse and bipolar
disorder: comorbidity or misdiagnosis?' Journal of Affective Disorders,
65: 105--15; K. T. Mueser, P. R. Yarnold, S. D. Rosenberg, C. Swett and
K. M. Miles (2000) 'Substance use in hospitalized severely mentally ill
psychiatric patients: prevalence, correlates and subgroups',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26: 179--92; I. L. Fowler, V. J. Carr, N. T.
Carter and T. J. Lewin (1998) 'Patterns of current and lifetime
substance use in schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24: 433--55.
70. K. H. Nuechterlein, M. E. Dawson, M. Giltin, J. Ventura, M. J.
Goldstein, K. S. Snyder, C. M. Yee and J. Mintz (1992) 'Developmental
processes in schizophrenic disorders: longitudinal studies of
vulnerability and stress', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 18: 387--425.

Chapter 17 From the Cradle to the Clinic 1. J. Milton (1671) Paradise
Regained. 2. S. Lewis, N. Tarrier, G. Haddock, R. P. Bentall, P.
Kinderman, D. Kingdon, R. Siddle, R. Drake, J. Everitt, K. Leadley, A.
Benn, K. Grazebrook, C. Haley, S. Akhtar, L. Davies, S. Palmer, B.
Faragher and G. Dunn (2002) 'Randomised, controlled trial of
cognitive-behaviour therapy in early schizophrenia: acute phase
outcomes', British Journal of Psychiatry, 181 (Supplement 43): s91--s97.
See also R. J. Drake, C. J. Haley, S. Akhtar and S. W. Lewis (2000)
'Causes of duration of untreated psychosis in schizophrenia', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 177: 511--15. 3. H. Hafner, K. Maurer, W. Loffler
and A. Riecher-Rossler (1993) 'The influence of age and sex on the onset
and early course of schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry, 162:
80-- 6. 4. F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison (1990) Manic-Depressive
Illness. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 5. E. Leibenluft (1996) 'Women
with bipolar illness: clinical and research issues', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 153: 163--73.

6. A. M. Vicente and J. L. Kennedy (1997) 'The genetics of
neurodevelopment and schizophrenia', in M. S. Keshavan and R. M. Murray
(eds.), Neurodevelopment and Adult Psychopathology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. 7. I. Feinberg (1982) 'Schizophrenia and late
maturational brain changes in man', Psychopharmocology Bulletin, 18:
29--31. 8. E. T. Bullmore, P. O'Connell, S. Frangou and R. M. Murray
(1997) 'Schizophrenia as a developmental disorder of neural network
integrity: the dysplastic net hypothesis', in Keshavan and Murray
(eds.), Neurodevelopment and Adult Psychopathology, op. cit. 9. H.
Hafner, W. an der Heiden, S. Behrens, W. F. Gattaz, M. Hambrecht, W.
Loffler, K. Maurer, P. Munk-Jorgensen, B. Nowotny, A. Riecher-Rossler
and A. Stein (1998) 'Causes and consequences of the gender difference in
age at onset of schizophrenia', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24: 99--113. 10.
Quoted in A. Jablensky (1999) 'The conflict of the nosologists: views on
schizophrenia and manic-depressive illness in the early part of the 20th
century', Schizophrenia Research, 39: 95--100. 11. R. Lewontin (2000)
The Triple Helix: Gene, Organism and Environment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. 12. W. T. Dickins and J. R. Flynn (2001) 'Heritability
estimates versus large environmental effects: the IQ paradox resolved',
Psychological Review, 108: 346--69. 13.A. E. Farmer (1996) 'The genetics
of depressive disorders', International Review of Psychiatry, 8:
369--72. 14. R. Mojtabai and R. O. Rieder (1998) 'Limitations of the
symptom-orientated approach to psychiatric research', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 173: 198--202. 15. H. Berenbaum, T. F. Oltmanns and I. I.
Gottesman (1987) 'A twin study perspective on positive and negative
symptoms of schizophrenia', in P. D. Harvey and E. F. Walker (eds.),
Positive and Negative Symptoms of Psychosis: Description, Research and
Future Directions. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 16. K. Kendler, L.
Karkowski-Shuman, F. A. O'Neill, R. E. Straub, C. J. MacLean and D.
Walsh (1997) 'Resemblance of psychotic symptoms and syndromes in
affected sibling pairs from the Irish study of high-density
schizophrenia families: evidence for possible etiologic heterogeneity',
American Journal of Psychiatry, 154: 191--8.

17. M. T. Singer and L. C. Wynne (1965) 'Thought disorder and family
relations of schizophrenics. III. Methodology using projective
techniques', Archives of General Psychiatry, 12: 187--200; M. T. Singer
and L. C. Wynne (1965) 'Thought disorder and family relations of
schizophrenics. IV. Results and implications', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 12: 201--12. 18. 'Projective' rather than standardized tests
were employed. In these kinds of tests, for example the familiar
Rorschach test in which the participant is asked to describe a series of
ink blots, the person being assessed is asked to generate imaginative
responses which are then analysed for their meaning. Most projective
tests were designed by psychoanalysts or psychologists inspired by
Freud's theory, and they have tended to fall into disuse, largely
because the interpretation of the participant's responses is highly
subjective, and scores are often unreliable. However, Singer and Wynne
used a very detailed scoring protocol in order to avoid this criticism.
19. An apparent exception, which seems to have knocked British research
into communication deviance stone dead, was a study reported in S. R.
Hirsch and J. P. Leff (1971) 'Parental abnormalities of verbal
communication in the transmission of schizophrenia', Psychological
Medicine, 1: 118--27. In fact, differences between the parents of
schizophrenia patients and the parents of psychiatric controls were
observed in this study, although only aminority of the parents of the
schizophrenia patients showed evidence of communication deviance. 20. N.
M. Docherty, J. P. Rhinewine, R. P. Labhart and S. W. Gordinier (1998)
'Communication disturbance and family psychiatric history in parents of
schizophrenic patients', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186:
761--8. 21. N. M. Docherty, M. J. Hall and S. W. Gordinier (1998)
'Affective reactivity of speech in schizophrenia patients and their
nonschizophrenic relatives', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107:
461--7. 22. M. A. Nugter, P. M. A. J. Dingemans, D. H. Linszen and A. J.
W. van der Does (1997) 'The relationships between expressed emotion,
affective style and communication deviance in recent-onset
schizophrenia', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 96: 445--51. 23. O.
Gambini, A. Campana, F. Macciardi and S. Scarone (1997) 'A preliminary
report of a strong genetic component for thought disorder in normals',
Neuropsychobiology, 36: 13--18. 24. D. K. Kinney, P. S. Holzman, B.
Jacobsen, L. Jansson, B. Faber, W. Hildebrand, E. Kasell and M. E.
Zimbalist (1997) 'Thought disorder in schizophrenic and control adoptees
and their relatives', Archives of General Psychiatry, 54: 475--9. 25.
K.-E. Wahlberg, L. C. Wynne, H. Oja, P. Keskitalo, L. Pykalainen, L.
Lahti, J. Moring, M. Naarala, A. Sorri, M. Seitamaa, K. Laksy, J.
Kolassa and P. Tienari (1997) 'Gene--

environment interaction in vulnerability to schizophrenia: findings from
the Finnish Adoptive Family Study of Schizophrenia', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154: 355--62; K.-E. Wahlberg, L. C. Wynne, H. Oja, P.
Keskitalo, H. Anais-Tanner, P. Koistinen, T. Tarvainen, H. Hakko, J.
Moring, M. Naarala, A. Sorri and P. Tienari (2000) 'Thought disorder
index of Finnish adoptees and communication deviance of their adoptive
parents', Psychological Medicine, 30: 127--36. 26. F. L. Coolidge, L. L.
Thede and K. L. Jang (2001) 'Heritability of personality disorders in
childhood: a preliminary investigation', Journal of Personality
Disorders, 15: 33--40; A. A. Dahl (1993) 'The personality disorders: a
critical review of family, twin and adoption studies', Journal of
Personality Disorders (Supplement 1): 86--99; S. Torgersen, S. Lygren,
P. A. Oien, I. Skre, S. Onstad, J. Edvardsen, K. Tambs and E. Kringlen
(2000) 'A twin study of personality disorders', Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 41: 416--25. 27. K. S. Kendler, A. M. Gruenberg and J. S.
Strauss (1981) 'An independent analysis of the Copenhagen sample of the
Danish Adoption Study of Schizophrenia: III. The relationship between
paranoid psychosis (delusional disorder) and the schizophrenia spectrum
disorders', Archives of General Psychiatry, 38: 985--7; K. S. Kendler
and P. Hays (1981) 'Paranoid psychosis (delusional disorder) and
schizophrenia: a family history study', Archives of General Psychiatry,
38: 547--51; K. S. Kendler, C. C. Masterson and K. L. Davis (1985)
'Psychiatric illness in first-degree relatives of patients with paranoid
psychosis, schizophrenia and medical illness', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 147: 524--31. 28. R. H. Dworkin, M. F. Lenzenweger, S. O.
Moldin, G. F. Skillings and S. E. Levick (1988) 'A multidimensional
approach to the genetics of schizophrenia', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 145: 1077--83; A. Jorgensen, T. W. Teasdale, J. Parnas, F.
Schulsinger, H. Shulsinger and S. A. Mednick (1987) 'The Copenhagen
High-Risk Project: the diagnosis of maternal schizophrenia and its
relation to offspring diagnosis', British Journal of Psychiatry, 151:
753--7; S. Onstad, I. Skre, S. Torgersen and E. Kringlen (1991)
'Subtypes of schizophrenia: evidence from a twin-family study', Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 84: 203--6. 29. R. C. Lewontin (1993) The
Doctrine of DNA: Biology as Ideology. London: Penguin. 30. S. H.
Barondes (1998) Mood Genes: Hunting for the Origins of Mania and
Depression. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 31. Vicente and Kennedy,
'The genetics of neurodevelopment and schizophrenia', op. cit. 32. J.-P.
Changeux and S. Dehaene (1989) 'Neuronal models of cognitive functions',
Cognition, 33: 63--109. 33. W. T. Greenough, J. E. Black and C. S.
Wallace (1987) 'Experience and brain development', Child Development,
58: 539--59; W. T. Greenough (1993) 'Brain adaption to experience: an
update', in M. H. Johnson (ed.), Brain Development and Cognition: A
Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.

34. J. L. Elman, E. A. Bates, M. H. Johnson, A. Karmiloff-Smith, D.
Parisi and K. Plunkett (1999) Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist
Perspective on Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 35. For an
excellently accessible description of these new techniques, see
Barondes, Mood Genes, op. cit. 36. D. F. Levinson, M. Mahtani, D. J.
Nancarrow, D. M. Brown, L. Kruglyak, A. Kirby, N. K. Hayward, R. R.
Crowe, N. C. Andreasen, D. W. Black, J. M. Silverman, J. Endicott, L.
Sharpe, R. C. Mohs, L. J. Siever, M. K. Walters, D. P. Lennon, H. L.
Jones, D. A. Nertney, M. J. Daly, M. Gladis and B. J. Mowry (1998)
'Genome scan of schizophrenia', American Journal of Psychiatry, 155:
741--50; L. E. DeLisi, S. H. Shaw, T. J. Crow, G. Shields, A. B. Smith,
V. W. Larach, N. Wellman, J. Loftus, B. Nanthakumar, K. Razi, J.
Stewart, M. Comazzi, A. Vita, T. Heffner and R. Sherrington (2002) 'A
genome-wide scan for linkage to chromosomal regions in 382 sibling pairs
with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 159: 803--12. 37. J. A. Egeland, D. S. Gerhard, D. L. Pauls,
J. N. Sussex, K. K. Kidd, C. R. Allen, A. M. Hostetter and D. E. Housman
(1987). 'Bipolar affective disorder linked to DNA markers on chromosome
11', Nature, 325: 783--7. 38. J. R. Kelsoe, E. I. Ginns, J. A. Egeland,
D. S. Gerhard, A. M. Goldstein, S. J. Bale, D. L. Pauls, R. T. Long, K.
K. Kidd, G. Conte, D. E. Housman and S. M. Paul (1989) 'Re-evaluation of
the linkage relationship between chromosome 11p loci and the gene for
bipolar affective disorder in the Old Order Amish', Nature, 342:
238--43. 39. C. Barr (1998) 'Why two findings which were eventually
refuted have been seminal for the field of psychiatric genetics',
Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 44: 625--6. 40. D. Hill (1988)
'Psychiatric delusions', New Statesman, 12 September. 41. R.
Sherrington, J. Brynjolfsson, H. Pertursson, M. Potter, K. Dudleston, B.
Barraclough, J. Wasmuth, M. Dobbs and H. G. Gurling (1988) 'Localization
of a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia on chromosome 5', Nature,
336: 164--7. 42. J. L. Kennedy, L. A. Giuffra, H. W. Moises, L. I.
Cavalli-Sforza, A. J. Pakstis, J. R. Kidd, C. M. Castiglione, L.
Wetterberg and K. K. Kidd (1988) 'Evidence against linkage of
schizophrenia to markers on chromosome 5 in a northern Swedish
pedigree', Nature, 336: 167-- 70. 43. D. St Clair, D. Blackwood, W.
Muir, D. Baillie, A. Hubbard, A. Wright and J. Evans (1989) 'No linkage
of chromosome 5q11--q13 markers to schizophrenia in Scottish families',

Nature, 339: 305--9. 44. S. D. Detera-Wadleigh, L. R. Goldin, R.
Sherrington et al. (1989) 'Exclusion of linkage to 5q11--13 in families
with schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders', Nature, 340:
391--3. 45. G. Turecki, G. A. Rouleau, J. J. Mari and K. Morgan (1996)
'A systematic evaluation of linkage studies in bipolar disorder', Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 93: 317--26; S. G. Simpson and J. R. DePaulo
(1998) 'Genetics', in P. J. Goodnick (ed.), Mania: Clinical and Research
Perspectives. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 46. The
dopamine hypothesis, discussed in Chapter 4, was proposed when it was
discovered that anti-psychotic drugs block dopamine receptors. There are
five known types of dopamine receptor, and the genes for all five types
are known. Reviewing the molecular evidence, Petter Portin and Y.O.
Alanen of the University of Turku in Finland ('A critical review of
genetic studies of schizophrenia. II: Molecular genetic studies', Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 95: 73--80, 1997) have concluded that, 'On
the whole, it seems that molecular genetic studies lend only minor
support to the dopamine theory of schizophrenia.' 47. D. B. Wildenauer,
S. G. Schwab, W. Maier and S. D. Detera-Wadleigh (1999) 'Do
schizophrenia and affective disorder share susceptibility
genes?'Schizophrenia Research, 39: 107--11. 48. T. J. Crow (1997)
'Current status of linkage for schizophrenia: polygenes of vanishingly
small effect or multiple false positives?' American Journal of Medical
Genetics (Neuropsychiatric Genetics), 74: 99--103; Portin and Alanen, 'A
critical review of genetic studies of schizophrenia, II, op. cit. 49.
Crow, 'Current status of linkage for schizophrenia', op. cit. 50.
Schizophrenia Linkage Collaborative Group for Chromosomes 3 and 6a
(1996) 'Additional support for schizophrenia linkage on chromosomes 6
and 8: a multicenter study', American Journal of Medical Genetics
(Neuropsychiatric Genetics), 67: 580--94. 51. L. E. DeLisi, S. H. Shaw,
T. J. Crow, G. Shields, A. B. Smith, V. W. Larach, N. Wellman, J.
Loftus, B. Nanthakumar, K. Razi, J. Stewart, M. Comazzi, A. Vita, T.
Heffner and R. Sherrington (2002) 'A genome-wide scan for linkage to
chromosomal regions in 382 sibling pairs with schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder', American Journal of Psychiatry, 159: 803--12.
52. S. O. Moldin (1997) 'The maddening hunt for madness genes', Nature
Genetics, 17: 127--9.

53. K. K. Kidd (1997) 'Can we find genes for schizophrenia?' American
Journal of Medical Genetics (Neuropsychiatric Genetics), 74: 104--11; E.
Rall (1998) 'Commentary: where are the genes specifying mental illness?'
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186: 722--3. 54. A. Serretti, F.
Macciardi, M. Catalano, L. Bellodi and E. Smeraldi (1999) 'Genetic
variants of dopamine receptor D4 and psychopathology', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 25: 609--18. 55. M. Boyle (1990) Schizophrenia: A Scientific
Delusion. London: Routledge; R. Marshall (1990) 'The genetics of
schizophrenia: axiom or hypothesis?' in R. P. Bentall (ed.),
Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London: Routledge; S. Rose, L. J. Kamin
and R. C. Lewontin (1985) Not in our Genes. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 56.
Consistent with this conclusion, a recent study of Irish families with a
'high density' of schizophrenia found six chromosomal regions associated
with psychosis, but found that very few families were 'positive' with
respect to more than one region. See R. E. Straub, C. J. MacLean, Y. Ma,
B. T. Webb, M. V. Myakishev, C. Harris-Kerr, B. Wormley, H. Sadek, B.
Kadambi, F. A. O'Neill, D. Walsh and K. S. Kendler (2002) 'Genome-wide
scans of three independent sets of 90 Irish multiplex schizophrenia
families and follow-up of selected regions in all families provides
evidence for multiple susceptibility genes', Molecular Psychiatry, 7:
542--59. 57. I. Feinberg (1997) 'Schizophrenia as an emergent disorder
of late brain maturation', in Keshavan and Murray (eds.),
Neurodevelopment and Adult Psycho-pathology, op. cit. 58. P. R.
Huttenlocher (1979) 'Synaptic density in human frontal cortex --
developmental changes and effects of aging', Brain Research, 163:
195--205; P. R. Hutten-locher (1990) 'Morphometric study of human
cerebral cortex development', Neuropsychologia, 517--27. 59. G. Edelman
(1989) Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 60. N. Davies, A. Russell, P. Jones and R. M.
Murray (1998) 'Which characteristics of schizophrenia predate
psychosis?' Journal of Psychiatric Research, 32: 121--31. 61. Feinberg,
'Schizophrenia and late maturational brain changes', op. cit.; R. E.
Hoffman and T. H. McGlashan (1993) 'Parallel distributed processing and
the emergence of schizophrenic symptoms', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 19:
257--61. 62. M. Davidson, A. Reichenberg, J. Rabinowitz, M. Weiser, Z.
Kaplan and M. Mark (1999) 'Behavioral and intellectual markers for
schizophrenia in apparently healthy male adolescents', American Journal
of Psychiatry, 156: 1328--35.

63. E. F. Walker (1994) 'Neurodevelopmental precursors of
schizophrenia', in A. S. David and J. C. Cutting (eds.), The
Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hove: Erlbaum. 64. E. F. Walker, K. E.
Grimes, D. M. Davis and A. J. Smith (1993) 'Childhood precursors of
schizophrenia: facial expressions of emotion', American Journal of
Psychiatry, 150: 1654-- 60. 65. M. F. Pogue-Geile and M. Harrow (1987)
'Negative symptoms in schizophrenia: longitudinal characteristics and
etiological hypotheses', in P. D. Harvey and E. F. Walker (eds.),
Positive and Negative Symptoms of Psychosis: Description, Research and
Future Directions. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 66. M. Cannon, E. Walsh, C.
Hollis, M. Kargin, E. Taylor, R. M. Murray and P. B. Jones (2001)
'Predictors of later schizophrenia and affective psychosis among
attendees at a child psychiatry department', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 178: 420--6. 67. S. A. Mednick and F. Schulsinger (1965) 'A
longitudinal study of children with a high risk for schizophrenia: a
preliminary report', in S. Vandenberg (ed.), Methods and Goals in Human
Behavior Genetics. New York: Academic Press. 68. L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling
and B. Cornblatt (1987) 'The New York High-Risk Project: a follow-up
report', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13: 451--63. 69. J. Marcus, S. L. Hans,
S. Nagler, J. G. Aurbach, A. F. Mirsky and A. Aubrey (1987) 'Review of
the NIMH Israeli Kibbutz--City Study and the Jerusalem Infant
Development Study', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13: 425--39. 70. P. H.
Venables (1990) 'Longitudinal research on schizophrenia', in Bentall
(ed.), Reconstructing Schizophrenia, op. cit. 71. T. D. Cannon, S. A.
Mednick and J. Parnas (1990) 'Two pathways to schizophrenia in children
at risk', in L. Robins and M. Rutter (eds.), Straight and Devious
Pathways from Childhood to Adulthood. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. 72. L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, B. Cornblatt, A. S. Bassett, S. O.
Moldin, U. Hilldoff-Adamo and S. Roberts (1990) 'High-risk children in
adolescence and young adulthood: course of global adjustment', in Robins
and Rutter (eds.), Straight and Devious Pathways, op. cit. 73. L.
Erlenmeyer-Kimling, U. H. Adamo, D. Rock, S. A. Roberts, A. S. Bassett,
E. SquiresWheeler, B. A. Cornblatt, J. Endicott, S. Pape and I. I.
Gottesman (1997) 'The New York HighRisk Project: prevalence and
comorbidity of axis-I disorders in offspring of schizophrenic parents at
25-year follow-up', Archives of General Psychiatry, 54: 1096--102.

74. J. R. Asarnow (1988) 'Children at risk for schizophrenia: converging
lines of evidence', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 14: 613--31. 75. C. Hollis
and E. Taylor (1997) 'Schizophrenia: a critique from the developmental
psychopathology perspective', in Keshavan and Murray (eds.),
Neurodevelopment and Adult Psychopathology, op. cit. 76. Cannon, Mednick
and Parnas, 'Two pathways to schizophrenia', op. cit. 77. R. H. Dworkin,
B. A. Cornblatt, R. Friedmann, L. M. Kaplansky, J. A. Lewis, A. Rinalsi,
C. Shilliday and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling (1993) 'Childhood precursors of
affective vs social deficits in adolescents at risk for schizophrenia',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 19: 563--76; L. R. Freedman, D. Rock, S. A.
Roberts, B. A. Cornblatt and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling (1998) 'The New York
High-Risk Project: attention, anhedonia and social outcome',
Schizophrenia Research, 30: 1--9. 78. P. B. Jones and D. J. Done (1997)
'From birth to onset: a developmental perspective of schizophrenia in
two national birth cohorts', in Keshavan and Murray (eds.),
Neurodevelopment and Adult Psychopathology, op. cit. 79. E. Frenkel, S.
Kugelmass, M. Nathan and L. J. Ingraham (1995) 'Locus of control and
mental health in adolescence and adulthood', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 21:
219--26. 80. S. A. Mednick (1970) 'Breakdown in individuals at high risk
of schizophrenia: possible predisposing perinatal factors', Mental
Hygiene, 54: 50--63. 81. S. W. Lewis, M. J. Owen and R. M. Murray (1989)
'Obstetric complications and schizophrenia: methodology and mechanisms',
in S. C. Schulz and C. A. Tamming (eds.), Schizophrenia: A Scientific
Focus. New York: Oxford University Press; S. L. Buka, M. T. Tsuang and
L. P. Lipsitt (1993) 'Pregnancy/delivery complications and psychiatric
diagnosis: a prospective study', Archives of General Psychiatry, 50:
151--6. 82. D. J. Done, E. C. Johnstone, C. D. Frith, J. Golding, P. M.
Shepard and T. J. Crow (1991) 'Complications of pregnancy and delivery
in relation to psychosis in adult life: data from the British Perinatal
Mortality Survey', British Medical Journal, 302: 1576--80. 83. E.
O'Callaghan, T. Gibson, H. A. Colohan, P. Buckley, D. G. Walshe, C.
Larkin and J. L. Waddington (1992) 'Risk of schizophrenia in adults born
after obstetric complications and their association with early onset of
illness: a controlled study', British Medical Journal, 305: 1256-- 9.

84. D. Cotter, C. Larkin, J. L. Waddington and E. O'Callaghan (1996)
'Season of birth in schizophrenia: clue or cul-de-sac?', in J. L.
Waddington and P. F. Buckley (eds.), The Neurodevelopmental Basis for
Schizophrenia. New York: Chapman Hall, pp. 17--30; E. F. Torrey, J.
Miller, R. Rawlings and R. H. Yolken (1997) 'Seasonality of births in
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: a review of the literature',
Schizophrenia Research, 28: 1--38. 85. E. F. Torrey and R. H. Yolken
(1995) 'Could schizophrenia be a viral zoonosis transmitted from house
cats?' Schizophrenia Bulletin, 21: 167--77. 86. S. Mednick, R. A.
Machon, M. O. Huttenen and D. Bonnett (1988) 'Adult schizophrenia
following prenatal exposure to an influenza epidemic', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 45: 188--92; P. C. Sham, E. O'Callaghan, N. Takei,
G. K. Murray, E. H. Hare and R. M. Murray (1992) 'Increased risk of
schizophrenia following prenatal exposure to influenza', British Journal
of Psychiatry, 160: 461--6. 87. T. J. Crow and D. J. Done (1992)
'Prenatal exposure to influenza does not cause schizophrenia', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 161: 390--5; L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, Z.
Folnegovic, V. Hrabak-Zerjavic, B. Borcic, V. Folnegovic-Smale and E.
Susser (1994) 'Schizophrenia and prenatal exposure to the 1957 A2
influenza epidemic', American Journal of Psychiatry, 151: 1496--8; J.-P.
C. J. Selten and J. P. J. Slaets (1994) 'Second trimester exposure to
1957 A2 influenza epidemic is not a risk factor for schizophrenia',
Schizophrenia Research, 11: 95; E. Susser, S. P. Lin, A. S. Brown, L. H.
Lumey and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling (1994) 'No relation between risk of
schizophrenia and prenatal exposure to influenza in Holland', American
Journal of Psychiatry, 151: 922--4. 88. N. Takei, P. C. Sham, E.
O'Callaghan, G. Glover and R. M. Murray (1995) 'Schizophrenia: increased
risk associated with winter and city birth: a case-control study in 12
regions within England and Wales', Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health, 49: 106-- 7; H. Verdoux, N. Takei, R. Cassoude Saint Mathurin,
R. M. Murray and M. L. Bourgeois (1997) 'Seasonality of birth in
schizophrenia: the effect of regional population density', Schizophrenia
Research, 23: 175--80. 89. E. O'Callaghan, D. Cotter, K. Colgan and C.
Larkin (1995) 'Confinement of winter birth excess in schizophrenia to
the urban-born and its gender specificity', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 166: 51--4. 90. P. B. Mortensen, C. B. Pedersen, T.
Westergaard, J. Wohlfahrt, H. Ewald, O. Mors, P. K. Andersen and M.
Melbye (1999) 'Effects of family history and place and season of birth
on the risk of schizophrenia', New England Journal of Medicine, 340:
603--8. 91. Cotter et al., 'Season of birth in schizophrenia', op. cit.
92. E. S. Susser and S. P. Lin (1992) 'Schizophrenia after prenatal
exposure to the Dutch hunger winter of 1944--1945', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 49: 983--8.

93. J. McGrath and R. Murray (1995) 'Risk factors for schizophrenia:
from conception to birth', in S. R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger (eds.),
Schizophrenia. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 187-- 205. 94. ibid. 95. C. M.
Hultman, P. Sparen, N. Takei, R. M. Murray and S. Cnattingius (1999)
'Prenatal and perinatal risk factors for schizophrenia, affective
psychosis, and reactive psychosis of early onset: case control study',
British Medical Journal, 318: 421--6. 96. J. B. Lohr and H. S. Bracha
(1989) 'Can schizophrenia be related to prenatal exposure to alcohol?
Some speculations', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15: 595--603. 97. H. A.
Nasrallah (1997) 'Neurodevelopment and affective disorders', in Keshavan
and Murray (eds.), Neurodevelopment and Adult Psychopathology, op. cit.
98. J. Worland, R. Edenhart-Pepe, D. G. Weeks and P. M. Koren (1984)
'Cognitive evaluation of children at risk: IQ, differentiation and
egocentricity', in N. F. Watt, E. J. Anthony, L. C. Wynne and J. E. Rolf
(eds.), Children at Risk of Schizophrenia: A Longitudinal Perspective.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 99. J. J. van Os, P. Jones, G.
Lewis, M. Wadsworth and R. M. Murray (1996) 'Evidence for similar
developmental precursors of chronic affective illness and schizophrenia
in a general population birth cohort', Archives of General Psychiatry,
54: 625--31. 100. M. Cannon, P. Jones, C. Gilvarry, L. Rifkin, K.
McKenzie, A. Foerster and R. M. Murray (1997) 'Premorbid social
functioning in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: similarities and
differences', American Journal of Psychiatry, 154: 1544--50. 101. Torrey
et al., 'Seasonality of births in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder',
op. cit. 102. Nasrallah, 'Neurodevelopment and affective disorders', op.
cit. 103. A. S. Brown, J. van Os, C. Driessens, H. W. Hoek and E. S.
Susser (2000) 'Further evidence of relation between prenatal famine and
major affective disorder', American Journal of Psychiatry, 157: 190--5.

Chapter 18 The Trials of Life

1. A. Camus (1955) The Myth of Sisyphus. London: Hamish Hamilton. 2. P.
Larkin (1988) 'This be the verse', Collected Poems. London: Faber &
Faber. 3. L. Johnstone (1999) 'Do families cause "schizophrenia"?:
Revisiting a taboo subject', Changes, 17: 77--90. 4. L. Kuipers, M.
Birchwood and R. D. McCreadie (1992) 'Psychosocial family intervention
in schizophrenia: a review of empirical studies', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 160: 272--5. 5. G. Bateson, D. D. Jackson, J. Haley and J.
Weakland (1956) 'Towards a theory of schizophrenia', Behavioral Science,
1: 251--64. 6. R. D. Laing and A. Esterson (1964) Sanity, Madness and
the Family: Families of Schizophrenics. London: Tavistock. 7. P.
Sedgwick (1982) Psychopolitics. London: Pluto Press. 8. J. Bowlby (1965)
Child Care and the Growth of Love (2nd edn). Harmonds-worth: Penguin. 9.
S. J. Suomi (1997) 'Long-term effects of different early rearing
experiences on social, emotional, and physiological development in
nonhuman primates', in M. S. Keshavan and R. M. Murray (eds.),
Neurodevelopment and Adult Psychopathology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 104--16. 10. For a review of evidence on the
social and cognitive consequences of insecure attachment, see E. Meins
(1997) Security of Attachment and the Social Development of Cognition.
Hove: Psychology Press. 11. M. Main (1991) 'Metacognitive knowledge,
metacognitive monitoring, and singular (coherent) vs. multiple model of
attachment: findings and future directions for research', in C. M.
Parkes, J. Stevenson-Hinde and P. Marris (eds.), Attachment across the
Life Cycle. London: Routledge, pp. 127--59. 12. P. Fonagy, S. Redfern
and A. Charman (1997) 'The relationship between belief-desire reasoning
and a projective measure of attachment security (SAT)', British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 15: 51--63.

13. Meins, Security of Attachment, op. cit.; E. Meins, C. Fernyhough, J.
A. Russell and D. Clark-Carter (1998) 'Security of attachment as a
predictor of symbolic and mentalizing abilities: a longitudinal study',
Social Development, 7: 1--24. 14. A. Myhrman, P. Rantakallio, M.
Isohanni, P. Jones and U. Partanen (1996) 'Unwantedness of pregnancy and
schizophrenia in the child', British Journal of Psychiatry, 169:
637--40. 15. For readable accounts of attachment theory, see J. Holmes
(1993) John Bowlby and Attachment Theory. London: Routledge; and Parkes,
Stevenson-Hinde and Marris (eds.), Attachment across the Life Cycle, op.
cit. 16. M. Dozier, A. L. Stevenson, S. W. Lee and D. I. Velligan (1991)
'Attachment organization and familial overinvolvement for adults with
serious psychopathological disorders', Development and Psychopathology,
3: 475--89. 17. M. Dozier and S. W. Lee (1995) 'Discrepancies between
self and other-report of psychiatric symptomatology: effects of
dismissing attachment strategies', Development and Psychopathology, 7:
217--26. 18. K. D. Mickelson, R. C. Kessler and P. R. Shaver (1997)
'Adult attachment in a nationally representative sample', Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73: 1092--106. 19. M.L. Cooper, P. R.
Shaver and N. L. Collins (1998) 'Attachment style, emotion regulation,
and adjustment in adolescence', Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74: 1380--97. For a study of disturbed adolescents that
found a relationship between paranoid personality characteristics and
the dismissing-avoidant attachment style, see also D. S. Rosenstein and
H. A. Horowitz (1996) 'Adolescent attachment and psychopathology',
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64: 244--53. 20. P.
Rankin, R. P. Bentall, J. Hill and P. Kinderman (submitted) 'Parental
relationships and paranoid delusions: comparisons of currently ill,
remitted and normal people'. 21. J. Schiffman, J. LaBrie, J. Carter, C.
Tyrone, F. Schulsinger, J. Parnas and S. Mednick (2002) 'Perception of
parent--child relationships in high-risk families, and adult
schizophrenia outcome of offspring', Journal of Psychiatric Research,
36: 41--7. 22. K.-E. Wahlberg, L. C. Wynne, H. Oja, P. Keskitalo, L.
Pykalainen, I. Lahti, J. Moring, N. Naarala, A. Sorri, M. Seitamaa, K.
Laksy, J. Kolassa and P. Tienari (1997) 'Gene--environment interaction
in vulnerability to schizophrenia: findings from the Finnish Adoptive
Family Study of Schizophrenia', American Journal of Psychiatry, 154:
355--62.

23. E. Kuipers and D. Raune (2000) 'The early development of expressed
emotion and burden in the families of first-onset psychosis', in M.
Birchwood, D. Fowler and C. Jackson (eds.), Early Intervention in
Psychosis. London: Wiley, pp. 128--40. 24. N. J. Goldstein (1987) 'The
UCLA high-risk project', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13: 505-- 14. 25. M. J.
Goldstein (1998) 'Adolescent behavioral and intrafamilial precursors of
schizophrenia spectrum disorders', International Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 13 (Supplement 1): 101. 26. M. E. Seligman, C.
Peterson, N. J. Kaslow, R. L. Tanenbaum, L. B. Alloy and L. Y. Abramson
(1984) 'Attributional style and depressive symptoms among children',
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 93: 235--8. 27. K. Durkin (1995)
Developmental Social Psychology. Oxford: Blackwell; F. D. Fincham and K.
M. Cain (1986) 'Learned helplessness in humans: a developmental
analysis', Developmental Review, 6: 301--33; E. Turk and B. Bry (1992)
'Adolescents' and parents' explanatory styles and parents' causal
explanations about their adolescents', Cognitive Therapy and Research,
16: 349--57. 28. J. Garber and C. Flynn (2001) 'Predictors of depressive
cognitions in young adolescents: negative interpersonal context leads to
personal vulnerability', Cognitive Therapy and Research, 25: 353--76.
29. C. Hammen (1991) Depression Runs in Families: The Social Context of
Risk and Resilience in Children of Depressed Mothers. London:
Springer-Verlag. 30. L. B. Alloy, L. Y. Abramson, W. G. Whitehouse, M.
E. Hogan, N. A. Tashman, D. L. Steinberg, D. T. Rose and P. Donovan
(1999) 'Depressogenic cognitive styles: predictive validity, information
processing and personality characteristics, and developmental origins',
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37: 503--31. 31. L. B. Alloy, L. Y.
Abramson, N. A. Tashman, D. S. Berrebbi, M. E. Hogan, W. G. Whitehouse,
A. G. Crossfield and A. Morocco (2001) 'Developmental origins of
cognitive vulnerability to depression: parenting, cognitive and
inferential feedback styles of the parents of individuals at high and
low cognitive risk for depression', Cognitive Therapy and Research, 25:
397--423. For an earlier relevant study from the same research group,
see: D. T. Rose, L. Y. Abramson, C. J. Hodulik, L. Halberstadt and G.
Leff (1994) 'Heterogeneity of cognitive style among depressed
inpatients', Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103: 419--29. 32. D.
Diamond and J. Doane (1994) 'Disturbed attachment and negative affective
style: an intergenerational spiral', British Journal of Psychiatry, 164:
770--81; G. Paley, D. A. Shapiro

and A. Worrall-Davies (2000) 'Familial origins of expressed emotion in
relatives of people with schizophrenia', Journal of Mental Health, 9:
655--63. 33. G. Harrison, D. Owens, A. Holton, D. Neilson and D. Boot
(1988) 'A prospective study of severe mental disorder in Afro-Caribbean
patients', Psychological Medicine, 18: 643--57. 34. D. Bhugra, M.
Hilwig, B. Hossein, H. Marceau, J. Neehall, J. P. Leff, R. Mallett and
G. Der (1996) 'First contact incidence rates of schizophrenia in
Trinidad and one-year follow-up', British Journal of Psychiatry, 169:
587--92; F. W. Hickling (1995) 'The incidence of firstcontact
schizophrenia in Jamaica', British Journal of Psychiatry, 167: 193--6.
35. G. Hutchinson, N. Takei, T. A. Fahy, D. Bhugra, C. Gilvarry, O.
Moran, R. Mallett, P. Sham, J. Leff and R. M. Murray (1996) 'Morbid risk
of schizophrenia in first-degree relatives of white and Afro-Caribbean
patients with psychosis', British Journal of Psychiatry, 171: 776--80;
P. A. Sugarman and D. Crawford (1994) 'Schizophrenia in the
Afro-Caribbean community', British Journal of Psychiatry, 164: 474--80.
36. J.-P. Selten, N. Veen, W. Feller, J. D. Blom, D. Schols, W.
Camoenie, J. Oolders, M. van der Velden, H. W. Hoek, V. M. Rivero, Y.
van der Graaf and R. Kahn (2001) 'Incidence of psychotic disorders in
immigrant groups to The Netherlands', British Journal of Psychiatry,
178: 367--72. 37. K. Zolkowska, G. E. Cantor and T. F. McNeil (2001)
'Increased rates of psychosis amongst immigrants to Sweden: is migration
a risk factor for psychosis?' Psychological Medicine, 31: 669--78. 38.
C. Haasen, M. Lambert, R. Mass and M. Kraesz (1998) 'Impact of ethnicity
on the prevalence of psychiatric disorders among migrants in Germany',
Ethnicity and Health, 3: 159-- 65. 39. F. W. Hickling (1991) 'Double
jeopardy: psychopathology of Black mentally ill returned to Jamaica',
International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 37: 80--9. 40. J. Boydell,
J. van Os, J. McKenzie, J. Allardyce, R. Goel, R. G. McCreadie and R. M.
Murray (2001) 'Incidence of schizophrenia in ethnic minorities in
London: ecological study into interactions with environment', British
Medical Journal, 323: 1--4. 41. D. Bhugra, J. Leff, R. Mallett, G. Der,
B. Corridan and S. Rudge (1997) 'Incidence and outcome of schizophrenia
in Whites, African-Caribbeans and Asians in London', Psychological
Medicine, 27: 791--8. 42. M. MacLachlan (1997) Culture and Health.
London: Wiley.

43. J. Berry (1988) 'Acculturation and mental health', in Pierre Dasen,
John Berry and Norman Sartorius (eds.), Health and Cross-Cultural
Psychology: Towards Applications. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 44. R. E. L.
Faris and H. W. Dunham (1939) Mental Disorders in Urban Areas. Chicago:
Chicago University Press. 45. D. L. Gerald and L. G. Houston (1953)
'Family setting and the ecology of schizophrenia', Psychiatric
Quarterly, 27: 90--101. 46. A. S. McNaught, S. E. Jeffries, C. A. Harvey
and A. S. Quale (1997) 'The Hampstead Schizophrenia Survey 1991:
incidence and migrationininner London', British Journal of Psychiatry,
170: 307--11. 47. C. B. Pedersen and P. B. Mortensen (2001) 'Evidence of
a dose--response relationship between urbanicity during upbringing and
schizophrenia risk', Archives of General Psychiatry, 58: 1039--46. 48.
V. K. Varma, N. N. Wig, H. R. Phookun, A. K. Misra, C. B. Khare, B. M.
Tripathi, P. B. Behere, E. S. Yoo and E. S. Susser (1997) 'First-onset
schizophrenia in the community: relationship of urbanization with onset,
early manifestations and typology', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 96:
431--8. 49. American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (4th edition). Washington, DC:
APA. 50. L. A. Goodman, S. D. Rosenberg, K. T. Mueser and R. E. Drake
(1997) 'Physical and sexual assault history in women with serious mental
illness: prevalence, correlates, treatment, and future research
directions', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 23: 685--96. 51. K. T. Mueser, L.
A. Goodman, S. L. Trumbetta, S. D. Rosenberg, F. C. Osher, R. Vidaver,
P. Auciello and D. W. Foy (1998) 'Trauma and posttraumatic stress
disorder in severe mental illness', Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 66: 493--9. 52. M. Hyun, S. D. Friedman and D. L. Dunner
(2000) 'Relationship of childhood physical and sexual abuse to adult
bipolar disorder', Bipolar Disorder, 2: 121--35; R. D. Levitan, S. V.
Parikh, A. D. Lesage, K. M. Hegadoren, M. Adams, S. H. Kennedy and P. N.
Goering (1998) 'Major depression in individuals with a history of
childhood physical or sexual abuse: relationship to neurovegetative
features, mania, and gender', American Journal of Psychiatry, 155:
1746--52.

53. B. M. Cohen and M. Z. Cooper (1954) 'A follow-up study of World War
II prisoners of war', Veterans Administration Medical Monograph.
Washington: US Government Printing Office; G. W. Beebe (1975) 'Follow-up
studies of World War II and Korean War prisoners', American Journal of
Epidemiology, 101: 400--2. 54. R. E. Eberly and B. E. Engdahl (1991)
'Prevalence of somatic and psychiatric disorders among former prisoners
of war', Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 42: 807--13. 55.R.W. Butler,
K.T. Mueser, J. Sprock and D. L. Braff (1996) 'Positive symptoms of
psychosis in posttraumatic stress disorder', Biological Psychiatry, 39:
839--44; K. T. Mueser and R. W. Butler (1987) 'Auditory hallucinations
in combat-related chronic posttraumatic stress disorder', American
Journal of Psychiatry, 144: 299--302. 56. L. Eitinger (1967)
'Schizophrenia among concentration camp survivors', International
Journal of Psychiatry, 5: 403--8. 57. J. D. Kinzie and J. J. Boehnlein
(1989) 'Post-traumatic psychosis among Cambodian refugees', Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 2: 185--98. 58. Y. Neria, E. J. Bromet, S. Sievers, J.
Lavelle and L. J. Fochtmann (2002) 'Trauma exposure and posttraumatic
stress disorder in psychosis: findings from a first-admission cohort',
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70: 246--51. 59. J. E. D.
Esquirol (1843/1965) Mental Maladies: A Treatise on Insanity. New York:
Hafner. 60. R. E. Kendell, J. C. Chalmers and C. Platz (1986)
'Epidemiology of puerperal psychoses', British Journal of Psychiatry,
150: 662--73. 61. I. F. Brockington, K. F. Cernik, E. M. Schofield, A.
R. Downing, A. F. Francis and C. Keelan (1981) 'Puerperal psychosis:
phenomena and diagnosis', Archives of General Psychiatry, 38: 829--33.
62. I. Brockington (1996) Motherhood and Mental Health. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 63. J. W. Ellason and C. A. Ross (1997) 'Childhood
trauma and psychiatric symptoms', Psychological Reports, 80: 447--50; C.
A. Ross, G. Anderson and P. Clark (1994) 'Childhood abuse and the
positive symptoms of schizophrenia', Hospital and Community Psychiatry,
42: 489--91. 64. J. Read and N. Argyle (1999) 'Hallucinations, delusions
and thought disorder among adult psychiatric inpatients with a history
of child abuse', Psychiatric Services, 51: 534--5.

65. P. Hammersley, A. Dias, G. Todd, K. Bowen-Jones, B. Reilly and R. P.
Bentall (in press) 'Childhood trauma and hallucinations in bipolar
affective disorder: a preliminary investigation', British Journal of
Psychiatry. 66. The specific association between trauma and
hallucinations has also been reported in studies of women who have been
abused. Bernadine Ensink (Confusing Realities: A Study of Child Sexual
Abuse and Psychiatric Symptoms. Amsterdam: VU University Press, 1992), a
psychologist working at the University of Amsterdam, interviewed 100
women who had sought psychological help for problems relating to sexual
abuse. Thirty-four per cent reported hallucinatory flashbacks of their
experiences, 42 per cent reported visual hallucinations, and 43 per cent
reported hearing voices. In general, the women who experienced auditory
hallucinations had been victims of the most severe forms of sexual
abuse. 67. C. Fernyhough and J. Russell (1997) 'Distinguishing one's own
voice from those of others: a function for private speech?'
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 20: 651--65. 68. A.
Honig, M. A. J. Romme, B. J. Ensink, S. Escher, M. H. A. Pennings and M.
W. DeVries (1998) 'Auditory hallucinations: a comparison between
patients and nonpatients', Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186:
646--51. 69. J. Read, B. D. Perry, A. Moskowitz and J. Connolly (2001)
'The contribution of early traumatic events to schizophrenia in some
patients: a traumagenic neurodevelopmental model', Psychiatry:
Interpersonal and Biological Processes, 64: 319--45. 70. R. W. Heinrichs
(2001) In Search of Madness: Schizophrenia and Neuroscience. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 71. For example, see the study by Butler et
al. cited earlier in this chapter. 72. E. Bleuler (1911/1950) Dementia
Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias (trans. E. Zinkin). New York:
International Universities Press. 73. M. F. Green (1998) Schizophrenia
from a Neurocognitive Perspective: Probing the Impenetrable Darkness.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 74. G. S. Hall (1916) Adolescence. New York:
Appleton. 75. R. E. Muus (1996) Theories of Adolescence. New York:
McGraw-Hill; J. C. Coleman and L. B. Hendry (1999) The Nature of
Adolescence (3rd edn). London: Routledge.

76. E. H. Erikson (1950) Childhood and Society. New York: Norton. 77. C.
Harrop and P. Trower (2001) 'Why does schizophrenia develop at late
adolescence?', Clinical Psychology Review, 21: 241--66. 78. P. D.
McGorry, C. McFarlane, G. C. Patton, R. Bell, M. E. Hibbert, H. J.
Jackson and G. Bowes (1995) 'The prevalence of prodromal features of
schizophrenia in adolescence: a preliminary survey', Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 92: 241--9. 79. B. A. Cornblatt, M. F. Lenzenweger, R. H.
Dworkin and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling (1992) 'Childhood attentional
dysfunctions predict social deficits in unaffected adults at risk for
schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry, 161 (Supplement 18):
59--64. 80. A. P. Morrison (2001) 'The interpretation of intrusions in
psychosis: an integrative cognitive approach to hallucinations and
delusions', Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 29: 257--76. 81. K.
Popper (1961) The Poverty of Historicism. London: Routledge.

Chapter 19 Madness and Society 1. Quoted in N. Zierold (1991) The
Moguls. New York: Silman-James. 2. E. Kraepelin (1899/1990) Psychiatry:
A Textbook for Students and Physicians, Vol. 1: General Psychiatry.
Canton, MA: Watson Publishing International. 3. W. Mayer-Gross, E.
Slater and M. Roth (1975) Clinical Psychiatry. London: Cassell. 4. A.
Lewis (1934) 'The psychopathology of insight', British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 14: 332--48. 5. X. F. Amador and H. Kronengold
(1998) 'The description and meaning of insight in psychosis', in X. F.
Amador and A. S. David (eds.), Insight and Psychosis. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 15--32. 6. World Health Organization (1973)
International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia. Geneva: WHO; X. F. Amador,
M. Flaum, N. C. Andreasen, D. H. Strauss, S. A. Yale, S. C. Clark and J.
M. Gorman (1994) 'Awareness of illness in schizophrenia and
schizoaffective and mood disorders', Archives of General Psychiatry, 51:
826--36; M. A. Weiler, M. H. Fleisher and D.

McArthur-Campbell (2000) 'Insight and symptom change in schizophrenia',
Schizophrenia Research, 45: 29--36. 7. A. S. David (1998) 'The clinical
importance of insight', in Amador and David (eds.), Insight and
Psychosis, op. cit., pp. 332--51; A. S. David (1999) '"To see ourselves
as others see us" ', British Journal of Psychiatry, 175: 210--16. 8. For
a study of recent historical trends in the use of coercion in Britain
see M. Hotopf, S. Wall, A. Buchanan, S. Wessely and R. Churchill (2000)
'Changing patterns in the use of the Mental Health Act 1983 in England,
1984--1996', British Journal of Psychiatry, 176: 479--84.

For evidence from Finland, see H. R. Kaltiala, J. Korkeila, C.
Tuohimaeki, T. Tuori and V. Lehtinen (2000) 'Coercion and restrictions
in psychiatric inpatient treatment', European Psychiatry, 15: 213--19.
For evidence from the USA, see S. K. Hoge, C. W. Lidz, M. Eisenberg and
W. Gardner (1997) 'Perceptions of coercion in the admission of voluntary
and involuntary psychiatric patients', International Journal of Law and
Psychiatry, 20: 167--81. For evidence from New Zealand, see B. G.
McKenna, A. I. F. Simpson and T. M. Laidlaw (1999) 'Patient perception
of coercion on admission to acute psychiatric services: the New Zealand
experience', International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 22: 143--53.
Finally, for evidence that patients' perceptions that they are being
coerced are often accurate, see C. W. Lidz, E. P. Mulvey, S. K. Hoge, B.
L. Kirsch, J. Monahan, M. Eisenberg, W. Gardner and L. H. Roth (1998)
'Factual sources of psychiatric patients' perceptions of coercion in the
hospital admission process', American Journal of Psychiatry, 155:
1254--60. 9. V. W. Swayze (1995) 'Frontal leukotomy and related
psychosurgical procedures in the era before antipsychotics (1935--1954):
a historical overview', American Journal of Psychiatry, 152: 505--15.
10. P. Breggin (1993) Toxic Psychiatry. London: Fontana.

11. J.-E. Meyer (1988) 'The fate of the mentally ill in Germany during
the Third Reich', Psychological Medicine, 18: 575--81. 12. R. N. Proctor
(1988) Racial Hygiene: Medicine under the Nazis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. 13. J. Le Fanu (1999) The Rise and Fall of Modern
Medicine. London: Little, Brown & Co. 14. See, for example, recent
systematic reviews published electronically (and available at academic
libraries) by the international 'Cochrane' collaborative network of
researchers, which provides evidence on the effectiveness of treatments
for the British National Health Service and other health care providers:
B. Thornley, C. E. Adams and G. Award (2001) 'Chlorpromazine versus
placebo for schizophrenia (Cochrane Review)', The Cochrane Library, 3.
Oxford: Update Software; C. B. Joy, C. E. Adams and S. M. Lawrie (2001)
'Haloperidol versus placebo for schizophrenia (Cochrane Review)', The
Cochrane Library, 3. Oxford: Update Software. 15. R. Warner (1985)
Recovery from Schizophrenia: Psychiatry and Political Economy. New York:
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 16. W. A. Brown and L. R. Herz (1989) 'Response
to neuroleptic drugs as a device for classifying schizophrenia',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15: 123--8. 17. B. J. Kinon, J. M. Kane, C.
Johns, R. Perovich, M. Ismi, A. Koreen and P. Weiden (1993) 'Treatment
of neuroleptic resistant relapse', Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 29:
309--14. 18. P. F. Kennedy, H. I. Hershon and R. J. McGuire (1971)
'Extrapyramidal disorders after prolonged phenothiazine therapy',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 118: 509--18. 19. G. Sullivan and D.
Lukoff (1990) 'Sexual side effects of anti-psychotic medication:
evaluation and interventions', Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 41:
1238--41. 20. J. Day, P. Kinderman and R. P. Bentall (1997) 'Discordant
views of neuroleptic side effects: a potential source of conflict
between patients and professionals', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 97:
93--7. 21. R. Robinson, P. McHugh and M. Follstein (1975) 'Measurement
of appetite disturbance in severe psychiatric disorders', Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 12: 59--68. 22. D. B. Allison, J. L. Mentore, M.
Heo, L. P. Chandler, J. C. Cappelleri, M. C. Infante and P. Weiden
(1999) 'Antipsychotic-induced weight gain: a comprehensive research
synthesis', American Journal of Psychiatry, 156: 1686--96.

23. T. van Putten and P. R. May (1978) 'Subjective response as a
predictor of outcome in pharmacotherapy', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 35: 477--80; T. van Putten, P.R. May, S.R. Marder and L.A.
Wittman (1981) 'Subjective response to antipsychotic drugs', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 38: 187--90. 24. M. Harrow, C. A. Yonan, J. R. Sands
and J. Marengo (1994) 'Depression in schizophrenia: are neuroleptics,
akinesia or anhedonia involved?', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20: 327--38.
25. T. Lewander (1994) 'Neuroleptics and the neuroleptic-induced deficit
syndrome', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 89: 8--13; N. R. Schooler
(1994) 'Deficit symptoms in schizophrenia: negative symptoms versus
neuroleptic-induced deficits', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 89:
21--6. 26. T. J. Crow, J. F. MacMillan, A. L. Johnson and E. C.
Johnstone (1986) 'The Northwick Park study of first episodes of
schizophrenia. II: A randomised controlled trial of prophylactic
neuroleptic treatment', British Journal of Psychiatry, 148: 120--7. 27.
N. Thorogood, P. Cowen, J. Mann, M. Murphy and M. Vessey (1992) 'Fatal
myocardial infarction and use of psychotropic drugs in young women',
Lancet, 340: 1067--8; W. A. Ray, S. Meredith, P. B. Thapa, K. G. Meador,
K. Hall and K. T. Murray (2001) 'Antipsychotics and the risk of sudden
death', Archives of General Psychiatry, 58: 1161--7; W. A. Ray and K. G.
Meador (2002) 'Antipsy-chotics and sudden death: is thoridazine the only
bad actor?', British Journal of Psychiatry, 180: 483--4. 28. S. N.
Caroff (1980) 'The neuroleptic malignant syndrome', Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 41: 79--83. 29. M. N. G. Dukes (ed.) (1992) Meyler's Side
Effects of Drugs. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 30. I am grateful to Professor
Simon Wessely of the Institute of Psychiatry in London, who first drew
my attention to this risk associated with neuroleptics. 31. E. C.
Atbasoglu, S. K. Schultz and N. C. Andreasen (2001) 'The relationship of
akathisia with suicidality and depersonalization among patients with
schizophrenia', Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
13: 336--41; H. Lars (2001) 'A critical review of akathisia and its
possible association with suicidal behaviour', Human Psychopharmacology:
Clinical and Experimental, 16: 495-- 505; M.Z. Azhar and S. L. Varama
(1992) 'Akathisiainduced suicidal behaviour', European Psychiatry, 7:
239--41; J. L. Schulte (1985) 'Homicide and suicide associated with
akathisia and haloperidol', American Journal of Forensic Psychiatry, 6:
3--7.

32. T. van Putten, S. R. Marder and J. Mintz (1990) 'A controlled dose
comparison of haloperidol in newly admitted schizophrenic patients',
Archives of General Psychiatry, 47: 754-- 8; J. P. McEvoy, G. E. Hogarty
and S. Steingard (1991) 'Optimal dose of neuroleptic in acute
schizophrenia: a controlled study of the neuroleptic threshold and
higher haloperidol dose', Archives of General Psychiatry, 48: 739--45;
A. Rifkind, S. Doddi, B. Karagigi, M. Bornstein and M. Wachspress (1991)
'Dosage of haloperidol for schizophrenia', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 48: 166--70. 33. P. Bollini, S. Pampallona, M. J. Orza, M.
E. Adams and T. C. Chalmers (1994) 'Antipsychotic drugs: is more worse?
A meta analysis of the published randomized controlled trials',
Psychological Medicine, 24: 307--16. 34. Royal College of Psychiatrists
(1993) Consensus Statement on the Use of High Dose Antipsychotic
Medication (CR26). Royal College of Psychiatrists. 35. A. F. Lehman, D.
M. Steinwachs, L. B. Dixon, H. H. Goldman, F. Osher, L. Postrado, J. E.
Scott, J. W. Thompson, M. Fahey, P. Fisher, J. A. Kasper, A. Lyles, E.
A. Skinner, R. Buchanan, W. T. Carpenter, J. Levine, E. A. McGlynn, R.
Rosenheck and J. Zito (1998) 'Translating research into practice: the
Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) treatment
recommendations', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24: 1--10. 36. L.M. Flynn
(1998) 'Patterns of usual care for schizophrenia: initial results from
the Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) Client Survey',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24: 30--2; D. Cohen (1997) 'A critique of the
use of neuroleptic drugs in psychiatry', in S. Fisher and R. P.
Greenberg (eds.), From Placebo to Panacea: Putting Psychiatric Drugs to
the Test. New York: Wiley, pp. 173--228.

In an as yet unpublished study carried out by myself and Jennie Day, in
which we collected data on neuroleptic treatment from 212 patients on
psychiatric wards in the North West of England and North Wales between
1995 and 1998, we found that the median dose of medication received by
the patients was equivalent to 600 milligrams of chlorpromazine a day
and approximately a quarter of the patients were on doses equivalent to
1 gram of chlorpromazine or more. 37. H. Hippius and D. Healy (1996)
'The founding of the CNIP and the discovery of clozapine (interview)',
in D. Healy (ed.), The Psychopharmacologists. London: Chapman & Hall,
pp. 187--213. 38. J. Kane, G. Honigfeld, J. Singer and H. Meltzer (1988)
'Clozapine for the treatmentresistant schizophrenic', Archives of
General Psychiatry, 45: 789--96.

39. H. Meltzer and D. Healy (1996) 'A career in biological psychiatry
(interview)', in Healy (ed.), The Psychopharmacologists, op. cit.,
pp. 483--507. 40. T. Van Putten, B. D. Marshall, R. Liberman and J.
Mintz (1993) 'Systematic dosage reduction in treatment-resistant
schizophrenic patients', Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 29: 315-- 20. 41.
J. Geddes, N. Freemantle, P. Harrison and P. Bebbington (2000) 'Atypical
antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia: systematic overview
and meta-regression analysis', British Medical Journal, 321: 1371--6.
42. American psychiatrist Peter Breggin takes this kind of position. See
Breggin, Toxic Psychiatry, op. cit. 43. L. R. Mosher and A. Z. Menn
(1978) 'Community residential treatment for schizophrenia: two-year
follow-up', Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 29: 715--23; L. R.
Mosher, R. Vallone and A. Menn (1995) 'The treatment of acute psychosis
without neuroleptics: six-week psychopathology outcome data from the
Soteria project', International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 41:
157--73. 44. H. S. Sullivan (1962) Schizophrenia as a Human Process. New
York: Norton. 45. F. B. Evans (1996) Harry Stack Sullivan: Interpersonal
Theory and Psychotherapy. London: Routledge. 46. K. T. Mueser and H.
Berenbaum (1990) 'Psychodynamic treatment of schizophrenia: is there a
future?', Psychological Medicine, 20: 253--62. 47. A. H. Stanton, J. G.
Gunderson, P. H. Knapp, A. F. Frank, M. L. Vannicelli, R. Schnitzer and
R. Rosenthal (1984) 'Effects of psychotherapy in schizophrenia: I.
Design and implementation of a controlled study', Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 10: 520--63; J. G. Gunderson, A. F. Frank, H. M. Katz, M. L.
Vannicelli, J. P. Frosch and P. H. Knapp (1984) 'Effects of
psychotherapy in schizophrenia: II. Comparative outcome of two forms of
treatment', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 10: 564--98. 48. T. H. McGlashan
(1984) 'The Chestnut Lodge follow-up study I: Follow-up methodology and
study sample', Archives of General Psychiatry, 41: 575--85; T. H.
McGlashan (1984) 'The Chestnut Lodge follow-up study II: Long-term
outcome ofschizophrenia and affective disorders', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 41: 586--601; M. H. Stone (1986) 'Exploratory psychotherapy
in schizophrenia-spectrum patients', Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic,
50: 287--306.

49. J. P. Leff, L. Kuipers, R. Berkowitz, R. Eberlein-Fries and D.
Sturgeon (1982) 'A controlled trial of intervention with families of
schizophrenic patients', British Journal of Psychiatry, 141: 121--34.
50. J. P. Leff, L. Kuipers, R. Berkowitz and D. Sturgeon (1985) 'A
controlled trial of social intervention in the families of schizophrenic
patients', British Journal of Psychiatry, 146: 594-- 600. 51. I. R. H.
Falloon, J. L. Boyd, C. W. McGill, M. Williamson, J. Razani, H. B. Moss,
A. M. Gilderman and G. M. Simpson (1985) 'Family management in the
prevention of morbidity of schizophrenia: clinical outcome of a two-year
longitudinal study', Archives of General Psychiatry, 42: 887--96. 52. G.
E. Hogarty, C. M. Anderson, D. J. Reiss, S. J. Kornblith, D. P.
Greenwald, R. F. Ulrich and M. Carter (1991) 'Family psychoeducation,
social skills training and maintenance chemotherapy in the aftercare
treatment of schizophrenia. II: Two year effects of a controlled study
on relapse and adjustment', Archives of General Psychiatry, 48: 340--7.
53. N. Tarrier, C. Barrowclough, C. E. Vaughn, J. S. Bamrah, K.
Porceddu, S. Watts and H. Freeman (1988) 'The community management of
schizophrenia: a controlled trial of a behavioural intervention with
families to reduce relapse', British Journal of Psychiatry, 153:
532--42; N. Tarrier, C. Barrowclough, C. E. Vaughn, J. S. Bamrah, K.
Porceddu, S. Watts and H. Freeman (1989) 'The community management of
schizophrenia: a controlled trial of a behavioural intervention with
families to reduce relapse: a two-year follow-up', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 154: 625--8. 54. W. G. Pitschel, S. Leucht, J. Baeumil, W.
Kissling and R. R. Engel (2001) 'The effects of family interventions on
relapse and rehospitalisation in schizophrenia: a meta-analysis',
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 27: 73--92. 55. N. Tarrier, C. Barrowclough, K.
Porceddu and E. Fitzpatrick (1994) 'The Salford family intervention
project: relapse rates of schizophrenia at five and eight years',
British Journal of Psychiatry, 165: 829--32. 56. D. J. Miklowitz, T. L.
Simoneau, E. L. George, J. A. Richards, A. Kalbag, N. SachsEricsson and
R. Suddath (2000) 'Family focused treatment of bipolar disorder: 1-year
effects of a psychoeducational program in conjunction with
pharmacotherapy', Biological Psychiatry, 48: 582--92. 57. A. T. Beck, A.
J. Rush, B. F. Shaw and G. Emery (1979) Cognitive Therapy of Depression.
New York: Guilford.

58. P. Chadwick and C. F. Lowe (1990) 'The measurement and modification
of delusional beliefs', Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
58: 225--32. 59. G. Haddock, R. P. Bentall and P. D. Slade (1993)
'Psychological treatment of chronic auditory hallucinations: two case
studies', Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 21: 335-- 46. 60.P.
Chadwick and M. Birchwood (1994)'The omnipotence of voices: acognitive
approach to auditory hallucinations', British Journal of Psychiatry,
164: 190--201. 61. D. G. Kingdon and D. Turkington (1994)
Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy of Schizophrenia. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum.
62. L. Yusupoff and N. Tarrier (1996) 'Coping strategy enhancement for
persistent hallucinations and delusions', in G. Haddock and P. D. Slade
(eds.), Cognitive-Behavioural Interventions with Psychotic Disorders.
London: Routledge, pp. 71--85. 63. N. Tarrier, R. Beckett, S. Harwood,
A. Baker, L. Yusupoff and I. Ugarteburu (1993) 'A trial of two
cognitive-behavioural methods of treating drug-resistant residual
psychotic symptoms in schizophrenic patients. I: Outcome', British
Journal of Psychiatry, 162: 524--32. 64. P. A. Garety, L. Kuipers, D.
Fowler, F. Chamberlain and G. Dunn (1994) 'Cognitive behavioural therapy
for drug-resistant psychosis', British Journal of Medical Psychology,
67: 259--71. 65. T. Sensky, D. Turkington, D. Kingdon, J. L. Scott, J.
Scott, R. Siddle, M. O'Carrol and T. R. E. Barnes (2000) 'A randomized
controlled trial of cognitive-behaviour therapy for persistent symptoms
in schizophrenia resistant to medication', Archives of General
Psychiatry, 57: 165--72. 66. E. Kuipers, P. Garety, D. Fowler, G. Dunn,
P. Bebbington, D. Freeman and C. Hadley (1997) 'The London--East Anglia
randomised controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural therapy for
psychosis. I: Effects of the treatment phase', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 171: 319--27; E. Kuipers, D. Fowler, P. Garety, D. Chizholm,
D. Freeman, G. Dunn, P. Bebbington and C. Hadley (1998) 'London-- East
Anglia randomised controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural therapy for
psychosis. III: Follow-up and economic considerations', British Journal
of Psychiatry, 173: 61--8. 67. N. Tarrier, L. Yusupoff, C. Kinner, E.
McCarthy, A. Gladhill, G. Haddock and J. Morris (1998) 'A randomized
controlled trial of intense cognitive behaviour therapy for chronic
schizophrenia', British Medical Journal, 317: 303--7.

68. The trial design is described in S. Lewis, N. Tarrier, G. Haddock,
R. P. Bentall, P. Kinderman, D. Kingdon, R. Siddle, R. Drake, J.
Everitt, K. Leadley, A. Benn, K. Grazebrook, C. Haley, S. Akhtar, L.
Davies, S. Palmer, B. Faragher and G. Dunn (2002) 'Randomised,
controlled trial of cognitive-behaviour therapy in early schizophrenia:
acute phase outcomes', British Journal of Psychiatry, 181 (Supplement
43): s91--s97. The 18-month outcome report is in preparation for
publication at the time of writing. 69. A. Gumley, K. Power, M. O'Grady,
L. Mcnay, J. Reilly, K. Athanasios, A. Tait, Z. Chouliara and C. White
(in press) 'A randomised controlled trial of targeted cognitive
behaviour therapy: effects on relapse at 12 months', Psychological
Medicine. 70. D. H. Lam, J. Bright, S. Jones, P. Hayward, N. Schuck, D.
Chisholm and P. Sham (2000) 'Cognitive therapy for bipolar illness: a
pilot study of relapse prevention', Cognitive Therapy and Research, 24:
503--20; A. Perry, N. Tarrier, R. Morriss, E. McCarthy and K. Limb
(1999) 'Randomised controlled trial of efficacy of teaching patients
with bipolar disorder to identify early symptoms of relapse and obtain
treatment', British Medical Journal, 318: 149--53; J. Scott, A. Garland
and S. Moorhead (2001) 'A pilot study of cognitive therapy in bipolar
disorder', Psychological Medicine, 31: 459--67. 71. R. J. Wyatt (1995)
'Early intervention in schizophrenia: can the course of illness be
altered?', Biological Psychiatry, 38: 1--3. 72. R. J. Drake, C. J.
Haley, S. Akhtar and S. W. Lewis (2000) 'Causes of duration of untreated
psychosis in schizophrenia', British Journal of Psychiatry, 177:
511--15. 73. A. R. Yung, L. J. Phillips, P. D. McGorry, C. A. McFarlane,
S. Francey, S. Harrigan, G. C. Patton and H. J. Jackson (1998)
'Prediction of psychosis: a step towards indicated prevention of
psychosis', British Journal of Psychiatry, 172 (Supplement 33): 14--20.
74. P. D. McGorry, L. J. Phillips, A. R. Yung, S. Francey, D. Germano,
J. Bravin, A. MacDonald, N. Hearn, P. Amminger and L. O'Dwyer (2000) 'A
randomized controlled trial of interventions in the pre-psychotic phase
of psychotic disorders', Schizophrenia Research, 41: 9; P. D. McGowry,
A. R. Yung, L. J. Phillips, H. P. Yen, S. Francey, E. M. Cosgrave, D.
Germano, J. Bravin, T. McDonald, A. Blair, S. Adlard and H. J. Jackson
(2002) 'Randomized controlled trial of interventions designed to reduce
the risk of progression to first-episode psychosis in a clinical sample
with subthreshold symptoms', Archives of General Psychiatry, 59: 921--8.
75. J. L. Rosen, S. W. Woods, J. Miller-Tandy and T. H. McGlashan (2002)
'Prospective observations of emerging psychosis', Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 190: 133--41. 76. R. P. Bentall and A. P. Morrison
(2002) 'More harm than good: the case against using antipsychotic drugs
to prevent severe mental illness', Journal of Mental Health, 11: 351--6.

77. A. P. Morrison, R. P. Bentall, P. French, L. Walford, A. Kilcommons,
A. Knight, M. Kreutz and S. W. Lewis (2002) 'A randomised controlled
trial of early detection and cognitive therapy for preventing transition
to psychosis in high risk individuals: study design and interim analysis
of transition rate and psychological risk factors', British Journal of
Psychiatry, 181 (Supplement 43): s78--s84. 78. R. P. Bentall (1992) 'A
proposal to classify happiness as a psychiatric disorder', Journal of
Medical Ethics, 18: 94--8; K. W. M. Fulford (2002) 'Values in
psychiatric diagnosis: executive summary of a report to the chair of the
ICD-12/DSM-VI coordination taskforce (dateline 2010)', Psychopathology,
35:132--8;P. Sedgwick (1982) Psychopolitics. London: Pluto Press. 79. Of
course, for many people, this is a big if. However, the popular
perception, fostered by the massmedia, that psychosis very often leads
to dangerous behaviour, is ill founded. For recent discussions of the
evidence, see: A. O'Kane and R. P. Bentall (2000) 'Psychosis and
offending', in J. McGuire, T. Mason and A. O'Kane (eds.), Behaviour,
Crime and Legal Processes: A Guide for Forensic Practitioners. London:
Wiley, pp. 161--76; P. Taylor and P. J. Gunn (1999) 'Homicides by people
with mental illness: myth and reality', British Journal of Psychiatry,
174: 9--14.

OceanofPDF.com

Index abnormal beliefs 28 Abraham, Karl 277 Abrams, R. 65 Abramson, Lyn
239--41, 240n, 243, 244n, 245, 247, 265, 415 acculturation 475--6
acetylcholine 155, 167, 514 adolescence 489--92 adoption studies 77--8,
105, 443, 471, 513 aetiological factors 407 family relationships 467--74
social environment 474--7 trauma 477--83 affect flat 219--20, 224--6,
523 negative 215--18 positive 215--18 in schizophrenia 24 affect-logic
disorders 228--9 affective blunting 219--20, 224--6, 523 affective
reactivity 513 affective style 426, 467, 513 Afro-Caribbean community,
British 127--8, 308, 474--5

age at onset of psychosis 436--8, 462--3 agranulocytosis 501, 502
akathisia 500, 501, 513--14 Akins, Kathleen 363 Akiskal, H. S. 103--4,
108--9 Al-Issa, Ihsan 133, 356 alien abduction beliefs 100 alleles 76,
445, 514 dominant/recessive 445 expressivity 445--6, 522 penetrance
445--6, 528 Allen, John 126--7 Alloy, Lauren 239--40, 244n, 245, 264,
282--3 alogia 220 Alpert, Murray 225--6, 357 Alzheimer, Alois 155
Amador, Xavier 496 ambivalence in schizophrenia 24 ambivalent attachment
514 American Psychiatric Association (APA) 42 and classification 45, 46
Task Force on Nomenclature and Statistics 55 Amish people 448
amphetamine 170--71, 173 amygdala 190 Andreasen, Nancy 101, 114, 145,
220, 276, 381, 383, 389, 396, 535 angiography 156 Angrist, Burt 170

Angst, Jules 103 anhedonia 105, 219--20, 227--8, 514 anorexia nervosa
139, 520 anti-cholinergic drugs 514 anti-depressants 89 anti-psychiatry
movement 116, 151--4 anti-psychotics see neuroleptics anxiety, in
schizophrenia 206 anxiety disorders 327--8 anxiolytics 89 APA see
American Psychiatric Association apathy 220 appraisal and depression
239--47 and emotion 207--8 and the self 248--50 Aretaeus 273 armed
conflict 479--80 Asarnow, Joan 456 Ash, Philip 48--9 ASQ 241--2, 253,
284--5, 318--20, 334, 600 associations in schizophrenia 23 associative
links 397 asthenic build 104 astrology 67--8, 459n asylums 2, 4--6, 7,
537 asyndesis 380 attachment relationships 467, 468--71, 486, 514, 515,
520 attachment representations 469--70 attention 182--9, 220, 514

and delusions 313--15 and paranoia 340--41 attribution
self-representation cycle 254--62, 337--40, 416 attributional style
241--7, 515 Attributional Style Questionnaire 241--2, 253, 284--5,
318--20, 334, 600 attributions 240--47, 515 and delusions 318--22
external 320--22, 525 external-personal 320--21, 331, 338, 340--43
external-situational 320--21, 331, 337--8 family influences 472--3
generation of 254--62 implicit 334--6 internal 241, 243--4, 280, 320,
525 of relatives 426 auditory association cortex 363 autism 24, 191--2,
193 autonomy 253, 515 avoidant attachment 515, 520 Ayton, Peter 324
backward masking effect 185--6, 187, 486, 515--16 Baker, Caroline 376
Baker, Gus 369 Bannister, Donald 142 Barber, Theodore 357 Barch, Deanna
396, 399 Barr, Cathy 448--9 Barrett, Tim 97

Barrowclough, Christine 331, 425, 426, 506 BAS 287, 516 Bateson,
Geoffrey 466 Bauer, Mark 417 Baumeister, Roy 199, 200 Bayesian reasoning
323n Bebbington, Paul 423, 430, 432 Beck, Aaron 239, 247, 250, 252, 253,
507 behavioural activation system 287, 516 behavioural inhibition system
287 behaviourism 45, 45n, 516 belief formation 304, 305 Bellack, Alan
180, 227, 228 Belmaker, R. H. 500n Benedetti, Francesco 289 benefits of
psychosis 111--12 benzodiazepines 89 bereavement and hallucinations
358--60 Berenbaum, Howard 225, 396, 399, 441 Berger, Hans 154, 161 Berk,
Laura 197 Berrios, German 302, 349, 406 Berry, John 475--6 Bhugra,
Dinesh 128, 475 Binding, Karl 30n biographical method 27 biological
psychiatry 9, 150--78, 203 and depression 265--8 and paranoia 343--4
biological time-bomb hypothesis 437--8, 453--63, 489 bipolar disorder
36, 37, 38, 516

comorbidity with schizophrenia 70--71 depression in 234 genetics 448,
450 mixed episodes 274 outcome 86--7 range of outcomes 85--6 remitted
patients 279--83 subclinical 108--9 subtypes 69 unpredictability of
course 84, 85 see also manic depression Birchwood, Max 206, 355, 356,
413, 507 Birley, Jim 421, 430 BIS 287 Blackwood, Nigel 344 Blanchard,
Jack 227, 228 Blashfield, Roger 63 Bleuler, Eugen 19--25, 35, 37, 39,
96, 101, 104, 276, 277, 378, 379--80, 389n, 397--8, 489 Bleuler, Manfred
19, 20, 84--5, 86 blood-oxygen-level-dependent response 162, 515, 523
Bodner, Ehud 341 BOLD response 162, 516, 523 borderline personality
disorder 106, 108--10 Borges, Jorge Luis 67 boundaries and
creativity/genius 111--15 and cross-cultural differences 131--8

and perspective 115--17 and psychosis-proneness 104--10 Bourguignon,
Erika 133 Bouricius, Jean 224--5 Bowen-Jones, Kim 257 Bowins, B. 331
Bowlby, John 468 Boyle, Mary 39 BPRS 548 Braff, David 186 brain activity
161--7 anatomy 154--61 asymmetry 568 cerebral lateralization 164--5
chemistry 167--74 development 446--7 early damage 458--63 foetal damage
156 functional imaging 161--7, 523 late development 453 modular
information-processing 193--8 neural pruning 453 post-mortem studies
155--6 and self-recognition 201 size 189--90 structural imaging 156--60,
174, 534 Brebion, Gildas 369, 372

Brentano, Franz 540--41 Brewin, Chris 426 Bridgeman, Percy 527 Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale 548 brief psychotic disorder 69 Broca, Paul 362
Broca's area 362, 363 Brockington, Ian 65, 87, 88, 481 Brodmann,
Korbinian 374n Brodmann area 32 374 Brothers, Leslie 190 Brown, George
221, 421--2, 429--30, 431, 486 Buckman, Rob 3n Butler, Samuel 120 Cade,
John 92 Calverley, David 357 Camberwell Family Interview 422, 423
Cameron, Norman 380 Candido, Carmie 332 Cannon, Walter 211 Capgras,
Joseph 299, 309--10 Capgras syndrome 299, 309--11, 314, 315, 516--17
carbamazepine 89 Carlsson, Arvid 170, 171 Carmichael, H. 48 Carothers,
John 122--3 Carpenter, William T. 65, 83--4, 223 Carstairs, Morris 421
Cartwright, Samuel 136

case studies 235n Cassidy, Frederick 274 catatonia 14, 15 categories of
disorder 69--71 category-relatedness effect 397 causal processes 406--8
CAVEing 243 Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge, The 67 cerebral
lateralization 164--5, 517 cerebral ventricles 157--60, 174, 517, 536
CFI 422, 423 Chadwick, Paul 297, 339, 355, 356, 507 Chadwick, Peter 298
Chaika, Elaine 394 chaos theory 339 chaotic systems 417--18 Chapman,
James 183 Chapman, Jean 106--7, 108, 181, 220, 312--13, 381, 387
Chapman, Loren 106--7, 108, 181, 220, 312--13, 381, 387 chess playing
193--4 child abuse 478--9 childbirth 481 complications 458--9
chlorpromazine 89, 90--91, 169, 170, 49 501, 502--3, 644 chromosomes 444
chronic fatigue syndrome 139, 520 Churchland, Patricia 541 Churchland,
Paul 541 Ciompi, Luc 84, 85, 86, 229, 229n circadian dysrhythmia 267--8,
517

circadian rhythms 266--7, 517 Claridge, Gordon 107, 108, 109, 110,
114--15, 415 Clark, Lee Anna 219 classification 94 consensus model 37,
38 and diagnostic reliability 43, 44--56, 63--6 and functional
relationships 410--14 international consensus 45--7 Kraepelin's theories
12--16, 42--3, 95, 140, 141, 410--11 Meyer's views 45 operational
definitions 47, 527 vanishing consensus effect 64--6 clinical outcome
83--4 clinical psychologists 3n, 517--18 closure 326--7 clozapine
502--3, 571 cluster analysis 547 Cobb, James 122--3 cognitive behaviour
therapy 507--9, 518 cognitive bias 182, 518 cognitive deficit 181--2,
182--9, 222--3, 518 cognitive neuropsychiatry 142 cognitive slippage 105
cognitive therapy xii Cohen's kappa 55, 55n, 56, 64 cohesion analysis
390--92 cohesive ties 390--92, 518 cohort studies 457--8, 518

Colby, Kenneth 295, 331 collectivist societies and the self 201 Colombo,
Christina 289 Coltheart, Max 317 combat veterans 136--7 communication
deviance 442--3, 467--8, 471--2, 518 communication disorder 101--3, 276
see also thought disorder Communication Disturbance Index 145, 392, 393
comorbidity 69--71, 519 comparative psychiatry 18 complaints see
symptoms computed tomography 157--60, 519 concordance 78--9, 519
confirmation bias 305 congenital abnormalities 77n Connell, Philip 170
Content Analysis of Verbal Explanations 242--3 Continuous Performance
Test 184--5, 186, 187, 223, 486, 514, 519 contrived failure experience
257--8, 257n controls, matched 159 coping skills 262--5, 289--90
enhancement 508, 519 Copolov, David 144 Corcoran, Rhiannon 316--17
Cornblatt, Barbara 455, 490--91 corpus callosum 160, 568 Corrigan,
Patrick 203 Cotard, Jules 299 Cotard syndrome 299, 314, 315, 519 CPT
184--5, 186, 187, 223, 486, 514, 519

creativity and psychosis 112--15 cross-cultural studies 118--40
attributions 321n delusions 300 depression 236--7 emotions 214--15
hallucinations 356--7 Crow, Tim 73, 81--2, 87, 93, 94, 158, 164, 203,
221--2, 354, 450 CT scanning 157--60, 519 culture and delusions 300 and
depression 236--7 and emotions 214--15 and hallucinations 356--7 and
psychiatric illness 118--40 culture-bound syndromes 130--31, 139,
519--20 Cutting, John 298 CVD Project245--6,246n, 253, 261--2,473
cycloid psychosis 36 cyclothymic personality 104 Dale, Henry 155
Dalgliesh, Tim 207, 208 Darwin, Charles 209 DAS 253, 280--81, 336 David,
Tony 201, 314 Davidson, Richard 265 Davis, Penelope 312 deficit syndrome
223--4

Delay, Jean 91, 93 delusional disorder 69, 297n, 520, 528 delusional
perception 28, 33 delusions 16, 293--6 and abnormal beliefs 28, 29
anomalous perception model 308--13, 411--13 and attention 313--15 and
attributions 318--22 clustering with hallucinations 72 cross-cultural
differences 130, 132--3 definitions 301--2, 520 as distortions of truth
305--8 and epistemological impulsivity 323--7 and the evaluation of
hypotheses 323--7 as first-rank symptoms 31, 34, 99, 100 Frégoli 299
grandiose 298 incidence 98--101 and inferences 315--22 of jealousy 299
and mania 276 model of 305 and need for closure 326--7 paranoid see
paranoia of parasitosis 299 of reference 298 relationship with
hallucinations 411--13 in schizophrenia 24

and the self 204 social 329 somatic/hypochondriacal 298, 329 themes
296--301 dementia paranoides 14, 15 dementia praecox 520 and
encephalitis lethargica 39--40 Jung's work 21 Kraepelin's theories 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 37, 39--40, 221, 436 Meyer's work 44 renamed
schizophrenia 22--3 see also schizophrenia Deniker, Pierre 91, 93
Dennett, Daniel 28n, 199, 363, 541 depression 233--8 adaptive nature 209
and appraisal 239--47 and attribution self-representation cycle 254--62
and coping strategies 262--5 evolution of term 213--14 maintenance of
262--5 and memory bias 249--50 model 269 and negative symptoms 222 and
paranoia 344 post-psychotic 413 psychotic 206, 235--6, 238 risk of 473

and the self 247--53 somatic symptoms 265--8 subclinical 279 unipolar
16, 36, 37, 38, 535 depressive realism hypothesis 244--5n Depue, R. A.
103, 287 Descartes, René 175, 201 Determinants of Outcome of Severe
Mental Disorders 124--6, 128--9, 130, 308, 356 diagnosis as description
68--75 Feighner criteria 58--9, 64, 65 and health insurance 57, 62
international differences in 50--53, 55, 56 and outcome 86--7
polydiagnostic approach 65--6 predictive value 83--9 reliability 43,
44--56, 63--6, 68 and treatment 89--93 validity 67--8 and value
judgement 176--7 vanishing consensus effect 64--6 Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders see DSM-I--V Diamond, Diana 427
Dickins, William 439 Digit Span with Distraction Test 184, 186, 187
dimension of experience 353n DiPasquale, Tony 352 discourse planning
363--4, 392, 394 discriminant function analysis 71, 74, 546--7

dismissing attachment style 520 dismorphobia 299, 328 dissociative
disorder 351, 351--2n distraction 263, 289--90, 520 DNA 444 Doane, Jeri
427 Docherty, Nancy 145, 206, 388, 392, 442--3 Dodgson, Guy 324
Donaldson, Margaret 191 dopamine 92--3, 167--8, 169--74, 521, 628
receptors 167--8, 172--3, 486, 571, 628 dopamine beta-hydroxylase 173--4
DOSMD 124--6, 128--9, 130, 308, 356 double-binds 466 downward social
drift 476--7, 521 Dozier, Mary 469--70 dreams 12 dreapetomania 136
droperidol 500n drug therapy 499--503 and diagnosis 89--93 drug names
89n effects on performance in psychological tests 180--81 drug use and
relapse 433 Drury, Val 317 DSDT 184, 186, 187 DSM-I 46, 47, 57--8, 69
DSM-II 47, 55, 69 DSM-III 59--62, 63--4, 65, 69, 95, 116, 297n
multi-axial system 105--6

DSM-III-R 62, 64, 65, 66, 69, 297n DSM-IV 62--3, 69, 94, 133, 140, 297n
delusions 301 hallucinations 350 influence of culture 138--9
post-traumatic stress disorder 478 DSM-V 63 dualism 175, 199, 521
Dudley, Robert 324, 325 Dunbar, Robin 190, 343 Dunham, Warren 476
Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale 253, 280--81, 336 dysphoria see depression
ECA Study 70--71, 97--8 eccentrics, speech 102--3 echolalia 383, 385
Edgerton, Robert 134 EE 423--8, 467, 471--2, 522 EEG 154--5, 161, 164,
362--3, 453, 521 effect size 485--6 Egeland, Janice 448 einheitpsychose
concept 94, 141, 410 Ekman, Paul 210 electroconvulsive therapy 497
electrodermal skin response 252, 360, 521 electroencephalography 154--5,
161, 164, 362--3, 453, 521 electromyography 198, 360, 521 eliminative
materialism 541

Ellgring, Heiner 226 Ellis, Haydn 142, 310--11 Elman, Jeffrey 446 EMG
198, 360, 521 emotional arousal and hallucinations 358--60 and high EE
relatives 425 emotional circumplexes 215--19, 521--2 emotions 205--6 and
appraisal 207--8 basic 210, 516 benefits 208--9 and culture 214--15
descriptive language 213--14 dimensional structure 215--18 expression
209--10 lack of 219--29 nature of 207--19 subjective 210--18 and thought
disorder 387--8 empathy 28--9 encephalitis lethargica 39 encephalization
190 Endicott, Jean 55 endogenous disorders 47 environmental factors in
aetiology 466--93 Epidemiological Catchment Area Study 70--71, 97--8
epistemological impulsivity 323--7

Erikson, Erik 490 Erlenmeyer-Kimling, L. 455 erotomania 299 Escher,
Sondra 138, 313, 353, 355, 356, 412 Esquirol, Jean-Etienne 350, 481
Esterson, Aaron 466 eugenics 30, 30n euphoria 273--4 euthanasia,
compulsory 30n evoked potentials 161 Ewers, Paula 473 experience
sampling 225 experiences see symptoms expressed emotion 423--8, 467,
471--2, 522 expressive aphasia 362 Eysenck, Hans 555--6 Fabrega, Horacio
120, 121n, 136 facial expression 209--10, 226 facial recognition 310--11
factor analysis 72--5, 522 factors 72, 74 failure experience, contrived
257--8, 257n Falloon, Ian 506 family relationships 421--8, 465--7,
467--74 family studies 77, 81--2 family therapy 506--7, 523 Faris,
Robert 476 Farmer, Ann 83 Fear, Chris 319, 336 feature encoding 199
Feighner, John 58

Fernyhough, Charles 482 Feyerabend, Paul 540 Finlay-Jones, Robert 431
first law of research 6 Five Minute Speech Sample 619 flat affect
219--20, 224--6, 523 Flechsig, Paul 10, 293--4, 295 Fliess, Joseph 55,
56 Flor-Henry, Pierre 163 Flynn, James 439, 439n Flynn effect 439n fMRI
162--3, 516, 523 Fodor, Jerry 193 foetal exposure to viral infection
459--60 Fogarty, Sarah 250 folie à deux 69 folk psychology 28n, 540--41
Fonagy, Peter 468 Forel, August 20 Forgas, Joseph 257, 258 Frank, Ellen
288 Franzen, Goran 165 Freeman, Daniel 328, 331 Freeman, Walter 497, 529
French, Chris 282 Freud, Sigmund 9, 19, 20, 22, 23, 116 differences with
Bleuler 21--2 honorary doctorate 44

introduction of theories to USA 45 theory of psychoanalysis 21 writings
on Daniel Schreber 294--5 Frith, Chris 315--17, 342 Fuchs, Thomas 308
Fulford, Bill 99, 177 functional analysis 409, 409n functional
relationships 408--14 GABA 167 Gallagher, Tony 358 Gambini, Orsola 443
gamma-aminobutyric acid 167 Garber, Judy 473 Garety, Philippa 300,
323--4, 325, 508 Gaupp, Robert 438 Geddes, John 503 Genain quadruplets
79--81 gene--environment interactions 439--40 genes 445 marker 447
genetic code 445 genetics 75--83, 438--52 genius and psychosis 112--15
genome 444, 523 scanning 447 genotype 445 Gershon, Samuel 170 ghosts 360
Gibson, Melissa 312

Gilbert, Daniel 342 Gilbert, Paul 209 Glaser, Frederick 153 glial cells
154 Glick, Marion 344 gliosis 156 global attributions 241, 243--4, 247
glossolalia 103 glycine 167 Godel, Kurt 112 Goldberg, Terry 396, 398,
399 Goldstein, Kurt 380 Goldstein, Michael 471 Goodman, Linda 478--9,
480--81, 486 Goodwin, Frederick 273--4, 275, 276 Gottesman, I. I. 83,
441 Gottschalk, Allan 417 Gould, Louis 361 Gourlay, Jane 71 Graham,
George 364, 375, 376 Gray, Jeffrey 287 Green, Michael Foster 180, 185,
187, 188, 489 Green, Paul 361 Griesinger, Wilhelm 9, 150 Grossman, Linda
400--401 Grove, William 389, 396 Gruzelier, John 164--5 Gumley, Andrew
508

Gunderson, John 505 Gur, Raquel 164 Guze, Samuel 151 Haddock, Gill 145,
388, 507, 508 Hall, G. Stanley 489--90 Halliday, M. A. K. 390
hallucinations 347--9 auditory 351--2 and bereavement 358--60 clustering
with delusions 72 coping with 354--6 cross-cultural studies 130, 133--4,
137--8, 356--7 definitions 350, 523 drug-induced 168--9, 354 and
emotional arousal 358--60 and external stimulation 357--8, 359 as
first-rank symptoms 31, 34, 97, 351 history of 349 and illness 353--4
incidence 96--8 inducible 357 and inner speech 360--64 and mania 276
model of 375--7 and normal mental imagery 353 olfactory 352
psychological mechanisms 356--60 relationship with delusions 411--13

in schizoaffective disorder 35 in schizophrenia 24 and the self 204 and
source monitoring 367--74 tactile 352 and trauma 481--3 visual 352--3
hallucinogenic substances 168--9, 354 haloperidol 170, 500n Hammen,
Constance 473 Hammersley, Paul 482 handedness 164 happiness 176n
Hardy-Bayle, Marie-Christine 395 Harris, Tirril 307--8, 429--30, 431--2
Harrison, Glyn 128 Harrop, Chris 490 Harrow, Martin 222, 227, 301,
386--7, 389, 394, 400--401 Harvey, Phil 390, 391, 394--5 Hasan, R. 390
Havers, Sue 369 health insurance and diagnosis 57, 62 Healy, David
267--8, 287--8, 319, 336, 500n heart failure, drug-induced 501
hebephrenia 14, 15 Heider, Fritz 240 Heilbrun, Arthur 368 Heinrichs,
Walter 485--6 Hemple, Carl 47, 58, 527

Hemsley, David 323, 358 Henry Phipps Psychiatric Clinic 44--5
heritability estimates 438--9, 523--4 Herz, Marvin 206 Hickling, Fred
127--8, 127n Higgins, E. T. 250--52, 332 high-risk studies 454--7, 458,
470--71, 471--2, 524 Highfield, Julie 282 Hill, David 449 Himmler,
Heinrich 76 hippocampus 160 Hirsch, Steven 222, 431 Hoche, Alfred 30n,
94 Hoenig, J. 31 Hoffer, Abram 111--12 Hoffman, Albert 168--9, 354
Hoffman, Ralf 363--4, 392, 394 Hogarty, Gerry 506 Hollis, Chris 456
homosexuality 57, 137 homovanillic acid 172, 484, 486, 524 Honderich,
Ted 406 Hooley, J. M. 425, 428 hopelessness 247 Hounsefield, Geoffrey
156--7 Howard, Rob 344 Hughes, Martin 191 human behavioural breakdowns
120--21

human genome project 194 Hunt, Edna 48 Hunt, William 48 Hunter, Richard
151 Huxley, Julian 111--12 HVA 172, 484, 486, 524 5-hydroxyindolacetic
acid 468 5hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) 167, 169, 468, 570 hypertension
107, 109 hypnosis 357 hypofrontality hypothesis 165--6, 524 hypomania
273, 524 incidence 103--4 and self-esteem 282 hypomanic personality 524
Iacano, William 159 ICD-6 46--7 ICD-8 47, 50, 64, 65 ICD-9 64 ICD-10 62,
65, 66 iconic memory 185, 515 illusions 350 imipramine 89 immigrants
127--8, 308, 474--6 incidence 524 cross-cultural differences 120--28
symptoms 96--104 individualist societies and the self 201 inferences and
delusions 315--22

Ingvar, David 165 Inouye, Tsuyoshi 361 insight 496--8, 525 insulin coma
497 intentional states 540 intermingling 387 internal stimuli and
emotions 211--13 International Classification of Diseases see ICD-6;
ICD-8; ICD-9; ICD10 International Follow-up Study of Schizophrenia
123--4 International List of Causes of Death 46 International Pilot
Study of Schizophrenia (IPSS) 51--3, 54, 87, 123--4, 129 IQ 439n, 461
Jablensky, Assen 124 Jackson, Henry 509 Jackson, Hughlings 73n Jackson,
Mike 99 James, William 211 Jamison, Kay Redfield 114, 270--72, 273--4,
275, 276 Janet, Pierre 351--2n Jannsen, Paul 170 Jaspers, Karl 25--9,
30, 37, 95, 300, 350, 378, 495, 520 Java 122 Jaynes, Julian 137--8, 349
jealousy, delusional 299 jet lag 267 John, Caroline 324 Johns, Louise
374 Johnson, Marcia 365, 366, 369, 375

Johnson, Sheri 283, 287, 431 Johnson, William 312 Johnstone, Eve 93,
158, 221--2, 354 Jones, Ernest 277 Jones, Peter 457 Juhasz, Joseph 349
Jung, Carl Gustav 20, 21, 44, 397--8 OceanofPDF.com

Just, Nancy 264 Kahlbaum, Karl Ludwig 538--9 Kallman, Franz 76, 76n
Kamin, Leon 76n, 79 Kane, John 502--3 Kaney, Sue 29, 257--8, 302, 313,
314, 318, 320, 334, 335 kappa 55, 55n, 56, 64 Karlsson, John 114
Kasanin, Jacob 35, 36 Katsanis, Joanna 227--8 Kelley, Harold 254 Kelly,
George 304 Kendell, Robert 62, 71, 87, 88, 481 Kendler, Kenneth 441, 444
Kenya 122--3 Kernis, Michael 249, 282, 415--16 Kerr, Natalie 317 Kerr,
Sandra 225 ketamine 396 Kety, Seymour 37, 39, 75, 78, 105 Kinderman,
Peter 252, 257, 285, 321--2, 332, 333--4, 337, 343 kindling 84 Kingdon,
David 507--8 Kinney, Dennis 443 Kirk, Stuart 63 Kissinger, Henry 305
Kitayama, Shinobu 201 Kleinman, Arthur 121n, 124, 125--6, 129, 139--40,
151n, 236--7

Klerman, Gerald 58, 59, 63, 95, 142, 151 Kliest, Karl 36 koro 130, 519
Kraepelin, Emil 9--14, 24, 26, 30, 34, 37, 175 and alcoholism 537 and
attention 182--3 clinical attitude 25 Compendium of Psychiatry 10
cross-cultural studies 122 and dementia praecox 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 37,
39--40, 221, 436 differences with Bleuler 22--3 disciples 19 and
encephalitis lethargica 39--40 and incoherent speech 378--9, 386 legacy
16--18 and manic depression 35, 36, 37, 84, 85--6 mentors 293 and
paranoia 297n place in history of psychiatry 42--3 post-mortem studies
155 Textbook of Psychiatry 12, 14, 15, 16, 18 theories on classification
of mental illness (paradigm) 12--16, 42--3, 95, 140, 141, 410--11
Kraepelin, Karl 9 Kramer, M. 50 Krasner, Leonard 313 Kretschmer, Ernst
104 Kring, Ann 225

Kronengold, Henry 496 Kruglanski, Arie 326 Kuhn, Thomas 41--2 Kuipers,
Elizabeth 423, 427, 428 Kutchins, Herb 63 Laborit, Henri 90--91, 169
Laing, R. D. 116, 152, 379, 386, 421, 466 Lam, Dominic 290 Langdon,
Robyn 317 language 194--8, 212n comprehension and production 388--92
incidence of disorders 101--3 and psychosis 203 see also speech
Largactil (chlorpromazine) 89, 90--91, 169, 170, 499, 501, 502--3, 644
Larkin, Philip 465--6, 474 LaRusso, Lucrezia 312 latah 130, 131, 519
late paraphrenia 308 Lazarus, Richard 207--8 Leafhead, Kate 314 learned
helplessness 221, 240n LEDS 429, 430, 431 Lee, Hon 334 Leff, Julian 128,
391, 424, 506 Lenz, Herman 357 Leonhard, Karl 36 Leonhard, Klaus 234

Leudar, Ivan 354, 360, 375 levo-dopa 171 Lewis, Aubrey 496, 525 Lewis,
Shön 508, 510 Lewontin, Richard 76n, 79 Librium 89 Liddle, Peter 73--4,
165, 410 life events 428--33 Life Events and Difficulties Schedule 429,
430, 431 Lindquist, Margit 170 linkage analysis 447--50, 525 Linney,
Yvonne 324 Lipsedge, Maurice 121n, 133 Lishman, W. A. 250 lithium
carbonate 89, 91--2, 93 Littlewood, Roland 121n, 132, 133 Lloyd, G. W.
250 locus of control 458 Loewi, Otto 155 Losch, Mary 97 Lothane, Zvi 306
LSD 168--9, 354 Lyon, Helen 243, 249, 283, 285, 334 lysergic acid
diethylamide 168--9, 354 MacAlpine, Ada 151 McCartney, Paul 365, 366
McDonald, Scott 133 McGhie, Andrew 183

McGilchrist, Ian 298 McGorry, Patrick 64, 490, 509 McGuffin, Peter 65,
83 McGuire, James 405n McGuire, Philip 363, 374 McKenna, Peter 172
MacMillan, Fiona 354 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 157--60, 525
functional 162--3, 516, 523 Maher, Brendan 308--9, 389--90, 398--9,
411--12 maintenance factors 407--8 Malkoff-Schwartz, Susan 288 Malla,
Ashok 206, 222 mania 36, 234, 270--72 attempts to recall 272--3 and
coping strategies 289--90 definition 525--6 excitability hypothesis
286--7 manic-defence hypothesis 277--86 model of 290--92 processes
leading to 286--90 and psychoanalysis 277--8 psychology of 283--6 and
the self 285--6 and sleep deprivation 287--9 stages 275 symptoms 273--6
manic-defence hypothesis 277--86 manic depression 16, 17, 19, 37, 38

definition 526 evolution of concept 35--7 Kraepelin's work 35, 36, 37,
84, 85--6 relationship with schizophrenia 24--5 see also bipolar
disorder manic episode 60, 61, 62 Manson, K. 252, 285 Margo, Andrew 358
Markar, H. R. 273 marker genes 447 Markus, Hazel 201 Marshall, J.
Richard 79n, 124 Martin, J. R. 381, 382, 386, 389, 390--91 Masserman,
Jules 48 Mastria, Mary 312 maternal nutrition 460 Mau Mau rebellion 123
Mayer, Meredith 226 Mayr, Ernst 111--12 Mednick, Sarnoff 455 Meehl, Paul
104--5, 106, 108, 127, 227, 415, 485 Meins, Elizabeth 468 Meir, Golda
305 Meltzer, Herbert 502--3 Melville, Charles 206 memories, source
monitoring 368--9 mental health professionals expressed emotion 428

quality of 7--8 mental representation 199 mentalizing 192--3, 526
metacognitive beliefs 355--6, 526 metonymic distortion 380 Meyer, Adolf
44--5, 58, 94, 142, 297n Miklowitz, David 425, 426 Mikulincer, Mario 341
Miller, J. G. 389, 394 Miller, Laura 352 Millon, Theodore 59 Mintz,
Sanford 357 Mirowsky, John 306--7 Mojtabai, Ramin 144, 145, 405, 406,
440, 441, 444, 451--2 Monitz, Egaz 156, 497, 529 mood disorder, subtypes
69 mood-stabilizing drugs 89 Moore, Estelle 428 Moore, Thomas 72--3
moral values 250n Morel, Augustin 14, 15 Morrison, Tony 328, 355, 356,
373--4, 376, 407, 491, 510 Mosher, Loren 504 Mosso, A. 161, 162 MRI see
magnetic resonance imaging Mueser, Kim 227, 228, 478--9, 480--81
multiple personality 351--2n Murphy, Jane 135 Murray, Robin 128, 363,
457 Musalek, Michael 204

Myin-Germeys, Inez 418--19 NARP 129 Nash, John Jr 111, 112, 114 National
Child Development Study 457--8 National Survey of Health and Development
457--8 Nazi Germany 30, 75--6, 497--8, 541--2 NCDS 457--8 Neale, John
184, 225, 278, 279--80, 390, 395 negative affective style 426 negative
cognitive triad 239, 247 neoKraepelinian movement 58, 59, 63, 71, 95,
116, 150, 151, 174, 203, 487 neologisms 383, 385 neurasthenia 237
neurodevelopmental studies 458--63 neuroleptic dysphoria 500
neuroleptic-induced deficit syndrome 222, 500, 526 neuroleptic malignant
syndrome 501, 526 neuroleptics 89, 92--3, 171, 222, 499--503, 500n,
513--14, 522, 526--7 atypical 501--3, 515 neurones 154, 167 damage 156
neuropsychological tests 180--82, 184--9, 527 neuroscience 154--74
neuroses 28, 37, 38 neurotransmitters 155, 167--74 New York High-Risk
Project 455 Nicola 95

NIDS 222, 500, 526 Niederland, William 306 Nisbet, Heidi 180 Nissl,
Franz 26 Nolen-Hoeksema, Susan 263--4, 289--90, 407 Noll, Richard 135
nonaffective acute remitting psychosis 129 noradrenaline 155, 167 normal
distribution 107n normal science 41 normalizing strategy 508, 527
Norman, Ross 206, 222 North Wales Hospital 2, 4--6, 7, 537 NSHD 457--8
nucleotides 444, 445 Nuechterlein, Keith 185, 186--7, 415, 433
nuthkavihak 135 obsessive--compulsive disorder 351 O'Carrol, Pierce 369,
372 occupational outcome 83--4 O'Connor, Eileen 352 odds ratio 70 Oden,
Chester 133 oestrogen 438 olanzapine 503 olfactory reference syndrome
352 Oltmanns, Thomas 184, 225, 395, 441 OPCRIT 65--6 operational
definitions 47, 527

Orley, John 121 Osmond, Humphrey 111--12 outcomes 83--9, 128--30, 499
overinclusion 380 Oxman, Thomas 332 Papua New Guinea 122 paradigm 41, 42
paranoia 16, 19, 37, 38, 296--8, 330--31 and attention 340--41 and
attribution self-representation cycle 337--40 and attributions 257, 258
bad me 297--8, 339 and biological psychiatry 343--4 computer simulation
295 definition 527--8 and depression 344 as distortion of truth 305--8
and external-personal attributions 331, 338, 340--43 functional
relationships 411, 412 genetic studies 443--4 Jaspers' theories 27 model
of 343--6 poor me 297, 339 and the self 331--40 terminology 296--7n see
also delusions paranoid personality disorder 297n, 528 parasitosis,
delusional 299

Parkinson, James 39 Parkinson's disease and dopamine 171 drug-induced
499--500 post-encephalitic 39 path analysis 455 Pavlov, Ivan 195, 195n
Pavlovian conditioning 45 Penn, David 203 perceptions and delusions
308--13 source monitoring 370--74 perceptual bias 370--72 perceptual
sensitivity 370--72 perseveration 383, 385 personality dimensions 353n
Eysenck's theory 555--6 questionnaires 106--8, 109, 110 personality
disorder 528 pessimism 235 PET 162--3, 165, 171, 172--3, 363, 374, 528
Peters, Emmanuelle 100, 324, 327 Petersen, Christopher 241 Pettus,
Charles 49, 55 phenothiazines 89 Phillips, Mary 314 phobias 327--8
phonemic paraphasia 385

phrenology 163 physical abuse 478--9, 481--2 Piaget, Jean 191, 196
pimozide 93 PIT 279, 284--5, 334--6 polydiagnosis 65--6 Pope, Marie 283
Popper, Karl 304--5, 325, 492 Posey, Thomas 97 positron emission
tomography 162--3, 165, 171, 172--3, 363, 374, 528 post-Kraepelinian
psychiatry 140--45, 495--8 postmodernism 564 post-mortem studies 155--6
post-traumatic stress disorder 160, 478, 480--81, 528--9 Poulton, Richie
98, 100--101, 103 Power, Mick 207, 208 Pragmatic Inference Task 279,
284--5, 334--6 predisposition to psychosis 105, 106--10 prefrontal
leucotomy 5, 156, 497, 529 Premack, David 192n Preston, Martin 361
prevalence 529 cross-cultural differences 120--28 symptoms 96--104
preventative intervention 509--10 Prince, Morton 352n principle of
functional interconnectedness 414 Proctor, Robert 497--8 projection 495

projective tests 624--5 Prosen, Mel 386--7 prospective studies 454--7
protein synthesis 445 proximate determinants 407, 408 Prozac 89
pseudohallucinations 350, 375 psychiatric wards 7--8 psychiatrists 529
differences from clinical psychologists 3n psychiatry history of 9
origin of term 9 psychoanalysis 21--2, 23, 45, 58, 277--8, 530
psychoanalysts 530 psychoanalytic therapy 505--6 psychological research,
Kraepelinian perspective 179--89 psychopharmacology 530 psychosis 37,
38, 530--31 psychosis-proneness 105, 106--10 psychotherapy 504--9
psychotic disorder due to a medical condition 69 PTSD 160, 478, 480--81,
528--9 puerperal psychosis 481, 531 pyknic build 104 Quade, Dana 49, 55

quadruplet study 79--81 questionnaires, personality 106--8, 109, 110
quetiapine 503 racial discrimination 127n, 308, 475 Rado, Sandor 227,
277 Raison, Charles 288 Rankin, Peter 369, 372, 470 Raune, David 427 RDC
65, 66 reaction-maintenance principle 376, 407 reactive depression 47
Read, John 481--2, 485 reality, recognition of 364--7 Reboul-Lachaux, J.
309--10 receptors 167 dopamine 167--8, 172--3, 486, 571, 628
recklessness 275--6 Reich, Walter 53 Reil, Johann Christian 9
reinforcement 4, 217, 531 relapse 419--20 and high expressed emotion
423--4 and life events 428--33 model of 433--5 relationships, stressful
420--28 relatives, creativity 114 reliability 531 of diagnostic systems
43, 44--56, 63--6, 68

of post-Kraepelinian psychiatry 144--5 symptoms 144--5 religious beliefs
and delusions 99--100 Research Diagnostic Criteria 65, 66 Resonance 138,
511 Response Styles Questionnaire 263 retrospective studies 453--4
Richards, Graham 213 Richards, Ruth 114 Rieder, Ronald 144, 145, 405,
406, 440, 441, 444, 451--2 risperidone 503 Roberts, Glen 99--100, 326--7
Roberts, John 431 Robins, Lee 70 Robson, Philip 248 Rochester, Sherry
381, 382, 386, 389, 390--91 Rokeach, Milton 296, 302, 326 Romme, Marius
137--8, 313, 353, 354, 355, 356, 412, 483, 511 Romney, David 247--8, 332
Rorschach test 624--5 Rose, Steven 76n, 79 Rosenberg, Stanley 332
Rosenhan, David 234 Rosenthal, David 79--80, 105 Rosetta stone 13--14
Ross, Catherine 306--7 Ross, Colin 481 Ross, James 312

Roth, Martin 153 RSQ 263 Rüdin, Ernst 30, 76 rumination 263--5, 289--90,
531--2 rural environment 477 Russell, James 210, 214, 215, 216, 217, 482
Rutter, Michael 422 Sabshin, Melvin 59 Saccuzzo, Dennis 186 safety
behaviours 328 Sally-Ann test 192--3 Salzinger, Kurt 325 Sandifer, Myron
49, 55 SANS 220, 224 Sarbin, Theodore 349 Sarfati, Yves 317, 395
Sartorius, Norman 124 Sass, Louis 376 Scale for Assessment of Negative
Symptoms 220, 224 Scale for the Assessment of Thought, Language and
Communication 101--2, 145, 383--5, 388, 395, 396 schemas 199, 532
schizoaffective disorder 35, 37, 38, 69, 87 schizophrenia 37, 38
Bleuler's four 'As' 23--4 comorbidity with bipolar disorder 70--71
continuum with normal personality 106--10 DSM-III criteria 60--61, 62

and emotion 205--6 as endogenous disorder 47 evolution of concept 22--9,
37, 39--40 genetics 448--50 latent 24 lay misunderstanding of 23, 23n
outcome 86--9 relationship with manic depression 24--5
Schneider-positive 34 simple 24 subtypes 69, 73 unpredictability of
course 84--5 schizophrenia spectrum disorder 105, 106 schizophreniform
disorder 69 schizotaxia 105, 106 schizothymic personality 104
schizotypal personality disorder 105--6, 415 schizotypy 104--6, 106--8,
109, 110 Schneider, Kurt 28, 29--35, 37, 39, 95--6, 97, 221, 300, 351
Schnurr, Paula 332 Schou, Mogens 92 Schreber, Daniel Paul 294--5, 298,
306, 307, 309 Schulsinger, Fini 455 scientific revolution 42 Scott, Jan
280--81, 283 SDT 370--72, 373, 532--3 Seal, Mark 369 season-of-birth
effect 459--60, 461

Sedgwick, Peter 176, 466 selective attention 514 selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitors 89 self 198--201 actual 248, 251, 251n, 252, 332--3
definition 532 and depression 247--53 domains 251n ideal 250--51, 251n,
252, 332--3 implicit beliefs about 333--6 influence of appraisals
248--50 in mania 285--6 ought 250--51, 251n and paranoia 331--40 and
psychosis 204 self-awareness 197 self-discrepancy 251--2, 532
self-esteem 247--50 definition 532 and expressed emotion 425
fluctuations in 415--16 and hypomania 282 and mania 283 see also self
self-guides 251n, 532 self-instructional training 5--6 self-reference
effect 199--200, 248, 285--6, 385 self-representation and attribution
254--62

self-schema 532 self-serving bias 243--4, 261, 331, 532 self-standards
250--53 Seligman, C. G. 122 Seligman, Martin 234, 239--43, 240n, 245,
415, 472 semantic encoding 199 semantic memory 397--9 semantic
paraphasia 385 semantic priming 397, 398--9 Serbsky Institute of
Forensic Psychiatry 53 serotonin 167, 169, 468, 570 Serper, Mark 184
sertindole 503 sexual abuse 478--9, 481--2, 486, 639 sexual dysfunction,
drug-induced 500 sexual feelings and mania 276 Shah, G. M. 363
Shakespeare, William, King Lear243--4 Shakow, David 180, 223 shamanism
134--5, 134--6 shared psychotic disorder 69 Sharp, Helen 319, 336
Shaver, Philip 470 Shimizu, Akira 361 Shimkunas, Algimantas 387 Shorter,
Edward 9, 45, 90, 92 Shugar, G. 331 Shweder, Richard 237

Siegel, Ronald 358 signal detection theory 370--72, 373, 532--3
Silbersweig, David 363 Simonton, Dean 112 Singer, Margaret 441--2 single
positron emission tomography 363 Sison, Cecile 225 Skinner, B. F. 211,
212, 527 Slade, Peter 110, 350, 358, 372 sleep deprivation 287--9 Smith,
David 225 Smith, Geoffrey 159 Snezebryakova, Andrei 52--3 social brain
hypothesis 189--93, 194, 533 social cognition 189--93, 194 social
constructionism 564 social desirability 280 social drift 476--7, 521
social isolation 413--14 social outcome 83--4 social rhythm disruption
events 288--9 socio-economic status 476--7 sociotropy 253, 533 Socrates
349 SoCRATES trial 508 source monitoring 365--8, 375, 394--5, 482--3
current perceptions 370--74 definition 533

memories 368--9 speech blocking 385 circumstantiality 103, 385 clanging
383, 385 cohesive ties 390--92 derailment 102--3, 383, 384 distractible
384 illogicality 383, 385 incoherent/psychotic see thought disorder
inner 196, 197--8, 239, 360--64, 524--5 loss of goal 102--3, 385 and
mania 276 planning 363--4, 392, 394 poverty 383, 384 poverty of content
383, 384 pressure of 103, 384 private 196--7, 482--3, 524--5
self-monitoring 394--5 social 196 stilted 385 tangentiality 103, 383,
384 and thought 196 see also language Sperber, Dan 131, 132 Sperry,
Roger 163 spiritual experiences and delusional beliefs 99--100 Spitzer,
Manfred 398--9

Spitzer, Robert 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 105--6, 116
Spohn, Herbert 180 SRD events 288--9 stable attributions 241, 243--4,
247 Standard Classified Nomenclature of Disease45--6 Stanton, Alfred 505
Startup, Mike 243, 249, 283, 285 state-dependent memory 272--3, 533--4
states 415--17 Stengel, Erwin 47 Stephens, G. Lynn 364, 375, 376
sterilization, compulsory 76 Strauman, Tim 251--2, 332 Strauss, John
83--4, 353 Strauss, Milton 180 stress 127 and expressed emotion 426--7
in relationships 420--28 sensitivity to 418--19 stress-vulnerability
model 241, 415, 484--5, 534 Stroop, J. R. 281 Stroop effect 281--2, 283,
284, 313--14, 315, 333--4, 335, 534 substance-induced psychotic disorder
69 subvocalization 198, 198n, 360, 534 suicide 247 Sullivan, Harry Stack
505 superego 250n Susser, Ezra 129 sustained attention/vigilance 184--5,
514

Swarbrick, Rebecca 327 Sweeny, Paul 243 symptoms 149 active 164--5 as
basis of psychiatry 140--45, 405--6 clustering 72--5 and cognitive
deficits 187--8 cross-cultural differences 130--31 first-rank 30--35,
65, 96, 97, 99, 100, 351 fluctuations in 414--20 functional
relationships 411, 412 genetics 440--44, 451--2 incidence 96--104 of
mania 273--6 negative xii, 73--4, 73n, 219--29, 526 origins of 488
positive 73--4, 73n, 187, 528 prodromal 206, 420, 529 reliability 144--5
synapses 167 Szasz, Thomas 117, 151--4, 151n, 174, 177 Szechtman, Henry
374, 377 Szulecka, Krystyna 314 Tai, Sara 388 tardive dyskinesia 500,
534--5 Tarrier, Nick 331, 425, 506, 507, 508 Taylor, Eric 456 Taylor, M.
A. 65

Taylor, Michael 81 Teasdale, John 240--41, 243, 245, 250 Tellegren, Auke
215--18 Temple--Wisconsin Cognitive Vulnerability to Depression Project
245-- 6, 246n, 253, 261--2, 473 temporal lobes 190 Tennen, Howard 247
test-retest reliability 531 Teuton, Joanna 118--20, 134 theory of mind
192--3, 192n, 395, 535 and attachment 468, 472 deficits in 315--18,
342--3, 411 second-order tests 316n third-order tests 316n Third Reich
14 Thomas, Justin 270n, 290 Thomas, Phil 354, 360, 375 Thompson,
Michelle 281 thought audible 32 diffusion 33 intrusive/obsessional 351,
376 and speech 196 withdrawal 32 thought disorder 24, 101--3, 276,
378--401 definition 535 functional relationships 411, 412 genetic
studies 441--3 thought insertion 350--51, 375

thought, language and communication disorder 383--5, 535 threshold
theory 370 Tien, Allen 97--8, 98n Tienari, Pekka 443, 467, 471 TLC Scale
101--2, 145, 383--5, 388, 395, 396 token economy 4--5 Topping, Gillian
421 Torrey, E. F. 81, 459 traditional healers 118--20, 134--6 traits
415--17 trauma 477--83 Trower, Peter 297, 339, 490 Tsuang, Michael 86
Turkington, Douglas 507--8 Turpin, Graham 425 twin studies 77, 78, 79,
81, 83, 519 discordance rates 79n pairwise concordance rate 78
probandwise concordance rate 78--9 thought disorder 443 twins dizygotic
76--7, 520--21 monozygotic 77, 77n, 526 UCLA Family Project 471--2
Uganda, traditional healers 118--20, 121, 134 Ullman, Leonard 313 United
States, concept of schizophrenia 50--51 ununderstandibility of psychoses
28--9 urban environment 477 US--UK Diagnostic Project 50--51, 55, 65

USSR, concept of schizophrenia 52--3, 544 validity 67--8, 535--6 Valium
89 van Duyl, Marjolein 118--19 van Os, Jim 65, 94, 98, 100 Vaughn,
Christine 424 verbal community 536 Virchow, Rudolf 152 visual
association cortex 363 Voltaire 296 von Economo, Constantin 39 Vygotsky,
L. S. 195--6, 197, 380 Wald, D. 500n Walker, Elaine 454 Wanderling,
Joseph 129 Warner, Richard 7, 221 Watson, David 215--18, 219 Watson, J.
B. 45, 45n, 197--8, 516 Webster, Donna 326 Weeks, David 102--3 Wehr,
Thomas 288, 289 weight gain, drug-induced 500, 501 Weinberger, Daniel
165--6, 396 Weingartner, Howard 272 were 135 Wernicke, Karl 362
Wernicke's aphasia 362 Wernicke's area 362 WHO see World Health
Organization

Whybrow, Peter 417 Williams, J. Mark 253, 283 Wing, John 34, 221
Winters, Ken 279--80 Wisconsin Card Sort Task 165--6, 180 witiko
psychosis 130, 131, 519--20 Wittgenstein, Ludwig 96, 212, 364 Wittson,
Cecil 48 Wong, Grace 290 Woodnut, Tom 282 Woodruff, Guy 192n word
approximations 385 word associations 398 word salad 23--4, 378, 384, 535
working memory 186--7, 395--6, 536 World Health Organization (WHO) 42
and classification 46 study of international discrepancies in diagnosis
51--3, 54 Wundt, Wilhelm 10, 11, 293 Wykes, Til 391 Wynne, Lyman 441--2,
443 Yolken, Robert 459 Young, Andy 310--11, 314 Young, Heather 324, 325,
326, 357 Yung, Alison 509 Zajonc, Robert 207 zeitgeber 266, 536 Zigler,
Philip 344 Zimbardo, Philip 309

Zubin, Joseph 55 OceanofPDF.com

\* Rob Buckman, doctor and humorist, has characterized the difference
between psychologists and psychiatrists in the following way: 'According
to psychologists, a psychologist is a scientist who has trained in
various aspects of experimental psychology, neurophysiology, operant
conditioning and interpersonal dynamics, whereas a psychiatrist is a
doctor who couldn't keep up the payments on his stethoscope.
Psychiatrists, on the other hand, tend to view the schism in a more
allegorical style. Thus, according to a very senior psychiatrist,
"neurotics are people who build castles in the air, psychotics are
people who live in them, while psychiatrists are people who charge the
rent, and psychologists are like Men from the Council who come round
once in a blue moon, talk incomprehensible crap, and do damn all"
(Medicineballs II. London: Papermac, 1988, pp. 78--9). As this quotation
suggests, the training of clinical psychologists and psychiatrists is
quite different. For short accounts of these differences, see the
Appendix, (pp. 513--26), which also contains brief definitions of many
of the technical terms included in the text. OceanofPDF.com

\* Of course, in Kraepelin's time, cars were owned only by the very
rich. OceanofPDF.com

\* For a brief but interesting account of this lay misunderstanding of
the concept of schizophrenia see T. Turner (1995) 'Schizophrenia', in G.
E. Berrios and R. Porter (eds.), A History of Clinical Psychiatry.
London: Athlone Press. According to Turner, the earliest recorded
misrepresentation of this sort occurs in an essay on literary criticism
written by T. S. Eliot in 1933. OceanofPDF.com

\* This theory anticipated recent philosophical discussions, for example
by Dan Dennett, about the relationship between 'folk' psychology and
scientific explanations of human behaviour. See note 16, p. 51.
OceanofPDF.com

\* The role of German psychiatry in promoting Nazi eugenic policies is
not widely known but has been well documented. Foremost among those who
played a role was Alfred Hoche (the man criticized by Jaspers as
'intelligent, yet unproductive' and prone to 'elegant sounding phrases
of gentlemanly superiority'), who, together with the philosopher and
jurist Karl Binding, in 1920 published a pamphlet entitled 'Permission
to destroy life unworthy of living', advocating compulsory euthanasia
for the inmates of 'idiot institutes'. It was supporters of the National
Socialist Movement, notably Rüdin, who pioneered genetic studies of
schizophrenia while at the same time advocating the most extreme eugenic
measures. Their work is considered in more detail in Chapter 4.
OceanofPDF.com

\* In 1913 Watson coined the term 'behaviourism' (roughly, the idea that
human behaviour should be studied objectively, using the same techniques
that had been successfully used to study animal behaviour). Behaviourism
became the most influential approach in psychology between the 1930s and
the 1960s. OceanofPDF.com

\* For the statistically unafraid, the formula for kappa is as follows:

where PO is the proportion of observed agreement between clinicians and
Pc is the level of agreement expected by chance.

OceanofPDF.com

\* The concept of positive and negative symptoms can be traced to the
British neurologist Hughlings Jackson. Writing at the end of the
nineteenth century, Jackson assumed a hierarchical-evolutionary model of
the nervous system, in which the most evolved regions of the brain were
not only responsible for the highest forms of mental functioning, but
also regulated the expression of more primitive functions. On this view,
negative symptoms were the consequence of the loss of higher functions
whereas the release of lower functions was responsible for positive
symptoms. Jackson's use of metaphor reveals the cultural origins of this
theory: 'If the governing body of this country were destroyed suddenly,
we should have two causes of lamentation: 1. The loss of services of
eminent men; 2. the anarchy of the now uncontrolled people' (quoted in
J. Miller (1978) The Body in Question. London: Jonathan Cape).
OceanofPDF.com

\* Kallman, who became one of the most influential of the early
psychiatric geneticists, believed that the gene for schizophrenia was
recessive and therefore would be carried by many of the healthy
relatives of schizophrenia patients. He therefore held that the spread
of schizophrenia genes into successive generations could only be checked
if both patients and their healthy relatives were prevented from
breeding. In their book Not in Our Genes, Steven Rose, Leon Kamin and
Richard Lewontin (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1985) have noted a curious
rewriting of history by some contemporary American writers, who have
argued that Kallman was motivated to believe that schizophrenia was a
recessive disorder precisely because he knew that this would make
eugenic measures impractical. OceanofPDF.com

\* Identical twins are not always identical in the uterus. Very rarely,
genetic mutations may affect one foetus and not the other. More
commonly, one foetus receives a better blood supply than the other, and
is born heavier as a consequence. Also, infectious or toxic agents may
have differential effects on twins. One twin may be affected by a virus
whereas the other is not (a study of six pairs of twins born to
HIV-positive mothers found that only one of the twins was affected in
three of the pairs). Similarly, drugs taken by the mother may have a
greater effect on one twin than on the other. One way of estimating the
influence of such factors on the development of twins is by the study of
congenital abnormalities that are present at birth. Identical twins are
often discordant for such abnormalities, and the degree of concordance
or discordance varies according to the organ system affected. For
example, concordance rates for clubfoot have been estimated at
approximately 75 per cent whereas those for brain abnormalities are much
lower, leading some researchers to conclude that non-genetic factors are
the main cause of the latter. (For discussions of these and other
factors complicating twin studies, see E. F. Torrey, A. E. Bowler, E. H.
Taylor and I. I. Gottesman (1994) Schizophrenia and Manic-Depressive
Disorder. New York: Basic Books, and also L. Wright (1997) Twins: Genes,
Environment and the Mystery of Identity. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.)
OceanofPDF.com

\* In an essay that is highly critical of the quality of genetic
research in psychiatry, the late J. Richard Marshall showed that the
same logic could be used to inflate estimates of dis cordance. For
example, in the above example the pairwise discordance rate is 70 per
cent. However, if we calculate a probandwise discordance rate for the
sample by counting separately each member of the discordant pairs, we
arrive at a discordance rate of 82 per cent, so that, 'It could then be
argued that the concordance rate is negligible' ('The genetics of
schizophrenia: axiom or hypothesis?' in R. P. Bentall (ed.) (1990)
Reconstructing Schizophrenia. London: Routledge). OceanofPDF.com

\* Confusingly, drugs are given two names. The generic name (for
example, chlorpromazine) refers to the active compound, whereas the
trade name (for example, Largactil) isused by the drug company when
marketing the compound. I will follow convention and begin generic names
inlower case and trade names inupper case. OceanofPDF.com

\* The 13.0 per cent figure was based on data from the first interview,
whereas the 11.1 per cent figure was based on data collected at the
follow-up interviews one year later. OceanofPDF.com

\* There is evidence of both cross-cultural and historical variation in
the extent to which visual hallucinations are reported by psychiatric
patients, which I review in later chapters. Modern psychiatric patients
in the West appear to report fewer visual hallucinations than patients
in Kraepelin's time. This difference between Tien's findings and the
earlier British findings may therefore reflect a genuine historical
trend. OceanofPDF.com

\* A normal distribution, as defined by statisticians and
epidemiologists, is characterized by the familiar 'bell curve' when
values of a trait are plotted on the x-axis of a graph, and the
proportion of the population having different values of the trait are
plotted on the y-axis (see Figure 5.1). OceanofPDF.com

\* I am indebted to Joanna Teuton for her helpful advice about the
contents of this chapter. OceanofPDF.com

\* There have been, of course, some notable researchers who have
straddled both camps, for example Horacio Fabrega and Arthur Kleinman in
the United States, and Roland Littlewood and Maurice Lipsedge in the UK.
OceanofPDF.com

\* We will see in a later chapter that the stresses associated with
racial discrimination may play a role in the excess of psychotic
breakdowns in British Afro-Caribbeans. It is therefore of some interest
to note that Dr Hickling was stopped by the police for no apparent
reason when driving in his hire car from his hotel to the Institute of
Psychiatry. On being unable to prove his identity, he was arrested
(Robin Murray, personal communication). OceanofPDF.com

\* According to Kleinman's distinction between illness and disease (as
discussed in the last chapter), Szasz's argument is against the concept
of mental disease. However, I will stick with Szasz's terminology here.
OceanofPDF.com

\* In an attempt to make this point humorously, I once wrote an article
entitled 'A proposal to classify happiness as a psychiatric disorder'
(Journal of Medical Ethics, 18: 94--8, 1992). In the article I was able
to point to evidence that happiness often leads to irrational or
reckless behaviour; that some people are genetically disposed to be
happier than others; and that states of happiness are accompanied by
abnormal activity in the right cerebral hemisphere of the brain. Of
course, my proposal was not a serious one, and was meant to illustrate
the problems involved in discriminating between disease and health.
Unfortunately, the joke was lost on a number of British journalists who
were alerted to the article by a press release from the publisher of the
journal. The magazine New Scientist devoted a whole page to suggesting
that I was making poor use of the salary at that time paid to me by the
University of Liverpool. However, my favourite headline from this period
was from the Daily Star, which said, TOP DOC TALKS THROUGH HIS HAT! From
this I could at least take some comfort that I was a top doc.
OceanofPDF.com

\* These tests are devised by finding out how different types of brain
damage affect the ability to solve different kinds of problems. Not all
psychological tests can be used to identify a specific locus of brain
damage in this way. OceanofPDF.com

\* The origin of this terminology is the paper that started this line of
research, written by the distinguished American primatologist David
Premack and his colleague Guy Woodruff, which was entitled 'Does the
chimpanzee have a theory of mind?' (Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 4:
515--26, 1978). OceanofPDF.com

\* Intriguingly, this observation led Pavlov to what may seem a most
unPavlovian conclusion: 'On the one hand, numerous speech stimulations
have removed us from reality, and we must always remember this in order
not to distort our attitude towards reality. On the other hand, it is
precisely speech which has made us human' (I. P. Pavlov (1941)
Conditioned Reflexes and Psychiatry (trans. W. H. Gantt). New York:
International Publishers). OceanofPDF.com

\* The phenomenon of subvocalization does not imply that speech muscles
are necessary for verbal thought. The subvocalization is an echo of
activity occurring in the language centres in the brain. For this
reason, if you are unfortunate enough to lose your speech muscles in
some kind of dreadful accident, your intelligence will not be affected.
OceanofPDF.com

\* This argument that names are learnt from others does not contradict
the view, now widely held among linguists, that some aspects of language
-- particularly syntax -- are wired into the architecture of the brain.
OceanofPDF.com

\* According to Ciompi ('Is schizophrenia an affective disease?', in W.
F. Flack and J. D. Laird (eds.), Emotions in Psychopathology. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1998): OceanofPDF.com

\* When clinicians write about their work there is a tension between
being truthful and preserving the anonymity of their patients. In all
the brief case studies reported in this book, I have gone to some length
to disguise patients' backgrounds and circumstances in order to render
them unrecognizable. However, without exception, I have tried to be
accurate when describing their complaints. Inevitably, the result is an
uneasy blend of fiction and reality. OceanofPDF.com

\* This theory is a revision of an earlier account of depression, known
as 'the theory of learned helplessness', proposed by Seligman in his
book Helplessness: On Depression, Development and Death (San Francisco,
CA: Freeman, 1975). To confuse matters further, the revised model has
undergone some further revisions, most notably by Lyn Abramson and her
colleagues (see L. Y. Abramson, G. I. Metalsky and L. B. Alloy (1989)
'Hopelessness depression: a theory-based subtype of depression',
Psychological Review, 96: 358--72). Details of the differences between
the various versions of the theory are not important in the present
context. OceanofPDF.com

\* The flip side to this observation is the claim that dysphoria often
reflects a realistic appraisal of events. This idea, first proposed by
Lauren Alloy and Lyn Abramson (see, for example, L. B. Alloy and L. Y.
Abramson (1988) 'Depressive realism: four theoretical perspectives', in
L. B. Alloy (ed.), Cognitive Processes in Depression. New York:
Guilford), has become known as the depressive realism hypothesis. It
suggests that depressed people are more in touch with reality than
ordinary people but that, unfortunately, reality is a very unpleasant
place to be in touch with. There is plenty of evidence that seems to be
consistent with this hypothesis. For example, depressed people seemto
make more realistic appraisalsof other people's opinions about them, and
their attributions have sometimes appeared more even-handed. However,
thesefindings can oftenbeinterpretedinways that are inconsistent with
the hypothesis (see R. Ackermann and R.J. DeRubeis (1991) 'Is depressive
realism real?', Clinical Psychology Review, 11: 565--84). My own view,
for what it is worth, is that the hypothesis holds for moderately but
not severely dysphoric patients. OceanofPDF.com

\* In fact, the data from the Temple--Wisconsin Project support this
conclusion. Approximately 17 per cent of the 173 high-risk participants
were subsequently diagnosed as depressed, yielding 30 'cases' of
illness. However, if we assume that about 1 per cent of the remaining
4827 participants became ill (the figure obtained for the low-risk
group), we find that this yields 48 cases of illness. Therefore, more
cases of illness probably occurred among the low-risk than the high-risk
participants. OceanofPDF.com

\* Readers familiar with Freud's theory will recognize this particular
aspect of the self as the 'superego'. One important general implication
of the material covered in this section, which I hope to examine further
at a later date, is that moral values play a direct and important role
in human psychology. OceanofPDF.com

† In Higgins's terminology, the actual self, ideal self and ought self
are described as different domains of the self. The ideal self and the
ought self are also called self-guides because of their motivational
properties. OceanofPDF.com

\* Gallinovular = chicken or egg. I am grateful to my good friend David
Dickins for this contribution to the English language. OceanofPDF.com

\* It would be understandable if readers had some ethical qualms about
this kind of experiment. However, it should be borne in mind that the
failure experiences contrived in these experiments are always very mild,
and that participants are always fully debriefed afterwards.
OceanofPDF.com

\* I am grateful to my Ph.D. student Justin Thomas for suggesting some
of the ideas in this chapter. OceanofPDF.com

\* A piece of laboratory equipment that separates out different
components of a sample of blood (or other bodily fluid) by spinning it
at high speed. OceanofPDF.com

\* The terms 'paranoia' and 'paranoid' have a confusing history. They
were first used by the Ancient Greeks to mean crazy or mad but were
reintroduced to describe a type of delusional disorder in the first half
of the nineteenth century. As we have already seen, this usage was
embraced by Kraepelin. During the post-Second World War era, when, under
Adolf Meyer's influence, psychiatric diagnoses became unfashionable
among US psychiatrists, the term 'paranoid' was often used to describe
persecutory beliefs that were not necessarily delusional; hence the
ordinary-language definition given in the Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary (1993): 'A tendency to suspect or distrust others or to
believe oneself unfairly used'. DSM-III used the term paranoia to refer
to a pure delusional psychosis (Kraepelin's concept) but the term
delusional disorder was used in its place in DSM-III-R and DSM-IV.
However, paranoid personality disorder remains in DSM-IV as an axis-2
disorder, and is defined in a way that closely matches the
ordinary-language definition given in the SOED. For the purposes of the
present discussion, I will use the term 'paranoid delusion' to describe
any delusional system in which themes of persecution are prominent.
OceanofPDF.com

\* This kind of complex theory-of-mind conundrum is called a
second-order test because, in order to answer it correctly, you have to
be able to work out what Bob thinks the policemen are thinking.
Similarly, third-order ToM problems require you to work out what X
thinks Y thinks X (or Z) is thinking. I used to believe that multi-order
ToM skills are rarely used in real life, but recently changed my mind
because of the following incident. I was standing in a supermarket close
to a (presumably married) couple, when a very beautiful young woman
walked past. The man glanced towards her, and then looked sheepishly
towards his wife. Responding to his expression, she said, 'You look as
if you think that I'll be irritated because I know you think she's
beautiful' -- a statement that clearly required higher-order ToM skills.
OceanofPDF.com

\* Having discussed attributional processes with people in many
countries, I can confirm that the traffic excuse is cross-culturally
invariant. OceanofPDF.com

\* This kind of reasoning is sometimes called 'Bayesian', after the
mathematician who proposed a theorem that describes the optimum way in
which to change one's conviction in a hypothesis in the light of new
evidence. However, we will not consider the details of Bayes' model
here, or the mathematical treatment of the research findings from
deluded patients. OceanofPDF.com

\* I sometimes think it would be helpful if researchers numbered
different versions of their theories, in the same way that computer
programmers number different releases of their software. The theoretical
model of paranoia outlined in this chapter is, by my count, version 4.1.
OceanofPDF.com

\* It is important to note that a dispositional attribution does not
require ToM, as it does not involve taking someone's point of view. Even
a simple attribution of malevolent intent, for example 'He hates me',
may require less use of ToM than the more complex situational accounts
we often give when friends behave in an unexpected manner.
OceanofPDF.com

\* Dissociative disorder is a controversial diagnosis in which different
facets of the individual's mind are supposed to become dissociated from
each other, leading, in extreme cases, to multiple personalities.
Unfortunately, the concept of dissociative disorder is often confused
with the concept of schizophrenia, which has never included multiple
personalities. Cases of multiple personality were reported in the
nineteenth century, for example by the French neurologist Pierre Janet
and the American pioneer of abnormal psychology Morton Prince, but the
diagnosis was used very rarely until recently. In a break from this
historical trend, over the last decade large numbers of multiple
personality cases have been reported by a small number of American
psychiatrists and psychologists. It seems likely that many of these new
cases are highly suggestible patients who have been encouraged to regard
themselves as 'multiples' by their therapists. For a fascinating and
sceptical account of the disorder, see Ian Hacking's book Rewriting the
Soul: Multiple Personality and the Sciences of Memory (1995) Princeton:
Princeton University Press. OceanofPDF.com

\* It is easy to confuse the idea of a dimension of experience with the
idea of a dimension ofpersonality, but they are not the same. The first
suggests that different kinds of experience (for example, vivid
daydreams and hearing voices) may be related to each other, whereas the
second indicates that people differ in their propensity to have those
experiences. Of course, both types of dimension imply that there is no
clear dividing line between normality and abnormality. OceanofPDF.com

\* The most common and least difficult answer to the vehicle question is
'car'. Suitable answers to the vegetable question are 'onion' or 'ocra'.
We know how difficult these questions are for English-speakers thanks to
one of the most laborious studies ever carried out by psychologists, in
which thousands of North Americans were asked to think of examples of
each category (W. F. Battig and W. E. Montague (1969) 'Category norms
for verbal items in 56 categories: a replication and extension of the
Connecticut category norms', Journal of Experimental Psychology
Monographs, 80: 1--46). The results of this study have proved immensely
useful to other psychologists like myself, because they enable us to
devise tests that vary in difficulty. OceanofPDF.com

\* Brodmann areas are locations on the cerebral cortex defined according
to a map developed by the German anatomist Korbinian Brodmann during the
first decade of the twentieth century. OceanofPDF.com

\* According to Eugen Bleuler ((1911/1950) Dementia Praecox or the Group
of Schizophrenias (trans. E. Zinkin). New York: International
Universities Press), 'The fact that the peculiarities of the associative
process usually manifest themselves in an identical fashion, regardless
of whether they are expressed in oral or written form, is certainly of
great, if as yet unrealized, significance to the theory of associative
thinking.' OceanofPDF.com

\* This is, of course, the scientist's standard lament when summarizing
findings. It's true, of course, but it also gives us a nice excuse for
applying for more research funds. OceanofPDF.com

\* I thank Dr James McGuire of the University of Liverpool for helpful
discussions about many of the issues discussed in this chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

\* Most of the clinical literature on functional analysis has been
written by psychologists who are sympathetic to behaviourism. However,
as an organizing principle, functional analysis does not require a
commitment to any particular school of psychology. OceanofPDF.com

\* To be more precise, these estimates give the proportion of variance
in a characteristic which can be attributed to genetic variation as
compared with the proportion attributed to environmental variation in a
given population. This definition assumes a simple additive model of the
two sources of variation, such that

OceanofPDF.com

† Nowhere has the debate between heredityversus environment been more
contentious than in relation to measured IQ and its implications for
racial differences. While this debate has raged, research has
demonstrated massive IQ gains in different countries (an increase in the
average IQ of as much as 20 points in 40 years). This phenomenon is
known as the Flynn effect, after James Flynn, the New Zealand political
scientist who first identified it. Accepting, for the sake of argument,
heritability estimates of 75 per cent or more, Dickins and Flynn's
mathematical analysis demonstrates that there remains room for the very
strong environmental influences on IQ that are necessary to explain the
Flynn effect. OceanofPDF.com

\* Of course, other interpretations of this finding are possible. The
astrologically minded might want to note that the star signs associated
with a high-risk of psychosis are Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.
OceanofPDF.com

\* Readers who are confused on this point might like to carry out a few
simple calculations based on hypothetical data. Suppose 10 per cent of
the normal population experience birth complications and that this
increases to 30 per cent in the case of future patients. Also suppose
that, out of a population of 1000 people, 10 (1 per cent) become
psychotic. It follows that 3 of the future psychotic patients (30 per
cent of the 10) will have experienced birth complications. However, out
of the 990 non-psychotic members of the population, 99 (10 per cent of
the 990) will also have experienced birth complications -- 33 times more
than patients with birth complications. Even if we assume that psychotic
symptoms are experienced by, say, 10 per cent of the population on the
basis of the evidence we considered in Chapter 5, ordinary people with a
history of birth complications would outnumber the number of psychotic
patients with birth complications by a factor of 3:1. OceanofPDF.com

† For example, consider the data on the onset of schizophrenia symptoms
shown in Figure 17.1. Half of the males in the sample first became ill
after the age of 25 years and half of all females became ill after the
age of 29. Similar proportions of 'older' patients can be calculated
from nearly all comparable studies. OceanofPDF.com

\* One way in which sceptical clinicians might overcome any doubts they
might have about the subjective effects of neuroleptics is to take one.
Two British psychiatrists, R. H. Belmaker and D. Wald ('Haloperidol in
normals', British Journal of Psychiatry, 131: 222--3, 1977), long ago
reported the effects of taking 5 mg of haloperidol: 'The effect was
marked and very similar in both of us: within ten minutes a marked
slowing of thinking and movement developed, along with a profound inner
restlessness. Neither subject could continue work, and each left work
for over 36 hours. Each subject complained of paralysis of volition, a
lack of physical and psychic energy. The subjects were unable to read,
telephone or perform household tasks of their own will, but could
perform these tasks if demanded to do so.' I was a participant in a
similar experiment conducted by my friend and colleague David Healy, in
which I received 5 mg of droperidol, and became restless and dysphoric
to the point of being very distressed (I burst into tears and, for some
reason, I felt compelled to tell David everything I had ever felt guilty
about). I had a hangover for several days. Similar effects were recorded
from the other volunteers in the study (D. Healy and G. Farquhar (1998)
'Immediate effects of droperidol', Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical
and Experimental, 13: 113--20). The doses in these experiments were far
lower than those typically given to patients. OceanofPDF.com


