A STUDENT'S GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIORAL CONDITIONS

JACK SCHAFFER and EMIL RODOLFA

American Psychological Association • Washington, DC

A STUDENT'S GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Copyright © 2016 by the American Psychological Association. All rights
reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of
1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in
any form or by any means, including, but not limited to, the process of
scanning and digitization, or stored in a database or retrieval system,
without the prior written permission of the publisher. Published by
American Psychological Association 750 First Street, NE Washington, DC
20002-4242 www.apa.org To order APA Order Department P.O. Box 92984
Washington, DC 20090-2984 Tel: (800) 374-2721; Direct: (202) 336-5510
Fax: (202) 336-5502; TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123 Online:
www.apa.org/pubs/books/ E-mail: order@apa.org In the U.K., Europe,
Africa, and the Middle East, copies may be ordered from American
Psychological Association 3 Henrietta Street Covent Garden, London WC2E
8LU England Typeset in Meridien by Circle Graphics, Inc., Columbia, MD
Printer: Sheridan Books, Ann Arbor, MI Cover Designer: Mercury
Publishing Services, Rockville, MD The opinions and statements published
are the responsibility of the authors, and such opinions and statements
do not necessarily represent the policies of the American Psychological
Association. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schaffer, Jack. A student's guide to assessment and diagnosis using the
ICD-10-CM : psychological and behavioral conditions / Jack Schaffer and
Emil Rodolfa. pages cm Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4338-2093-9 --- ISBN 1-4338-2093-5 1. Mental
illness---Classification. 2. Mental illness---Diagnosis---Problems,
exercises, etc. I. Rodolfa, Emil. II. Title. RC455.2.C4S33 2016
616.89'075---dc23 2015018198 British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication
Data A CIP record is available from the British Library. Printed in the
United States of America First Edition
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-000

To my family---Jan, Josh, Alethea, and their children---Sophia, Soleil,
Solomon, and Aurora ---Jack Schaffer And to mine---Mary Jo, Kit, and
Joie ---Emil Rodolfa

Contents a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s   ix i n t r o d u c t i o n   3

Welcome to Our World  4 Critical Thinking  7 What's in a Name?  8 Note
to Instructors  9 Chapter 1.

The ICD--10: A Primer  11 A Brief History of the ICD  12 The
ICD--10--CM  13 The Basics of the ICD  14 The ICD--10--CM Coding
System  16 Additional ICD--10--CM Coding Designations  18 General
Considerations in Diagnosing  20 Why the ICD?  22

Chapter 2. Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis  25
What Is Abnormal?  25 What Is a Diagnosis?  29 Purposes of Diagnosis  30
Pitfalls of Diagnosis  33 The Potential for Error  36 Chapter 3.
Conducting an Assessment and Making a Diagnosis  49 Collecting Data  50
Making Sense of the Data  58 Developing an Intervention or Disposition
Plan  60 Chapter 4. Using the ICD--10--CM: Case 1---Lynn  63 The Case:
Lynn  64 Assessment Considerations  68 Diagnostic Considerations  70
Closing Comments  78

vii

viii

CONTENTS

Chapter 5.

Using the ICD--10--CM: Case 2---John Smith  79 Assessment
Considerations  81 Diagnostic Considerations  86 Closing Comments  88

Chapter 6.

Using the ICD--10--CM: Case 3---Anne Sanchez  89 Psychological
Testing  92 Tests Results  93 Assessment Considerations  95 Diagnostic
Considerations  101 Closing Comments  105

Chapter 7.

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients  107 Case 1---Lynn  111
Case 2---John Smith  119 Case 3---Anne Sanchez  125

Chapter 8.

Risk Management---Protecting Your Patients and Yourself  131 Laws and
Rules  133 HIPAA  135 Informed Consent  137 Release of Information  141
Specific Risks  143 Case 1---Lynn  144 Case 2---John Smith  148 Case
3---Anne Sanchez  152

Chapter 9.

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?  157 Evidence-Based
Practice  158 Treatment and Theory  160 Standard of Care  161 Case
1---Lynn  162 Case 2---John Smith  167 Case 3---Anne Sanchez  170

Chapter 10. Resources---To Prepare for the Work of a Psychologist  173
ICD and Diagnosis  173 Additional Resources for Diagnosis  174
Assessment  175 Clinical Interviewing  175 Practice Guidelines  176
Evidence-Based Practice  177 Ethics and Risk Management  178 Resource
for Other Resources  180 a p p e n d i x a : i n t e r v i e w p r o t o
c o l    181 a p p e n d i x b : r e l e v a n t f o r m s    185 r e f
e r e n c e s    195 i n d e x    215 a b o u t t h e a u t h o r s   
225

Acknowledgments

W

riting a book is a formidable task. Many psychologists have written more
than one book, and some have written dozens. We are in awe! This project
would not have been possible without the support, assistance, and input
of many people. To a very large degree, what follows in this text is
based on the authors' 30-plus years of experience, in which numerous
graduate school faculty; practicum, internship, and post doc
supervisors; colleagues and mentors; and students have played an
important role. In that list, a number of colleagues deserve special
mention. For me (Jack Schaffer), at the top of that list is the late
Richard Friberg, PhD, a licensed psychologist with whom I consulted
regularly for more than 30 years. What I learned from him about how one
approaches the assessment process cannot be overemphasized. And, he
became a dear friend in the process. A second person who deserves
special mention is Tom Boll, PhD. During my internship I spent a few
days with Tom at his clinic in Charlottesville, Virginia, and in that
brief time, followed by reading much of what he has written about
assessment, I got started in the direction my assessment career took
over the next 35 years. Much of what is written in Chapter 2 is thanks
to the perspectives and insights provided by Dick and Tom. Beyond those
two, however, is a long list of colleagues who have influenced me,
guided me, taught me, and sometimes, protected me from myself. To all of
my supportive colleagues, I am deeply appreciative. And, of course, to
my wife, Jan, without whose support and occasional chiding I would not
be the person I am today. I (Emil Rodolfa) thank so many colleagues who
have influenced my professional practice of psychology. There are truly
too many colleagues and friends to mention. But I would be remiss if I
did not thank Robert Reilley, PhD, my ix

x

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

major professor, academic advisor, dissertation chair, mentor, and
friend, who taught me not only how to practice psychology but also how
to be a psychologist. I appreciate all that he taught me (and tried to
teach me) and all that I learned from him. I also thank my wife, Mary
Jo, who has greatly supported all my professional endeavors. We have had
a great ride together. Thanks for the memories. We also thank the
following people who reviewed and provided feedback on parts of this
manuscript: Tom Boll, PhD; Gary Fischler, PhD; David Fisher, PhD; Floyd
Jennings, JD, PhD; and Dan Tranel, PhD. In some cases, we adopted what
they suggested, because we thought them correct. In other instances, we
ignored their advice because we liked what we had said better.
Ultimately, you the reader will have to decide how useful our writing
is. A special word of thanks also goes to a number of individuals at the
American Psychological Association: to Gary VandenBos and Julia
Frank-McNeil, who asked us to commit a few words to paper; to Claude
Conyers, whose gentle prodding and encouragement was greatly appreciated
and truly helped us get started; and to David Becker and Lynn Bufka, who
thoughtfully reviewed and edited our work, and to Nikki Seifert, our
copyeditor, whose attention to detail helped us improve the clarity of
our message. Each one of the terrific staff at APA Books helped us
produce a work that we hope will be helpful to you. Jack Schaffer also
thanks Emil Rodolfa. We have become collaborators on a variety of
projects, mutual motivators, and, close friends. Emil Rodolfa also
thanks Jack Schaffer. Working on this project was hard work and time
consuming (more time consuming than I ever would have imagined), yet
enjoyable because of that mutual motivation, encouragement, and
friendship.

A STUDENT'S GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Introduction

T

his book is part of a series of books published by the American
Psychological Association (APA) on the classification system known as
the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems (ICD) developed by the World Health Organization (WHO).
As we describe in more detail in Chapter 1, the ICD has been the
standard in medical classification internationally since the mid-19th
century. It is now in its 10th edition (ICD--10; WHO, 2016), with the
11th edition scheduled for dissemination by the WHO sometime in 2017. As
we discuss the ICD--10, if you have interest in learning about some
projected changes and the development of the ICD--11, see Tyrer et
al. (2011). The ICD--10 was endorsed by the WHO in 1990 and adopted for
use in most countries in the world by 1994 (WHO, 2016). The WHO allows
each country to adapt the ICD for its own specific clinical needs. In
the United States, that adaptation is referred to as the Clinical
Modification, hence, the ICD--10--CM (National Center for Health
Statistics, 2015).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-001 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

3

4

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

On October 1, 2015, the United States switched from using the ICD--9 to
using the ICD--10 because the limitations of the ICD--9, primarily in
the number of diagnostic categories present, were becoming increasingly
obvious and problematic. Although the ICD is fundamentally a list of
causes of death, expanded to include morbidity, it is recognized that
not all health-related problems fit into those two categories, so the
ICD--10--CM incorporates the flexibility to include a variety of signs
and symptoms that would end up in a patient's chart and about which
gathering of health information could be of benefit. At the same time,
unless the number of categories is limited, the system is not very
helpful, so the ICD--10--CM provides a balance between comprehensiveness
and practicality. The goal of the ICD endeavor has been to provide a
specific category for any condition that either has importance to the
well-being of the population or occurs with some frequency. In addition,
unbeknownst to many or most psychologists, it is not the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) of the American Psychiatric
Association (e.g., 2013) that is the standard classification system used
by agencies of the U.S. government (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid) and by
most private insurance companies---it is the ICD (specifically,
ICD--9--CM until October 1, 2015, and ICD--10--CM starting on October 1,
2015). The change from ICD--9--CM to ICD--10--CM constituted a
significant change in codes, as we describe in Chapter 1. Briefly
stated, the codes used by the fourth edition of the DSM (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994) and the ICD--9--CM were virtually
identical. The development of the fifth edition of the DSM (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013) led to some divergence in codes (i.e.,
the numbering system used to refer to specific diagnoses) and with the
ICD--10--CM, the divergence has increased. Thus, this series of books
published by APA is intended to educate mental health professionals,
psychologists in particular, in the use of the ICD system, specifically,
the ICD--10--CM. The goal is to help mental health professionals
understand the requirements for billing insurance companies under the
ICD--10--CM and to assist them to become more consistent in their
thinking and diagnostic procedures with an increasingly globalized
psychology.

Welcome to Our World This book, focused on the ICD--10--CM, is written
primarily for graduate students and interns in psychology. Our specific
goal is to assist in their preparation for the diagnostic tasks they
will encounter as practicing psychologists in the very near future. In
other words, this book has been

Introduction

written to help students think like psychologists, including using
critical thinking skills, and learn to use and apply the classification
system of the ICD--10. However, we firmly believe that diagnosis is part
of a broader enterprise for psychologists that includes, centrally, the
assessment of the personality, social context, needs, problems, and
strengths of the individuals with whom they work. Therefore, this book
focuses to a large degree on assessment, placing the ICD--10--CM
diagnostic system at the center of that assessment process. To that end,
the book comprises 10 chapters, in addition to this brief introduction.
Chapter 1 presents a primer of the ICD--10--CM system, with the goal of
providing the historical context for the ICD system and, more important,
the specific steps one must take to arrive at the correct diagnostic
code using the ICD--10--CM system. Chapters 2 and 3 explore assessment
and diagnosis and provide an overview of the numerous issues a
psychologist should consider in the process of assessing an individual
and arriving at a diagnosis. For the experienced psychologist,
assessment of a person is an endlessly interesting and challenging
process. The goal is, in the matter of a few short hours and with a
limited number of psychological tools, to come to an understanding of a
person, such that the goals of the assessment can be accomplished,
whether the goals have to do with, for example, the provision of
psychotherapy and the resolution of some problem; or the development of
an assessment process resulting in a report to a court, as happens in
forensic psychology; or responding to another professional who makes a
referral. It is the complexity of trying to understand a complicated
human being that makes the process interesting and challenging, even for
the experienced psychologist. That complexity can be daunting to a
student. Chapters 3 is our attempt to provide an outline of the process
and some of the challenges of undertaking such a formidable task as
trying to understand another human being. Obviously, these two chapters
cannot provide everything that a student can and should know about
assessment. Hence, supplemental resources that might be helpful are
provided in Chapter 10. Chapters 2 and 3, however, provide a
philosophical perspective regarding psychological assessment leading to
the process of diagnosis, which requires knowledge and skill to carry it
out in an appropriate and competent manner. The remainder of the book
relies on Chapters 4, 5, and 6 as its core. Each of these three chapters
provides a case that serves as a basis for discussion of issues involved
in the assessment process. These three cases, chosen in part with
commonly used ICD--10--CM diagnostic categories in mind and in part on
the clinical experiences of the two authors, cover three very different
clinical situations. The first case, described in Chapter 4, is a
referral to a graduate student clinic for assessment as part of a
treatment process, and provides a consideration of issues related

5

6

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

to students providing psychological services. The second, described in
Chapter 5, is a referral for an assessment in a medical setting, with
the possibility of treatment follow-up. What is different from the first
case, but common in the real world, is that very few specifics are
provided with the referral, creating a challenge to know what should be
done and how. The third case, described in Chapter 6, is a referral by
an attorney. This referral has a very complex social history and
presents with very challenging psychological issues. The referral is for
an assessment without the potential for follow-up treatment. These three
cases were conceived with the goal of providing a range of problems and
situations that are typically seen in clinical practice. After
describing each case, we discuss the process a psychologist undertakes
in thinking about clinical cases, both in terms of how one approaches
the assessment process, that is, what assessment methods to use and what
type of data to collect, and subsequently how those collected data
influence the diagnostic decisions and differential diagnoses using the
ICD--10--CM. Chapters 7 through 9 all have as their core the three
cases. In these chapters, we ask readers to continue to apply their
critical thinking skills to the information presented, skills that we
believe are central to the competent practice of psychology. (More on
the important issue of critical thinking momentarily.) Chapter 7
examines how ethical issues are incorporated into professional practice.
It begins with a general presentation on ethical standards and then
considers the ethical issues raised by each of the three cases. Chapter
8 presents a discussion of risk, that is, how one approaches clinical
practice in a way that minimizes risk to the practitioner. Again, after
some general comments about risk management, we consider the potential
risks in each of the three cases, along with methods for minimizing
those risks and thereby maximizing the positive outcomes for both
patient and psychologist. Chapter 9 covers disposition, that is, how one
responds to a given case to reach whatever goals are set. With the first
case, we present a possible treatment plan that could be developed,
given the data available in that case. Case 2 is primarily an assessment
case, but treatment issues are also examined. Case 3 is strictly an
assessment case, so the focus of the discussion is on how to approach a
case with such limits. Chapter 10 is a snapshot of resources for the new
psychologist. We have relied on many of these resources during our
careers; many are classics with updated editions, and all are useful
books or websites that exist to provide guidance in the practice of
psychology. This chapter describes resources for the following areas, as
well as a comment about additional resources: ICD, diagnosis,
assessment, interviewing, practice guidelines, evidence-based practice,
ethics, risk management.

Introduction

Critical Thinking We are certain that as you matriculated into your
academic program, you heard comments from your faculty about the
importance of critical thinking. But what is critical thinking? The
numerous definitions of critical thinking (Brookfield, 1987; Clayton,
2007; Facione, 2013; Scriven & Paul, 1987) all stress the need for the
thinker (i.e., you) not to take things at face value but to examine
systematically and thoroughly all of the information you have, challenge
your conceptualizations of this information, and then draw conclusions
in a self-disciplined and self-examining manner. We discuss this process
and additional reasons for using critical thinking throughout this text.
Clearly, critical thinking is essential to the practice of psychology,
as the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB) has
incorporated this concept into its framework of Competencies Expected of
Psychologists at the Point of Licensure (ASPPB, 2014a; Rodolfa et al.,
2013). ASPPB lists three competencies that specifically include the
concepts of critical thinking specific to the practice of psychology: 1.
Select relevant research literature and critically review its
assumptions, conceptualization, methodology, interpretation, and
generalizability. 2. Interpret, evaluate, and integrate results of
data-collection activities within the context of scientific/professional
knowledge to formulate and reformulate working hypotheses,
conceptualizations, and recommendations. 3. Articulate a rationale for
decisions and psychological services that rely on objective supporting
data (e.g., research results, base rates, epidemiological data). You
will see, as you move through the process to become a licensed
psychologist, that licensing boards will require that you are able to
think critically about your work as a psychologist. It is also important
to note that the academic associations in psychology have worked
together to develop models of competency, as well as the entity in
psychology that accredits training programs. All of these competency
models acknowledge the importance of critical thinking in the
development of psychological competencies and the functioning of the
psychologist. As you can see from this discussion, we believe, and the
profession emphasizes, that critical thinking is essential to the work
of a psychologist. This book is written to help you do just that.

7

8

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

What's in a Name? Before we conclude this chapter, we believe it is
important to briefly discuss three issues. The first is our choice to
use the term patients instead of clients. Psychology does not have a
universally accepted term to refer to the individuals to whom we provide
psychological services. Patient is the term most commonly used in
medical settings, but it has the disadvantage of implying a hierarchical
relationship. Client is the term most used in university counseling
clinics, but it comes originally from business settings and has the
disadvantage of implying a professional relationship in which the
therapist provides information and advice as an accountant or attorney
might, rather than a caring relationship in which the therapist treats
mental disorders. We do not have an ideal term for a person with some
psychological issues who is looking for a provider with expertise in
listening and helping the person explore various behavioral and
cognitive options, as well as teaching the person new behavioral and
cognitive skills to treat psychological problems. As a result, we have
chosen to use the term patient, partly because this text focuses on the
issue of clinical assessment and diagnosis, and partly because we
believe the term patient more accurately captures the relationship
between psychologist and the individual seeking service. But it was a
close call. We do, however, use the term client to refer to recipients
of psychological services who are not individuals, such as couples,
families, or organizations. The second issue is how a patient is
addressed, that is, by first name or more formally. We have chosen to
refer to Lynn (Case 1; see Chap­ ter 4) by her first name and John Smith
(Case 2; see Chapter 5) and Anne Sanchez (Case 3; see Chapter 6) more
formally, for several reasons. First, which form of address is most
appropriate is in part a function of setting. The case of Lynn came from
a university setting where most of the recipients of psychological
services are students and typically they are addressed by their first
name and use of a more formal address would seem awkward, at best, and
distancing, at worst. In other settings, such as medical or forensic
settings, from which Cases 2 and 3 come, the use of formal address is
much more common. In addition, in medical settings, most physicians and
psychologists are referred to only as "Dr." For a medical or
psychological provider in turn to refer to his or her patient by first
name appears to us to be disrespectful, as it stresses the inequality of
the relationship. When discussing the case of Anne Sanchez, we also use
a more formal address due to the setting and referral source, an
attorney, where formality also helps define the nature of the
professional relationship and boundaries. We are raising this issue and
suggesting that the use of address is important because it has to do
with the context and the nature of the professional relationship. How
you address your patients should be

Introduction

carefully considered and discussed directly with them. We chose to use
both means of address to raise this issue and indicate that both should
be considered. Third, throughout this book, we use the terms diagnosis
and assessment repeatedly. Although similar, they are not the same
thing. Diagnosis has to do with choosing a specific category to apply to
a person. In this text, we use the ICD--10--CM classification system for
that purpose. An assessment is the process of understanding the issues
and problems of the person in the role of patient. One uses the
assessment process to arrive at a diagnosis, and vice versa. This
distinction is discussed in more detail in Chapters 2 and 3. A further
distinction relevant to our book is that between descriptive and dynamic
diagnosis (Oyebode, 2008). Descriptive diagnosis, the approach used by
the ICD--10--CM, focuses on a statement of what is, that is, classifies
individuals on the basis of the signs and symptoms they presented, that
is, the behaviors, cognitions, and emotions present in the person.
Dynamic diagnosis attempts to explain why those symptoms are present,
usually using a behavioral, cognitive, or affective theory to explain
the underlying causes of the symptoms. In this book, we attempt to
describe rather than explain---that is, we describe the processes
necessary to understand who the patient is; what experiences, objective
and subjective, the person has; how the person presents to others; and
whether those experiences and behaviors are in some way abnormal. We do
not try to explain the underlying causes of such behaviors. That would
be a different task for a different text. In closing, we hope that this
text contributes to your understanding of the ICD--10--CM; enhances your
ability to assess, diagnose, and consider dispositions for your
patients; enriches your capacity to think like a psychologist; and
provide you a foundation to take the next step and put your knowledge
into practice under close supervision.

Note to Instructors This book is intended primarily for use in graduate
training, in particular, in courses on assessment and psychopathology.
It focuses on the issues involved in engaging in a process of
psychological assessment, and it describes how one can use a diagnostic
system, such as the ICD-- 10--CM, to arrive at a better diagnostic
understanding of the patient, hence its usefulness in a course on
psychopathology. We are in the process of developing a casebook as a
companion text, which is included in the APA series on the ICD--10--CM.
This casebook will help students examine 16 diagnostic categories using
the framework provided in this current text. We anticipate that it will
be available in 2016.

9

The ICD--10 A Primer

T

1

he International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems (ICD) is a compendium of diseases and causes of death
created by the World Health Organization (WHO, 2016), an agency of the
United Nations that is charged with overseeing and promoting public
health internationally. As part of this overall mission, the WHO
developed the ICD, now in its 10th edition (ICD--10), to track and
interpret causes of death and illnesses throughout the world. The ICD
has become the international standard system for diagnosing and
reporting illnesses. In the United States, it has been the system used
by physicians for diagnosing phys­ ical illnesses and causes of death and
by private insurance companies, Medicare, and Medicaid for reimbursing
practic­ ing health care professionals.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-002 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

11

12

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

A Brief History of the ICD At its first meeting in Brussels in 1853, the
International Statistical Con­ gress directed the development of a list
of causes of death, which it adopted at its next meeting in 1855 and
further revised at four subse­ quent meetings. Its successor
organization, the International Statistical Institute, meeting in Vienna
in 1891, formed a committee whose charge was to continue this work by
developing a universally acceptable clas­ sification system for the
causes of death. Thus was born the initial inter­ national classification
system, based largely on the system used by the city of Paris, which in
turn was based on a synthesis of systems used in England, Germany, and
Switzerland. Seeing its utility, a number of cities and countries in
Europe and South America adopted this classification system. In 1898,
the American Public Health Association recommended its adoption for use
in Canada, Mexico, and the United States, with an additional
recommendation that it be revised every 10 years to reflect changes in
both knowledge and terminology (ICD, Vol. 2). Subsequent international
conferences were convened to create such revisions in 1900, 1909, 1920,
1929, and 1938. It was at the Fifth International Conference in 1938
that the need for a corresponding list of the com­ prehensive causes of
diseases, whether or not fatal, was recognized and the list's
development directed. This initiative used as its starting point a study
conducted by the U.S. government in 1929 on methods of selecting the
main causes of death. The U.S. government responded in 1945 by the
Secretary of State appointing members to a newly formed U.S. Committee
on Joint Causes of Death. This committee started with the assumption
that it needed to consider not only diseases that resulted in mortality
but also the mor­ bidity of the diseases, that is, the degree to which a
disease initiates or contributes to a series of medical events that can
result in death or impairment. The WHO, founded in 1948 as a specialized
agency of the newly created United Nations, was formed to promote world
health. One of its first actions was to help plan and to participate in
the Sixth Decennial Revision Conference to update the International List
of Causes of Death, in particular in light of work of the Committee on
Joint Causes of Diseases, the American committee convened in 1945. The
results of the work of that conference were published as the sixth
edition of the International Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and
Causes of Death (ICD--6; WHO, 1949). This meeting was the beginning of a
new era in international disease classification. In addition to
approving a comprehensive taxonomy of both mortality and morbidity, that
is, both death and disease, it promoted international cooperation in
gathering health statistics worldwide. Over

The ICD--10: A Primer

the 4 decades from 1949 to 1992, four subsequent revisions of the ICD
were developed. An important development in terms of diagnosis in mental
health began in 1978, when the WHO entered into a collab­ orative project
with the U.S. Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration with
the goal of improving the process of diagnosis in the area of mental
health (WHO, 1993). The ICD--10, which included the advances made in the
diagnosis of mental health disorders, was approved for use by the World
Health Assembly in 1992, and the plan is to publish the 11th edition
(ICD--11) in 2017. The ICD today constitutes the standard in the world
for categoriz­ ing and reporting diseases, health-related conditions, and
external causes of disease and injury. It should be noted that the ninth
edition (ICD--9) was adopted in 1979, and although the ICD--10 was
adopted by most of the world after 1992, the ICD--9 continued to be used
in the United States until October 1, 2015. That means that as of
October 1, 2015, all entities covered by the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), including Medicare
and Medicaid providers, are required to use the Clinical Modification of
the ICD--10 (ICD--10--CM; National Center for Health Statistics, 2015)
as their primary diagnostic system for purposes of reporting diseases
and submitting claims for reim­ bursement by insurance companies. Most
private insurers are likely to switch entirely to the ICD--10--CM
system, which has substantial changes from the ICD--9. This means that
it is likely that virtually every psychol­ ogist will be required to use
the ICD--10--CM diagnostic system for billing and communication
purposes, either directly or through transla­ tion programs from the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (fifth ed.;
DSM--5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

The ICD--10--CM The ICD as published by the WHO is primarily a document
intended to assist in compiling health-related data and providing a
basis for research. Recognizing that the use in clinical contexts can
require additional speci­ ficity, the WHO has authorized each country to
publish its own adapta­ tion of the ICD that meets the needs of
clinicians in that country. The U.S. government, through the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) (2015a, b), and the National Center
for Health Statistics, both within the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS), publishes the ICD--10--CM to meet that need. The
purpose of this modification of the ICD is to provide a basis for
classifying all visits to any health care facility or practitioner. The
ICD--10--CM is the classification system that is discussed in this text.
This document is available in PDF format free

13

14

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

of charge from the U.S. government's Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd/icd10cm.htm. Click on the
FY2016 release, then the PDF Format, then in the resulting down­ load,
the Tabular PDF. In addition to the ICD--10--CM, we refer to the ICD--10
Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical
Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines (Blue Book; WHO, 1993), the
international document that pro­ vides a description of the main clinical
features of all of the diagnoses in Chapter 5 of the ICD--10. The Blue
Book is available free of charge from the WHO at the following website:
http://www.who.int/classifications/ icd/en/bluebook.pdf. In general, the
ICD is designed for flexible use by clinicians, who are assumed to have
expertise in mental health assess­ ment, but the Blue Book can also be of
use to clinicians in deciding between various diagnoses. We recommend
that you download these two documents now and use them as you read this
text.

The Basics of the ICD The ICD model is referred to as a variable-axis
classification system, which means that a certain number of categories
provide a general structure to the system. One general category, for
example, reflected in the middle chapters of the ICD--10--CM (Chapters
6--14), includes diseases having to do with specific anatomical
locations, such as diseases of the eye or of the digestive system.
Another general category is even more multi­ faceted, including external
causes, such as injuries; constitutional diseases, such as cancer;
developmental disorders, such as congenital problems; and epidemic
diseases. Of most relevance to our discussion is Chap­ ter 5, "Mental,
Behavioral, and Neurodevelopmental Disorders," which includes the 11
subcategories contained in Exhibit 1.1. The ICD--10--CM is composed of
three volumes. Volume 1 is a list­ ing of all diagnoses within the
categories just described. It consists of 21 chapters that cover the
major illnesses and causes of diseases within the ICD system. Volume 2
is an instruction manual, from which much of the current information is
extracted, and Volume 3 is an alphabetical listing of all diagnoses to
assist the professional in finding the appropriate diagnosis. That is,
if you have the description of the diagnosis in mind and need to know
the code (the combination of letters and numbers), use Volume 3 to find
the correct code. For example, if you knew that the diagnosis was some
form of anxiety, rather than looking for anxiety disorders within
Chapter 5 of Volume 1, you could look for anxiety in the alphabetical
listing of diseases in Volume 3 (found on p. 96). Because the online or
downloadable form of Volume 1 has easy-to-use links (e.g.,

The ICD--10: A Primer

EXHIBIT 1.1 Categories of Mental, Behavioral, and Neurodevelopmental
Disorders 1. Mental disorders due to known physiological conditions
(F01--F09) 2. Mental and behavioral disorders due to psychoactive
substance use (F10--F19) 3. Schizophrenia, schizotypal, delusional, and
other non-mood psychotic disorders (F20--F29) 4. Mood \[affective\]
disorders (F30--F39) 5. Anxiety, dissociative, stress-related,
somatoform and other nonpsychotic mental disorders (F40--F48)
6. Behavioral syndromes associated with physiological disturbances and
physical factors (F50--F59) 7. Disorders of adult personality and
behavior (F60--F69) 8. Intellectual disabilities (F70--F79) 9. Pervasive
and specific developmental disorders (F80--F89) 10. Behavioral and
emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in childhood and
adolescence (F90--F98) 11. Unspecified mental disorder (F99)

clicks on the blue print in the Table of Contents on p. 1 of Volume 1 to
get to Chapter 5, then click on the blue print that immediately appears
for Anxiety, dissociative, stress-related, somatoform and other non­
psychotic mental disorders to get to that section), in terms of ease of
access, Volume 3 has few advantages for the mental health professional
over Volume 1. However, Volume 3 lists various forms of the disorder
that may be found elsewhere in Chapter 5, such as Separation anxiety of
childhood (F93.0),1 or symptoms that may be relevant that are not in
Chapter 5, such as Depression: functional activity (R68.89). On the
other hand, the listing of disorders under a general heading can include
non­ mental health disorders, which can be confusing. For example, under
Depression (p. 360 in Volume 3) is also listed such physical disorders
as bone marrow depression (D75.89) or chest wall depression (M95.4). For
a well-trained mental health professional, it will be obvious those are
medical disorders, not mental health disorders. Volume 3 has four sec­
tions contained in Exhibit 1.2. The section most relevant to psychology
is the Index of Diseases and Injury.

1 In this text, diagnostic terms in the ICD--10--CM are listed with the
title of the diag­ nosis, with the first word capitalized, followed by
the alphanumeric code: for example, Major depressive disorder, single
episode, mild (F32.0). Such an alphanumeric code fol­ lowing a diagnostic
label with the first word capitalized is taken directly from the coding
of the ICD--10--CM.

15

16

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

EXHIBIT 1.2 Sections of ICD, Volume 3 Index of External Causes of Injury
Table of Neoplasms Table of Drugs and Chemicals Index of Diseases and
Injury

The ICD--10--CM Coding System The ICD--10--CM diagnosis codes consist of
a series of letters and num­ bers, with a range from A00.00 to Z99.99.
The first character is always a letter and designates the general
category of the disorder. This consti­ tutes a change from the ICD--9
(and differs from the DSM system) that used only numeric codes, hence
the increasing divergence between the two systems. The ICD--10--CM
coding system, in comparison with the ICD--9, allows for an increase in
the number of diagnoses listed (i.e., all diagno­ ses, psychiatric and
general medical and surgical diagnoses) from some­ what more than 14,000
to slightly more than 69,000. In the portion of the ICD having to do
with psychological disorders, the number of threecharacter diagnoses
increased from 30 in the ICD--9 to 100 in the ICD--10, although some
areas have fewer codes. For example, mood-related dis­ orders has 78 full
codes (four- to five-character codes) in the ICD--9--CM and 71 codes in
the ICD--10--CM. On the other hand, the ICD--9--CM has one code for
Other, whereas the ICD--10--CM has five subcategories, with each
subcategory having from two to five subcategories under it. Thus, the
general expansion enables greater specificity and more information in
each diagnostic code, which enables improvements in tracking public
health, making clinical decisions, and providing health care to
patients. Many clinicians, however, will use only a small number of
codes that are relevant to their specific practices. In the ICD--10--CM
coding system, Chapter 1, "Certain Infectious and Parasitic Diseases,"
has codes that begin with either the letter A or the letter B; Chapter
2, "Neoplasms" (cancers), has codes that begin with the letter C, and so
on. All diagnoses that fall within Chapter 5, "Mental, Behavioral, and
Neurodevelopmental Disorders," begin with the letter F. This chapter
(Codes F01--F99; pp. 193--234 in the document you have downloaded from
the WHO website) is most relevant to the issues discussed in this book.
The other diagnostic categories with rel­ evance to mental health
symptoms begin with the letter R, (R40--R49),

The ICD--10: A Primer

T (T74--T79), and Z (Z02--Z04) and are contained in Chapter 18, pages
948--953; Chapter 19, pages 1356--1360; and Chapter 21, pages 1538--
1539, respectively. The next two characters in the ICD code, the first
of which is always numeric, are the specific diagnoses within the
general category. The ICD--10--CM attempts to group conditions together
that have a common theme, making it easy to find diagnoses. For example,
mood disorders have one of the codes F30--F39: Manic episode (F30),
Bipolar dis­ order (F31), Major depressive disorder (F32), and so on.
Thus, the fun­ damental coding system of the ICD--10--CM includes three
characters and a letter designating the general category, followed by
two charac­ ters, the first of which is numeric and the second of which
is either numeric or alphabetic, designating the specific diagnosis. In
the case of mental health disorders (see Chapter 5 of ICD--10) or
symptoms (see Chapter 18 of ICD--10), however, both of the next two
characters are numeric. Some of the diagnostic codes are for classes of
disorders, whereas some are for single conditions, which usually reflect
diseases that occur frequently, are severe, or have specific
interventions associ­ ated with them. General diagnoses can have
subcategories, which are designated by a series of characters that
follow a decimal point and which in the men­ tal health area, Chapters 5
and 18 of the ICD--10--CM are all numeric. Subcategories can designate
either a specific type of a disorder or the severity of the disorder.
Thus, Bipolar disorder, current episode manic without psychotic features
is coded F31.1; Bipolar disorder, current episode manic severe with
psychotic features is F31.2; and so on. The fourth character .8 is
generally used for "other" conditions belonging to the three-character
category. Thus, F31.8 is Other bipolar disorders. The fourth character
.9 is the "unspecified" designation; for example, F31.9 is Bipolar
disorders, unspecified. In some cases, the subcategory is further
categorized, allowing for a second, third, or fourth number following
the decimal, reflecting greater differentiation between sub­ categories.
In this example, if the symptoms of the bipolar disorder without
psychotic features are mild, the coding is F30.11; if moderate, F30.12;
and if severe, F30.13. Likewise, the code F40.2 is Specific (iso­ lated)
phobias. The subcategory Animal type phobias is coded F40.21 and
subcategories of that code are 40.210, Arachnophobia (fear of spiders),
and 40.218, Other animal type phobias. If a particular diagnosis does
not have a second number follow­ ing the decimal, it is recommended that
an x be placed in that location when submitting a diagnosis, such as
Bipolar disorder, current episode manic severe with psychotic features
(F31.2x). On the other hand, if a diagnosis has two or more numbers
following the decimal, the entire code must be used. For example,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

17

18

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

has three specific manifestations, PTSD unspecified (F43.10), PTSD acute
(F43.11), and PTSD chronic (F43.12). One of those codes must be used. A
coding of F43.1 alone will not be considered a valid coding. If more
than one diagnostic code is appropriate, the code listed first is
considered the primary or principal diagnosis for that particu­ lar
patient encounter, which is the term used in the ICD for all patient
contacts, whether inpatient or outpatient and whether the purpose is
assessment or treatment. If other diagnoses are present, but those were
not considered or were not the primary focus during a particular
encounter, they should be listed as secondary diagnostic codes.

Additional ICD--10--CM Coding Designations In addition to the general
rubric, that is, the three-, four-, or five-character code and title of
the diagnosis, a few additional designations help clarify the diagnostic
category and distinguish it from alternative diagnoses. In some
diagnoses the term includes or excludes is used. Thus, under F30, the
diagnosis Manic episode clarifies that it includes bipolar dis­order,
single manic episode and mixed affective episode but excludes Bipolar
dis­order (F31.---),2 Major depressive disorder, single episode
(F32.---), and Major depressive disorder, recurrent (F33.---). In the
case of the exclusion category, the diagnosis being excluded is listed
in some other category and the coding of the alternative diagnoses is
provided, with the dash replacing the spe­ cific subcategory that should
also be included. In this example, Bipolar disorder (F31.---) is
considered a separate diagnostic category, not part of the category,
F30, Manic episode. If the presentation in a particular encounter is
manic, but part of a varying presentation of nonpsychotic mania and
depression, the appropriate diagnostic category would be F31.1x, Bipolar
disorder, current episode manic without psychotic features, with the x
being replaced by the number appropriately reflecting the severity of
the presentation (F31.10 = unspecified severity, F31.11 = mild sever­
ity, F31.12 = moderate severity, and F31.13 = severe). The first of two
types of exclusion categories is Excludes1, which means that the code to
be excluded should never be listed as a diagno­ sis with the primary
diagnosis, because the two diagnoses cannot occur together. Excludes2
means that the excluded code is not the same as or part of the diagnosis
with which it is listed, but a person can have both

A dash indicates that a number of subcategories (subtypes) are possible
within the code. 2

The ICD--10: A Primer

conditions, so both codes could be listed as diagnoses. For example,
under F32, Major depressive disorder, single episode, is Excludes1:
Bipolar disorder (F31.---), meaning that a person cannot be given both
the diagnosis Major depressive disorder (F32) and Bipolar disorder
(F31.---). Also under F32 is Excludes2: Adjustment disorder (F43.2),
meaning that F43.2 is a different diagnosis from F32 but that a patient
could be given both diagnoses because they are different but not
mutually exclusive. Brackets are used to designate synonyms or
alternative word­ ing, as in Mood \[affective\] disorders. Parentheses
are used to indicate supplemental, but nonessential, modifiers, such as
in Other specified anxiety disorders, Anxiety depression (mild or not
persistent) or to reflect the coding for a diagnosis that is an
exclusion, such as indicated in the preceding paragraph. When a
condition has an underlying etiology (cause), with multi­ ple
manifestations (presentations), the ICD uses the designation "use
additional code," with the etiology (underlying cause) code to indicate
that the specific manifestation of that underlying cause should also be
listed as a diagnosis. For example, in the category F84, Pervasive
developmental disorders, it states: "Use additional code to identify any
associated medical condition and intellectual disabilities." This means
that this category could be the result of or be associated with a medi­
cal condition, which should also be listed, and could have intellec­ tual
implications, which should also be listed, if appropriate. So, for
example, a child could have a developmental disorder as a result of a
Bacterial meningitis (coded G00, found in Chapter 6, ICD--10--CM), which
could be coded, if known, and could have effects on intellec­ tual
functioning, such as a Moderate intellectual disability (F71). The ICD
uses the term code first with the manifestation code to indicate that
the underlying cause of the disorder should be listed as the first
diagnosis. Usually in this instance, the term in other diseases
classified elsewhere is used to indicate that this is one manifestation
of another, more basic, disease entity. For example, under F01, Vascular
dementia, it states, "Code first the underlying physiological condition
or sequelae of cerebrovascular disease," meaning that the underlying
cardiovascular disorder that causes the vascular dementia should be
listed as the primary diagnosis, such as Systolic (congestive) heart
failure (I50.2), as one example. Obviously, a medical diagnosis would be
pro­ vided by a physician, not a psychologist. The term code also is used
to indicate that another diagnostic code should typically be used to
describe fully the disorder being consid­ ered, although this term does
not indicate which code should be the primary diagnosis. This is to be
determined by the clinician, consider­ ing all of the data available from
the assessment. Likewise, if more than one diagnostic code can be
established with equal support from

19

20

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

the clinical data, either of the codes can be listed as primary. For
exam­ ple, Pain disorder with related psychological factors (F45.42)
directs the clini­ cian to code also associated acute or chronic pain
(G89.---), providing the code of the disorder that should also be
listed. It should be noted that a distinction is made in the ICD--10--CM
between Not otherwise specified (NOS), on the one hand, a diagnosis with­
out specific qualifications that does not meet all of the requirements
of another diagnosis, and, on the other hand, Not elsewhere classified
(NEC), meaning that certain types of the diagnosis may occur elsewhere.
The specification NOS in the ICD--10--CM has the same meaning as NOS in
the previous versions of the DSM system classifications through the
fourth edition, text revision, of the DSM (DSM--IV; American Psychiatric
Association, 2000), but NOS was eliminated from the DSM--5. In the cur­
rent DSM, the designation NEC is used when a specific code is not avail­
able for the condition or in other words, for understudied conditions
(Brown, Keel, & Striegel, 2012). In the ICD--10--CM, the designation Not
elsewhere classified is used in Chapter 5 only in the general exclusion
category at the very beginning of the chapter, where it refers to sets
of signs and symptoms that do not have a specific diagnosis, that is, it
refers to Chapter 18, with codes of R00--R99. On the other hand, the
phrase classified elsewhere does occur frequently in Chapter 5 and
refers to a diagnosis that is a result of some other condition, and the
other condi­ tion should also be listed, often as the primary diagnosis.
For example, Dementia in other diseases classified elsewhere (F02)
includes dementia as a result of other conditions, such as Alzheimer's
disease (G30.---). In this example, when a diagnosis of dementia is
given and is the result of another condition, such as Alzheimer's
disease, the underlying physiologi­ cal condition should be listed as the
primary diagnosis and dementia should be listed as a secondary
diagnosis. However, it is also important to note that the clinician
should use as many diagnostic codes as necessary to present an accurate
picture of the individual's level of functioning. Generally, which
diagnoses are given precedence is dependent on which will be most useful
or helpful, given the purpose of the assessment or which is most
predominant in a given encounter.

General Considerations in Diagnosing Whenever possible, specific
diagnostic codes should be used. However, sometimes, the information
available is insufficient to establish a spe­ cific diagnosis. In that
case, two possible types of codes can be used. In the case when a number
of signs (what is observed by the clinician,

The ICD--10: A Primer

the objective data) and symptoms (what is reported by the patient, the
subjective data) are present but insufficient in number or in
specificity to establish a definitive diagnosis, codes with the terms
unspecified or NOS can be used, as in Major depressive disorder, single
episode, unspeci­ fied (F32.9). This is used when some of the signs and
symptoms of a major depressive disorder are present but not sufficient
in number to establish a more specific diagnosis of Major depressive
disorder (F32.x). Sometimes, specific signs and symptoms are present,
but without a suf­ ficient configuration of symptoms to warrant even an
unspecified diag­ nosis. Chapter 18 of the ICD--10--CM provides a listing
of such signs and symptoms with associated codes. For example, without
sufficient indica­ tion of a Sleeping disorder (F51.xx), the sole
symptoms of Somnolence (drowsiness) has a code of R40.0. Some additional
useful examples of such categories used by psychologists are Age-related
cognitive decline (R41.81), Auditory hallucinations (R44.0), Unhappiness
(R45.2; not meeting all of the requirements for Depression), Hostility
(R45.5), Violent behavior (R45.6), and Suspiciousness and marked
evasiveness (R46.5). Thus, if the psychologist observes or is aware of a
series of specific behav­ iors or emotional states that are relevant but
are not sufficient for a specific diagnosis, Chapter 18 (and in
particular, R40--R46, Symptoms and signs involving cognition,
perception, emotional state, and behavior) should be consulted for
useful coding. However, if a definitive diagnosis has been established,
that diagnosis should be used as the primary diagnosis. We emphasize
that for all diagnoses, whether specific, unspecified, or based on one
sign or symptoms, the specific problems or complaints observed during an
encounter and a sufficient basis in observed or reported facts should be
present and documentation provided to assign any diagnostic code to a
patient's condition. However, what is one to do when there are not yet
sufficient data to provide a definitive diag­ nosis but the data do
suggest some hypotheses of what an appropriate diagnosis might be?
Often, such terms as rule out or suspected or probable would be used. In
the ICD system, the correct thing to do is to use the code (even a
definitive diagnosis) that is suspected as if it were already
established, with documentation of a specific plan for continuing the
assessment to gather more information. In an encounter without a
specific diagnosis providing the reason for that encounter, Chapter 21,
"Factors Influencing Health Status and Contact With Health Services,"
provides codes appropriate to such situ­ ations (all of these diagnoses
have codes beginning with the letter Z). Relevant to work a psychologist
might do, there are codes for premarital counseling (Z02.89: Encounter
for other administrative examinations), initial assessments following a
rape to determine whether a diagnosis is appropriate (Z04.4x: Encounter
for examination and observation following alleged rape), initial
forensic assessments without findings of a psychological disorder
(Z04.6: Encounter for general psychiatric

21

22

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

examination, requested by authority, or Z04.8: Encounter for examina­
tion and observation for other specified reasons) or a general screening
(Z13.9: Encounter for general screening, unspecified).

Why the ICD? Why does this book use the ICD--10--CM as its diagnostic
manual? Don't most American psychologists use the DSM--5? The answer to
the second question is, or in the past has been, yes. The first question
has a number of answers. First, the ICD--10--CM is the classification
system in mental health that is the official diagnostic system for
mental and behavioral disorders in the United States, including those
codes used by Medicare and required by HIPAA. In addition to its use by
the U.S. government, it is the classification system used by and
required by most private insur­ ance companies. Most psychologists would
likely say that the official diagnostic sys­ tem in the United States is
the DSM--5. And, in fact, when the DSM--IV was in effect, it
corresponded virtually identically with the ICD--9--CM classification
codes (the numbers used to identify the diagnosis). So, when a
practitioner diagnosed someone using a DSM--IV diagnosis and sub­ mitted
the corresponding code to the insurance company, the insurance company
simply read it as an ICD--9--CM code---no problem. However, the move to
the ICD--10--CM and the DSM--5 has led to some increased divergence
between the two coding systems; acknowledging this diver­ gence, the
DSM--5 has included ICD--9--CM and ICD--10--CM codes with the DSM--5
codes. When the international community moves to the ICD--11, which is
anticipated to begin in 2017, there is likely to be even more
divergence; because one of the goals of the ICD--11 is to make the clas­
sifications of even more practical use to the clinician, additional
changes will probably be needed to the current systems. Therefore, it
will become increasingly incumbent on psychologists practicing in the
United States who submit bills to insurance companies to become
acquainted with and use the ICD coding system. Second, the ICD is the
classification system used in the rest of the world. Ninety-five percent
of physicians, nurses, and psychologists in the world use the ICD system
(Reed, 2013). In fact, all of the member countries of the WHO (including
the United States and Canada) are required by international treaty to
collect health data and report those data to the WHO using the ICD
classification system. So, both to be in compliance with international
treaties and to operate consistent with the rest of the world, it will
become increasingly important for psycholo­ gists in the United States to
use the ICD framework.

The ICD--10: A Primer

Third, by using the ICD system, North American health practitio­ ners
will be contributing to a consistent and systematic way of tracking and
treating health-related dysfunctions. Thus, they will contribute to the
attainment of maximal health throughout the world. Fourth, the reader
has learned in this chapter that the ICD system is quite user friendly
for both experienced and novice users. And that it is the standard used
by the federal government and most insurance companies, as well as the
rest of the world. So, becoming versed in the ICD system makes sense.
Nevertheless, as with any skill, to become competent in the
implementation of this classification system in your clinical work, you
will need to implement your knowledge through supervised practice.

23

Psychological Assessment The Foundation for Diagnosis

I

2

n this chapter, we focus on the myriad challenges to being objective and
accurate in our assessment of patients. We begin by discussing views of
abnormality and defining and describing the process of diagnosis. We
then explore the issues involved in the process of assessment, in
particular, common cognitive errors.

What Is Abnormal? The world is increasingly diverse, yet connected. With
increased awareness of diversity, people have become cognizant of the
risks associated with human prejudice (Collins & Clément, 2012; Gordijn,
Finchilescu, Brix, Wijnants, & Koomen, 2008; Hogg & Williams, 2000;
Murphy, Richeson, Shelton, Reinschmidt, & Bergsieker, 2013; Richeson &
Shelton, 2007;

http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-003 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

25

26

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

EXHIBIT 2.1 Factors Influencing Views of Abnormality Frequency of
behavior Subjective distress Deviation from societal norms Risk
Interference with social functioning

Tajfel & Turner, 1986). With this awareness of, and increasing
acceptance of, human diversity (Teixeira & Halpin, 2013), what value
does it have for us as professionals and for society to regard some
individuals, whose behavior is diverse in particular ways, as possessing
a psychological problem, otherwise referred to as a "mental health
diagnosis"? How do we know or decide that a particular individual should
appropriately be viewed as having a psychological condition? How do we
set aside particular types of diverse behaviors and fit them into a
different category, one that we categorize as problematic? What are the
criteria for making such a decision, one that can have dramatic effects
on the recipient of this label? We discuss some of these criteria in the
following subsections. Exhibit 2.1 provides an overview of the criteria
we can rely on to help us decide whether a behavior is problematic in
some way.

FREQUENCY Certainly, the frequency of the behavior is one consideration
(Oyebode, 2008). If a behavior is statistically unusual, it is more
likely to be considered abnormal. However, behaviors can occur
infrequently for a variety of reasons. People behave in certain ways in
response to environmental stimuli or demands. If an environmental event
is unusual, say, being held up on the street at gunpoint, which for most
people is a rare occurrence, thankfully, our response to such an event
is likely to be unusual (e.g., passive compliance or, at the other end
of the spectrum, verbal or behavioral aggression), but whatever the
response, it might be very appropriate and adaptive, depending on the
situation and the outcome. Likewise, the behavior by a person from a
different culture might be unusual in a North American culture but
common in that culture. Would such unusual behavior be worthy of a
psychological diagnosis? Almost certainly not, but for the presence of
considerable cultural insensitivity (Alarcón, 2009). Or if a behavior is
unusual but appropriate given the context or circumstances (e.g.,
locking oneself in a room---in the context of an abusive family member),
that almost certainly would not

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

be considered psychologically abnormal. In fact, it might be the most
psychologically adaptive response to a challenging situation. Another
way of thinking about the frequency issue, in addition to frequency of a
behavior, for a group of people or a culture is the typicality of the
behavior for the individual. If a behavior constitutes an abnormal one
for the individual---that is, it is unusual for that person, given that
person's history of cognitions, behaviors, and emotions---such a
behavior is more likely to be considered appropriate for a psychological
diagnosis. But, again, if the circumstances are new or uncommon, the
unusual behavior may be adaptive. In an otherwise self-confident,
assertive person, passivity and compliance in the face of a gun may be
normal and adaptive and normally assertive behavior might be deadly. So,
if frequency by itself is an insufficient criterion, what else is
required?

SUBJECTIVE DISTRESS Yet another consideration in whether a behavior is
abnormal is the subjective distress of the individual. Subjective
distress is a term used to describe emotions that interfere with a
patient's---or more broadly, a person's--- ability to function. As
everyone manifests subjective distress differently, it is important to
understand the contributing factors to and implications of subjective
distress on an individual's life. For instance, if a person is upset by,
or uncomfortable with, the emotions or cognitions she or he experiences
when engaging in a particular behavior, then that behavior is more
likely to be thought of as abnormal. Certainly, subjective distress is
one important element of abnormality. In fact, if the level of
subjective distress is high enough and interferes with daily
functioning, some kind of psychological abnormality is highly likely.
However, as a counterexample, both of us have lost parents in the past
few years, which resulted in very upsetting, but perfectly normal and
adaptive, emotions. So, although distressing emotions may be a necessary
element of abnormality, they are not sufficient.

DEVIATION FROM SOCIETAL NORMS Likewise, deviation from societal norms is
a factor to take into account. This is not quite the same as frequency,
because a behavior could be infrequent but still not violate social
norms. At the same time, one must remember that abnormal behavior is not
necessarily mental illness. Criminal behavior is abnormal and violates
social norms but in and of itself is not a mental illness. Likewise,
rebelliousness in an adolescent, although often disturbing to those
around him or her, is not by itself an indication of a mental illness.
Similarly, rebelliousness against an oppressive societal norm, for
example, defiance in the face of the

27

28

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

violent racism often expressed during the era of slavery in 19th century
America, is not a mental illness.

RISK Another consideration is whether the behavior places the physical
or psychological well-being of someone at risk. For instance, deep
feelings of depression sap one's motivation to do much of anything and,
therefore, may even place one's life at risk because one may draw the
conclusion that continuing to live is not worth the effort. Or,
hallucinations, especially if they involve violent images, might
influence people to harm others and, in turn, create a risk to people in
proximity to the person experiencing the hallucinations. On the other
hand, the rebelliousness against slavery that often occurred (see
Northup, 1855) most definitely resulted in risk to the rebellious slave
but was by no means the result of a mental illness. In fact, from
today's perspective of resilience (Reich, Zautra, & Hall, 2010), it
likely would be considered a strength.

INTERFERENCE WITH SOCIAL FUNCTIONING Yet another factor that is
considered an important element of abnormality is whether the behavior,
cognition, or emotion in some way interferes with the individual's
ability to function adequately in his or her social context (e.g.,
Aetna, 2015; Beidel, Frueh, & Hersen, 2014; Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, 2015b). A number of terms or concepts in that
sentence require greater specificity to provide clarity and avoid
confusion. How much of an impediment to "normal" functioning does the
behavior have to cause? How uncharacteristic does the behavior have to
be for it to be considered abnormal? If an abnormality is dependent on
the social context, is the concept of abnormal totally dependent on
social norms and expectations, or are aspects of behavior considered
abnormal regardless of context? Given the complexity of human behavior
and human social systems, these questions do not have definitive
answers. Many variables influence when a behavior is considered a mental
disorder. To come to a conclusion regarding a specific individual, which
is one of the first and most important tasks of the psychologist, one
needs a starting point, a foundation from which to make judgments. The
Clinical Modification of the International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD--10--CM; National Center for
Health Statistics, 2015) provides such a foundation for understanding
unusual behaviors by providing a standardized, internationally accepted
definition of what types of unusual behaviors fall into a category we
refer to as "mental illness."

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

What Is a Diagnosis? What value does diagnosis have, and does diagnosis
carry any disadvantages? First, one should consider the question, What
is a diagnosis? In medical terms, a diagnosis is a cluster of symptoms
that typically occur together in the presence of some underlying
anatomical, physiological, or biochemical abnormality. The diagnosis is
used to describe and explain the problems the patient presents. Thus,
for example, a person with blocked (occluded) coronary arteries will
have symptoms such as pain or pressure in the chest (angina) or other
parts of the upper body, shortness of breath, nausea, and profuse
sweating (diaphoresis). A single term, the diagnosis, is used to convey
information about that constellation of symptoms, all of which have the
same underlying cause. In medicine, the diagnosis is necessary for
treatment, as it points the way to the appropriate intervention
strategy. How does considering the use of diagnosis by physicians relate
to the practice of psychology? Many or most psychological abnormalities
do not fit all of the typical requirements of a medical diagnosis.
Although they have been considered at least in part related to the
nervous system since the fifth century B.C.E. (Alcmaeon, a Greek medical
scientist and philosopher, discussed them in such terms; Millon, 1969),
the specific anatomical, physiological, and biochemical dysfunctions
that underlie psychological disorders have not yet been unequivocally
identified. Thus, although a cardiologist may have a good idea of what
is going on physically when a person presents with angina, a
psychologist does not know precisely what is happening anatomically or
physiologically when a person presents as depressed; what psychologists
have at this point are hypotheses. Psychologists must also consider that
although a very large number of symptoms can be present in any
particular disorder, a given individual may present with only a small
number of them. For the diagnosis major depressive disorder (MDD), the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (fifth ed.;
DSM--5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) lists nine symptoms. To
obtain the diagnosis of MDD, one has to present with five or more of
those nine symptoms, with one of the five symptoms being either
depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure. That means that, taking
five symptoms at a time, as many as 72 different combinations of
symptoms could result in the diagnosis of MDD, whereas in the fourth
edition of the DSM (American Psychiatric Association, 2000), it was 126
combinations. Thus, currently, a person could be diagnosed with MDD up
to 72 different ways, quite different from an occlusion in a coronary
artery that results in chronic chest pain (e.g., chronic ischemic heart
disease; coded in ICD--10--CM as I25), which itself is a much

29

30

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

more nonspecific diagnosis than many cardiac diagnoses (e.g., see ST
elevation myocardial infarction of the anterior wall, I21.0). The
ICD--10--CM does not have quite the same problem, because it does not
adopt the same menu approach (choosing x number of symptoms from a list
of y number of symptoms). However, any diagnostic classification system
will have limits in the amount of information the diagnostic label
itself can convey. Thus, a psychological diagnosis is a summary
statement or a conceptual inference (i.e., a hypothetical
construct)---something useful but not observable with the five human
senses (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955)--- for a cluster of symptoms that
provides a mental health professional an understanding of the relevant
problems experienced by the patient. And, most notably, it means that
the diagnostic category by itself has much more limited value for us as
psychologists because of the minimal information the diagnostic label
provides us about who this individual we are working with is and what we
need to understand to be helpful. Much more on that important issue
below.

Purposes of Diagnosis Psychological diagnosis has a number of very
concrete and positive purposes, as listed in Exhibit 2.2. Certainly, the
first and foremost purpose of diagnosis must be an understanding of the
patient. By engaging in the diagnostic process, psychologists gather
important information about the individuals with whom they work
professionally. Understanding the types of symptoms that combine to make
a diagnostic category helps us as psychologists think about the types of
problems that a given individual may be experiencing. Such
understandings help us formulate questions about the person's experience
that might not otherwise occur to us but that help us understand the
person better and ultimately lead to a more appropriate disposition. On
a very practical level, diagnosis is necessary for insurance
reimbursement and is one reason many clinicians attach diagnostic labels
to their patients. Insurance companies determine the criteria for
reimburseEXHIBIT 2.2 Purposes of Diagnosis Understanding the patient
Communication through common language Inform the treatment process
Insight into possible causes of disorders

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

ment and have stipulated that a service must be "medically necessary" to
be eligible for reimbursement. The U.S. federal government's definition
of medically necessary is brief and simple: "Services or supplies that
are needed to diagnose or treat your medical condition and that meet
accepted standards of medical practice" (Medicare, 2013). As an
additional example, Anthem Blue Cross, the trade name of Blue Cross in
California, adds some more specific requirements: "Medical Necessity"
shall mean health care services that a medical practitioner, exercising
prudent clinical judgment, would provide to a Covered Individual for the
purpose of preventing, evaluating, diagnosing or treating an illness,
injury, disease or its symptoms, and that are (a) in accordance with
generally accepted standards of medical practice; (b) clinically
appropriate . . .; and (c) not primarily for the convenience of the
Covered Individual, physician, or other health care provider; (d) and
not more costly than an alternative service. . . . For these purposes,
"generally accepted standards of medical practice" means standards that
are based on credible scientific evidence published in peer-reviewed
medical literature generally recognized by the relevant medical
community . . . and the views of medical practitioners practicing in
relevant clinical areas and any other relevant factors

An essential element of this language is that one cannot be careless or
nonchalant about giving someone a diagnosis. Specific expectations about
the evidence underlie a diagnosis and rules about how one goes about the
process of diagnosing. In addition to doing potential harm to the
patient, not following those rules can mean, at best, that a claim
submitted for insurance reimbursement will be rejected and, at worst,
that the clinician can be accused of fraudulent billing. The primary
value of diagnosis in a clinical setting is its ability to communicate a
considerable amount of information in a brief manner. Communicating to
another professional the diagnosis of an individual provides a great
deal of information about the person's experiences and presentation,
without having to list all of the observed behaviors (Trull, 2005). Such
shorthand communication not only enables another professional to have
some understanding of the patient but also to have a certain level of
empathy for the individual's experience. In turn, it can provide
patients some understanding of why they have the kinds of experiences
they have and, thereby, allows them to be less critical or judgmental
and more accepting of themselves. A related purpose of diagnosis is to
have a common language and consistent means of talking about specific
behaviors, cognitions, and emotions, with some limitations discussed
below. Not only does diagnosis allow clinicians to communicate
information to each other, but

31

32

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

it also ensures that professions are generally talking about the same
types of events when using specific terminology. It is often the case in
everyday conversation that people use words with slightly different
nuances, a fact that a clinician ignores with some risk to therapeutic
effectiveness. However, diagnostic systems such as the ICD--10--CM
enable psychologists to use well-defined terms in the same way, such
that the probability of misunderstanding is diminished. In addition, the
ICD--10--CM enables research into certain types of problems to develop
more effective treatments for problems. In 1967, Gordon Paul asked the
question regarding psychotherapy that has become the prototypic question
of researchers and clinicians alike: "What treatment, by whom, is most
effective for this individual with that specific problem, and under
which set of circumstances?" (p. 111). Having an accurate diagnosis is
an essential first step in answering that question. Having at least a
partial answer is essential for being able to provide effective
psychological service or intervention. The single most important purpose
of diagnosis for us as psychologists is to inform the treatment process.
In short, one cannot know what treatment is appropriate without knowing
the nature of the problem being treated. Thus, the process of reaching a
diagnosis helps in identifying and clarifying the nature of the problem,
including its severity, complexity, and impact on daily functioning, and
assists the clinician in setting therapeutic goals as a function of the
problems presented. Having stated all of that, we also believe that the
value a diagnosis has for psychological treatment, which focuses on the
individual and his or her experience and specific behaviors, can be
somewhat limited because the presence of a diagnosis per se is
inadequate to distinguish one person from another, that is, one person
with major depression from another, given all of the ways a person can
end up with that diagnosis. In the absence of specific insights into the
behaviors of a particular individual, the contribution of diagnosis to
our work as psychologists can at times be minimal. That is, the most
central part of diagnosis for psychologists is the assessment process
and the interplay between diagnosis and data collection that accompany
the development of a diagnosis. We discuss this process at greater
length below. Last, although the science of causality in human behavior
is still young, diagnostic categories can give us some insight into
possible causes of the presenting symptoms and can raise questions in
our minds about which avenues to pursue in a search for causality. This
is true not only for the clinician working with a specific client but
also for the researcher searching for the underlying causes of all
psychological diagnoses. However, the degree to which the diagnosis per
se is helpful to psychologists is dependent in part on the setting and
the nature of the diagnosis. In many settings, such as college
counseling centers and small, private

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

practices, the diagnostic category itself may provide little additional
information, beyond the understanding of the person obtained through a
process of adequate assessment, regarding the preferred treatment
options, even though the diagnosis may be necessary for insurance
reimbursement. In other settings---for example, multidisciplinary
settings---the diagnosis may be central to the collaborative efforts
across disciplines. Further, certain diagnoses, such as Paranoid
schizophrenia (F20.0) or Bipolar dis­ order, current episode hypomanic
(F31.0), do provide information that is central and critical to
decisions about treatment.

Pitfalls of Diagnosis The process of reaching a diagnosis includes a
number of potential difficulties (see Exhibit 2.3). First, the empirical
data regarding the reliability of diagnoses are not encouraging (Bhugra,
Easter, Mallaris, & Gupta, 2011; Matuszak & Piasecki, 2012). For
example, in one study, experienced psychiatrists, the vast majority of
whom had used the diagnosis Schizoaffective disorder (F25.x in the
ICD--10--CM), largely disagreed with each other regarding which symptoms
are appropriate to the disorder, with more than half of the respondents
disagreeing that it was a distinct diagnostic category, even though they
had used it as a diagnosis (Rowe & Clark, 2008). Given the subjective
nature of psychological diagnoses, and the large combinations of
symptoms that can result in a single diagnosis, the consistency with
which clinicians use the same diagnostic code is discouragingly low. How
one clinician uses Major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate
(F33.1x) might be different from how another clinician understands it,
such that miscommunication between the two professionals is still
possible. As a result, the communicative power of diagnosis is not as
high as desirable. One variable that explains some, although not all, of
the variance in diagnosis is the presence of comorbidity; that is, it is
often the case that more than one diagnosis

EXHIBIT 2.3 Pitfalls of Diagnosis Reliability Stigma Labeling Diagnostic
categories are discrete Arbitrary nature of diagnosis

33

34

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

may be present, resulting in complex interrelationships between symptoms
in each individual (Borsboom, Cramer, Schmittmann, Epskamp, & Waldorp,
2011), which supports our contention above that the diagnostic label
alone has limited value to us as psychologists. Second, although stigma
attached to psychiatric diagnoses is diminishing, it has not vanished
(N. Evans, Gilpin, Holmes, Rafique, & Yates, 2010; Hayne, 2003; Lyons,
Hopley, Horrocks, 2009). People with a psychiatric diagnosis are often
viewed with caution or, even, paranoia (ironic, as paranoia is itself a
symptom of a psychological disorder) and not treated the same way as
"normals" (as if any of us would fall into that category!). Thus,
individuals who have received a psychiatric diagnosis can sometimes be
denied employment or housing or any other of many social necessities,
even though doing so is against the Americans With Disabilities Act
(2014). Attaching a diagnosis to an individual can create stigma that
might follow that person for the rest of his or her life. Future
disadvantages might outweigh the current advantages of having a
diagnosis. Further, the patient cannot be expected to understand what
either the current advantages or future disadvantages might be. It is
incumbent on the clinician to be sensitive to such issues and, following
the Hippocratic Oath (Hulkower, 2010) and Principle A of the Ethical
Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct (American Psychological
Association, 2010): First, do no harm. A third related disadvantage of
diagnosis is that applying a label to a person tends to make people view
the person more as an entity than an individual. Each person has
strengths and weaknesses. Certainly, the areas of weakness, inadequacy,
or abnormality are major foci of any diagnostic enterprise. However,
each person has her or his own pattern of weaknesses that come from
specific environmental experiences. Without understanding something of
those patterns and experiences, the label itself does not convey
sufficient information about who the individual is and what his or her
experiences are like. Equally as important, the label indicates nothing
about the pattern of strengths--- recognizing this is also necessary to
understand the person, and without which a program of effective
intervention is virtually impossible. Beyond such weaknesses of
diagnosis, a diagnosis can blind the clinician to the complexity of the
individual. Given the tendency to seek evidence that confirms one's
impressions (see below), the diagnostic label might interfere with the
psychologist's ability to gather additional information that will lead
to a better understanding of the person, not to mention with the
perceptions of nonprofessionals in the person's environment, and the
characteristics implicit in the diagnosis may be self-fulfilling, as the
person may come to expect such behaviors, cognitions, and emotions from
himself or herself. Fourth, diagnostic categories are by nature
discrete. A person either fits into a category or not. One either is a
graduate student or not. One

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

either has a broken bone or not. Human behavior, cognitions, and
emotions are, however, much more continuous than discrete. People can
have varying degrees of anxiety or depression. As we discuss below, all
people have varying degrees of irrational or inaccurate cognitions.
Depending on the context, everyone has acted in a strange or unusual way
at times. How does one decide at what point on a continuum one considers
a person to have, for example, a Generalized anxiety disorder (F41.1)?
How much anxiety is necessary? How disruptive or distressing must the
anxiety be? Is the difference meaningful between a person who does not
quite meet the criteria and a person who does but just barely? Last is
the arbitrary nature of the diagnostic enterprise in mental health. Most
diagnoses are developed in a discussion of a committee of experts. Such
discussions are not likely to be necessary in deciding whether a broken
bone or a viral infection is a disease or not. Perhaps the stereotypical
example of this problem was the inclusion of homo­ sexuality as a disease
in the first and second editions of the DSM (American Psychiatric
Association, 1952, 1968) but its exclusion from the third (American
Psychiatric Association, 1980) and subsequent editions of the DSM. The
Oxford Dictionary of American English defines disease as "a dis­order of
structure or function in a human, animal, or plant, especially one that
produces specific signs or symptoms or that affects a specific location
and is not simply a direct result of physical injury" ("Disease," 2014).
Wouldn't one expect such a condition to be an objective affliction that
goes beyond what a committee of people can decide upon? In addition to
the advantages and disadvantages of attempting to diagnose an
individual, the diagnostic process has some other pitfalls. When an
individual first presents in a clinical context, the amount of
information gathered is extensive and includes what the person says
about his or her inner experiences, the way in which that information is
presented (i.e., with or without emotion, level of certainty, the amount
of force or energy inherent in the telling, etc.), the facts of the
person's life as described by the patient, and the observations made by
the professional, including developing hypotheses about the meaning or
significance of the story being told and the other data being gathered.
Sometimes the presence of one sign or symptom, referred to as a
pathognomonic sign, is sufficient for a diagnosis. For example, if a
person is clearly hallucinating, that is usually a strong indication
that some abnormal process is occurring, although whether it is a result
of a psychosis or drug use or some other cause might not be apparent.
One must also recognize that in some circumstances (i.e., some cultures
or religious contexts), what in a psychological context might be labeled
a hallucination might be labeled a vision, a dream, or a trance and,
therefore, not pathological (Benedict, 1934; Myers, 2011; see also
Luhrmann, 2011; Luhrmann, Padmavati, Tharoor, & Osei, 2014).

35

36

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

In part because of the risk of misidentifying the experience, most often
a diagnosis is arrived at by considering a broad range of data and the
patterns observed in those data. Given the overwhelming amount of
information being communicated, the clinician needs some framework for
deciding both what is important and how the various elements of the data
being presented fit together in a coherent whole that provides an
understanding of the individual's experience. Thus, what is needed is a
system that provides an objective classification of behaviors and
experiences that assists the clinician in organizing, privileging, and
interpreting the data available. The ICD--10--CM diagnostic system
provides just such a framework agreed upon by international experts. As
we mentioned earlier, diagnoses in mental health are conceptual
inferences. They are concepts or conclusions that the clinician comes
to, on the basis of information gathered. One might even debate whether
they exist "in the person," as Thomas Szasz (1961) argued in his classic
book, in all but the most serious dysfunctions. They certainly do not
present themselves like a broken bone that is projecting through the
skin (a compound fracture) or, even, like a burst appendix that one
cannot see by looking at the person (although what one would see by
looking at a person with a burst appendix would certainly lead one to
believe that something pretty serious is going on) but would be readily
apparent through medical imaging. Rather, psychological diagnoses are
based on a combination of data, including signs and symptoms, as well as
a variety of other information (see Chapter 3, this volume, for a
discussion about sources of psychological data). The clinician's task is
to decide what kinds of data to collect and from whom or where; how to
assess the data and follow up, as necessary, to clarify or add to the
data collected; and then to conceptualize the data in a way that allows
for reasonably reliable conclusions (meaning other professionals with
the same data would likely come to the same conclusions) and valid
conclusions (meaning they fit the individual in question) regarding the
experiences and condition of the patient.

The Potential for Error As might be obvious, this extremely complex
process requires considerable knowledge, skill, and experience, as well
as a conscious awareness of some of the factors that play an important
role in whether the clinician's conclusions are reasonably reliable and
valid, as the process of coming to a diagnosis can itself lead to some
errors. Some of those factors that affect the accuracy of an assessment
are listed in Exhibit 2.4.

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

EXHIBIT 2.4 The Potential for Error Base rates Primacy effect
Confirmation bias effect System 1 thinking Actuarial (statistical)
versus clinical prediction Confabulation Assumption of dual directional
causality Oversimplification of the data Misplaced attributions of
causality Bias and self-deception

The first thing to consider is the base rate of a condition or behavior,
that is, at what rate or how frequently a condition occurs. This is
important because when the base rate of a condition is low, the ability
to predict or identify the presence of the condition is fraught with
difficulty. Let us say, for example, that the base rate of some event,
such as Antisocial personality disorder (F60.2), is just over one in 100
(Neumann & Hare, 2008). A central symptom for a person with anti­ social
personal disorder (ASPD) is disregard for social norms, rules, and
obligations (World Health Organization, 1993). Perhaps you work in a
sexual offender treatment center and it is your job to interview 100
residents of that center to determine how many of them have ASPD. This
turns out to be an extremely important question, because, for example,
many states in the United States have laws that allow the state to keep
a sex offender incarcerated even after they have served their sentence
for their crime if they are diagnosed with ASPD. Although some studies
that have shown that antisocial attitudes are predictive of recidivism
in sexual offenders (Hanson & Bussière, 1998), those results are
controversial, and the science demonstrating that ASPD is a major
contributing factor to sexual offending is lacking (Hatch-Maillette,
Scalora, Huss, & Baumgartner, 2001). However, the societal emotion
around sexual offenses is such that the science, at least until recently
(see the court case, ongoing at the time of this writing, in Minnesota;
Serres, 2015), has generally been ignored. So, given this unfortunate
circumstance and because of how many state laws are written, your
diagnosis of the person may influence whether that person is allowed to
return to society or remains incarcerated. It is often difficult for
science to gain a toehold when emotions reign. If you are wrong about
your diagnosis, it could result in a circumstance in which an individual
who should be free may remain incarcerated or a circumstance in which a
person who is, in fact, a danger to society may be freed to

37

38

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

commit another sexual crime. It is important to note that because the
science connecting ASPD and sexual offending is lacking, your failure to
diagnose someone as having ASPD is no guarantee that that person will
not reoffend, nor is your diagnosis of ASPD a guarantee that they will.
Returning to our example of you interviewing 100 residents, if you are
prone to thinking that people who do bad things and are at risk to do
bad things again should be locked up and the key should be thrown away
(not an uncommon perspective in our society), you might well declare all
100 as having ASPD, thereby likely ensuring in some states that all of
them will remain incarcerated. If you are more concerned about locking
up potentially innocent people, you might be much more conservative in
whom you diagnose as having ASPD, which may increase the risk to certain
vulnerable people in the society. For the sake of our example, let us
say your job now is to make a prediction about which sex offenders whom
you evaluate are likely to reoffend (and, therefore, should remain
incarcerated) and which can safely be released. Let us assume for the
moment, incorrectly based on the science we have cited but consistent
with what many state laws seem to assume (or, at least, lean toward), a
perfect correlation between ASPD and future risk of sexual offending,
that is, that individuals with ASPD are much more likely to offend again
than others without ASPD. On the basis of this set of circumstances, if
you state that you believe a sex offender is likely to reoffend or you
diagnose that person as having ASPD, you likely are ensuring that that
person will remain incarcerated. In our example demonstrating the
effects of base rates, it does not matter much whether you predict or
merely diagnose. Further, perhaps you are aware of the literature that
suggests that the rate of ASPD among sex offenders has been estimated to
be in the range of 30% (Borchard, Gnoth, & Schulz, 2003; Motiuk &
Porporino, 1992), but you are not aware that the recidivism rate for
sexual offenses is likely to be considerably lower than that, as one
study found that only 5% (California Department of Corrections and
Rehabilitation, 2010) of ASPD and non-ASPD sexual offenders reoffend,
and other studies have shown a somewhat higher rate of reoffending, for
both ASPD and non-ASPD offenders (cf. Harris & Hanson, 2004). This means
that only a minority (even in the Harris & Hanson, 2004, study) of sex
offenders will, in fact, reoffend. In reality, because some without ASPD
will reoffend, the percentage of ASPD reoffenders may be less than 5%,
so the differences in rates may be even more dramatic than initial
impressions. So, to continue with the example, you take as your base
rate for reoffense 30%, based roughly on the findings by Borchard et
al. (2003) and Motiuk and Porporino (1992) and assuming similar to the
state laws, that all offenders with ASPD will reoffend, even though the
reoffense rate will be even higher, that is, all those with ASPD and
some percent-

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

age of those without ASPB will reoffend. However, in our example you are
being conservative and sticking with the 30%. All of that leads us to
the fundamental question in our hypothesized example: What kinds of
prediction accuracies would that lead you to? Let us assume that you are
really good at identifying people who are likely to reoffend, regardless
of whether their diagnosis is ASPD, so your hit rate (the percentage of
those who will reoffend that you identify as reoffenders) with those
people is 100% (a very unlikely outcome, by the way, but we are giving
you the benefit of the doubt, in this instance). But, being
conservative, you have also included some people as reoffenders, who, in
reality, will not reoffend, and let us set your hit rate with this
category also pretty high, say at 90%. If the base rate were 30%, your
overall accuracy would look as follows. You evaluate 100 sex offenders
and you get all of the true positives correct, that is, 30. And because
your error rate is pretty low, you correctly identify 29 (rounding up
based on the 90% hit rate) of the 30, but of the 70 who will not
reoffend, you misidentify seven. So, overall, your accuracy rate is 92%,
pretty good (except for the one person you let go who will reoffend and
the seven you keep locked up even though they would not reoffend---too
bad for them). How would your accuracy compare with someone who randomly
assigned people to categories based on statistically probabilities, that
is, 30% to the reoffender group and 70% to the nonoffender group,
without doing any other screening? Your accuracy is better, but not by
as much as one might expect. You accurately classify 92% of the people,
and the actuary correctly classifies 84%. This all assumes, however, an
accurate consideration of base rates. What happens if your knowledge of
the literature (or your beliefs about sex offenders) leads you to
believe that the base rate is 30%, so your classifications remain the
same, but the actual base rate is 5%, as in the data from the California
Department of Corrections? This is much closer to the case if the actual
literature on the correlation between ASPD and risk of sexual offending
is followed. In this case, the actuarial classification results in a
90.5% accuracy rate (still not as good as your 92% in the 30% base rate
example). However, you still classify 30 of the 100 individuals as high
risk. Let us assume you identify all of the bad actors correctly,
meaning all five of them. But now you have incorrectly classified 25
people who are not likely to offend as people who should remain
incarcerated. That means that your overall accuracy rate has fallen to
75%, well below the result of a random assignment of the actuary, and
with pretty dramatic consequences for those 25 people whom you
misclassified. (For a discussion of this issue, see Zander, 2005). To
summarize this example, the practical consequence of a lack of
consideration of base rates is typically a dramatic overpathologizing of

39

40

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

the individual or group under consideration. Table 2.1 (from Greene,
2011, p. 414) provides a guide for the relative accuracy of predictions
of a condition (in Greene's table, major depressive disorder) based on
the presence of one sign of the condition in the presence of varying
levels of base rates. In addition, this discussion assumes the best-case
scenario regarding the prediction of any future behavior, about which
the empirical data are in fact very discouraging (DeClue, 2013; Yang,
Wong, & Coid, 2010). Another type of base rate should be considered. We
have been discussing the base rate of the presence of particular
behaviors or characteristics in the population in general and the
implications for being able to predict future behaviors accurately if
the base rates in the population are low. The other kind of base rate
has to do with the degree of variability in behavior within a given
individual. Generally, we consider scores or characteristics that are
unusual, whether in comparison with other people or for the individual
herself/himself, as indicative of a potential problem. However, what if
the typical variability in behavior turns out to be quite large, that
is, people act in a whole variety of different ways? That would indicate
that one cannot simply use the scores (indicating

TA B L E 2 . 1 Effects of Prevalence (Base Rate) on Positive (PPP) and
Negative Predictive Power (NPP) Prevalence (base rate)  50%

Depression Scale 2 (D) T \> = 65 T \< 65 Total

Yes 350 150 500

No 100 400 500

Total 450 550 1000

PPP = NPP = Sensitivity = Specificity =

350/450 = 77.8% 400/550 = 72.7% 350/500 = 70.0% 400/500 = 80.0%

Prevalence (base rate)  10%

Depression Scale 2 (D) T \> = 65 T \< 65 Total

Yes 70 30 100

No 180 720 900

Total 250 750 1000

PPP = NPP = Sensitivity = Specificity =

70/250 = 28.0% 720/750 = 96.0% 70/100 = 70.0% 720/900 = 80.0%

Prevalence (base rate)  1%

Depression Scale 2 (D) T \> = 65 T \< 65 Total

Yes 7 3 10

No 198 792 990

Total 205 795 1000

PPP = NPP = Sensitivity = Specificity =

7/205 = 3.4% 792/795 = 99.6% 7/10 = 70.0% 792/990 = 80.0%

Note. From The MMPI--2/MMPI--2--RF: An Interpretive Manual (3rd ed.,
p. 414), by R. L. Greene, 2011, Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Copyright
2011 by Allyn & Bacon. Reprinted with permission.

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

variation from some mean) as a basis for concluding that something
pathological is going on. It turns out that one study found exactly such
variability in test scores within individual test takers (Schretlen,
Munro, Anthony, & Pearlson, 2003). One implication that can be drawn
from that finding is that conclusions regarding abnormality should not
be based on statistical variance by itself but on the degree to which a
pattern of results fits recognizable clinical patterns, such as
described by ICD--10--CM diagnoses. Let us take a scenario mentioned
briefly above as an example. You are held up at gunpoint in a dark
alley. (What possessed you to frequent a dark alley is a whole other
issue!) Your response is to behave in a very passive, submissive manner.
Although submissive passivity is not a highly unusual behavior in the
population as a whole, let us assume that it is for you. Does this
statistically unusual behavior therefore constitute a disorder? Given
the circumstances, probably not---a message that for psychologists,
diagnosis should never occur independent of the context. However, apart
from the context, the answer would also be probably not, because
passivity is not pathognomonic, that is, by itself reflective of a
disorder. Passivity is on a behavioral continuum that may or may not be
reflective of a problem. What if your behavior is at the other end of
this behavioral continuum, that is, you react with intense aggression in
such a way that you do serious bodily damage, and maybe even death, to
your assailant? Does that reflect a disorder? In our society, that may
be a political question. In a psychological context, it is probably not
a disorder if this is the only time in your life you have reacted in
that way and you did so only to protect yourself. If, however, it is a
behavior that occurs with fairly high statistical frequency for you, it
does fit an ICD--10--CM category, such as Antisocial personality
disorder (F60.2), or Explosive personality (disorder) coded under
Borderline personality disorder (F60.3) or any one of a number of
ICD--10--CM diagnoses in Chapter 18, including Hostility (F45.5),
Violent behavior (F45.6), State of emotional shock and stress,
unspecified (F45.7), or Homicidal ideations (F45.850). Failing to
consider the effects of base rates is not the only error inherent in the
process of assessing and diagnosing individuals (for a longer list than
we can consider here, see Pope, 2014). The design to organize and
understand information is such a powerful motive for humans (Kahneman,
2011; B. Weiner, 1986; see also below) that it leads to number of
cognitive errors. One of these errors is the primacy effect (Deese &
Kaufman, 1957; Murdock, 1962). That is, we as psychologists tend to
overvalue the importance of information provided early in the assessment
process, to a large degree because we use that information to help us
formulate an understanding of the person, which colors our
interpretation of data we collect subsequently. That, in turn,

41

42

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

leads us to the second of those errors, favoring evidence that supports
our thinking and ignoring evidence that conflicts with the conclusions
we have already drawn, the confirmation bias effect (J. St. B. T. Evans,
1989; Nickerson, 1998). A confirmation bias is the tendency all people
have to look for and think about evidence or experiences that confirm
their beliefs, because they like being right as opposed to wrong, as
opposed to looking for data that contradict their beliefs (Davies,
2003). Why would one want to look for disconfirming data? Because if we
do not, we never know when we are wrong. In working with people
professionally, that is a big problem. In our experience in dealing with
complaints to licensing boards, professionals are more likely to do harm
to others because of a lack of consideration of alternative hypotheses
than because of evil intent. Daniel Kahneman (2011), in his wonderful
book Thinking, Fast and Slow, provides in part a summary of his
career-long quest to understand cognitive processes and assumptions. His
work, which resulted in a Nobel Prize, suggests that people have two
cognitive systems, also constructs. The first is fast System 1 thinking,
which allows people to react to their environments quickly and
efficiently, that is, intuitively. The second system, System 2 thinking,
involves a deliberate process of considering a variety of data and using
analytic abilities to decide what is important and drawing conclusions
that are appropriate in any given situation, resulting in the ability to
take measured and well-considered suitable action. System 1 develops
over time, based on experiences and the connections or associations
people make between events that occur together. Thus, it is more a
correlational than a causational system, that is, people draw
conclusions on the basis of the relationships between events. Its
advantage is that it enables people to react quickly and automatically
to these events, without the need for expensive (in terms of both time
and energy) mental processes or calculations. Sometimes, the speed of
responding can be lifesaving. However, System 1 can also lead to errors,
because it does not have the ability to evaluate or make judgments about
the stimuli to which it reacts. In a psychological assessment situation,
System 1 can lead us as psychologists to draw automatic and erroneous
conclusions about situations or people we are assessing. One common
error is to draw conclusions based on availability to our conscious
thinking of events or data, the availability heuristic (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1972). Thus, for example, because it is easier to think of
words that begin with the letter k rather than have a k as the third
letter, people tend to think that more words begin with the letter k
than have k as the third letter, even though it turns out that is not
true. A second common error is what Kahneman and his late collaborator,
Amos Tversky, called the representative heuristic (Kahneman & Tversky,
1972). Consider the following question from the discussion

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

above: You are doing a psychological assessment on a sex offender. Is
that person more likely to have ASPD or not? Most of us psychologists
would probably say that the person is more likely to have ASPD than not,
because we believe (based on System 1 processes, that is, what we have
"picked up" through reading or conversations) that sexual offending is a
representative antisocial behavior. The correct answer, however, is no,
because we know from the discussion above that the percentage of sex
offenders with a diagnosis of ASPD is around 30%, meaning that 70% of
sex offenders do not have ASPD. Your System 2 can understand the logic
of the argument (we hope), but your Sys­ tem 1 probably concluded ASPD at
first, because it relied on quick, automatic conclusions based, in this
case, on the representativeness of the data. Another approach that makes
a very similar point is based on Paul Meehl's (1954, 1986) original work
on actuarial (statistical) versus clinical prediction (for an excellent
review, see Grove, 2005). Meehl essentially showed that using
statistical probabilities, one can do a better job of prediction than
using clinical information---a sobering thought for all of us
psychologists! Meehl's idea, understandably, has been controversial (see
Holt, 1958, and Zubin, 1956), given that clinical prediction is the
lifeblood of what we as psychologists do, whether in therapy (predicting
what will happen in the future based on current circumstances, e.g., a
suicide attempt, vs. what will or can happen based on changes that are
made in therapy) or in assessment (which often explicitly demands
predictions, whether about employability, the effects of disability, the
ability to manage one's own affairs, the need for treatment, the
likelihood of a convicted felon reoffending, etc.) or even in licensing
boards (who is going to be an ethical and competent psychologist) and
among faculty/supervisors (what kinds of knowledge and skills are
necessary to be an ethical and competent psychologist). However, most
subsequent research has provided support for Meehl's original position,
whether such research has examined interrater reliability among
clinicians, (Goldberg, 1968; P. R. Miller, Dasher, Collins, Griffiths, &
Brown, 2001), accuracy in predicting suicidality (G. S. Brown, Jones,
Betts, & Wu, 2003), or reviews of the literature on the question of
statistical versus clinical prediction itself (Ægisdóttir et al., 2006;
Grove, Zald, Lebow, Snitz, & Nelson, 2000). Research from a very
different area of psychology makes a similar point about how people's
brains work in two regards. Antonio Damasio (2010), a neurologist who
has long grappled with the issues in neuro­ science, such as how memories
are formed, the role of emotion in decision making, and consciousness,
stated that the basic automatic processes (similar to Kahneman's, 2011,
System 1) that contribute to people's survival, preexisted their more
deliberate side, similar to System 2. The

43

44

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

evolutionary progress that enabled people to store images in memory
allowed for their more reflective cognitive processes to use those
stored images for "effective anticipation of situations, previewing of
possible outcomes, navigation of the possible future, and invention of
management solutions" (p. 187). This sounds very much like the
Kahneman's (2011) System 2 and very much like what a good psychologist
should do. The second contribution from neuroscience proposes that
people's brains have a strong need to make sense of experience, to
create a coherent whole out of many, sometimes disparate, parts
(Damasio, 2010; Frankl, 1963; Proulx & Inzlicht, 2012; Steger, 2012).
One of the ways people make sense is to create stories, about themselves
and the world in which they live. Stories, which are ubiquitous in
various human cultures, create the coherent whole people need. In fact,
Damasio (2010) saw the telling of stories as foundational to the core of
who people are and how they understand themselves, the subjective sense
they have that they are actors in their environment: "Storytelling is
something brains do, naturally and implicitly. Implicit storytelling has
created our selves, and it should be no surprise that it pervades the
entire fabric of human societies and cultures" (p. 311). However, in
telling stories, the details are less important than the whole. As
cognitive neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga (2011) wrote, "Our human
brains are driven to infer causality. They are driven to explain events
that make sense out of the scattered facts" (p. 77); "facts are great,
but not necessary" (p. 88); and "if there is an obvious explanation we
accept it. . . . When there is not an obvious explanation, we generate
one" (p. 89). What is ultimately important to people is that the stories
they tell others and themselves help explain the world they experience
and their place in it. Gazzaniga referred to this process as
confabulation, that is, the concocting of a story that makes sense, even
when the facts do not support the story. People are storytellers because
making sense out of experiences likely had evolutionary value. Most
events do occur for a reason, and understanding that reason helps people
cope with those events. So humans' brains are structured in such a way
that they look for coherence, even when coherence is not present--- or
even when the story they tell, the coherence they believe is present, is
the wrong story (see also classic experiments by Kelley, 1967; Kleck &
Strenta, 1980; and Schachter & Singer, 1962 ). An important message for
the professional psychologist is that something is fundamental about the
ways our brains work that helps us to create a coherent story out of all
of the information we gather about the people with whom we work. The
good news is that we are able to make sense of the individual events and
experiences people tell us about and communicate that sense to others,
as well as use that sense to benefit our patients. The bad news is that
the stories we create can be

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

dead wrong, although they appear to be logical and realistic
(Gottschall, 2012). Coherence is no proof of accuracy. Nor is the amount
of information we gather a guarantee of the accuracy of our conclusions,
an issue we discuss below. Research has indicated that the more we know
about something, the more we can delude ourselves into thinking that
what we conclude is accurate (Son & Kornell, 2010). Beware the overly
confident psychologist---even psychologists who are also authors sharing
their views of how the world is! Another common error in understanding
the causes of events is the assumption of dual directional causality.
For example, because a person with lung cancer has a very high
probability of being a smoker (99%; Dawes, 1988), it is easy and common
to assume that smoking is an extremely useful predictor of lung cancer,
that is, if a person smokes, she or he is highly likely to get lung
cancer. However, actuarial tables indicate that only 10% of smokers get
lung cancer. The relevance for this error in psychological diagnoses
would be if a particular diagnosis had a high incidence of a particular
characteristic---for instance, hallu­ cinations or, perhaps, a high score
on the Schizophrenia scale (Scale 8) on the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory---2 (Butcher, Dahlstrom, Graham, Tellegen, &
Kaemmer, 1989)---to believe without additional data that the presence of
that characteristic is an indication of the presence of schizophrenia,
when, in fact, a person might present with hallucinations or a high
Scale 8 score for numerous other reasons. Remember Table 2.1? It depicts
a situation in which the presence of one symptom typical of a disorder
is used to assume the presence of the disorder in the face of varying
base rates. Another error we believe is important to mention is
oversimplification of data. We started this discussion with the
description of the massive amount of data of varying sorts that a
clinician gathers during an assessment process. Even if we, as
psychologists, are aware of the dangers of relying too strongly on
Kahneman's (2011) System 1 in our deliberations, it is still the case
that the data we gather are so voluminous that we have to choose. We
have to identify what we think are the most important facts or factors.
We have to categorize so that we can keep track of and make sense of the
disparate bits of information we receive. We have to draw connections
between variables whenever possible to draw necessary conclusions and to
make sense out of separate bits of information. In the process of
engaging in those rather complex cognitive processes, we also run the
risk of leaving out important data, especially data that do not fit our
developing theories or conceptualizations of the person (recall the
primacy and confirmation bias effects). We see what we expect to see and
do not see what we do not expect to see. That leads us to not follow up
on threads that might be important. However, we are often not even aware
of our error. So, we

45

46

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

package the information in ways that make it manageable and intelligible
but thereby miss important keys or factors and overvalue other factors
that we think explain what they might not explain. We need to
continuously guard against becoming overconfident with the data we
possess and the conclusions we draw. Because of our need to understand
and categorize, we have a tendency to try to attribute causality to
events without clear causality, referred to as misplaced attributions of
causality. If we try to make sense out of complex situations, to provide
order where little order exists, by making predictions about how things
are likely to go in the future, we run the risk of trying to fit random
data (noise) into our conceptualizations, which may result in garbage
in, garbage out (Silver, 2012), leading to unsupported conclusions and
predictions. Psychologists are often asked to provide a glimpse into the
future---what treatment will work with this person, is that person
likely to continue to act abnormally, is this person likely to be a
danger to self or others? Our predictions can even be erroneous when
they are based on common clinical lore: The best predictor of future
behavior is past behavior. Although that is very often true, such
predictions assume that circumstances in the future will be the same as
they were in the past, when in fact things sometimes change. The
fundamental argument we are making here is that it is crucial for
psychologists to be intentional, deliberate, and thoughtful in what we
do. Human brains are structured in such a way that unconscious,
automatic processes will take over whatever tasks they can, to allow our
conscious minds to focus on more salient or more challenging aspects of
our environments. Allowing our unconscious sway over psychological
decision making, however, comes with a risk that we will fall into the
variety of cognitive errors we have discussed above. To quote Damasio
(2010) again, "We cannot run our kind of life, in the physical and
social environments that have become the human habitat, without
reflective, conscious deliberation" (p. 288). Further, to paraphrase a
favored saying of a high-school teacher friend of one of us, "The person
who fails to read directions gives up the advantage she or he has over
the illiterate." We would say, the psychologist who fails to use a
deliberate, intentional, scientific approach to data gives up the
advantage she or he has over the other creatures in the animal kingdom.
As Damasio (2010) stated, "Taking the time to analyze facts, to evaluate
the outcome of decisions, and to ponder the emotional results of those
decisions is the path to building a practical guide otherwise known as
wisdom" (p. 297). Perhaps the most serious error to which humans are
prone is the ease with which we can deceive not only others but also
ourselves. We are good at self-deception. Kahneman (2011) stated it this
way: We have an "almost unlimited ability to ignore our ignorance"
(p. 201). Carol Tavris and Elliot Aronson (2007), in their very readable
and insightful book Mistakes Were

Psychological Assessment: The Foundation for Diagnosis

Made (But Not by Me), discussed our seemingly never-ending abilities to
convince ourselves that our errors are not errors at all, but justified
and based correctly on the information available.1 Michael Gazzaniga
(2011), from a neuropsychological perspective, made the further point
that all of our conscious conclusions are merely post hoc explanations
or rationalizations for what our brains have already decided at a
subconscious level. One form of such an error is the assumption that as
professionals, we are objective and without bias. The reality is that we
all have biases involving preconceptions. To ignore our biases or to
pretend that they do not exist is to open ourselves to the very biases
we pretend not to have by viewing the hypotheses we develop---and should
develop---as fact, rather than as hypotheses that need to be tested by
comparisons with collected data. This potential for bias, particularly
in a context in which a clinician has to make decisions about which data
to discard and which to privilege and pursue, is a major reason that a
diagnostic system like the ICD--10--CM is so helpful. Knowing how
symptoms group together in diagnostic categories enables psychologists
to focus our attention on elements of the person's history and present
functioning that have the highest probability of providing useful
information to answer the referral questions. We now turn to that
process of collecting and considering data to answer specific questions.

1 Mistakes Were Made (But Not by Me) is largely a modern application of
cognitive consistency theories (see Abelson et al., 1968) generally and
cognitive dissonance theory (Festinger, 1957) more specifically.

47

Conducting an Assessment and Making a Diagnosis

I

3

n this chapter, we describe the challenges involved in the process of
deciding on a diagnosis for the specific individuals with whom we work.
In Chapter 2, we described the complexities and pitfalls of diagnosis
and the necessity of providing diagnoses, but we did not explore how a
psychologist goes about the process of deciding on a diagnosis. How does
a psychologist ensure, as best as he or she can, that the process that
leads to a diagnosis, using the Clinical Modification of the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems (ICD--10--CM; National Center for Health Statistics, 2015), is
thorough, objective, and accurate? Theodore Millon (1969) suggested that
clinical analysis involves four steps: (a) a survey of the patient's
current clinical picture, (b) tracing the developmental influences which
shaped the problem, (c) constructing a model or syndrome representing
the central features of the patient's pathology, and (d) formulating a
remedial plan for management and therapy. (p. 110)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-004 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

49

50

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

More recently, Bram and Peebles (2014) described variations on this
process in their discussion of psychological testing, but across the
years and regardless of the goals, the steps remain basically the same:
(a) collect data, including information about developmental influences;
(b) make sense of the data; and (c) develop an intervention or
disposition plan.

Collecting Data The first phase involves collecting the data necessary
for the purposes of the psychological service being provided. As we
discuss more fully later, the ICD--10--CM can be of assistance in the
data collection process to help psychologists focus on the relevant
symptoms and signs for each disorder. The data collection process begins
with a plan to gather information, both the signs (objective data)
observed during the interview and the symptoms (subjective experiences)
described by the patient. As the psychologist interacts with the
patient, a plan is refined, focusing on the additional data needed and
the means by which those data will be collected. The psychologist has
five major methods to acquire psychological data, which we summarize in
Exhibit 3.1: (a) clinical interview, (b) record review, (c) behavioral
observations, (d) psychological testing, and (e) collateral interviews.

CLINICAL INTERVIEW A clinical interview provides both current and
historical information. See Exhibit 3.2 for the areas it would be
helpful to cover during an interEXHIBIT 3.1 Major Sources of
Psychological Data Clinical interview: Extensive interview of the
current functioning and history of the evaluee, covering some or all of
the topics below Record review: Reviewing and evaluating records from
other mental health and health professionals, schools, employers, legal
records, and other relevant professional records Behavioral
observations: All observations of the evaluee's behavior during the
interview and testing, including a formal mental status examination, if
appropriate Psychological testing: Use of standardized psychological
tests that are valid for the purpose being used Collateral interviews:
When appropriate, interviews with others who may know the evaluee well
(including other professionals, friends, parents, teachers, employers)

Conducting an Assessment and Making a Diagnosis

EXHIBIT 3.2 Outline of Interview Protocol 1. Reason for referral 2.
Family-of-origin background 3. Interpersonal relationships 4.
Educational background 5. Vocational history 6. Interests/hobbies 7.
Subjective strengths/weaknesses 8. Other important life events/traumatic
experiences 9. Current psychological state 10. Legal history 11. Medical
history 12. Chemical use 13. Daily activities 14. Current functioning
15. Personal goals

view. In addition to having such an outline as a template, the interplay
between data gathering, diagnostic impression, and diagnostic hypothesis
from the ICD--10--CM, informed by a text like the Blue Book (World
Health Organization, 1993) or a text such as those suggested in Chapter
10 (this volume), also helps you to focus your interview questions. In
other words, our perspective is that an interview will not and should
not simply follow in rote fashion an outline such as found in Exhibit
3.2 but should be informed by the specific questions whose answers you
are seeking. Relying on the ICD--10--CM helps you to formulate those
specific questions. The interplay between the data gathered and the
diagnostic possibilities should be ongoing, with the data informing the
differential diagnoses and the diagnoses informing the additional data
that need to be gathered. A structured interview such as the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM--5 (First, Williams, Karg, & Spitzer, 2015)
can also be helpful in focusing interview questions on specific
diagnostic categories. The ICD--10--CM provides a basis for knowing
better what type of data is important to gather not just during the
interview but also in the other methods of data collection discussed
below. How extensive the interview needs to be will depend on the
purposes of the assessment and the rights to privacy. The more impact
the assessment is likely to have on a person's life, the more extensive
the interview should generally be and the more likely one will need to
gather most or all of the information listed by Exhibit 3.2. Unless the
questions are asked, a psychologist cannot know for certain what
information should be gathered and how it might be relevant to the
assessment. Covering in some detail the topics contained in Exhibit 3.2,
plus those questions

51

52

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

specific to the ICD--10--CM diagnostic possibilities, an interview
normally will take from 3 to 7 hours, depending very much on the
complexity of the clinical situation and the talkativeness of the
evaluee. With the extensive gathering of personal information,
consideration for inclusion in the record must be balanced, however,
with the evaluee's right to privacy. The ethics codes of both the
American Psychological Association (APA, 2010; 4.04a) and the Canadian
Psychological Association (2000; I, 37) state that only that information
"germane to the purpose" of the assessment should be collected. The
evaluee may have some event or behavior in the past that has nothing to
do with the reasons for the assessment but that may compromise her or
his well-being or cause embarrassment. The psychologist should be
sensitive to such concerns and work to maintain a balance between
respecting the individual's right to privacy, on the one hand, and
gathering all of the information necessary for a valid assessment, on
the other. This is an area in which supervision or consultation is
especially warranted and helpful. The specific question is, can the
referral questions be answered fully without providing this piece of
information?

RECORDS Psychological, medical, school, work, and/or legal records can
provide useful information. Records may be available at the first
interview, either supplied by the referral source or previous records in
a clinic, if the patient has received prior health services. Sometimes,
helpful records will need to be requested from relevant providers. If
such records are needed, it will be necessary to secure a release of
information to request the records (see further discussion in Chapter 8,
this volume).

BEHAVIORAL OBSERVATION Behavioral observation includes all observations
of the behaviors and style of the interviewee, during the interview and
in other contexts, such as interacting with the psychologist's office
staff, which can provide very useful insights. Behavioral observations
include how a person comports himself or herself, facial expressions,
and how information is conveyed (i.e., tone of voice, emphasis, and
apparent emotional reactions). Such observations are often referred to
as the mental status examination, which includes observations of the
person's behavior and an estimate of level of cognitive functioning,
that is, a rough estimate of the integrity of the individual's brain.
Exhibit 3.3 provides an overview of the components of a mental status
examination. Because such external observations include conclusions
about what is happening internally with a person, both emotionally and
cognitively, on the basis of external behaviors, one should be very
cautious about using them to draw conclusions, as opposed to simply
reporting the observa-

Conducting an Assessment and Making a Diagnosis

EXHIBIT 3.3 Mental Status Examination Overview ❚❚ Basic grooming and
hygiene ❚❚ Gait and motor coordination ❚❚ Interview behavior and manner
❚❚ Interpersonal characteristics and approach to assessment ❚❚
Behavioral interactions ❚❚ Speech ❚❚ Expressive language ❚❚ Mood and
affect ❚❚ General feelings most days ❚❚ Feelings expressed during the
interview ❚❚ Establishing rapport ❚❚ Behavioral expression of emotions
❚❚ Thought processes and content/orientation ❚❚ Orientation ❚❚ Alertness
❚❚ Coherence ❚❚ Concentration and attention ❚❚ Hallucinations and
delusions ❚❚ Judgment and insight

tions. For example, one could describe the person as talking with a loud
voice, using dramatic words (e.g., expletives), and frowning, or as
having difficulty remembering information or tracking the questions
posed. However, one could not necessarily conclude that the person is
angry, or even more so, that the person has a propensity toward violence
or that the person is brain damaged. Behavioral observations can also be
considered to include the clinician's own reaction to the evaluee. Given
the biases that can be part of our responses to a variety of stimuli,
the problems inherent in our emotional reactions to those we work with
professionally is apparent. However, those reactions can also provide
useful clinical information (see Colli, Tanzilli, Dimaggio, & Lingiardi,
2014). Damasio (1994, 2000) has long argued that emotions are an
important part of decision making. In this context, your emotional
reactions to people with whom you work professionally is one important
source of information and is to be compared with the other sources of
information discussed here. The role of such reactions should be a part
of the supervision every reader of this book has had or will have.

PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING Psychological testing is an area that historically
has been unique to psychologists. In the earlier days of clinical
psychology, psychological testing was the primary activity of
professional psychologists, and it continues

53

54

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

to be the second most common professional service offered by
psychologists, next to psychotherapy (Weiner, 2013). The use of
psychological tests requires a number of considerations: errors,
objectivity, validity, bias, fit, added value, and accuracy. The
following discussion examines each of these issues in turn. One primary
reason we as psychologists use tests is because we are concerned about
the errors inherent in other kinds of data we collect, which are in part
dependent on the perspectives and approaches of the psychologist, or of
others, in the cases of records and collateral interviews. Psychological
test data, on the other hand, are independent of us and so can be used
as a more objective measure of the accuracy of our developing theories
of the person we are evaluating. Ample studies demonstrate the
reliability and validity of psychological tests (see Meyer et al.,
2001). That gives psychological testing a unique role in our gathering
of relevant information. Psychologists use literally hundreds of tests.
Professional neuropsychologists, who use tests as a primary assessment
tool, were surveyed a few years ago to determine which tests are used
most often. The Wechsler tests (Wechsler, 2008, 2014), among cognitive
measures, and the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory---2
(MMPI--2; Butcher, Dahlstrom, Graham, Tellegen, & Kaemmer, 1989), among
personality measures, were found to be the most frequently used (Rabin,
Barr, & Burton, 2005). A recent survey of faculty who teach assessment
techniques found training occurred most frequently with these same tests
(Ready & Veague, 2014). Two important criteria guide psychologists in
choosing specific tests for use in an assessment, regardless of whether
the evaluation process is formal (e.g., in response to a referral from
another professional or a court and involving the writing of a formal
report) or informal (e.g., a first step in providing psychotherapy,
involving collecting only as much data as reasonable or necessary and,
usually, without a written report). The first criterion is whether a
test being used has been shown empirically to be valid and reliable for
the purposes and with the population for which it is to be used. In
other words, for the person you are assessing, does the test actually
measure what it is you want it to measure? The answer to that question
depends on the standardization data. When the test was developed for use
with a certain group of people, the test is given to a representative
sample from that group and data collected about how they perform. Those
data then serve as the norms, the criteria against which the person you
are testing is compared. If the person you are assessing does not bear
substantial resemblance to the normative sample1 (the definition of what
substantial resemblance requires is not 1 There is no definitive
definition of what substantial resemblance requires---another instance
in which psychology is also an art based on clinical judgment, as well
as a science based on empirical data.

Conducting an Assessment and Making a Diagnosis

definitive---another instance in which psychology is also an art based
on clinical judgment, as well as a science based on empirical data),
then you will have no idea how your evaluee should perform on the test
and no way of interpreting the results of the test. For example, the
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale---IV (WAIS--IV; Wechsler, 2008) has
been well validated as a measure of intelligence with English-speaking
people, but it is not a good choice for someone who does not speak
English or does not speak English fluently. Without further empirical
data, researchers would have no idea how a person who does not speak
English fluently should do on the WAIS--IV, even though it is a
well-validated test. So, although researchers know what an IQ of 100
means in the normative sample, they have no idea what it means with a
group different from the normative sample. Further, the WAIS--IV is not
intended as a measure of personality, although Wechsler tests were once
used in that way (Rapaport, Gill, & Schafer, 1974). Thus, a test should
be used only for the specific purpose for which it was designed. A more
realistic example these days is, perhaps, the use of the MMPI--2 for
questions of employment. That is, should the MMPI--2 be used as a
screening test to determine whether a person will be a good employee?
Certainly, the MMPI (Hathaway & McKinley, 1942) and, subsequently, the
MMPI--2, were not developed with employment considerations in mind. They
were developed as a means of determining who was experiencing a major
psychological dysfunction and who is likely to need hospitalization.
However, thousands of studies have been done on the MMPI and the
MMPI--2, and studies have been done that standardize the use of the
MMPI--2 in specific employment contexts (e.g., police officers; Butcher,
Ones & Cullen, 2006; Detrick, Chibnall, & Rosso, 2001; Sellbom,
Fischler, & Ben-Porath, 2007). As a test user who has been trained in
the MMPI--2, you should also know the literature well enough to
determine whether norms for this test, or any test, have been developed
for the person you are asked to assess, or if you are asked to assess
someone different from people you have previously assessed, you should
search the empirical literature to see what studies have been done (see
additional discussion of this general issue in Chapter 7, this volume).
Another issue to consider in using psychological tests is assessor
error. We made the statement above that psychological test data are
unique and valuable because they provide information that is independent
of us as the examiner. A more accurate statement would be that they are
independent of us---except when they're not! In cases of assessor bias2
in the use of tests, as well as in the interpretation of observed
behaviors (Hoyt & Kerns, 1999; Miller, Rufino, Boccaccini, Jackson,

2 Assessor bias is the lack of objectivity in the mental health
professional that occurs during the process of collecting and evaluating
assessment data.

55

56

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

& Murrie, 2011). A primary risk to consider is the use of nonstandard
means of administration and test scoring. Such errors are particularly
likely in the Wechsler tests (Kaufman & Lichtenberger, 2006) but are
also possible with straightforward self-report tests, such as the
MMPI--2 if nonstandard administrations are used (Butcher, Graham, &
BenPorath, 1995). An additional problem is that assessor error is
typically not reported in testing manuals (McDermott, Watkins, & Rhoad,
2014). The possibility of such errors should emphasize the importance of
standard use of tests and of some humility in our use of any kind of
data. The second criterion, related to the first, is that the tests used
constitute a "battery" rather than a "pile" of tests (T. Boll, personal
communication, October 15, 1976). That is, tests should be chosen for a
specific purpose, to measure a specific type of characteristic or
ability, and multiple tests should be chosen to complement each other,
that is, to provide different types of information or to provide some
degree of corroboration for other tests and other sources of
information, all of which are intended to fit the purposes of the
assessment. Thus, a test should be used only if it will provide needed
or helpful information. In other words, the exact questions meant to be
answered by the assessment in general, and the testing specifically,
should be determined ahead of time and a decision made about the kinds
of tests that together will provide reliable and valid answers to those
questions. Obviously, this means that you have to have a clear idea of
what the referral question is---sometimes a much more difficult task
than is initially obvious. Not infrequently, the psychologist may have
to engage in a training process with referral sources, helping them to
ask the right kinds of questions, with the understanding that they are
much more likely to get their questions answered in a helpful and
accurate way if the psychologist knows what the questions are. The
alternative to a battery, the pile of tests, constitutes using a variety
of tests because the clinician is acquainted with them and knows what
they mean, but in a specific clinical context has no particular thought
about why one test rather than another. A pile of tests will produce a
pile of data, the meaning of which is likely to be difficult or
impossible to determine. We believe that psychological testing should be
used in formal assessments when possible (i.e., whenever a test is
reliable and valid for the purposes of the assessment and resources
allow), because of the uniqueness the data testing provides, that is,
the data from testing are like no other data psychologists obtain in
that they are less dependent on the subjectivity of the observer. The
other reason is that many psychological tests included what are called
embedded measures of dissimulation, that is, measures of whether the
test taker is approaching the test in an open and honest manner, or
conversely, whether he or she is exaggerating or underreporting
problems, or perhaps, some combina-

Conducting an Assessment and Making a Diagnosis

tion of those two (depending on the nature and social acceptability of
the problems). All people, including psychologists, are notoriously
ineffective in judging people's honesty by observation alone (Hurd &
Noller, 1988). So, the embedded measures are some of the only objective
ways we psychologists have of determining whether the assessment overall
of the individual is likely to be accurate and valid, based on the
person's approach to the assessment process. Many in the field do not
agree that testing should typically be used, however (see, e.g., Jackson
et al., 2011; Walfish, Vance, & Fabricatore, 2007). Psychological tests
are less frequently used as part of a treatment planning process during
psychotherapy, both because insurance companies are less inclined to
reimburse for testing in therapy and because the focus of therapy should
primarily be on the needs and goals of the patient, rather than the
needs of the psychologist to gather complete information. Nevertheless,
when psychologists use psychological tests as part of the provision of
psychotherapy, tests can provide helpful information because they sample
a different type of behavior than that observed in an intake interview
and ongoing data gathering in therapy. One primary question in a therapy
context is whether a sufficient amount of additional useful information
is likely to be obtained through the use of tests to justify the
additional expense in both time and money. We do want to emphasize that
a process of assessment, whether including the use of tests or not, is
an essential component of all psychotherapy. One cannot help another
person deal with problems without an understanding of the problems and
of the person who exhibits those problems. John Hunsley (2007) makes
this point in arguing convincingly that skill in assessment is essential
to being able to engage in evidence-based practice.

COLLATERAL INTERVIEWS Collateral interviews are conducted with persons
other than the individual being evaluated who might be able to provide
additional information from a different perspective (e.g., family
members, teachers, employers, friends). Collateral interviews are common
in some forensic assessment contexts and less common as part of a
treatment planning procedure for psychotherapy, except interviewing
family members when the patient is a minor. An important consideration
in doing collateral interviews is privacy. In most states, the
communications between a psychologist and a client are confidential and
cannot be passed on to others. By its nature, doing a collateral
interview means breaking confidentiality by letting the collateral
interviewee know that the evaluee is being assessed. Most often, the
privacy considerations override the value of the additional information

57

58

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

in a psychotherapy context, although collateral interviews could proceed
with the consent of the person (see Chapter 8, this volume, for a more
complete discussion of informed consent). In a forensic context,
someone's freedom or employment or monetary compensation or some other
fairly significant outcome may provide a strong enough basis for
gathering the information that the patient or evaluee (or, sometimes, a
court) will decide that privacy is not a prohibitive factor. For further
consideration of some of the ethical issues involved in conducting an
assessment, see Chapter 7, this volume; APA (2010); and Sattler and
Schaffer (2014). As discussed above, the precise procedures used to
gather data will depend on the purposes and the context of the
assessment. It is important to use procedures and sources of data that
are adequate to the conclusions provided (see APA, 2010, Section 9.01).
To quote from APA's (2013) Specialty Guidelines for Forensic Psychology:
Forensic practitioners ordinarily avoid relying solely on one source of
data, and corroborate important data whenever feasible. . . . When
relying upon data that have not been corroborated, forensic
practitioners seek to make known . . . any associated strengths and
limitations, and the reasons for relying upon the data. (p. 15)

These guidelines are useful for forensic psychologists as well as all
psychologists who provide nonforensic psychological testing. You might
ask yourself two additional questions as you think about what kinds of
data are necessary for your assessment and how you should go about
collecting those data: What are the consequences to the evaluee of your
being wrong in your assessment of him or her (either by misidentifying
the problems present or by either over- or understating the problems),
and what implications does that have for how comprehensive and varied
your data should be? Remember that during your experiential training,
you will have supervisors who will assist you with these complex
questions. In sum, the psychologist gathers information that is
appropriate to the purpose and goals of the assessment. She or he is
also clear and transparent about procedures, purposes, and sources of
data, and discusses the limitations of the sources of data and
procedures used in the assessment process.

Making Sense of the Data Once we have significant amounts of data, we
return to our starting point, namely, how to make sense out of all of
that information. We must sort through all of the bits of data we have
to draw appropriate

Conducting an Assessment and Making a Diagnosis

conclusions and make helpful recommendations without leaving out
important information or being biased in the data we emphasize. A number
of guidelines can help us psychologists accomplish that goal. It is
important that no information is ignored. In fact, information that
seems not to fit may be especially useful, and it requires careful
consideration. With respect to all data obtained, the clinician should
ask, Could this be important? Does this information provides insight
into the evaluee's experience and the ICD--10--CM diagnostic
possibilities? Is there something about this information that can shape
or reshape the hypotheses and conclusions I have? And, beyond that,
should the information be included in a report or is it unimportant
enough, or private enough, to be excluded? Not all information can or
should be included or the outcome (whether a written or verbal report)
would be so voluminous as to be unusable. Two significant strategies can
help a psychologist make decisions about the inclusion or exclusion of
data. First, it is important not to draw conclusions or formulate
perspectives too early in the process, which is nearly guaranteed to
eliminate viable alternatives that might be helpful---and accurate. One
good strategy is to wait to draw conclusions until the end of the
process, having pulled together and reviewed all of the data relevant
enough to be included in the report, enabling you to consider carefully
all of the information you have. Second, an essential aspect of the
process of conducting a psychological assessment is to look for
disconfirming evidence. That is, as one begins to draw tentative
conclusions and form an overall conceptualization of what the important
factors are in the assessment of a particular person, one should very
intentionally and actively look for data, from all sources of collected
information, that may provide alternative perspectives. With regard to a
particular formulation, ask yourself whether any information disagrees
with that formulation or provides an alternative viewpoint. Competence
in engaging in psychological assessment requires that one be thorough
and brutally honest in seeking disconfirming evidence. When one finds
disconfirming information, which is virtually always present in any
assessment, what does one do with it? Here, rules are hard to come by
because the answer to the question will always depend on the nature of
the information available. And, this is where experience with dealing
with complex data is particularly helpful. A first answer is to seek
consultation or supervision for help. In the final analysis, the
formulations and conclusions one draws and the degree of confidence one
can place in those formulations and conclusions will depend upon how
much the various sources of data agree, that is, where the data
converge. If multiple sources of data all point in the same direction
and very little information suggests an alternative conceptualization,
one can present conclusions with a fair degree of

59

60

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

confidence in their accuracy. When there is disagreement in the
information gathered, one option is to attempt to gather additional
information to resolve the discrepancies, but if one has all the data
possible or reasonably available, one goes with the conclusions that
seem to agree most with the preponderance of the data and acknowledge
that one's confidence in those conclusions is lower. One should state
the level of confidence openly and clearly in the report. Last, no
assessment and no assessment procedure or technique, whether test or
interview or records from others, will be perfectly reliable and valid.
With a test, the evaluee of a given assessment and the population on
which the test was standardized will never exactly correspond. With an
interview, a variety of factors can influence how much the individual
reveals about herself or himself, including variability from day to day
in mood or outlook, the nature of the professional relationship, and the
evaluee's understanding or interpretation of the questions posed. In
addition, every psychologist, regardless of how expert or how
experienced, has limits to his or her ability to understand in a
comprehensive manner the experiences and viewpoints being shared by the
patient. With records or other information from others about the
evaluee, the other person's own biases and perspective may color
interpretations and conclusions. Thus, one should approach all data with
due skepticism and remember that the process of drawing conclusions
about a person involves comparing and contrasting all of the information
collected. To summarize, the process a psychologist follows when
conducting a psychological assessment is based on the scientific
methodology of hypothesis generation and hypothesis testing. This
methodology starts at the very beginning of the assessment process. When
one receives a referral, it is desirable to obtain a certain amount of
patient information, along with the specific questions that the referral
source would like answered. From the initial request for an assessment,
the psychologist begins to formulate some hypotheses about what is
occurring and the sources of information that might provide insight. At
this point in the process, those hypotheses are a very long way away
from conclusions. Rather, they are pathways to guiding the process of
collecting specific information.

Developing an Intervention or Disposition Plan Once the available,
relevant information is gathered, one consciously and intentionally uses
the scientific methodology a second time, to form coherent explanatory
conceptualizations about the person and develop appropriate conclusions.
To accomplish this, one begins by for-

Conducting an Assessment and Making a Diagnosis

mulating hypotheses about possible alternatives. This is another point
at which reliance on the ICD--10--CM can be especially helpful. Which
diagnostic possibilities have you considered, and how do those diagnoses
help you think about what possible alternative explanations help tell a
story that is not only coherent but also fits the data? We consider in
much more detail in the next chapter how to think about diagnostic
possibilities and implications. The next step is to review all of the
data that have been collected to assess the support or lack of support
for each hypothesis. This process can lead to additional questions that
might be pursued by seeking more records, conducting more interviews, or
administering more psychological tests, depending on the goals of the
assessment. Once all of the necessary and reasonably available data has
been collected, one weighs and considers the data and draws conclusions
with the appropriate level of confidence. That weighing of the data
involves looking for convergence within the data, that is, consistent
support from the data for previously developed hypotheses, and comparing
the developing conclusions with those hypotheses, from the various
sources of data and from the objective diagnostic categories of the
ICD--10--CM, to ensure that you have adequately considered the data from
sufficient vantage points to know that your conclusions are not only
unbiased but also thorough. This process of evaluating data and reaching
conclusions can be both simplified and complicated if the person you are
assessing has had previous contact with a mental health professional and
comes to you with an ICD--10--CM diagnosis. The process is simplified in
that the potential range of diagnostic and assessment options may be
narrowed. The previous diagnosis provides you with information regarding
what the other mental health professional saw as important and
noteworthy. That type of communication from one professional to another
is a major reason for diagnosis. The data communicated to you by the
diagnosis should be considered carefully. However, it can also be
complicated by the increased chance of bias, in this case by narrowing
the range of options too much by looking only at those factors
emphasized by the other professional. Every psychologist has the ethical
and fiduciary duty to consider carefully all of the data available and
to make an independent judgment of what data are important, how they fit
together, and to which conclusions they lead. Again, using the
ICD--10--CM as an objective backdrop assists us in navigating that
process. That is, by comparing the information you have with the
ICD--10--CM diagnoses and thinking through carefully what the diagnosis
means, you can guard against cherry-picking only those data that support
your hypotheses. It is helpful in this process to remember the
importance of base rates and to question, once again, the value and
accuracy of your data in drawing conclusions in answer to the referral
questions for the particular

61

62

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

individual. The following three steps can help you decide on the
conclusions you draw: 1. "Anchor your judgment of the probability of an
outcome on a plausible base rate" (Kahneman, 2011, p. 154). 2. "Question
the diagnosticity of your evidence" (Kahneman, 2011, p. 154). 3. In the
absence of strong and consistent evidence of your initial prediction,
regress your predictions toward the mean (for an excellent and
accessible video on regression to the mean, see Schneider, 2013). This
last point means that if you are about to draw a conclusion that is
somewhat unusual, (i.e., out of the typical range of behaviors for most
human beings), with some degree of disconfirming evidence, consider a
conclusion that is less extreme, such as a less severe form of a
disorder or, even, a characteristic that is unusual but not
pathological.3 In ICD--10--CM terms, consider instead of an F code
(Chapter 5), an R code (signs and symptoms in Chapter 18) or Z code
(factors influencing health status in Chapter 21). This may or may not
be the end of your task. If you have been asked to do an assessment only
(see the cases in Chapters 4 and 5), then once you have satisfied
yourself by carefully considering the data and taken into account the
errors you can make in drawing conclusions, your only remaining task is
writing a report to share your thinking and conclusions with the
referral source. The issues involved in writing a report are beyond the
scope of this book, but multiple resources are available for you (see
those listed in Chapter 10 for a beginning). If the assessment you have
conducted is for the purposes of providing some type of intervention
(usually, but not always psychotherapy---it could also be primarily
educational or consultation with some other entity), then an additional
methodology should be considered in getting from your data and
conclusions to the specific interventions that are appropriate. It is
that process that provides our focus in Chapter 9.

3 For purposes of this discussion, we define out of the typical range as
at least one standard deviation away from the mean, which by definition
would include all mental health diagnostic categories.

Using the ICD--10--CM Case 1---Lynn

I

4

n the next three chapters, we discuss three examples of assessing and
diagnosing using the Clinical Modification of the International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems
(ICD--10--CM; National Center for Health Statistics, 2015). We have
created cases to reflect the referrals psychologists receive, the
variety of clinical content, and the range of professional issues
psychologists confront. We hope that focusing on these cases helps us
and you, the reader, be on the same page, so to speak, in considering
clinical, ethical, and risk management issues. The cases are either
completely invented, based on our experiences, or are based on one or
more real cases but with enough information changed or invented that
there is no possibility of identifying one of the patients as a real
person (see the American Psychological Association, 2010, Ethical
Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct, Ethical Standard 4.07).
The cases are used, further, as the basis for exploring ethical issues
raised in clinical practice in Chapter 7, the ways of minimizing risks
in practice in Chapter 8, and taking steps toward disposition in Chapter
9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-005 A Student's Guide to Assessment
and Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

63

64

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

These cases were developed to provide you a common set of circumstances
to explore diagnostic, ethical, risk management, and dispositional
considerations. They are meant to be illustrative rather than
definitive. That is, they are not intended to cover all or any specific
portion of the crucial issues involved in assessment. Rather, we use
them to provide some common ground for you to consider some of the
issues we believe are important in the process of psychological
assessment. In Chapters 2 and 3, we discussed, in some detail, issues
related to the process of engaging in a psychological assessment, and we
presented in broad terms the types of data and thinking involved in
assessment. In Chapters 4, 5, and 6, in the context of the three cases,
we consider in more detail the thinking process a psychologist uses in
understanding the needs and perspectives of a patient, what data are
needed and why, how to develop appropriate diagnostic hypotheses using
the ICD--10--CM, and generally, how to competently conduct an objective
assessment of your patient. Another note on our methodology here: We
used the Blue Book (World Health Organization \[WHO\], 1993), a
companion volume to the ICD--10--CM, which is a classification system
rather than a diagnostic manual. We decided to use the Blue Book not
because it is the best or most recent diagnostic manual available but
because it is readily available online for the reader and provides us
with a common text to refer to, in addition to its specificity to the
ICD--10--CM. The actual diagnostic manual you decide to use with your
own cases may well depend on the texts your professor has assigned for
use in your coursework in psycho­ pathology. We also provide some
suggested psychopathology texts in Chapter 10.

The Case: Lynn The following assessment was conducted by you, a doctoral
student. You are currently enrolled in your second assessment course and
as a course requirement need to complete a recently assigned battery of
tests, including the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory---2
(Butcher, Dahlstrom, Graham, Tellegen, & Kaemmer, 1989), the Millon
Clinical Multiaxial Inventory---III (Millon, 2006) and the Stanford--
Binet Intelligence Scale (fifth ed.; Roid, 2003), three very commonly
used tests of psychological and intellectual functioning. With this
assignment in mind, you interviewed and tested the following individual
and wrote a report.

Case 1---Lynn

PRESENTING CONCERN At the time of the interview, Lynn was a 25-year-old,
single, European American woman. She was living alone and had a good job
working as a loan officer at a local bank. She was referred to the
community service agency by her sister, with encouragement from the
president of the bank. Lynn reported that her sister has been concerned
that Lynn had not been herself for the past few weeks and that her boss
was concerned that her work productivity had decreased. Lynn described a
growing sense of dread that began soon after her mother died of natural
causes about two months ago. She hoped that therapy might be useful to
help her understand and change her behavior. You received a written
request from the bank president for updates on Lynn's condition and
progress, with a focus on whether her job performance was likely to
improve in the near future.

RELEVANT HISTORY Lynn reported a desire to stay at home but said, "I
drag myself out of the house to work every day." She found herself
worried about going out of her home and did not believe that she was
able to concentrate and focus on her work very effectively. She had
found herself behind in writing reports at work, and her clients were
beginning to complain to her manager. She believed that she was building
a good career, was financially stable, and she was proud of her
accomplishments but had become worried that she might lose her job.
After their father was killed in a head-on automobile accident with a
drunk driver when Lynn was 6 years old, she and her sister were raised
by their mother. As a result of the accident, the family received a
significant amount of money from life insurance that helped support
them. Her mother worked as a real estate agent, which provided the
primary financial support for the family. Lynn reported that she was
very close to her mother and relied on her for support and advice. She
also described a positive supportive relationship with her sister, who
lived approximately 900 miles away with her husband and two children,
ages 2 and 4. Lynn was in a 2-year relationship that ended approximately
five months ago. She stated that she and her former partner had
discussed marriage but that he met someone when he was out with "the
boys" and had an affair. He ended the relationship, and then she found
out about the affair from a friend of her former boyfriend. Lynn felt
betrayed and reported feeling very cautious about meeting men. She had
not dated since her relationship ended. Lynn had a few close friends who
lived fairly close to her. She reported that all had "checked in" with
her because they had noticed the changes in her behavior and feelings
over the past month, but

65

66

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

sometimes she thought they were pushing too hard for her to seek help.
She did appreciate their concern but felt their focus on her welfare was
excessive and hoped they would stop pushing her. But she was unable to
tell them to reduce their encouragement because she did not want to
offend them. She used to exercise regularly and felt that she was in
good shape. But during the past few weeks, rather than exercising daily
as was her past practice, Lynn had been exercising considerably less
frequently. On some occasions she had difficulty catching her breath,
even when she had not been working out for a long time. She indicated
that she usually has a physical exam once a year and that her last one,
about 11 months ago, found her to be in good health. After her mother's
death, Lynn began drinking at least one glass of wine a night and on
some nights, two or three glasses "to take the edge off." Up until then,
her use of alcohol had been limited. She reported that she did not use
street drugs and was not taking any medications. Lynn reported that her
mother took her to therapy immediately after her father died. She
attended only a few sessions and did not believe it was helpful,
although she could not remember much about the experience. As a result,
as Lynn began the interview, she expressed concern that therapy might
not help her at this point.

CURRENT FUNCTIONING/MENTAL STATUS Presentation Lynn was of average
height and weight. She appeared healthy, except for a bandage on her
right hand, which she described as an accidental cut on her palm while
cooking recently. She was dressed in a gray and black suit, as she
reported coming to the session immediately from work. She indicated that
she usually dresses casually in jeans and a t-shirt when not at work.
During the interview, Lynn appeared thoughtful and pensive. She
initially was cautious about self-disclosing, but as the interview
proceeded, she became more open and candid in her responses. By the end
of the interview, she was openly volunteering information about herself.
She responded well to minor positive reinforcements and supportive
comments. She indicated on a number of occasions that she appreciated
feeling understood. Lynn appeared visibly anxious when discussing her
future (both her vision of herself in relationships and her view of her
work life), sad when discussing the death of her mother, and angry when
discussing the end of her relationship. She expressed anger at the other
driver when discussing the death of her father. Her speech ranged from
slow and steady when discussing her mother to slightly rapid and
pressured when discussing the loss of her relation-

Case 1---Lynn

ship. Initially, Lynn was hesitant to make eye contact with the
interviewer, but as the interview continued, she consistently did so.
She did not have difficulty expressing her feelings, and she appeared to
appreciate having her feelings reflected back to her, as she stated that
made her feel understood. Lynn's comments were consistently responsive
to the questions asked and, as the interview proceeded, she was able to
elaborate more fully.

Mood and Affect Lynn reported feeling tense and pensive most days. She
described herself as "jumpy" at work and said she felt anxious when
people were physically close to her. She felt lethargic at home and
anticipated that something else "bad" was going to happen to her. During
the interview, Lynn's emotions were congruent with the content of the
conversation, but underlying these emotions was a sense of dread,
helplessness, and anxiety that things were not going to change. She
rarely smiled or laughed. She did cry when discussing her mother's death
and the breakup of her relationship. Overall, she appeared tense and on
edge.

Thought Processes and Content/Orientation Lynn was oriented to person,
place, and time. Her short- and long-term memory appeared intact. She
was alert, although she complained of being tired and of having
difficulty falling asleep at night. She had a tendency to perseverate on
her problems, and she reported difficulty concentrating and attending to
details both at work and at home. Lynn's thought processes were intact
and easy to follow and understand. She did not display delusions or
hallucinations, although at one point she did say she thought she saw
her mother walking in from her condo soon after she had died. Her
judgment appeared good, and her intellectual ability was estimated to be
above average. Lynn did not express suicidal thoughts, and she
explicitly stated that the cut on her hand was a cooking accident and
she had no intention of hurting herself, nor had she ever harmed herself
in any way. She also indicated that although she was still angry at her
former partner, she had no intention to harm him. Her risk for violence
to herself or others was assessed to be low.

Motivation for Treatment Lynn's initial motivation for treatment as the
session began was variable. She appeared to seek service in large part
as an effort to appease her sister. As the interview continued and she
felt supported and understood, her motivation for treatment increased.
By the end of

67

68

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

the interview, Lynn committed herself to working on the issues and
concerns she discussed.

Assessment Considerations Let us now turn our attention to
considerations that will influence your assessment of Lynn. The first
question to ask yourself with any patient is, What is the goal of the
professional service you are offering? What is it that you are supposed
to do, and what do you hope to accomplish? With Lynn, we knew that her
behavior and emotions had changed recently and that she wanted to, as
she said, "understand and change my behavior"---a statement that
actually needs to be unpacked quite a lot. First, there is not a
specific referral question. Lynn was referred by her sister because her
sister was concerned about her, but there is no directive to you about
what you should do or what specific questions you are to address.
Frequently, a referral is made for a psychological service with a
specific goal in mind. That is particularly true when the psychological
service is a formal assessment resulting in a written report, although
such referrals are often made without a specific referral question,
which is puzzling, as well as troubling. It seems intuitive to know that
a question is more likely to be answered if the psychologist knows and
understands exactly what the question is. When specific referral
questions are not provided, referral sources need to be educated about
how to make referrals. Sometimes there is also a referral question when
the referral is for therapy. If the referral comes from a professional,
that professional may have a particular goal in mind. If it comes from a
family member or someone who knows the person well, that person may also
have a particular goal in mind. For example, it is not infrequent in
dealing with minors that the referral question is, in essence, "fix my
kid," followed by a list of things that are "wrong" with the child or
adolescent. However, it is also frequently the case that the referral is
a self-referral, in which case there is no initial referral question,
and one relies on the patient for identification of goals. In this case,
Lynn's goals have to do with understanding and changing her behavior,
based on a growing sense of dread and decreased work productivity. We
know from the psychological literature that understanding in and of
itself is not what is most helpful in psychotherapy (Owen, Wong, &
Rodolfa, 2010; Tracey, Lichtenberg, Goodyear, Claiborn, & Wampold,
2003), which raises the question, What is it that Lynn is really looking
for? How does she conceptualize understanding her problems, and how does
she think that enhancing her understanding will be helpful? How does she
think about the path to that understanding and

Case 1---Lynn

how, therefore, does she understand her current problems? Answering
these and similar questions would require a fairly long discussion with
her, with the initial goal to provide you with an understanding of what
Lynn's thinking is and how she conceptualizes both herself and her
perceived problems, as well as their solution. Lynn is looking for
behavior change. Although behavior change has been shown to be an
effective means of improving one's life and feeling better about one's
self and one's life (DeRubeis et al., 2005; Turner & Leach, 2012), that
fact does not answer the question, Why is Lynn looking for behavior
change? Does she have in mind specific behaviors she would like to
change, or is it a more global change she desires? If she seeks specific
changes, how and why did she choose those behaviors? What does she hope
to accomplish by changing her behavior? In her thinking about herself
and her life, what problems would behavior change solve and how? It is
important to emphasize that these questions are not intended in any way
as a challenge to her goal or her thinking regarding changing her life.
Rather, they are intended to provide you with a better understanding of
what her thinking and experiences are like. At this juncture, to stress
the point, the goal of the discussion with Lynn is to gain a better
understanding of her internal experience. A similar set of questions
could be developed around the terms dread and decreased work
productivity. We want to know early in the process of the assessment how
Lynn sees herself and her life and what her style of reacting to herself
and her life experiences is. Let us take a step back from this case at
this point and consider a bit the process we are now engaged in. One
important message is that everything we do at the beginning of an
assessment process revolves around understanding the person we are
working with. What kind of a person is this? What are the person's life
circumstances? Is his or her life challenging and difficult or
relatively easy? What makes it difficult or easy? What kinds of external
and internal resources does the person have? Given that, how does the
person perceive him- or herself and the surrounding environment? Who are
the important people in this person's life---or aren't there any? Is the
person able to think logically and clearly about her life, or is she so
overwhelmed that logic is simply not an option? Or is he a person who
reacts emotionally and has difficulty thinking sequentially and
logically? What impact do the person's cognitions seem to have on his or
her life? What emotions are present, and how strong are they? How do
they impact thoughts and behaviors? As one can see, this a very long
list of question to ask. However, doing a good assessment is not a
matter of having all of the right questions in front of you and getting
the person's answers. What is critical is understanding the internal
experiences of the individual you are working with. That requires being
focused on your patient and asking

69

70

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

questions that grow out of what you are being told, rather than on a
preconceived list of interview questions that appear on a sheet of paper
in front of you. We have provided an interview outline in Appendix A
that covers the topics we think will be important in doing a complete
assessment. Many others are available, some of which we discuss in
Chapter 9. We do not advocate simply going through an outline or a list
of questions and getting information---perhaps information you think
your supervisor might ask you about and you do not want to be
embarrassed by saying you do not know. If that is a primary motivation,
then the process is more about you than it is about your patient. We
understand that early in training, it is inevitable that the process is
in part about your learning, but eventually, the goal is to make the
process about the patient, not about your needs. Doing a good assessment
requires understanding the patient, learning about who that person is
and how she experiences the world, as well as what resources and styles
she has that you can use collaboratively to help her make the life
changes desired. And to do that requires careful listening, but
listening in a way different from social listening, where a primary goal
of listening (if we are honest) is to look for opportunities to state
our own opinions or talk about our own experiences. Listening in a
professional relationship is of a very different quality. Carl Rogers,
one of the fathers of clinical psychology, posed a series of questions
that have to do with the nature of the professional relationship (C. R.
Rogers, 1961, pp. 50--55). Every practicing psychologist, whether
Rogerian in theoretical orientation or not, should read and think hard
about such questions as, "Can I be in some way which will be perceived
by the other person as trustworthy, as dependable or consistent in some
deep sense" (p. 50) and "Can I let myself enter fully into the world of
his \[or her\] feelings and personal meanings and see these as he \[or
she\] does" (p. 53). The goal is listening closely enough to be able to
ask ourselves, What does he mean by what was just said? What meaning or
significance does that have for him? How does that relate to his
internal experience and external behaviors? How does it relate to the
work we have before us?

Diagnostic Considerations The discussion above suggests that you still
need to gather a considerable amount of information to understand Lynn's
experience sufficiently for a competent assessment. Because you do not
yet have all of that information, the following discussion on diagnostic
considerations will of necessity be tentative. Our goal is not to
provide the correct

Case 1---Lynn

answer regarding her diagnosis but to lead you through the process that
one should undertake to arrive at the most appropriate diagnosis. A word
here about this process. As we stated in Chapter 3, you will be
gathering a great deal of information, from one or more of the five
sources of data we discussed, depending on the nature and purpose of the
assessment. The first step is to decide which of those data are most
important. To make those decisions, you will need coursework that has
taught you about normal and abnormal human behavior, that is, courses in
personality, human development, cognition and affect, and
psychopathology. Once you decide what is most important, you will need
to compare those behaviors, cognitions, and emotions with what is in a
diagnostic manual, such as the Blue Book or a textbook in
psychopathology, to begin to formulate a list of possible, hypothetical,
diagnostic categories that fit the signs and symptoms observed. Those
diagnostic categories will then provide you with clues about other
possible related symptoms that fit the diagnosis in question. Usually,
especially early in your training, you will then need to go back to the
patient and gather more information to determine whether the related
symptoms are present. The final step, once you have determined, through
multiple methods of data gathering, which signs and symptoms are present
and are most crucial, is to compare those signs and symptoms with those
most often present in your hypothetical diagnoses in order to ascertain
the diagnosis that best fits the patient. So, with regard to Lynn, what
else might we need to know to develop an appropriate formulation and
diagnosis? Let us start with the symptoms (meaning the problems as
described by the patient) related to a potential diagnosis. What do we
know? Most important, we know that Lynn is experiencing feelings of
sadness and wants to stay home, finding it difficult to get out of the
house and get to work. To stick with just these symptoms for a moment,
what are the various possible (technically, called differential)
diagnoses?1 Lynn could be experiencing depression, given her apparent
lack of energy and interest in life. But, what kind of depression? She
has had some major life stressors within the last few months: her
mother's death and the end of a relationship. The impact of those events
may be demonstrated in part by her level of physical activity. These
contextual factors suggest that depression might be more episodic than
ongoing. However, she is also experiencing physical symptoms related to
her level of exercise. That information by itself might not be of
immediate 1 The less you know about a patient, the larger the list of
potential diagnoses. The more information you have about the patient and
the better your understanding of the ICD--10, the easier it will be to
rule out some diagnoses and determine an appropriate one based on the
patient's symptoms. This process of considering and ultimately
eliminating possible diagnoses is called differential diagnosis.

71

72

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

concern, as it could indicate natural deconditioning, but it could also
suggest the possibility of a physical ailment, or it could be a symptom
of her depression. A psychologist should not attempt to think of
differential diagnoses for medical illnesses, but a referral to a
physician if symptoms are persistent or severe is certainly warranted.
What are Lynn's major symptoms, then, and which syndromes (diagnoses) do
they best fit? At this point, consulting a diagnostic manual, the Blue
Book for our purposes, is most helpful. The Blue Book lists what to look
for when considering a diagnosis of depression (e.g., a change of mood
or affect along with a change in activity, often related to a specific
stressful event or situation; see p. 94), the specific symptoms one is
likely to see ("depressed mood, loss of interest and enjoyment, and
reduced energy leading to increased fatigability and diminished
activity"; p. 100), and a list of other possible symptoms. The Blue Book
also addresses the presence of anxiety in a primary diagnosis of
depression, as well as the vegetative signs (e.g., sleep disturbance,
psychomotor retardation, loss of appetite) one might see. It discusses
which of the three varieties of depression--- mild, moderate, and
severe---is most appropriate, given the symptoms presented. The specific
diagnostic guidelines regarding a depressive disorder state that,
depending on whether the depression is mild, moderate, or severe, either
two or three of the following symptoms should be present (pp. 101--102):
depressed mood, loss of interest and enjoyment, and increased
fatigability, plus two to four or more of the other symptoms listed
(reduced concentration and attention, reduced self-esteem and
selfconfidence, ideas of guilt and worthlessness, bleak and pessimistic
views of the future, ideas or acts of self-harm or suicide, disturbed
sleep, diminished appetite; p. 100). Thus, the Blue Book provides a fair
amount of guidance regarding which symptoms to look for and the types of
symptom configurations that are usually present in each of the specific
diagnoses. Note that we said "usually": The ICD--10 (WHO, 2016) system
provides the clinician with a certain amount of judgment to determine
which diagnosis or diagnoses best fit the clinical picture. Whenever you
have questions regarding a specific diagnosis, we recommend you consult
a diagnostic manual. What, then, are the various signs and symptoms in
Lynn's presentation? The following key experiences can be noted: feels a
sense of dread and helplessness; work productivity has suffered; drags
self to work; experiences anxiety, tension, fatigue, lethargy, and
anger; has concentration difficulties; has decreased physical activity;
and uses alcohol. With these general guidelines and list of signs and
symptoms in mind, one can see that Lynn's presentation certainly fits a
depressive disorder, specifically a major depressive disorder, although
she is able to get to work and there is not evidence at this point of
psychotic features (intact thought processes, lack of hallucinations or
delusions, good judgment,

Case 1---Lynn

general orientation, and adequate memory, although seeing her mother
walking into the room after her death should be explored). If there were
psychotic features, the ICD--10--CM code would be F32.3. The current
symptoms seem more suggestive of Major depressive disorder, single
episode of either a moderate (F32.1) or severe (F32.2) nature, with all
three of the primary symptoms being present and at least three of the
other listed symptoms. (It also is highly likely, given her
presentation, that lowered self-esteem and, possibly, feelings of guilt
or worthlessness are present, so those possibilities should be further
explored with her.) If depression, the possibility of Suicidal ideations
(R45.851) should be considered, especially in light of the bandage she
had on her hand, which could be an indication of self-harm (Intentional
self-harm by knife \[F78.1\]), in spite of her claims that it was an
accident. On the other hand, this constellation of symptoms could be an
anxiety disorder, given her general emotional discomfort and your
observations during the interview. Checking the Blue Book for symptoms
of anxiety, the following are relevant: presentation with anxiety and
tension and difficulty concentrating. Such behavioral observations are
an important source of psychological data. Again, though, there are
multiple possibilities. Lynn might have an anxiety disorder,
specifically, Generalized anxiety disorder (F41.1), or she might be
reacting more to particularly stressful environmental events, of short
duration (symptoms began within 1 month of a stressful event and have
not been present for more than 6 months), resulting in an adjustment
disorder. An adjustment disorder has a range of options: It could be an
adjustment disorder with no greater specification because no particular
symptom stands out as determinative (Adjustment disorder, unspecified
\[F43.20\]), it could be an adjustment disorder that presents with
depression as the primary symptom (Adjustment disorder with depressed
mood \[F43.21\]), or with anxiety as the primary symptom (F43.22), or
with mixed anxiety and depressed mood (F43.23). When one looks further
at the ICD--10--CM, one sees even more possibilities, with conduct being
the primary disturbance (F43.24), or with mixed disturbance in both
conduct and emotion (F43.25) or, even, a category that does not fit any
of those specific presentations, Adjustment disorder with other symptoms
(F43.29). A variety of other possible diagnoses, such as a Persistent
mood disorder (F34.x), Major depressive disorder, recurrent (F33.x), or
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (F42; reflecting her perseveration) are
possibilities, but you would need more evidence for such diagnoses. More
information is obviously needed. Given her current use of alcohol,
Alcohol abuse (F10.1x) is also a consideration. Although alcohol use
does not seem to be the primary problem, it often complicates, and
sometimes makes impossible, progress in psychotherapy (Hester

73

74

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

& Miller, 2002). As a result, it is important to consider Lynn's alcohol
intake carefully. As stated above but worth repeating, we currently have
no firm basis for making a differential diagnosis that best fits Lynn's
symptoms. All of our diagnostic statements to this point should be
considered as hypotheses that need to be ruled out. What we are doing is
considering all of the possible diagnostic categories on the basis of
the data we currently have. This process should lead us to think of the
appropriate questions that would provide answers necessary to understand
the person and to determine the best diagnosis. The fine distinctions
these diagnoses (or others not yet considered here) provide might be
crucial to the question of what is the best way to move forward, meaning
in Lynn's case, what kinds of therapeutic interventions would likely be
most helpful. As you can see, thinking carefully about the diagnosis
helps us to consider what the patient's individual and specific
experiences are like. Stated another way, we believe that a thorough
consideration of the differential diagnoses leads to a more complete and
accurate conceptualization of the person. That is, a consideration of
the possible diagnostic categories helps us develop the important
questions that will lead us to better understand the patient. And
understanding the patient is crucial to developing an intervention
approach that will most likely help Lynn achieve her goals. In Lynn's
case, therefore, we need to know the answer to questions such as, How
severe is her emotional disturbance? How pervasive is it in her life and
to what degree does it affect her ability to function, her
relationships, and her subjective sense of satisfaction in her life? Is
it always present or does it come and go? How long has she felt this
way, and was its onset something fairly sudden (more likely, then, to be
a reaction to some external event), or has it actually been coming on
for a long time? Or was an underlying emotional disturbance always
present, and it was just her immediate emotional state that was
precipitated by life events (possibly indicating a gradually developing
reaction to chronic stressors in her life or a stronger genetic
component, less triggered by her environment)? The answers to those
specific types of questions and following up whatever threads her
answers provide will help us differentiate between chronic and episodic
dysfunction, as well as mild, moderate, and severe disorders. The
various possibilities under the Adjustment disorders category would lead
us to ask questions about the exact nature of Lynn's emotional
reactions, from her subjective experience. How does she experience her
emotional reactions, and are they constant or changing? Do her problems
express themselves primarily in behavioral terms, or is there a
combination of emotional discomfort and disturbed or disturbing

Case 1---Lynn

behavior? Do her emotions seem to her to tend toward the constellation
of depressive or anxiety symptoms? We also know that she has difficulty
with concentration and focus. Does that provide us any diagnostic help?
Probably not by itself. Both depression and anxiety can result in
difficulties with concentration and focus, although for different
reasons. Certainly, exploring with her the nature of those difficulties
could be enlightening, both diagnostically and in understanding what
Lynn's experience is like. A number of other factors are important to
consider in trying to understand Lynn and determine the types of
interventions that would be most helpful. Lynn lives alone. At this
point, we do not know what that means. It could be a positive indication
of independence. It could mean that she is lonely, because she is
naturally a gregarious person and living alone does not provide her
sufficient interpersonal interaction. It could mean that she is lonely
because she has lived with other people her entire life and only
recently started living alone. If the latter, was that by her choice, or
was that decision made for her, such as in the breakup of her
relationship? Besides the external variables associated with living
alone, how does she experience it? Is it enjoyable for her or
undesirable? Does she look forward to being home alone or dread it, or
something in between? How did it happen that she started living alone,
and how long ago did that happen? The important point we are making is
that you should not make assumptions about what a seemingly simple fact
means for a patient. You cannot know what it means for her unless you
ask her about it. Living alone is a very good example of a situation
that we all have some reaction to, either because we now live alone, we
have lived alone, or we have avoided or sought living alone. Precisely
because it is such a common human experience, it is also extremely
important that we not let our own feelings and reactions to the idea of
living alone influence how we approach the issue with Lynn. We cannot
and must not assume that her experience will be at all like ours is or
has been. It is very important that we allow her to have her own
experience, that we not read our experience into hers, but that we
listen carefully and with empathy to how she experiences living alone.
Remember, as her psychologist, your goal is to understand her
experience. It is also important to maintain some degree of objectivity.
That means that you must avoid getting drawn too intimately into the
patient's story. One can understand and empathize with, without being
drawn into, the life experience being described. How one reacts to a
person who is describing difficult experiences is also important. You
should not overstate the amount of understanding you have of the
experiences being described. The more heart-wrenching those experiences
are, the less likely you are really to understand, even if you have had
similar experiences, as each

75

76

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

experience is unique and each individual is unique. Thus, be cautious of
saying you understand, for it creates the risk of appearing simply
shallow and superficial. The risk is that the people you are listening
to might well say in their own heads, "You can't possibly understand
what this was like for me," or question, "How can you possibly
understand, you are too (young, old, male, female) different from me?"
When that happens, the relationship experiences a rupture that may be
difficult to repair. We do know that family is involved in Lynn's case.
She has a positive relationship with her sister, although exactly how
close they are and how much of a support her sister is, we do not know
yet, except that her sister lives at some geographic distance. Lynn
appeared to have a special relationship with her mother. Her father was
tragically killed when she was 6, so her mother may have taken on an
especially important role for her. That can have numerous repercussions
and meanings, which should be explored. Her mother's death was likely a
major event for her and might have been a major contributing factor to
her current psychological problems. The quantity and quality of
psychological resources Lynn has, including interpersonal support, may
be central to determining whether the psychological problems she is
having are of a mild, moderate, or severe nature. Lynn's loss of a
romantic relationship within the past 5 months adds another layer of
emotional stress and may have primary implications for the supports
available to her and the resources she has to work with. The way in
which the relationship ended might also have had an impact on how she
feels about herself and the level of trust she believes she can have in
other people, perhaps meaning that her psychological and interpersonal
resources are even more limited. The possibility that she is grieving
the loss of social supports might provide useful data about whether her
emotional disturbance is more depression or anxiety. Some people react
to loss by feeling profoundly sad; others, by feeling extremely anxious
about how they will manage without the support they had. In addition,
people may react with anger, which is not considered a diagnostic
disorder unless it reflects a personality style, such as Antisocial
personality disorder (F60.2), or fits an R code in the ICD--10--CM
(i.e., signs and symptoms that do not have specific diagnoses), such as
Irritability and anger (R45.4), Hostility (R.45.5), Violent behavior
(R45.6), or anger without Homicidal ideation (R45.850). Certainly people
can be angry at partners who betray them, but they can also be angry at
loved ones who die and leave them. Lynn does still have some social
supports in the form of friends who live close to her and who check in
with her. However, the degree to which she is able to experience that
support, given her possible irritabil-

Case 1---Lynn

ity about their suggestions about her seeking help, is not clear. That
is also an issue worth exploring with her. The bit of data about Lynn's
reaction to her friends also has potential implications for her
involvement in therapy. If that is the reaction she had, does that mean
that she is involved in therapy with reluctance, despite her supposed
commitment? Against her better wishes? Was she indeed in therapy
primarily to "appease her sister?" Might she carry some animosity from
her friends toward you? Will she be resistant to any input or
suggestions made by you for those reasons? Does she carry negative
feelings about psychotherapy generally, given that she does not believe
the therapy she received after her father died was helpful? This is a
good example of one small bit of information that can have wide-ranging
implications. It means that it is crucial for you to be thinking beyond
the information of what is being said to the meaning or importance of
that information for the patient's life. We also know that Lynn's work
performance is an issue. Her worry about job security suggests anxiety,
but these kinds of stressors can also result in feelings of being
overwhelmed and depressed, which are prime issues for exploration with
Lynn. In addition to this myriad of specific questions in Lynn's case,
some basic questions should be a part of every assessment, whether
formal, with written report, or informal. What are the person's general
strengths? What does this person do well? Where has this person had
success in her life? In what ways does she feel good about herself and
her life? Beyond general strengths, what are the specific
strengths/skills that allow her to manage in her life? Every person
copes to some degree with stressors, even when generally the person
feels overwhelmed. What, specifically, does she do that enables her to
live her life with whatever level of productivity, personal satisfaction
and comfort, and interpersonal warmth exists? When hard times or
challenging situations come, what works to lessen the load or overcome
the troubles? A second major area of inquiry should concern the
vulnerabilities the person has. What experiences or situations cause him
or her the most pain? Where are the person's weaknesses? What are the
behaviors or reactions that seem to work least well in coping with
difficult circumstances? Where does the person feel most inadequate and
most overwhelmed? Although the first two general categories focus on the
individual himself/herself, the last one focuses on the environment.
What are the triggers in this person's life? What sets her off? What
makes her feel particularly inadequate and vulnerable? What has she
attempted to do in the past to cope with these situations and how do
they defeat her despite her best efforts?

77

78

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Closing Comments If the assessment is intended to answer specific
referral questions, a discussion of the person's strengths, weaknesses,
and triggers may provide the core of what can be said. If the purpose of
the assessment is an attempt to help the person cope more effectively,
some additional questions regarding the relationship between the three
categories might be helpful, such as, Can this person's strengths be
used in a different, more effective manner to help cope better, or are
new coping skills likely to be necessary? What can be done to minimize
the weaknesses that exist? Can the strengths be strengthened in a way
that will work or, are new skills necessary to overcome the weaknesses
that are present? How has the person conceptualized the trigger
situations in her life? Have the responses been inadequate or, in some
way, misplaced? In other words, are new skills or behaviors required or
can more effective use of current skills suffice? What does all of this
mean for the ultimate ICD--10--CM diagnosis? As we have stated, we do
not yet know what that ought to be, because we need additional data to
answer that question. At this point, your diagnostic thinking should
include Lynn's overall presentation and additional data you collect,
which may answer your question about whether she is more depressed or
anxious. Thus, it seems that the most likely central differential
diagnoses are Major depressive disorder, single episode, moderate
(F32.1); Generalized anxiety disorder (F41.1); or Adjustment disorder
with depressed mood (F43.21), or with anxiety as the primary symptom
(F43.22). Narrowing down the potential diagnoses helps you focus on the
questions that are most important for you to understand Lynn's
experiences.

Using the ICD--10--CM Case 2---John Smith

A

5

47-year-old African American man named John Smith is referred to you for
an assessment by his cardiologist, Dr. Jones, to identify underlying
psychological issues and for possible follow-up for psychological
treatment. She would like a full, formal assessment to ensure
completeness, but no other information is provided in the referral
letter. The exact language in the letter states, "Please conduct a
complete assessment to determine psychological diagnosis and possible
disposition and provide a report in two weeks. Thank you." You note in
your own mind that you have received numerous referrals from Dr. Jones
in the past without a great deal of specificity. You have taken
seriously the notion to train your referral sources to ask more specific
questions, but you have been unsuccessful with Dr. Jones, as she has
indicated in the past that she sometimes is too busy to provide patient
information in the referral, as you can find the information in the
patient's chart. You contact her office and are told that she is out of
town at a conference and will not be back for a week.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-006 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

79

80

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

It is even possible that Dr. Jones's nurse drafted the letter. You call
the cardiologist's office to talk with the nurse practitioner, and sure
enough, she does not know exactly what Dr. Jones would like to know. So,
as sometimes is the case, you will need to make the best of the limited
information that you have. You could, on the basis of that limited
(inadequate) information, decline the referral, but if you work in a
medical setting and react that way, you will probably have a difficult
time getting enough referrals to earn a living. What might you do to
make the best of this situation? You do know that your prospective
evaluee is hospitalized. Therefore, the first step might be to go to the
hospital and read through his chart, which might provide you not only
with useful psychological information but also some medical history that
will likely be helpful to know, given that the primary diagnosis of this
person has to do with his heart. You find out from your review of
Mr. Smith's chart that his diagnosis according to the Clinical
Modification of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases
and Related Health Problems (ICD--10--CM; National Center for Health
Statistics, 2015) is Unstable angina (I20.0). You have worked with
cardiac patients in the past. In fact, you did a rotation during your
postdoctoral training year in an inpatient cardiology unit. But you have
not worked with a patient with this specific diagnosis yet. That raises
a question of limits of competence, which we discuss in Chapter 7, this
volume. You further discover that Mr. Smith is a chemist who works in
the research section of a local large company that, among other
products, manufactures antifungal agents for use in agriculture. The
medical chart indicates that Mr. Smith experiences considerable
job-related stress, although the exact nature of the stress is not
clear. You are also surprised to learn that the company he works for is
the same company your significant other's brother works for. The chart
provides some personal history. Mr. Smith grew up in a rural area of the
country, the son of a high school chemistry teacher. He attended the
state university in his home state and then went to California Institute
of Technology (Cal Tech) for graduate school. He is married and has
three children living at home. Medically, he began having chest pain for
the first time 2 months ago. Prior to that time, he had not experienced
any symptoms and, in fact, had felt quite healthy, although his doctor
told him that his blood sugars were borderline. He put off seeing his
physician, because he thought the pain he was having was either
indigestion or a result of stress-related anxiety, until the pain became
fairly severe 2 days before his hospitalization. At that time, he called
his primary care physician's office and, on the basis of the nature and
severity of the symptoms, they called 911 and had Mr. Smith taken to the
emergency department of

Case 2---John Smith

the local hospital. He was then admitted to the cardiology unit. He is
slightly overweight, had nonfasting blood sugars of 120, heart rate of
85, blood pressure of 150/90, but he is otherwise healthy. The chart
provides little other information that is relevant to your assessment.
It provides you with no indication of the specific questions the
cardiologist might have.

Assessment Considerations Given this limited information, what is it
that we know about Mr. Smith, and what clinical issues or questions are
raised? The first issue is that this is, obviously, a very different
type of referral from that discussed in Chapter 4. It is not a referral
for psychotherapy (at least not initially), but specifically for an
assessment. We very purposely included such a case because, although not
every psychologist engages in formal psycho­ logical testing, testing and
psychological assessment is one of the services psychologists offer that
is unique to our profession. Very little information was provided with
the referral letter, leaving you at a decided disadvantaged (as we
discussed in Chapter 3). It is difficult to answer questions completely
and accurately when one does not know what the questions are. The first
step is to seek as much background information as possible, although in
some cases, such as this one, it might be difficult to determine exactly
why a referral is being made. When that is the situation, one does the
best that one can. That includes, in particular, developing one's own
set of referral questions, that is, your developing sense of what needs
to be addressed as you collect data about the potential reasons someone
has been referred for a psychological assessment. The best source of
such information would be the patient himself or herself. In this case,
you would gradually, through a variety of data sources, begin to develop
a sense of who Mr. Smith is, what his concerns or questions or fears
are, and the impact those issues have on his life. From there,
developing a set of implied referral questions is often not so complex a
process. A good starting point in a health psychology context is with
the medical diagnosis. The more one knows about the medical aspects of
the person's problems, the more conversant one can be with the language
medical professionals use, and the more one is likely to have some
understanding of what the subjective experience of the patient might be.
Hence, consulting with a decent general text in internal medicine that
includes a review of cardiology might be beneficial (see, e.g., Wiener,
Fauci, Braunwald, Kasper, & Hauser, 2012). Working in a medical setting
does not require

81

82

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

that one become knowledgeable at the level of a physician or a nurse,
but if the psychologist does not have curiosity about the kinds of
issues medical professionals face and the kinds of experiences medical
patients have, working in such a setting is probably not a good fit. In
this case, as in many situations, start with a review of the available
data, especially the patient's chart. Without knowing the referral
questions, it is difficult to know what exactly one should be looking
for. A medical chart would be full of medical test data (e.g., lab
values, EKG, echocardiogram), as well as nursing notes that have to do
with vital signs (temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, respiration
rate), eating schedule, and so on. Much of that is not particularly
relevant for a psychologist, but sometimes it contains information that
is relevant to the particular concerns of the patient. In particular,
nursing notes are often a rich source of information about the
day-to-day functioning and psychological conditions of medical
inpatients. So, at least scanning the nursing notes is recommended. One
might also hope (and expect) that the progress notes of the physician or
physicians would contain information about why a referral to a
psychologist was considered. A conversation with the charge nurse on the
unit or with the nurse who has provided the most care for Mr. Smith
might also be helpful, but confidentiality considerations play an
important role, which we examine more fully in Chapter 7. There is
another issue to consider before we start a discussion of the process of
undertaking an assessment. Your significant other's brother (let's call
him Mark) works in the same company as Mr. Smith. That raises an ethical
consideration that we consider in more detail in Chapter 7. At this
point, if you believe there is no conflict of interest or other reason
for you to reject the referral, the next step would be a conversation
with Mr. Smith about whether he thinks this presents a prohibitive
conflict of interest. In a hospital setting, it is helpful to check with
the nursing staff first to see what the patient's schedule might be, to
be sure he is available. In addition, when working in an outpatient
setting, it is reasonable to assume that a person coming to see you does
so voluntarily and with certain goals (or, at least, thoughts on what
might be helpful about the process). You cannot necessarily assume that
in an inpatient setting. So, the first task is a discussion with
Mr. Smith about whether he wants to see you. Such a conversation might
provide a great deal of information about Mr. Smith's current situation,
emotional state, and goals. Or it might not. It might take more
questioning and discussion to find out what Mr. Smith's views and goals
are. Whichever way the discussion goes, however, you have collected
useful information about Mr. Smith. You know that he is either a willing
and enthusiastic participant in an assessment process or he is
reluctant, closed, cautious, or suspicious or downright resistant. Now,
in addition to the information you have

Case 2---John Smith

on his medical condition and something of his work situation and its
potential relationship to his angina, you have information about how he
relates to you, to Dr. Jones, and to the referral. That opens three
potential avenues (his medical status, his work status, and his
interactive ability) for discussion with Mr. Smith. Which of those three
paths you take depends on a number of factors and is beyond the scope of
this text. Most readers will have had coursework in interviewing before
reading this book or will have such coursework soon. If not, check
Chapter 10, this volume, for possible resources in the area to consult,
remembering that in addition to consulting the psychological literature,
both in the form of journal articles and books, one needs to receive
supervision in the provision of virtually any psychological service from
a competent supervisor to be adept at providing that psychological
service. Let us now flesh out the data we have available to decide how
best to proceed with the assessment process and with the conclusions
regarding diagnosis and ultimate disposition. In Mr. Smith's case, you
have been responsible for seeking out the information, as very little of
it was forthcoming easily. So, let us assume the following information,
based on your review of the medical chart, your interview with
Mr. Smith, and possibly, collateral interviews (e.g., with Mr. Smith's
family members, work colleagues, work supervisors). (Collateral
interviews are discussed further in Chapter 7.) So, who is Mr. Smith? He
tells you about growing up in the rural South, the third of four
children of a high school chemistry teacher and a stay-at-home mother.
The family was quite close, although all of the children felt the high
expectations placed on them by their parents. Grandparents on both sides
had been lower middle-class farmers, so his father had worked very hard
to put himself through college to become a teacher. Mr. Smith had always
felt the pressure of living up to his father's expectation and has
generally been successful in doing so, graduating with honors from his
state university and receiving a masters' degree from Cal Tech, although
he always feared that his acceptance and success there was in part a
function of affirmative action rather than his abilities, a notion he
reacts to with some irritability. Mr. Smith is in a committed gay
relationship, and he and his partner have three adopted children, ages
8, 10, and 17. If you assumed up to this point that married with
children meant a heterosexual relationship with biological children,
consider what that says about your biases. His partner works as a police
officer. Together, their income is well within the middle class, but
they have very high expectations for their three children and the cost
of private schools is very high, so they are feeling some financial
stress. Both he and his partner experience some discrimination, both
because of their sexual orientation and their ethnic backgrounds. In
addition, although his partner's job is not a 9-to-5 job, he is
frequently

83

84

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

called in for emergencies. They have had some struggles about work hours
and finding someone to be responsible for the two younger children
without relying too much on the 17-year-old, which has resulted in some
difficult interactions between him and his partner and between the two
of them and their oldest child. Mr. Smith has been very successful
working for All Chemical Com­ pany; he has worked there for 6 years,
following two previous positions in a different city. He has a good
working relationship with his boss, although he tends to feel inferior
to him, who is a doctorally trained chemist and whom Mr. Smith views as
a genius. Mr. Smith has been working on a new chemical and is feeling a
great deal of pressure because his boss believes that a rival company is
working on a similar, though not identical, chemical. His boss believes
that the company that brings its product to the market first is likely
to have a significant advantage in market share. Mr. Smith has always
worked very long hours, believing that he had to be better than most to
be considered their equal. Recently, he has felt that even longer hours
are required, so he typically leaves their home before 7:00 a.m. and is
usually not home until around 9:00 p.m. Mr. Smith presented as very
interactive, responsive, and cooperative with the interview process. He
appeared to be very bright, on more than one occasion answering the
question before you completed it---and doing so correctly, that is, he
was able to correctly understand the intent of your question before you
finished asking it. That style also revealed to you a certain degree of
impatience. He talked more rapidly than the average person and seemed
jittery. As he discussed his work situation in particular, it was
evident that he feels considerable stress, but sometimes both his
financial condition and his social interactions are also difficult for
him. Last, Mr. Smith is obviously concerned about his health. He does
not know at this point what implications for lifestyle and workload his
heart disease will have, and that is worrisome for him. From the
interview, what do you now know about Mr. Smith? You know about his
supportive family with high standards, to which Mr. Smith has reacted
with some underlying feelings of inadequacy. His current family life is
also supportive and, from Mr. Smith's perspective, very successful but
not without its stresses, as well. He is very successful professionally,
in large part as a result of his competence but also because of his work
ethic. His general intellectual and interpersonal competence means that
he is able to deal with most situations in his life very effectively,
although his underlying feelings of inadequacy are a challenge for him.
He denies use of alcohol or drugs, which is supported by the level of
productivity he demonstrates in a job that is intellectually
challenging. Given this set of facts, what additional data would you
want? Mr. Smith has not obtained psychological services in the past, so
there are no psychological records to seek. You have had access to the
medical

Case 2---John Smith

records. Other records, such as educational records, are unlikely to add
much to this clinical picture and have the additional problems of
confidentiality and logistics in obtaining them. Likewise, there is no
reason to believe, given the information that you have, that collateral
interviews would add much useful information. That leaves psychological
test data, which can be obtained without great difficulty. What testing
data might you want? A large number of questions do not need to be
answered, so a large battery of tests probably is neither necessary nor
worth the cost. Given his presentation during the interview and his
level of vocational success, it is unlikely that taking the time to
administer a general test of intelligence would be worthwhile and
provide useful information to the cardiologist. You would likely find
out what you have already concluded. Mr. Smith is considerably brighter
than average. No major psychological disorders are present, although it
might be helpful to get confirmation of that hypothesis from
psychological test data. So, we would probably want to get a general
test of psychological disorders, such as the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory---2 (MMPI--2) or the Personality Assessment
Inventory (PAI; Morey, 1991). Nothing indicates an underlying
personality disorder, which is helpful because no tests are available
that provide reliable and valid diagnostic impressions for personality
disorders. However, especially in a person without major psychological
dysfunction, a measure of normal personality function, such as the NEO
Personality Inventory--III (NEO-PI-III; Costa & McCrae, 2005), the
California Personality Inventory---Revised (CPI--R; Gough, 1987), or the
16-PF might be instructive. A projective test like the Thematic
Apperception Test (TAT; Murray, 1943) or the Rorschach (Rorschach, 1927)
might also provide useful personality information, although you would
need to ask yourself whether the time required for administration and
scoring would provide sufficient reliable information, in addition to
what you already know or the other tests will provide you, to be worth
the expense involved in gathering such information (see, e.g., Wood,
Nezworski, Lilienfeld, & Garb, 2003). Given the set of circumstances
described in this case, we would likely start with the MMPI--2, as it
provides a fairly broad-based test of psychological dysfunction. It
could provide value just in case something important was missed in the
file review and interview that indicates a psychological disorder is in
fact present. The PAI is somewhat more closely aligned with current
taxonomies, such as the ICD--10 and the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013), but in the absence of any clear diagnostic
hypothesis, the breadth of the MMPI--2 might cover more ground. In this
case, the shorter Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory---
Restructured Clinical (MMPI--RC; Tellegen et al., 2003) is also an
option.

85

86

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

On the other hand, our experience is that the MMPI--2 or MMPI--RC and
the PAI often provide slightly different information. Given that little
expense is involved in either test, if Mr. Smith is cooperative and
willing to take both tests, it might make sense to administer both to
him. Last, we would administer a test of normal personality to obtain a
better sense than tests of pathology provide on the coping styles a
person uses. In addition, in our experience the two types of tests often
are somewhat mutually exclusive, in the sense that the test of normal
personality often adds little helpful information when a great deal of
pathology is present (i.e., when there is considerable elevation on the
profiles of the MMPI--2 and/or the PAI). Conversely, when relatively
little pathology is present, such that the MMPI--2 or the PAI have
little, if any, elevation and provide limited data, the test of normal
personality can be extremely rich in information. One author of this
text, although trained in the use of the CPI--R, began to use the
NEO-PI-R because it reflects the mostly widely accepted and researched
model of personality, the five-factor model (McCrae & Costa, 1987;
Wiggins, 1996) and found the test extremely beneficial.

Diagnostic Considerations In this situation, we encourage you to go
through the same process of hypothesis generation, data collection, and
decision making as we did in the case described in Chapter 4. Now we
consider the information we have and need to make a diagnosis. Without
the benefit of the psychological test data, but assuming accuracy of the
information we have gathered during the clinical interview, what
implications do the data we have acquired have in determining an
ICD--10--CM diagnosis---and what implications do the diagnostic
considerations have for the kinds of data you might look for in the
psychological tests? First, on the basis of medical data, you know that
Mr. Smith has a diagnosis of Unstable angina (I20.0). What are the
psychological symptoms that seem to be most important? You know that he
is under considerable stress---job, financial, and family related---and
feels burdened by that stress. He also appears to have feelings of
inadequacy and inferiority. He reports being worried about his health.
He presents as somewhat jittery, mildly hyperactive, and mildly
impatient. Although it would be natural for such a person to feel some
depression, and ruling out depression is one purpose of giving a test
like the MMPI--2 or the PAI, Mr. Smith appears to present more with
anxiety than depression. His anxiety does not appear to be debilitating,
as he has been able to cope reasonably well and continues to be
productive at work. At the

Case 2---John Smith

same time, it may well be that his anxiety is a contributing factor to
his vascular occlusions, although you cannot know whether the
relationship is causal. You do know (or would learn through reading and
experience if you are competent to take on a referral such as this) that
psychological distress is a significant risk factor for heart disease
(Smith & Ruiz, 2002; Stansfeld, Fuhrer, Shipley, & Marmot, 2002). No
evidence indicates, and you have no reason to speculate, that cognitive
dysfunction is related to cardiac insufficiency (Vascular dementia;
F01.50), but you might keep this tucked in the back of your mind as a
future possibility (Battistin & Cagnin, 2010). You know that he is
concerned about his health, so a diagnosis of a Mood disorder due to
known physiological condition (F06.3; here, a blockage of one or more
coronary arteries) is a possibility, although Anxiety disorder due to
known physiological condition (F06.4) may be more likely, given his
presentation. Nothing indicates Alcohol abuse (F10.1) or Alcohol
dependency (F10.2), and Mr. Smith denies they are relevant, although
given the prevalence of self-medication using alcohol or drugs in
individuals with depression or anxiety, those diagnoses should always be
considered. Thus far, you have a medical diagnosis of Unstable angina
(I20.0) and a possible mental health diagnosis of Anxiety disorder due
to known physiological condition (F06.4), although the latter appears to
be a secondary diagnosis, as the primary emotional distress comes not
from his medical condition, but from his work and, somewhat less so,
from his social life. Therefore, a number of diagnostic categories are
possibilities as the primary psychological diagnosis, given the symptoms
described. Mr. Smith could have Generalized anxiety disorder (F41.1),
given indications of lack of self-confidence and emotional distress
since childhood, along with apprehension and motor tension, symptoms
listed in the Blue Book (World Health Organization, 1993, p. 116). Or,
some degree of depression may be present, which additional interviewing
or the testing data might reveal and which could result in a diagnosis
of Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder (F41.2) or, even, an Other
mixed anxiety disorder (F41.3), depending on whether other
anxiety-related symptoms are discovered through additional interviewing
or testing, or an Anxiety disorder, unspecified (F41.9). Given his
general level of productivity and emotional stability, however, it might
be that his current distress is primarily a result of the stressors he
is experiencing in his life. The degree of stress does not appear to be
sufficient to warrant a diagnosis of Acute stress reaction (F43.0) or
Posttraumatic stress disorder (F43.1), given that the level of stress in
those disorders is usually of an overwhelming degree, such as threat to
life or psychological integrity. Mr. Smith could well be experiencing an
Adjustment disorder (F43.2), however, which can result from a "period of
adaptation to the consequences of a stressful life event (including the
presence or

87

88

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

possibility of serious physical illness)" (Blue Book, p. 121). In the
case of an adjustment disorder, the general considerations we discussed
above, strengths, weaknesses, and triggers, will be particularly
crucial, given the Blue Book statement: Individual predisposition or
vulnerability plays a greater role in the risk of occurrence and shaping
of the manifestations of adjustment disorders than it does in the other
conditions in F43.--, but it is nevertheless assumed that the condition
would not have arisen without the stressor. (p. 121)

The Blue Book makes a similar point about the importance of considering
broader issues in stating, "Diagnosis depends on a careful evaluation of
the relationship between (a) form, content, and severity of symptoms;
(b) previous history and personality; and (c) stressful event,
situation, or life crisis" (p. 121). Psychological testing data might be
particularly useful in providing such broader perspectives. Although
multiple questions are to be answered before a final diagnosis can be
reached, given the data we have, our primary psychological working
diagnosis would be Generalized anxiety disorder (F41.1), given
Mr. Smith's current level of anxiety and long-standing issues with
selfesteem and emotional distress. At this point in the process, one
should think about a working diagnosis as a starting point, from which
questions arise, the answers to which lead to the final diagnosis. So
given what you know, do you agree with our working diagnosis or do you
have other potential diagnoses that you are considering?

Closing Comments This chapter has provided you with numerous questions
that would potentially be explored in a thorough assessment of this
patient. Once that thorough assessment is completed, you will be able to
formulate a final diagnosis. This chapter also highlighted a number of
issues regarding consultation and referral, in addition to the process
of assessment and diagnosis. Regardless of the location of your
practice, whether it is an independent practice or in an integrated
health center, it is critical for you to develop positive working
relationships and an ability to professionally consult with your
colleagues from other professions.

Using the ICD--10--CM Case 3---Anne Sanchez

Y

6

ou recently began your practice in a small city after having been
licensed as a psychologist 3 years ago. After working in a hospital in a
much larger city, you and your life partner decided that you wanted to
move to a smaller town with a slower pace of life. You appreciate the
relationships you have already been able to build with members of the
health care community, and you have hospital privileges at the closest
hospital, which is about 20 minutes away from your office. You are one
of three psychologists in town and the three of you are on good terms,
are helpful to one another, and consult regularly with each other. You
receive a referral from an attorney who works at a resource center for
indigent and homeless individuals. The attorney refers Anne Sanchez, a
36-year-old, single, Mexican American woman. Ms. Sanchez was homeless
for several years and recently has been living in her mother's converted
garage in your town. An evaluation was requested to determine
specifically if Ms. Sanchez has a mental disability

http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-007 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

89

90

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

resulting in functional impairment, which might qualify her for federal
supplemental income programs. Ms. Sanchez is bilingual, fluent in
English and Spanish, having grown up in a family that primarily spoke
Spanish but attended a school where English was used. Ms. Sanchez's
presenting complaints were constant sadness, difficulty concentrating,
and poor ability to report facts accurately. She complained of physical
problems, including fatigue and pain in her legs, arms, and hands. She
also reported that voices tell her to harm herself by running onto the
freeway. She stated that when the voices become persistent, she takes at
least two and sometimes more sleeping pills to fall asleep as a way of
coping, because she also has a strong desire to live. Ms. Sanchez has an
extended history of polysubstance abuse (cocaine, alcohol). However, she
stated that she has not used alcohol or cocaine for more than 2 years,
which was corroborated by her physician, Dr. Winters. Ms. Sanchez
explained that about 2.5 years ago, she went to a substance abuse
treatment program and feels committed to using the techniques and
incorporating the attitudes she learned there. Currently, she reported
feeling stress due to her living situation and lack of energy that
impairs her functioning. She described having few friends and does not
trust others, because of past experiences of being harmed by people with
whom she had close relationships. Ms. Sanchez reported sleeping most
afternoons as a way to pass time and cope with her bad moods. She
expressed suicidal ideation but did not have intent or a plan and
described a strong will to live and to attempt to reunite with her
children. Ms. Sanchez was often uncertain about exact dates or years
when events actually occurred. She was born in a neighboring town
approximately 100 miles away from where she now lives. She has never
traveled far out of the local area. Ms. Sanchez is the middle child,
initially with two brothers and two sisters. One brother died in a car
accident when Ms. Sanchez was 12 years old, and a sister was found dead
in her own apartment about a year ago. There was speculation of a
purposeful drug overdose, but there was no note, and her sister's death
was ruled an accidental drug overdose. Ms. Sanchez has a son (age 14)
and a daughter (age 18). She lost custody of her children 12 years ago
because of drug and alcohol problems; at that time, she went to jail for
possession of cocaine. Her father, an electrician, died of a heart
attack when she was 16 years old. She recounted tearfully that his death
was very difficult for her. Ms. Sanchez described her mother as distant,
uninvolved, and having difficulty providing for the family once her
father died. She reported that she turned to prostitution after her
father's death as a way of providing income for her family, sometimes
with men as the customer and

Case 3---Anne Sanchez

sometimes, women. It was, simply, a source of badly needed income for
her and her family. She left high school at the start of her senior year
to take care of her first child. She was uncertain about the identity of
the father of her child. She estimated that she started drinking heavily
in her teens after her father died and started using drugs in her 20s.
She reported being sexually molested as a teenager by relatives,
including an uncle and a female family friend. She described a suicide
attempt, "taking a lot of pills," but she was vague about when that
happened (either in her late 20s or early 30s) and was vague in
describing what she wanted to have happen. In her early 20s, Ms. Sanchez
received her GED, which allowed her to enter community college and also
to attend cosmetology school. However, she did not finish her community
college degree and completed only three classes at cosmetology school.
Previous employment included working in a beauty shop washing hair and
scheduling appointments, working at a preschool as a child care worker,
and most recently as a telemarketer. She reported not being employed
during the past year. She was dismayed by her work history and reported
that her substance use significantly interfered with her ability to find
work, and she continued to believe that she had trouble finding work
because of her former substance use, although she was vague about the
connection. Ms. Sanchez's physical and medical history includes falling
and hitting her head on a rock when she was 4 years old. She reported
frequent childhood nosebleeds and several head injuries from domestic
violence, as well as a broken arm and a fractured nose. She reported
being involved in violent relationships with her partners, as well as
her pimp. She also stated that she had sustained a head injury in her
20s when she was pregnant and her partner hit her with a metal cane,
knocking her unconscious and resulting in headaches for the following
year. She described another instance of being beaten by the same
boyfriend and pointed to a scar on her forehead, which she said was
caused by his ring. Currently, she reports high blood pressure, fatigue,
and headaches, in addition to pain throughout her body. Medical records
indicate a long-standing history of dysthymia. She is currently taking
medication for depression and fibromyalgia. Her medications include
tramadol (25 mg qid \[four times a day\]), duloxetine (20 mg bid \[twice
a day\]), and gabapentin (300 mg tid \[three times a day\]). You have
decided to give Ms. Sanchez a battery of tests to answer the referral
question. During the testing, Ms. Sanchez was friendly, cooperative, and
motivated. It took three sessions to complete the testing, and each
session lasted approximately three hours. Ms. Sanchez rescheduled one
session because of feeling ill. She appeared neatly groomed, wearing

91

92

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

casual attire during the first testing session. During the second
testing session, she wore a blouse with only the middle button buttoned,
exposing a part of her breasts. During the third session, she wore short
shorts and a tank top. During the session, Ms. Sanchez appeared oriented
to person, place, and time and thought content was appropriate to
affect. During the first testing session, her comments were responsive,
although you noticed it was challenging to develop an effective
professional relationship with her because she was slightly withdrawn
and, especially initially, she provided monosyllabic responses to
questions. During the second and third sessions, she was increasingly
verbally responsive to your comments, questions, and directions,
although she also became more flirtatious in her interactions with you.
Ms. Sanchez did state that during the administration of the Wechsler
Adult Intelligence Scale---Fourth Edition (WAIS--IV; Wechsler, 2008),
she heard a voice telling her not to listen to your instructions and
commented on your attractiveness. She stated that although she tried to
block out the voice, it was difficult for her to concentrate. You
provided frequent breaks during the testing in an attempt to maintain an
acceptable level of attention, concentration, and performance.
Ms. Sanchez's affect was labile during the three testing sessions,
ranging from depressed and tearful to euthymic. At the beginning of the
first testing session and during some subtests of the WAIS---IV when she
experienced difficulty, Ms. Sanchez was very tearful. In addition, she
was tearful recounting her personal history in the second session.
During all sessions, she complained of pain in her arms, hands, and legs
and appeared to experience pain and walk with difficulty during breaks
in testing.

Psychological Testing You wanted to measure both personality and
cognitive functioning. Therefore, you administered the following tests:
Beck Depression Inventory---II (BDI--II; Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), ❚❚
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory---2 (MMPI--2; Butcher,
Dahlstrom, Graham, Tellegen, & Kaemmer, 1989), ❚❚ Repeatable Battery for
the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS Update; Randolph,
2012), ❚❚ Trailmaking Test A and B (Army Individual Test Battery, 1944;
Reitan & Wolfson, 1993), ❚❚

Case 3---Anne Sanchez

❚❚ ❚❚

WAIS--IV, and Logical Memory I & II and Designs I & II from the Wechsler
Memory Scales---Fourth Edition (WMS--IV; Wechsler, 2009).

Test Results GENERAL INTELLECTUAL FUNCTIONING Ms. Sanchez's WAIS--IV
Full Scale IQ measured at 75 (5th percentile), which is within the
borderline range of intellectual functioning. She obtained a scaled
score of 80 on the Verbal Comprehension subscales, which measure general
verbal abilities and abstract verbal reasoning (9th percentile),
although her perceptual reasoning score was 70 (2nd percentile). Her
performance was found to be lower than the IQ in the psychological
record approximately four years ago, which was estimated to be in the
Low Average Range, based on the Shipley Institute of Living Scale
(Shipley-2). Although her overall IQ was low, her areas of relative
strength were in verbal comprehension and expression. Ms. Sanchez had
more difficulty with visuospatial tasks, including both visual
comprehension and reasoning.

COGNITIVE FUNCTIONING On the RBANS, which is a brief screen of cognitive
functioning, Ms. Sanchez displayed performance in the borderline range,
consistent with her intellectual abilities, in attention and
concentration, immediate and delayed verbal memory abilities, and
picture naming. She showed somewhat more impairment (at or below the 2nd
percentile) in constructional abilities, including fine motor skills,
visual perception, and visual memory. On the Logical Memory I & II of
the WMS--IV, Ms. Sanchez scored in the low average range of performance,
slightly higher than expected, given her general intellectual level. On
the Designs subtest, her performance was within the impaired range (1st
percentile) in both immediate and delayed memory, with some improvement
in recognition memory (5th percentile), although not statistically
significantly higher than immediate and delayed memory and still within
the borderline range of performance. On measures of executive
functioning, she consistently had difficulties. On both the Matrix
Reasoning and Visual Puzzles subtests of the WAIS--IV, she scored below
the 1st percentile. On the Trailmaking Test B, a measure of mental
flexibility and the ability to understand the essential nature of a
problem-solving task, she also scored below the 1st percentile.

93

94

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

PERSONALITY/EMOTIONAL FACTORS The validity indicators on the MMPI--2
reflected a significant degree of emotional distress, although still
within the range considered psychometrically valid. A scale that can
reflect the degree of psychological resources available to deal with
problems was very low. The scale measuring unusual experiences was high,
although in a range that can be reflective more of general distress than
an exaggeration of the problems present. Other validity scales that
reflect an attempt to exaggerate or simulate, or indicate a specific
tendency to respond in the positive to questions about psychopathology
or to respond randomly, were not elevated. As a result, the validity of
the testing results was adequate. The highest clinical scale reflected
strong feelings of depression, supported by her score of 33 on the
BDI--II. The MMPI--2 codetype reflected a depressed person who is
ruminatively introspective and evidences excessive indecision, doubts,
and worry. She is likely to be obsessional about her own inadequacies
and feels overwhelmed and extremely vulnerable. She may get so caught up
in her internal thoughts, which can be not only intrusive but also
disorganized, that she gets behaviorally paralyzed. It is not surprising
that she has difficulty concentrating, in part perhaps because she
easily becomes distracted by her own thinking. She likely experiences
little pleasure from a life that is very challenging to her. Suicidality
is always a major concern for a person with this type of profile.
Ms. Sanchez probably has a tendency to overreact to minor stressors with
agitation, guilt, and feelings of insecurity and inadequacy. She seems
to have difficulty advocating for herself, instead responding to others
with passivity and feelings of inferiority, increasing the likelihood
that she will be taken advantage of. Her history of being exploited by
others is reflected in mild elevation on the scale that measures
paranoid thinking, reflecting her suspicion and mistrust of others. She
admits to being socially isolated, and she presents as lacking in
effective social skills. Perhaps because of her history of exploitative
and ineffective interpersonal relationships, she is likely a person who
feels lonely even when she is around others. The scale that can reflect
psychotic thinking showed some degree of elevation. Given the
multidimensional nature of that scale, the noted elevation could be an
indication of the auditory hallucinations Ms. Sanchez periodically
experiences, as well as a general sense of social alienation; alienation
from herself; and her fears of losing control, both interpersonally and
over her own internal life. A scale that measures concerns about
physical health also showed mild elevation, which may reflect an attempt
to manage her anxieties through focusing on physical dysfunction,
although those attempts do not appear to be successful.

Case 3---Anne Sanchez

Assessment Considerations This case is quite different from the other
two cases, especially John Smith (see Chapter 5, this volume), because
we already have a considerable amount of information, even though not as
much as would be ideal. We know the purpose and goal of this assessment
because they were stated clearly in the referral from the attorney. So
the goal, in this case, would be to write a formal report for the
referring attorney with specific answers to the question posed. The
first question that should occur to you is, What are the sources of
information you should look for to answer the referral question? If you
need to, look back at our discussion of sources of information in
Chapter 3. Certainly, you would want to do a fairly extensive clinical
interview. That is the core of any assessment process, whether formal,
which usually ends with a written report, or informal, as part of a
psychotherapeutic assessment process. Observing the person's behaviors
and, perhaps, asking specific questions regarding mentation are integral
parts of any interview, so those two sources of data will certainly be
included. The referral was made to you as a psychologist, so use of
psychological tests, one of the unique areas of practice for
psychologists, will also be important, in our opinion. As is typical in
a referral from an attorney, multiple records are available: medical,
prison, legal, and psychological. At this point we might defer a
decision about collateral interviews. The two most important questions
here are, Whom might you interview? and, What specific information would
you hope to get from collateral sources? Those questions should also be
answered before proceeding with any collateral interviews. Given that
the case, as provided, includes a considerable amount of test data, a
number of questions arise about the tests used. Normally, you would want
to have answers to the questions we discuss below before you even
consider which tests to administer. What types of tests are relevant in
this case? The term mental impairment is pretty nonspecific. If that is
as specific as the referral question is, you need to think of a number
of possibilities. First, Ms. Sanchez could have limited intellectual
ability, which makes it difficult for her to function independently. To
find that out, a test of intellectual functioning would be appropriate.
Or she could be experiencing some kind of acquired brain dysfunction,
such as a disease that affects brain tissue; common examples would be a
brain tumor or a cerebral vascular accident (stroke) or a brain injury,
such as a head trauma. We do have evidence from her medical record of a
number of head injuries. What we do not know with much specificity is
how severe any damage to her brain might have been, whether there were
any behavioral or cognitive sequelae (results or consequences), and how
long term any such effects may have been.

95

96

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Sometimes, although not always, a closer review of medical records can
provide some answers, but rarely do medical records provide much in the
way of psychological (cognitive, emotional, behavioral) information
regarding head injuries. Beyond the records, tests that evaluate brain
functioning, that is, neuropsychological tests, would provide helpful
information. The case description suggests that Ms. Sanchez reports
reported feelings of sadness and lack of energy, with some suicidal
ideation, stress, difficulty concentrating, and poor memory. The latter
two cognitive symptoms, which might affect her abilities to function
independently, could be the result of some kind of brain dysfunction, or
they could also be the result of stress and depression. So, some kind of
measure of her psychological functioning, that is, personality testing,
is indicated. We do not know the exact nature of her psychological
issues, so a test that measures a broad range of psychological
dysfunction would be most useful. Ms. Sanchez goes on to report auditory
hallucinations, so a personality test that measures psychotic symptoms
would be important. She also complains of vague symptoms of fatigue and
pain. A number of medical illnesses can cause such symptoms, but it is
also the case that people who want to present in an overly negative
manner, in this case possibly as a means of gaining a financial
advantage by qualifying for a federal supplemental income program, can
also present with vague symptoms of fatigue and pain. So, measures that
evaluate the tendency to exaggerate or simulate psychological or
physical symptoms would be essential, as well as making sure that she
has had a recent assessment by a physician to determine the current
medical contributions to such symptoms. She also reports a history of
polysubstance abuse, so some measure of chemical dependency is
necessary, even though she reports being sober for more than 2 years.
The fact that she is experiencing stress in her life increases the risk
that she might return to the use of chemicals as a means of
self-medication. It is important that as a professional psychologist you
neither make assumptions about people before you have collected the
requisite data nor accept what others report to you at face value. It is
not that you should not trust others but that you need to verify
everything you possibly can. If you do not, at some point in your career
you will be caught assuming something that is not true. At best, it will
be embarrassing to you; at worst, it will be harmful to those you work
with. So, at this point you are thinking that you want measures of
intellectual function, personality dysfunction, neuropsychological
functioning, and chemical dependency. You know one thing from
observations during the interview, which is rich with possible causes:
Ms. Sanchez had difficulty reporting facts accurately. You will want to
consider (i.e., collect data about) a number of etiologies for such a
presentation,

Case 3---Anne Sanchez

including psychotic thinking, memory difficulties, lack of verbal skill,
or lack of engagement in the assessment process. That is a fairly
inclusive list of problems to evaluate and should provide the basis to
answer the referral question. The next question you should ask yourself
is whether you are the appropriate person to undertake this assessment,
and if yes, whether you are going to take it all on. You are fairly new
in your private practice (in the described scenario), so you may well
feel a temptation to take on all comers. That is a very bad idea. That
is especially true when the referral comes from an attorney. Not many
experiences that psychologists have are more sobering than being grilled
on the witness stand by the opposing attorney and being shown to be
lacking in competence or knowledge about something you have done. As a
colleague has quipped, Be gratified by the knowledge of what you know.
Strive to know that which you know you don't know. Don't worry about the
many things you don't know you don't know. These things will be called
to your attention by a cross-examining attorney. (D. Martindale,
personal communication, July 31, 2014)

Most psychologists have had considerable training in assessing
intellectual functioning and personality dysfunction, so you probably
have had such training (remember, for the purposes of this example, you
are now a licensed psychologist). The question here is whether now, 3
years after your obtained your degree, you have continued to be active
enough in those areas, both in terms of continuing to practice in those
areas and of staying current with the literature in those areas, to be
competent to provide assessment in those two areas. Fewer psychologists
have had training in neuropsychology. If you have had no such training,
don't do it! If you are clear with your referral sources about the
boundaries of your competence, they will learn whom to refer to you and
whom to refer elsewhere. And if they are the kind of referral sources
you want, they will respect you for your honesty about your
competencies. That does not mean that a screening for brain functioning
is inappropriate--- again, assuming you have some training and
experience in doing so. A screening can provide sufficient data
regarding whether a referral should be made for a more complete
neuropsychological assessment. Perhaps even fewer psychologists have had
much training, with supervision, in assessing chemical dependency. If
you decide you are not competent in that area, you should refer. Once
you have decided which problem areas you have the competency to assess
and you have decided which general types of tests would be appropriate
in this case, you need to ask yourself which specific tests you want to
use. The following should be viewed as simply illustrative of the
thinking process you should go through. You made choices on

97

98

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

certain tests (some of which we discuss below), but other tests could
have been used and might even have been more appropriate. As we stated
in Chapter 3, this volume, the first and most important questions you
should ask yourself regarding the use of any specific test is whether
the test being considered is valid for the purpose and the person being
tested, that is, Has research been conducted to ensure that this test
has adequate reliability and validity for the population of people from
whom the specific examinee comes? The manual for the test should provide
helpful information on the norms developed and the standardization
sample used. The latter information will tell you whether the test fits
the person you have in mind to test. Because the manual was created by
the publisher, it would be wise to consult a more independent evaluation
of the test. Two excellent sources are Buros Mental Measurement Yearbook
(Carlson, Geisinger, & Jonson, 2014) and Tests in Print, also published
by Buros (Murphy, Geisinger, Carlson, & Spies, 2011). To measure
intellectual functioning, you used the WAIS--IV in this assessment. The
Wechsler tests are among the most widely used tests of intelligence. The
WAIS--IV has well-documented data on reliability and validity for use
with individuals with Ms. Sanchez's age, language, socioeconomic,
gender, and ethnic background (Wechsler, 2008). One disadvantage is that
it is not based on a widely accepted theory of intellectual functioning,
such as the Cattell--Horn--Carroll theory (Flanagan & Harrison, 2005;
McGrew & Flanagan, 1998). That theory serves as the basis for the most
recent editions of the Woodcock--Johnson test (Schrank, Mather, &
McGrew, 2014) and Stanford--Binet Intelligence Scales (Roid, 2003),
which would also be good choices to use with a person like Ms. Sanchez.
Among other tests that could provide a valid assessment of her
intellectual abilities are the Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence
Test (Kaufman & Kaufman, 1993), the Cognitive Assessment System 2nd Ed.
(Naglieri, Das, & Goldstein, 2014), and the Differential Abilities Scale
(Elliott, 2007). You also chose a general measure of psychological
dysfunction. You know from the case history that these include symptoms
of depression, possible psychotic thinking, and paranoid thinking. With
regard to the latter symptom, remember that paranoia can be based on
reality---to wit, the saying from Joseph Heller's (1961) delightful,
satirical novel, Catch-22: "Just because you're paranoid doesn't mean
they aren't after you." You chose the MMPI--2 because it is the most
widely used and researched test of psychopathology. Literally thousands
of studies have been done, initially on the MMPI (Hathaway & McKinley,
1942) and subsequently on the MMPI--2, which was first published in 1989
(Graham, 1990). Using this test with Ms. Sanchez has an excellent
empirical basis. An advantage of the MMPI--2 is that it provides mea-

Case 3---Anne Sanchez

sures of all of the suspected areas of psychological dysfunction,
including depression, psychosis, and paranoia, plus it provides an
assessment of interpersonal skill and involvement, which could be a
contributing problem for Ms. Sanchez, and it provides measures of
test-taking approach, that is, it gives you some basis for knowing
whether she is exaggerating or underreporting the extent of her
psychological problems. Alternative measures of general psychopathology
could be used. A particularly good choice would be the Personality
Assessment Inventory developed by Morey (1991), also an increasingly
widely used test that was developed using more modern test construction
methods and that has categories that are more closely aligned with the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems (ICD--10; World Health Organization \[WHO\], 2016) than are the
MMPI--2 scales. You also administered the BDI--II. The assessment basis
for using this test is only moderately strong, as it is not as reliable
a test as the depression scales on the MMPI--2, but it takes little time
for either examinee or psychologist, so the cost is not high. If it
provides similar results to the MMPI--2, it provides a bit more
confidence in the results. If the score is different, however, it
creates a problem of what to do with the results. Most often, one would
trust the MMPI--2 more than the BDI--II, meaning that it adds only mild
incremental value. You decided to do a neuropsychological screening but
not a complete neuropsychological assessment. One relatively brief
general measure of neuropsychological functioning was used, the RBANS
Update, and the Trailmaking Test, as the RBANS Update does not have a
good measure of executive functioning. The WAIS--IV does provide some
measure of executive functioning, but having an additional, independent
measure of it for convergence is a good idea. In addition, the WMS--IV
subscales of Logical Memory and Designs are useful measures of memory
for stories and for spatial figures. The Logical Memory scales measure
the kinds of information people normally come across in daily life,
information about situations, as opposed to a shopping list, for
example; the Designs scales measure memory for an unfamiliar spatial
design, a somewhat more pure visual task compared with the visual memory
component of the RBANS Update, so you get two slightly different
measures of this ability. You decided on the addition of a test of
memory because of specific questions during the interview about her
memory abilities. However, because you did not feel competent to do a
complete neuro­ psychological assessment, you also entertained the
possibility of a referral for a complete neuropsychological assessment,
depending on the data obtained from the tests that you administered. You
also did not feel comfortable doing a chemical dependency assessment.
Thus, you recommended to the attorney that a referral for a chemical
dependency assessment be made.

99

100

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Let us take a brief look at the data again to see what conclusions we
can draw, with regard both to the ultimate referral question and what
additional testing might be necessary, if any. First, from the
interview, you know Ms. Sanchez is of Mexican American heritage, so the
effects ethnicity can have on the reliability and validity of
psychological tools, as well as her personal and interpersonal
functioning, will need to be kept in mind. She has had a very
challenging life, with the early death of her father and a nonsupportive
mother who was overwhelmed with the responsibilities of her family after
her husband died. To assist the family financially, Ms. Sanchez dropped
out of school and turned to prostitution, with few other avenues
available to her, and began using drugs and alcohol. She has two
children, of whom she does not have custody. When she was in her early
20s, she received her GED and attempted to further her education,
unsuccessfully. She has worked in multiple jobs, suggesting limited
effectiveness or lack of ability to stick to one position. On the
positive side, she reports having been drug free for more than 2 years,
although that has not yet been conclusively established. Some
clarification of current drug use and its potential impact on her
employability should be part of the referral question to a chemical
dependency specialist. Ms. Sanchez reports feeling unhappy, with lack of
energy and difficulty concentrating. She sleeps most afternoons and
describes some suicidal ideation but without current intent or plan. She
reports a series of head traumas, whose consequences are unclear. She
complains of vague medical symptoms, which could be the result of
fibromyalgia, or depression, or could be the result of the conversion of
psychological distress into medical complaints. All possibilities should
be considered. However, it should be noted that the question about which
might best explain her physical symptoms is not a referral question.
When responding to a referral from an attorney, in particular, it is far
better just to respond to the questions asked, rather than questions
that are not asked. Keeping in mind that her medical problems could have
a relationship with psychological issues, however, might help you
understand Ms. Sanchez better. (For a summary of the psychological
issues in fibromyalgia, see White, Nielson, Harth, Ostbye, & Speechley,
2002.) You noticed a general willingness to be cooperative and
motivation to respond appropriately and with sufficient care to the
psychological tests. She was adequately oriented times three
(appropriately aware of person, place, and time), but she also reported
hearing a voice telling her not to listen to your instructions. She
demonstrated a range of emotional reactions, with some emotional
lability. During the second and third sessions, Ms. Sanchez acted in a
sexually provocative and flirtatious manner. The WAIS--IV results
indicate that Ms. Sanchez is a person with limited intellectual ability.
An important question is whether the scores on

Case 3---Anne Sanchez

the WAIS--IV and the previous Shipley-2 are statistically significantly
different (i.e., no overlap in the confidence intervals of each score
based on the respective standard error of the measurements) or whether
this is a case of variability in scores that is within the expected
range. Whichever is the case, generally one would place more confidence
in the WAIS--IV score because the reliability measures on this test are
superior to those on the Shipley-2. The results on the RBANS Update
indicated that Ms. Sanchez performed with mild impairment only in visual
perception, visual memory retrieval, and constructional abilities. With
cues, her visual memory did improve. Her performance on tests of
executive functioning---the ability to plan, organize, and
strategize---were consistently in the impaired range. From the MMPI--2,
we have indications that the psychological test data are adequately
valid, although they reflect a high degree of general psychological
distress. Knowing that is an important place to start before attempting
to draw any conclusions from the specific testing data. From the MMPI--2
and the BDI--II, we have data that suggest a moderate to severe level of
depression, with difficulties in interpersonal relationships, and a high
level of unusual experiences that can point to psychotic thinking,
although her depression seems to be primary and may drive her auditory
hallucinations. A person with this level of emotional distress and
agitation will almost always have difficulties with concentration and
attention. Hence, it is very difficult to know whether her cognitive
difficulties are a result of psychological or neurological factors. What
is almost certainly the case is that her limited intellectual abilities
and possible brain dysfunction, perhaps as a result of repeated head
injuries or chemical use, make it more difficult for her to cope with
and manage a life that would be challenging for most of us. Now, let us
return to the question of collateral interviews. On two bases, pursuing
that source of data does not seem necessary. First, the data you have
obtained seem to provide a fairly consistent picture of Ms. Sanchez,
leaving questions you cannot answer regarding brain functioning and
chemical dependency because you do not have the expertise, but otherwise
the results seem pretty clear. Second, there does not appear to be
anyone you could consult to get a clearer picture of her.

Diagnostic Considerations The diagnostic process is much easier with
ample data from a variety of sources, especially when those sources of
data agree with each other. Thus, unlike the cases in Chapters 4 and 5,
this case offers a better opportunity for you to come to a definitive
diagnosis. You have convergent

101

102

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

data from Ms. Sanchez's self-description, behavioral observations,
medical records, and psychological test data that she is experiencing a
moderate to severe level of depression. Thus, a diagnosis of depression
seems fairly self-evident. The major question would be, What form of
depression does she have? Given the medical record statement about a
long history of dysthymia, it does not seem to be a Major depressive
episode, single episode (F32). The medical record points to a Dysthymic
disorder (F34.1), but the psychological test data and observations,
supported by her self-report, suggest a more severe level of depression.
You have seen no evidence of cycling into mania (i.e., Bipolar disorder;
F31). Hence, the best diagnosis for Ms. Sanchez appears to be Major
depressive disorder, recurrent (F33). The remaining question in that
regard is what to do with her auditory hallucinations. One possibility
is to give her a dual diagnosis of major depression and psychosis, with
the latter being (a) a Delusional disorder (F22), although the Blue Book
(WHO, 1993) states that clear and persistent auditory hallucinations are
incompatible with this diagnosis (p. 85); (b) a Brief psychotic disorder
(F23), which, however, requires an acute onset within the previous 2
weeks (Blue Book, p. 8); or perhaps most suitably, (c) a Schizoaffective
disorder, depressive type (F25.1), although the voices do not appear to
engage in a running commentary on Ms. Sanchez's behavior or to have a
discussion among various voices about her (as suggested by the Blue Book
\[pp. 78, 91\] guideline on hallucinations). However, two factors
mitigate against that type of dual diagnosis, that is, some kind of
depressive disorder plus some kind of psychotic disorder. First, the
Clinical Modification of the ICD--10 (ICD--10--CM; National Center for
Health Statistics, 2015) does not allow for such dual diagnoses. No
diagnosis of a severe major depression is independent of psychotic
features. That is, with a severe major depression, one has to choose
either with psychotic symptoms (F33.3) or without psychotic symptoms
(F33.2). It would not be logical to choose F33.2, then add F22 or F25.1
as an additional diagnosis, and the code F33.3 already includes both her
depression and hallucinations. Second, it does appear that Ms. Sanchez's
depression is the primary diagnostic feature, with the auditory
hallucinations all revolving around it, with the voice's messages
centering around self-harm or social interaction. Therefore, a primary
diagnosis of Major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe with psychotic
symptoms (F33.3) is the most appropriate one. Most of her reported
symptoms fall well within this diagnosis, constant sadness, difficulty
concentrating, low energy level, poor memory, and fatigue. Some of those
symptoms also fit other diagnostic categories that should be considered.
We know from the medical record that she has been diagnosed with
Fibromyalgia (M79.7). Many of her symptoms of fibromyalgia (fatigue and
pain, in particular) could also be the result

Case 3---Anne Sanchez

of her depression. However, not only is it not necessary for you to try
to change her diagnosis from fibromyalgia to depression but also, as a
nonphysician, it would be inappropriate for you to do so. There is one
other interesting consideration related to her diagnosis of
fibromyalgia. Often, you can note the medications a person is taking as
an indication of the diagnosis given that person by a physician. In this
case, Ms. Sanchez is taking duloxetine (Cymbalta), a
serotonin--norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor commonly used for the
treatment of depression. Aha! The physician's treatment provides support
for your diagnosis of depression! However, alas, duloxetine is also used
to treat pain (remember, pain is also mediated by the serotonin
neurotransmitter system), so is a common pharmacological treatment for
fibromyalgia. So, beware of using the record of medications to point you
to a specific diagnosis. Some of the symptoms can also be the result of
an abnormality in brain functioning, especially concentration, memory,
and headaches. You have some testing data to support difficulties with
concentration and attention, visual memory recall, and executive
functioning. However, you are not a trained neuropsychologist, so you
have recommended referral for a more complete neuropsychological
assessment. Nevertheless, you can get a rule-out diagnosis, which is a
hypothesized diagnosis for which additional data are necessary. You have
the best evidence for a memory disorder. To consider this as a primary
diagnosis, you have to move out of Chapter 5 of the ICD--10--CM
("Mental, Behavioral, and Neurodevelopmental Disorders"), which includes
the diagnoses we have discussed up to the point. Memory disorders are
found in the other section of the ICD--10--CM that is most often used by
psychologists, Chapter 18 ("Symptoms, Signs, and Abnormal Clinical and
Laboratory Findings"), not elsewhere classified, and more specifically
to the section Symptoms and Signs Involving Cognition, Perception,
Emotional State and Behavior. Here the Blue Book is not going to be of
any assistance, as it discusses only the diagnoses in Chapter 5.
Consultation with another text on psychopathology would be recommended.
So, which diagnoses should you consider from Chapter 18 in the
ICD--10--CM? You know that Ms. Sanchez has difficulty retrieving new
memories, although she was able to describe her past life adequately, so
Anterograde amnesia (R41.1) makes the most sense, although Other amnesia
(R41.3), which includes Amnesia NOS and Memory loss NOS, are also
possible diagnoses. We know that her cognitive problems go beyond memory
impairment, however, so one might also provide rule-out diagnoses of
Mild cognitive impairment, so stated (G31.84); Intracranial injury
(S06); or Other specified mental disorders due to known physiological
condition (F06.8), which can include mild memory impairment, although
the only evidence you have for that diagnosis

103

104

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

is the history of head injuries, the severity and impact of which you
know very little. Last, Alcohol dependence with alcohol-induced
persisting amnestic disorder (F10.26) or Alcohol use with
alcohol-induced persisting amnestic disorder (F10.96) should certainly
be a rule-out diagnosis until you have additional information from the
chemical dependency evaluation. Now, back to the original referral
question: Is Ms. Sanchez impaired? Is she able to work? What do you
think? First and foremost, that is a very difficult question to answer
as a psychologist, and psychologists should be careful to address only
those areas in which we have competence. Most psychologists are not
employment specialists, so we do not know all of the skills necessary to
be gainfully employed. So, providing a definitive answer to the question
is likely beyond the competence of most of us, unless we have had
specialized training and experience in the field of employment
assessment. What you can say, however, is that Ms. Sanchez faces a
variety of challenges that have made it difficult for her to maintain
employment and are likely to play a role in her future employment. What
are those challenges? First, she has limited intellectual abilities and
limited educational preparation, so only nonskilled work would be an
option for her. Second, she has some cognitive difficulties that would
challenge her ability to do unskilled work. Her verbal skills are
adequate, such that she might even appear more skilled than she is, but
her visuospatial skills are generally very poor, including her fine
motor skills. Thus, a task that requires her to use her visual
perception and motor skills, such as assembly line work, would likely be
very difficult for her. Third, beyond her cognitive limitations, her
psychological status adds to her challenges. Her depression causes her
to have a low energy level, low motivation, and difficulties with
concentration, all of which would make it difficult for her to engage in
exactly the kind of task her intellectual abilities make appropriate for
her, namely, a repetitive, physical task. Finally, her family background
and responsibilities have added an additional layer of stress to her
life, which, combined with her limited resources, may have resulted in
her feeling overwhelmed. Certainly, she did not have the social and
emotional support that she needed to cope effectively. Given all of
these challenges and her difficulty with planning and organizing
(executive functions), especially with spatial tasks, anything more than
a repetitive, assembly-line type task will be beyond her cognitive and
psychological abilities. Add to that the pain she experiences as a
result of her fibromyalgia, and there are very few jobs she would be
able to hold over time, which is exactly what her history demonstrates.
Bottom line: Due to this complex set of factors, it would be difficult
to be the employment specialist whose job it is to find an appropriate
job

Case 3---Anne Sanchez

for her. In this case, your task is to help the employment specialist by
describing Ms. Sanchez's problems and explaining something of the
difficulties that she experiences that affect her ability to carry out
tasks. This is another reminder for you to restrict yourself to your
area of expertise, that is, emotions, cognitions, and behaviors.

Closing Comments The cases of Lynn, John Smith, and Anne Sanchez raise a
number of questions about assessment and diagnosis and determining the
procedures to conduct a thorough assessment and arrive at a diagnosis.
These tasks can feel daunting, particularly if you are fairly new at the
process of psychological assessment and diagnosis. Never fear! One of
the authors of this text remembers a very early supervision session in
graduate school during which the supervisor asked him, in response to
something he had said to the patient during the second session with her,
what his case conceptualization was at that point. He replied that he
was struggling to understand what the person's experience was and could
not do that and think about case conceptualization at the same time. The
supervisor helpfully stated that with experience, the ability to listen
and think conceptually at the same time would come. And, it did!

105

Ethics of Assessment--- Protecting Your Patients

A

7

lthough we have presented ethical discussions throughout this text, in
this chapter we specifically explore ethical considerations in
conducting assessments and arriving at diagnoses. It is not possible for
a conscientious psychologist to divorce ethics from other aspects of
practice. Ethics is foundational to the practice of psychology and
permeates all our professional behavior. So, although we consider ethics
separately in this chapter as a means of providing a more comprehensive
and reasonably succinct overview of the ethical issues involved in
psychological assessments, you (as a student of psychology) should think
about these issues as being embedded in every aspect of what we as
psychologists do. The major ethical question that has confronted humans,
perhaps from the time they attained consciousness, has been, What is the
right thing to do? In other words, What does it mean to be virtuous in
this situation, with these people, with this set of circumstances
(MacIntyre, 1998)? The quest for

http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-008 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

107

108

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

the correct answers to that question has been the focus of moral
philosophy since at least the time of the Greek writer and philosopher
Homer about 3,000 years ago. The answers to the questions are, however,
culture bound, as is most of what people think and believe. For Homer,
the right thing was for a person to perform "his socially allotted
function" (MacIntyre, 1998, p. 8), which for most men at the time meant
technical skill (especially military), courage, cunning, and
aggressiveness, and for married women it meant being faithful in
marriage (MacIntyre, 1998)--- at the time, few other attributes were
important for women! Clearly and thankfully, the view of what
constitutes the right thing to do, or virtue, has changed considerably
since that time. So, how does one decide today what the right thing to
do as a psychologist is? For most psychologists in North America, the
standards by which we make that judgment professionally are grounded in
the Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct
(hereinafter, Ethics Code) of the American Psychological Association
(APA, 2010) and the Canadian Code of Ethics for Psychologists
(hereinafter, Code; Canadian Psychological Association, 2000). In
addition to standards for professional conduct in specific situations,
both codes also provide general guidelines for how one thinks about and
approaches ethical behavior by enumerating certain guiding principles
for ethical behavior (see Exhibit 7.1 and Exhibit 7.2). To some degree,
these principles are aspirational in nature. They set goals toward which
an ethical psychologist should strive. However, both codes also spell
out specific, minimal ethical standards (i.e., the minimum level of
ethical behavior that is acceptable for a psychologist) to which a
psychologist is expected to adhere. We provide a brief summary of the
principles here, and we reference specific standards throughout the
remainder of this chapter, but every student of psychology and every
practicing psycho­logist should at least be familiar with the code of
their home country. The principles enumerated in the ethics codes of the
APA and the CPA are similar, although packaged somewhat differently. The
APA Ethics

EXHIBIT 7.1 Ethical Principles From Ethical Principles of Psychologists
and Code of Conduct (American Psychological Association, 2010) Principle
A: Beneficence and Nonmaleficence Principle B: Fidelity and
Responsibility Principle C: Integrity Principle D: Justice Principle E:
Respect for People's Rights and Dignity

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

EXHIBIT 7.2 Ethical Principles From Canadian Code of Ethics for
Psychologists (Canadian Psychological Association, 2000) Principle I:
Respect for the Dignity of Persons Principle II: Responsible Caring
Principle III: Integrity in Relationships Principle IV: Responsibility
to Society

Code lists the following principles that serve as the foundation of
ethical behavior: Principle A: Beneficence and Nonmaleficence, that is,
striving to benefit those with whom we work and taking care to do no
harm, recognizing that our own needs and biases can interfere with
providing help and avoiding harm, and actively looking for ways in which
harm can occur. As ethical psychologists, we proactively take steps to
minimize harmful outcomes and maximize benefits, including ensuring
competence in our activities and self-reflective consideration of our
actions and motives. ❚❚ Principle B: Fidelity and Responsibility
involves behaviors necessary to establish professional relationships of
trust, including being aware of professional responsibilities to society
and professional communities, upholding professional standards,
accepting responsibility for our behavior, and seeking to manage
conflicts that can lead to harm or exploitation. It is our ethical
responsibility to work collaboratively with other professionals when it
in the best interest of our clients. ❚❚ Principle C: Integrity
emphasizes promoting truthfulness and honesty in practice of psychology,
and striving to follow through on commitments and obligations. ❚❚
Principle D: Justice recognizes the rights of others and provides us
with a guideline regarding exercising sound judgment in the practice of
psychology. We recognize potential biases, manage boundaries of
practice, and acknowledge that all individuals are entitled to access to
the contributions that the field of psychology provides. ❚❚ Principle E:
Respect for People's Rights and Dignity involves respecting the dignity
and worth of all people and the rights individuals have to privacy,
confidentiality, and self-determination, respecting the breadth of
cultural and individual differences and neither participating in nor
condoning activities based on prejudice. ❚❚

109

110

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

One helpful feature that the CPA Code provides is a rank ordering of the
weight that should be given to the various principles when a particular
situation results in a conflict between the principles, that is, when
one cannot follow one principle without being in violation of another.
An example of such a conflict is provided below, following the ordering
of principles by the CPA Code. They are as follows: Principle I: Respect
for the Dignity of Persons is the rights of the individual to be treated
with respect as a person with worth and to certain considerations,
including privacy, self-determination, personal liberty, and justice,
with special responsibility to those most vulnerable. ❚❚ Principle II:
Responsible Caring is an active caring for the welfare of others,
including the concepts of beneficence and nonmaleficence, emphasizing
that we, as psychologists, should strive to benefit those with whom we
work and taking care to do no harm, recognizing that our own needs and
biases can interfere with providing help and avoiding harm, and actively
looking for ways in which harm can occur and proactively taking steps to
minimize harmful outcomes and maximize benefits, including ensuring
competence in our activities and self-reflective consideration of our
actions and motives. ❚❚ Principle III: Integrity in Relationships
involves (a) establishing relation­ ships of trust and (b) acting in ways
that promote honesty, accuracy, straightforwardness, openness, and
truthfulness, including maintaining standards of conduct, making clear
what the professional role involves, accepting responsibility for our
own behaviors, minimizing bias, and avoiding conflicts of interest. ❚❚
Principle IV: Responsibility to Society is a commitment to fairness and
justice, not only in professional relationships but in society,
including equal access to services offered by psychologists and
knowledge created by psychological research. ❚❚

We emphasize that the order of these principles does not suggest that
the later principles are less important to the practice of psychology,
only that the first principles take precedent when the principles
conflict. The principles from the two ethics codes reflect the history
of Western moral philosophy in a number of ways (MacIntyre, 1998).
First, the codes reflect the tension between individualism and
communalism. On the one hand, each psychologist is responsible for
choosing between various ethical options, and further, individuals
(including psychologists) have the freedom and the power to make
choices. Our behaviors are not totally determined, and we must take
responsibility for the choices we make. At the same time there is a
concern for the broader social community, a perspective that was core to
early Greek thinking regarding morality and responsibility. Both codes
reflect the responsibility that we

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

have toward the larger human community, in particular, our
responsibility to advocate for justice and fairness, in addition to our
primary responsibility for our clients, whether individuals, groups, or
organizations, with whom we work. We also emphasize that the codes
address our behaviors and roles as psychologists, not our broader moral
responsibilities to each other as individuals. Second, the principles of
the codes reflect a concern for the other and the human rights of all
persons: "Psychologists respect the dignity and worth of all people, and
the rights of individuals to privacy, confidentiality, and
self-determination" (APA Ethics Code, p. 4) and each person has dignity
and the right to "privacy, self-determination, personal liberty, and
natural justice" (CPA Code, p. 8). These rights can only be abridged by
a contractual agreement between the individual and the other party,
whether that party is the state or an individual, such as a
psychologist. The primary goal of ethical behavior is the well-being of
those with whom we work, and in particular those most vulnerable, as
opposed to choosing behaviors based on how we can benefit from the
relationship (see, by comparison, Machiavelli, 1532/2008). The process
of diagnosis has important ethical implications. To the degree that an
incorrect diagnosis from the Clinical Modification of the International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems
(ICD--10--CM; National Center for Health Statistics, 2015) is used,
based on an inadequate or inappropriate assessment process, there may
result an inaccurate understanding of the individual and resulting
ill-advised or ineffective recommendations regarding disposition. With
these introductory comments forming the foundation of our understanding
of the ethical principles, we now turn our attention to the cases we
have been discussing.

Case 1---Lynn A number of primary ethical issues are associated with
Case 1: testing, training, confidentiality, and mental health provider
roles. Competence is also a concern, but we discuss this in Chapter 8.
Lynn was referred by her sister to a training clinic that had doctoral
students as the primary service providers. To meet the requirements of
an assessment course you were taking, you proposed to administer three
psychological tests to Lynn. Is there a problem here? Students have a
right to be trained adequately, do they not? And tests provide useful
information, do they not? We said so ourselves in Chapter 3! The problem
lies primarily in the use of the three tests. First of a number of
potential problems, are those tests necessary for the purposes

111

112

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

of this psychological service? Let us deal with each test separately. Is
there evidence of a psychological dysfunction for which the Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory---2 (MMPI--2; Butcher, Dahlstrom,
Graham, Tellegen, & Kaemmer, 1989), would be an appropriate assessment
tool? Probably, yes. Lynn presents with depression and/or anxiety, for
which the MMPI--2 could well provide useful information and for the
identification of which the MMPI--2 was originally developed (Graham,
2000). In addition, Lynn falls into the category of individuals on which
the MMPI--2 has been well normed, so the test would be used
appropriately for the purposes for which it was designed. However, that
leaves a number of questions that should be asked. First, is there a
reasonable expectation that the MMPI--2 would provide useful information
beyond that obtained through the clinical interview? Possibly, yes. Is
there another test that might provide even better or more relevant
information, without the length of the MMPI--2? Potentially, the answer
is yes, for instance, the Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI; Morey,
1991), the NEO Personality Inventory---III (Costa & McCrae, 2005) or the
California Personality Inventory---Revised (CPI--R; Gough, 1987), or the
16 Personality Factor Questionnaire (Cattell, Cattell, & Cattell,
2002)---and this view is held by both of the authors who are strong
advocates of the MMPI--2. Who is going to pay for the administration,
scoring, and interpretation of the test? If Lynn pays directly, is that
a wise use of her funds? If a third-party payer (like an insurance
company), are there limits to the amount the insurance company will pay,
and if so, is it wise to use part of the reimbursement Lynn would get
for psychological services for the MMPI--2? Does it add enough to make
its use justified? None of this should be interpreted as an argument not
to use the MMPI--2, but these are questions, of both a practical and
ethical nature, that should be considered. The use of the Millon
Clinical Multiaxial Inventory---III (MCMI--III) is potentially more
problematic. Why is this particular test being used on this particular
person? That is a different question from why this test is being used as
a required test in an assessment course. Ample evidence in the
literature (Jankowski, 2002; Millon & Bloom, 2008; Strack, 2008)
indicates that the MCMI--III was developed for the assessment of
individuals with personality disorders. Is there any evidence in what we
know now that Lynn has a personality disorder? Likely the answer is no.
Then why is the MCMI--III being used? In addition to the general ethical
guideline to use tests only for the purposes for which they were
designed (APA Ethics Code, Standard 9.08(b); CPA Code, Ethical Standard
II.21), a problem with the MCMI--III is that it should not be used as a
screening tool for psychopathology (Craig, 1999; Millon & Bloom, 2008;
R. Rogers, 2003). Virtually everyone, whether they have a personality
disorder or not, is likely to have elevation on at least one scale of
the MCMI--III (Millon & Bloom, 2008). The MCMI--III profile

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

alone does not tell us whether that is a problem or, merely, a
personality style. This is more true of the personality disorder scales
than of the Axis I scales, although in Lynn's case, using the MCMI--III
to distinguish between depression and anxiety has problems of its own
(see Saulsman, 2011) and may not add anything to the information
provided by the MMPI--2. As a result, it will be helpful to provide a
clear rationale for the use of the MCMI--III that describes Lynn's
specific needs and goals. There is, perhaps, an even greater difficulty
with the use of the Stanford--Binet Intelligence Scales (fifth ed.; SB5;
Roid, 2003). What evidence do we have that intelligence may be an issue
related to Lynn's presenting problems? What kind of information might
the SB5 provide that can be expected to be of significant usefulness?
Given these questions/problems, what are the ethical concerns associated
with your assessment plan? The first question, as described above, is
whether the tests being used are appropriate for a person like Lynn (or,
to use the more technical language, whether the test is reliable and
valid for the purposes being used and whether it will provide useful
information). The second question has to do with the purpose and goal of
using these tests: Is the primary purpose for the benefit of Lynn or for
your benefit, given that you need to complete a battery of tests using
these three tests to meet course requirements? If the latter (which
appears to be the case), how does that speak to the ethical requirement
not to exploit a patient for the psychologist's own benefit (APA Ethics
Code, Standard 3.08; CPA Code, Ethical Standard III.31)? Your being in a
multi­ ple relationship with Lynn (APA Ethics Code, Standard 3.05; CPA
Code, Ethical Standards I.26, III.33, III.34) also carries the risk of
your playing a role of being an evaluator/therapist and, at the same
time, a graduate student who is asking Lynn for a favor, and/or a
conflict of interest (APA Ethics Code, Standard 3.06; CPA Code, Ethical
Standard III.31) whereby you are proposing a service that Lynn may not
really need without adequate consideration of the impact that may have
on her or the consequences of requesting Lynn to take these tests. So,
is the provision of services by students, who by definition have a lower
level of competence than independently practicing psychologists, always
unethical? In a word, no. And perhaps we should be more emphatic:
Absolutely not! Two factors can make provision of services by students
ethical. First, services are offered only under supervision, so the
student is receiving continual input regarding how best to provide the
service and is not practicing independently (which would be not only an
ethical violation but also a violation of the law regardless of the
jurisdiction where the training takes place). The second factor has to
do with the nature of the interaction between student and client. The
appropriate means for dealing with this dilemma in this context is based
on the principles of respect,

113

114

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

beneficence, and integrity and is focused on the process of informed
consent (APA Ethics Code, Standards 3.10, 9.03, 10.01; CPA Code, Ethical
Stan­dards I.16--I.36). One can see even from the number of references to
informed consent in the two ethics codes how important it is for
psychologists. The ethical imperative is to provide full, open, and
noncoercive informed consent and in turn assessment and/or treatment
that allows the individual to make a voluntary and knowledgeable
decision (Bersoff, DeMatteo, & Foster, 2012). This means having an open
and honest discussion with a client about the goals of and reasons for
all psychological services being proposed, along with a consideration of
alternatives to the proposed services. In this case, if you seek to use
the tests proposed to meet a class requirement (as well as to gain some
potentially useful information), that purpose needs to be explained to
Lynn and a discussion undertaken to make sure than Lynn understands and
consents willingly. In other words, "getting" Lynn to sign a consent
form is not adequate. But, beyond that, the goal should also not be
simply obtaining her acquiescence. Patients are usually cooperative and
go out of their way to be responsive to mental health professionals.
Lynn needs to know that the choice is completely hers and that if she
decides to decline, there will be no negative consequences, either in
your feelings toward her or in the possible therapy offered in the
future. And this process takes a good deal of self-knowledge and
self-monitoring on your part. If you feel a strong need to meet your
class requirement (and we, the authors, as current or former faculty,
hope you do) and you have seen Lynn's situation as a perfect opportunity
to do so, it will be a difficult task for you to prevent your
disappointment in Lynn's declining to take the tests from getting in the
way of your attitudes and behaviors toward her. There is yet another
issue. By definition, our patients are in a position of vulnerability.
They come to us because they are struggling and looking for help. That
puts us in a position of considerable power, that is, we have the power
to influence whether their lives will proceed down a more satisfying and
fulfilling path or a much more negative one. We have a special
obligation to not take advantage of people in vulnerable positions, even
if, on the surface, they agree to our proposals (APA Ethics Code,
Principle E; CPA Code, I. Values Statement, II. Values Statement).
Acting ethically in such a situation involves engaging in a complete and
honest discussion regarding the services offered and careful questioning
to make sure that the consent given, if that is the end result, is both
fully informed and freely and willingly given. Learning how to reach the
goal of a mutually acceptable outcome without any residual feelings of
resentment or disappointment takes knowledge and the kind of skill that
comes from careful and competent supervision. The second primary ethical
issue in this case concerns the involvement of Lynn's bank president.
She or he encouraged Lynn's sister to refer Lynn for psychological
treatment, and she or he subsequently

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

requested updates from you regarding Lynn's condition and progress. Two
issues are embedded in this aspect of the scenario: confidentiality, a
complex issue we discuss first; and the professional role, which we
discuss a bit later. Keeping information we obtain from any source about
people we work with professionally private is one of the most important
values of our profession. Not only is keeping information private a
crucial element of respect, but it also determines the degree of trust
we receive, in both an individual and a broader perspective. If people
tell us intimate and private things about their lives and learn that we
have passed that information on, the chances of them telling us anything
else of importance is near zero. In a broader sense, if the public at
large does not have trust that psychologists will keep information
confidential, they are not likely to seek out our services. Both the APA
and the CPA codes speak repeatedly to this value (APA Ethics Code,
Principle E, 1.04, 1.05, 1.06, 4.01, 4.04, 4.06, 4.07, 6.02, 8.05, 8.14,
8.15, 9.03; CPA Code, I. Values Statement, I.37--I.45, III.20) and
again, the amount of attention given to this issue is reflective of its
importance in our profession. What should you do about Lynn's boss's
request for information? Does the boss have a right to that information
to determine whether Lynn can continue to work or, more magnanimously,
to assist Lynn in being a good employee and thereby decreasing her
anxiety about job security? In a word, no. The information Lynn provides
you is private and no one has a right to that information---with five
major exceptions. The first exception involves mandated reporting, that
is, situations in which you are required by law to report something that
you learn during the course of providing a psychological service. These
are those relatively extreme conditions in which the state (in the form
of a legislature and a governor) have decided that public welfare or
safety is more important than the general value of confidentiality in a
professional relationship, so they have created a law that requires you
to pass on information. Two such laws exist in many jurisdictions,
although you will need to check the statutes and regulations in your own
jurisdiction to know how these, or other situations, might apply. First,
if you believe that Lynn is an imminent danger to an identified
individual, you are often required to report that to the relevant
authorities (e.g., police, family member, other persons who are in a
position to prevent the dangerous behavior) as a means of protecting the
potential victim despite the fact that taking such action violates the
principle of confidentiality. This requirement is based on the
well-known Tarasoff case that occurred in California in the 1970s, in
which the California Supreme Court ruled that the mental health
professionals involved in the treatment of their patient who made a
threat against his former girlfriend have a duty to protect the
potential victim. The majority opinion included the now famous
statement, "The protective privilege ends

115

116

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

where the public peril begins" (Tarasoff v. The Regents of the
University of California, 1976). As a result, although the mental health
professional has an obligation to protect the confidentiality of the
patient, the California Court decided that there was a higher principle,
and many state legislatures have subsequently developed statutes that
clarify that the higher order obligation is to protect an identified
victim from harm (Herbert & Young, 2002). Be sure to check the laws and
rules in your jurisdiction to determine whether such a report is
required or only allowed. Different jurisdictions have used the Tarasoff
ruling in different ways to write their laws, so they are not all the
same (Herbert & Young, 2002). An allowed exception would mean that a law
or rule permits you to release information, even if it does not require
that you do so. That means that if you, in good faith (meaning that you
have used adequate judgment and reasoning to draw your conclusion and
you can present that reasoning to another professional in a reasonably
convincing manner), report such a situation to proper authorities or
individuals, you will not be accused or disciplined as a result of
breaking confidentiality. The second type of report, this one mandated
rather than merely allowed, is when you learn of a situation where a
minor child or a vulnerable adult is being abused or neglected. You are
then typically required to report that information to the appropriate
state agency, typically a department of child protection, although the
requirements differ substantially from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
From all of the information available to us at this point, these
exceptions do not apply to Lynn. The second general exception is a court
order for release of private information. If you receive a court order
for information, then you are required by law to release it. However,
one can appear in front of a judge (or can appeal a judge's decision to
a higher court) to argue that the information should be kept private and
not revealed to anyone else, but the ruling of the judge (or appellate
court) must be followed, if the psychologist wants to avoid legal
consequences. If the request for information comes in the form of a
subpoena it cannot be ignored, but a subpoena is not the same as a court
order, unless the subpoena is signed by a judge. If a subpoena is
received, a psychologist can request a hearing in front of a judge to
hear arguments for why the subpoena should be quashed (withdrawn). You
should carefully consult with your supervisor, and if needed, with an
attorney knowledgeable about this type of law, if you receive a court
order or subpoena to discuss its implications for your practice with the
client, as well as your obligation to respond to them. The third
exception occurs when sharing the information you have is necessary to
the services being offered. For example, your billing person has a right
to have access to certain private information (not the entire file, but
name, address, dates seen, etc.) to bill for your services. If you work
in an organizational setting, other providers might have

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

access to your file to provide comprehensive and competent services. For
example, in hospitals, notes are often written in electronic charts to
which many professionals might have access. Or you may work in a setting
that has an on-call person for emergencies who has an ethical right to
have access to your patients' files. In addition, you may be requested
to submit information to the insurance company to meet their
requirements for reimbursement of your services, if your patient has
elected to use insurance coverage. This is a complex situation that
requires a bit more consideration. If patients want to use their
insurance to cover the cost of your services, it seems natural that
these patients would expect you to comply with the release of
information requirements of the insurance company to have their services
covered. That may not always be the case, however, as some patients will
not want any information released to their insurance company. When such
a request occurs, it can be, at best, awkward for you, and even more
than awkward if you have released information your patient wanted kept
private. The best practice is to have every patient who desires to use
insurance coverage sign a limited release of information form to allow
you to share the information required by their insurance company. If
they choose not to sign such a release, they always have the option of
paying for your services privately. The fourth exception occurs when a
complaint is filed against you with a court or a licensing board. In
such a circumstance, you may be compelled to release information in a
patient record, for example, in the form of a subpoena from the board.
Your patient could deny you permission to release those records.
However, if you do not release the records to the board, you are subject
to disciplinary action by the board for non­ cooperation with a board
investigation. If at all possible, you want to avoid putting yourself in
some disadvantageous position as a result of a choice made by your
client. At the very least, you also deserve informed consent, that is,
you should know in advance if you do not have permission to release
records to a licensing board. However, we would never advise you to put
yourself in that situation. If, in the unlikely event of a board
complaint (less than 10% of psychologists have ever had a complaint
filed against them; see Van Horne, 2004), you have a right to be able to
take such action as is reasonably necessary to defend yourself. If your
patient from the very beginning is unwilling to allow that, you should
very seriously consider discontinuing the service. (It is not unethical
for you to not provide a service.) It is only unethical to discriminate
on the basis of legal categories, such as race, sexual orientation, or
gender, or to abandon someone you are seeing, typically by not even
providing the names of other professionals they can consult. The fifth
exception is when your patient gives you permission to share information
with another individual or organization. For your self-protection (as
well as to comply with laws or rules in many states

117

118

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

or provinces), you should obtain this permission in writing. Similar to,
but perhaps even more important than, the issue with informed consent
for testing, the informed consent to release information should be
undertaken with great care and with great respect and deference to the
wishes of your patient. And it is important to remember that you are the
professional, not your patient. Your patient may not have a clear
understanding of what the consequences of releasing private information
might be, so it is your responsibility to describe such potential
consequences as part of the informed consent process. For instance in
Lynn's case, if you release information to Lynn's boss, does Lynn's boss
have a legal and ethical obligation to keep the information private? No.
The boss may share the information with the human resources department,
Lynn's direct supervisor, or others who the boss believes have a need to
know. Information can travel quickly, particularly in this day and age.
Lynn needs to understand that such sharing of information can occur
before she can provide informed consent. And, beyond the issue of
informed consent to release information, an informed consent regarding
the limits of confidentiality is needed. That is, as discussed above,
your ability to keep information confidential is limited, that is, in
cases of potential harm or if court ordered. Your patients do not have
the knowledge you do about how therapy works and they have a right to
know, from the very beginning, what those limitations are. The second
issue regarding the bank president has to do with the role you play in
this scenario. You have been contacted to do an initial assessment,
followed up with the provision of any psychological interventions that
together you and Lynn decide might be of benefit to Lynn. Thus, you are
primarily in the role of therapy provider. The assessment you conduct is
going to have the goal of being helpful. Although objectivity and
comprehensiveness are important in this context, both are of a different
nature than if you were being hired to conduct a fitness for duty
evaluation, a service that might have a major impact on Lynn's ability
to maintain her employment and that might well end up in court, with you
being called to testify as an expert witness. In providing therapy, the
level of comprehensiveness of assessment may not be as great. In terms
of the sources of information, the most important one will be what Lynn
tells you. There may be some collateral information, what her sister
reports initially, but there would usually not be an extended collateral
interview. Likewise, some previous health records may be obtained, but
likely not as many as would be obtained in a forensic assessment. How
important are the psychological records for Lynn's treatment after her
father's death 19 years ago? For most people, the event might be very
important to explore, but the records from that time, less so. If a
determination were made down the road that the records were important to
obtain, Lynn would have to sign a release to

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

acquire them. However, there would not be the presumption that they are
important from the beginning, as they could be in a forensic assessment,
for example. Beyond the specific goals and sources of information
involved in different forms of assessment, the role of therapist and the
role of evaluator are quite different, and one moves from one into the
other at some peril (S. Greenberg & Shuman, 1997, 2007; Strasburger,
Gutheil, & Brodsky, 1997). Even if you are trying to be helpful to Lynn
in communicating with the bank president, what if you provide
information to Lynn's boss that he or she then uses to restrict Lynn's
work or fire her? How is Lynn likely to feel about you in that case?
That factor is apart from the fact that as a therapist, you are not in a
position to make an objective assessment of how Lynn's progress relates
to her ability to work. You should be focused primarily on how you can
be helpful to Lynn, not on obtaining a comprehensive, objective
assessment of Lynn's ability to work. Any attempt to do so opens the
door to troubles for both you and Lynn. A very common complaint to
licensing boards about psychologists has to do with exactly this kind of
situation--- a therapist attempting to provide input in a legal or
employment context, believing that the input is objective. In fact,
therapists often believe they have even better information because they
have worked with the person for a period of time. What they fail to take
into consideration is that the information they have is generally
exclusively from the client. As such, it is neither totally objective
nor verified. The rule in our opinion should be: Just don't do it.

Case 2---John Smith The case of Mr. Smith raises a different, yet
overlapping, set of ethical issues. It is important that this is
primarily an assessment case, although it could potentially become a
therapy case. The role of assessor is different from the role of
therapist and raises a different set of ethical considerations. We
consider here the following ethical issues in more detail: referral
source expectations, competence, conflict of interest, informed consent,
the advisability of collateral interviews, bias, and changing
professional roles. One of the first issues mentioned is that the
cardiologist wants a report back on your work within 2 weeks. It is not
unusual for a time frame to be provided in referrals, but such a time
frame raises clinical, as well as ethical, concerns. Specifically, given
that the primary goal of our work as mental health professionals is to
provide competent services, What is the likelihood that a competent
report can be generated within

119

120

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

2 weeks? That question becomes even more crucial when you discover that
the exact referral question is absent and that the referring
cardiologist is out of town and unable to provide additional guidance.
The issues you would need to consider in determining whether you want to
take on this referral have to do with your level of expertise and
comfort with the specific type of referral, the accessibility of the
data you will need to write a competent report, and the amount of time
you have available. What if, for example, Mr. Smith is about to be
discharged from the hospital and it turns out to be a week or more
before you can see him? If the stars align just right, go for it!
However, if there are reasons it might not be possible to do a competent
job within 2 weeks, absolutely do not try to do it. Both authors of this
text have seen licensed psychologists disciplined by licensing boards
for taking on more than they should have and providing inadequate or
harmful services, all with very good intentions. The second, and perhaps
most crucial, question always to ask yourself is, Do I have the
competence to provide the psychological service being requested? In this
case, it looks to be a situation of stress, perhaps depression and/or
anxiety and/or a personality style prone to taking on too much, that has
contributed to or is related to heart disease. Given that in the case
scenario you did part of your postdoc in such a setting, you likely are
competent, but if you are not (and here, being brutally honest with
yourself is not only important but also sometimes career saving), the
appropriate action would be to decline the referral or immediately seek
out supervision/consultation from a psychologist with more expertise in
the area than you. The case does specify that you have not worked with
an individual with the diagnosis unstable angina (I20.0) before. A
specific medical diagnosis is not likely to rule out competence for you,
if you have dealt with similar cases (i.e., cases with similar
psychological issues), although differing ICD--10--CM diagnoses may well
rule out competence for you if you have not received training and
supervision in providing clinical services to people with a specific set
of problems in the past. However, there is always a consideration
regarding competence that you should think about, as every individual is
different. The APA Ethics Code does not (and should not) require that
you get supervision or consultation with every single person you see
because that person is, by definition, going to be different from
everyone else you have seen (see Bersoff, 2008; Fisher, 2003;
Sommers-Flanagan & Sommers-Flanagan, 2007). But not only is competence
an important issue to ensure that you first, do no harm but it is also
one of the primary reasons for disciplinary action by licensing boards
(Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards, 2014b; Rodolfa
et al., 2013). So, it behooves you to be honest with yourself about your
level of competence before taking on a professional

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

situation that is in any way new for you without seeking supervision/
consultation as part of the services you offer. In this case, let us
assume that you are competent, so you decide to proceed. The third issue
involves your review of the hospital chart, which indicates that part of
the problem may be job-related stress (at this point this is a
hypothesis to be tested through gathering additional data). Because you
know someone well who works at the same place, you have to decide
whether it is a good idea for you to work with Mr. Smith. The first of
two questions to answer is, Does your contact with Mark (your
significant other's brother) present a conflict of interest that might
make it difficult for you to be open and objective in working with
Mr. Smith? Do you know something about the workplace (either positive or
negative) that already leads you to think in some specific way about
Mr. Smith? If any part of the answer to that question is a yes, then you
should not accept the referral, responding to Dr. Jones that a personal
conflict of interest prevents you from working with Mr. Smith. Even if
in your honest assessment of the situation you decide that you can be
completely unbiased and objective, you should ask yourself whether it is
possible that you might find out information about the company or about
Mark that you would prefer not to know. For example, what if you found
out that racial discrimination were part of the stress Mr. Smith
experiences, and further, you find out that Mark is one of the people
causing that stress? Would knowing that have the potential for causing
problems in your relationship with your significant other? Again, if the
answer in any way is yes, or could be yes, it is better to communicate
to Dr. Jones (even with the time deadline) that you are not able to
accept the referral because of a personal conflict of interest. As a
student (or newly licensed psychologist), you may be very curious and
inclined to take on this likely very interesting case. You will reach a
point in your career, either by taking the advice of others or through a
negative experience of your own, that you will undoubtedly realize it is
better to avoid problems before they develop. Hopefully, you already
know this and do not need to learn it through negative experiences in
the future. An important issue raised by this case has to do with
informed consent, a slightly different aspect of informed consent issues
with Lynn. As indicated in Chapter 5 when you are working in an
outpatient setting and someone seeks your service, it is reasonable to
assume that they are coming to you voluntarily and that they know what
you do and something of the purpose of the session. There certainly are
circumstances in which that is not the case, such as a court-ordered
referral. Such forensic referrals raise a whole other list of issues to
consider (see S. Greenberg & Shuman, 1997, 2007) that are beyond the
scope of this text. In an inpatient medical setting, one should not make
an assumption of informed consent. It is possible that the referring
physician has

121

122

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

made a decision that your services might be helpful without so informing
the patient. Or, at least, you should not assume that such a
conversation occurred between the physician and the patient. Therefore,
it is ethically incumbent on you to spend sufficient time determining
what the patient's starting point is. Typically, starting with something
along the lines of the following can be helpful: "Dr. Jones referred you
to see me and I'm wondering whether you and Dr. Jones had a conversation
about that and what your thoughts are about working with me." Beyond
that, it will be important for you to explain who you are, what you do,
and something of what your goals are, in this case, determining what
Mr. Smith's experiences and needs might be. It is perfectly appropriate
to say that you have very little information about him, so you need to
learn more about him and why he is in the hospital and why Dr. Jones has
referred him to you. Even before you start asking questions, however,
you ought to find out whether Mr. Smith has any questions of you that
you can answer. This same point can and should be made with every
patient you see. He may well have questions that have to do with whether
you are a person who will likely be able to relate to him and understand
him. Although that may (or may not) be an issue in this case because of
ethnic, age, or gender differences, the question about whether you can
relate is one that every single patient you see is likely to have,
regardless of how similar or different in background and experience you
are to that person. Patients are expected to reveal, in a very honest
manner, very personal and private aspects of themselves. Without such
honesty, we have limited or skewed data on which to make decisions or
recommendations. But, of course, they are going to wonder whether you
are a person who is trustworthy and sensitive enough for them to do so
with you. Your job will be to demonstrate, in small, but consistent,
behavioral ways over time that you are exactly that kind of person,
recognizing that trust gets built slowly over time but can be broken
down very quickly. So, Mr. Smith could ask questions about your
vocational history, your experience in dealing with medical patients,
your family circumstances, your experience in dealing with people of
different ethnic backgrounds from yourself (for those of you who are
from a different ethnic background from Mr. Smith). Because of
theoretical and personality differences, mental health professionals may
differ in the degree to which they are willing to answer those questions
directly and completely. We believe that honest sharing of yourself,
with limits on how personal the information is that you share, is one
way of communicating that this professional relationship is one in which
directness and self-disclosure is expected and respected (see Derlega &
Berg, 1987; Farber, 2006; Lee, 2014). It is sometimes useful to ask
yourself before responding to a specific question, Would I be willing in
a different context to tell someone

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

the same information about myself? Or, more important, Can I imagine a
scenario in which I might later feel uncomfortable in answering this
question directly? If the answer to this second question could be yes,
trust your own reactions, and rather than answering the question, ask
the person why knowing that would be helpful to him/her. Last, with
regard to informed consent, you need to make clear to Mr. Smith that he
can decide not to talk with you and that there will be no negative
consequences from you. Further, you need to let Mr. Smith know that you
will communicate to Dr. Jones that your work together was discussed and
Mr. Smith decided that it would not be in his best interest to continue
the professional relationship; that is, he needs to know that you will
report his decision in an objective manner, such that Dr. Jones would be
unlikely to draw negative conclusions about him as a result. We
discussed collateral interviews briefly in Chapter 3. At times, getting
the input of another individual might be helpful---especially when the
patient is a child and the collateral source is a parent or, sometimes,
a teacher. Custodial parents have a legal right to know when health
services are being provided to their children, so there are no legal
concerns regarding confidentiality in talking with them, although there
may be clinical concerns in discussing your work with a child with his/
her parents, as children often desire confidentiality, even from their
parents (Sattler & Schaffer, 2014), but that is an issue beyond the
scope of this text. With adults, however, a collateral interview, by
definition, means a violation of confidentiality. In some circumstances,
the patient desires such collateral contact and gives permission for you
to talk to someone else. That can happen with the patient being unaware
of all of the potential consequences of such collateral contact. It is
your task as the professional to understand what the various
consequences could be and to have a thorough informed consent
conversation before making any contact with collateral sources. The
other variable to weigh is what the potential benefits, as well as the
expected benefits, might be. Just because there is a significant other
(whether a family member or colleague or employer) does not mean that
you should seek permission to contact that person. You should have a
good idea of what information you are looking for, who might be able to
provide that information, and how it relates to either the assessment or
the intervention process before you proceed with the informed consent
discussion with your patient. Most often, in reality, collateral
interviews would not be conducted in this type of situation, for two
reasons. Conducting such interviews often provides only limited
additional clinical information, and it is often not worth the extra
cost to undertake. You should have a good idea of what information you
are looking for and who might be able to provide that information and
how that information relates to

123

124

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

either the assessment or the intervention process before you proceed
with the informed consent discussion with your patient. Even more
important are confidentiality issues. In a clinical situation,
contacting his employer or his colleagues by definition reveals that
Mr. Smith has psychological issues that warrant the involvement of a
psychologist. Even if Mr. Smith gives his permission, breaking that
confidentiality might not be worth the amount of additional information
obtained. Mr. Smith is in a committed and satisfactory gay relationship.
That may raise moral concerns for you, depending on your own background.
The APA and CPA ethical codes make clear that it is unethical to
discriminate against people because of their sexual orientation, and
federal law makes it clear that it is illegal to do so. If you are a
person who cannot be objective and unbiased because of Mr. Smith's
sexual orientation, then you should not work with him, and a referral is
appropriate. In making the referral, however, it is ethically essential
that you not communicate or imply in any way that you're not working
with him is a result of some deficit, lack, or inappropriateness in him.
You need to own and take responsibility for your own views. The last
ethical issue raised by this case has to do with changing roles. You
were asked to conduct a psychological assessment to assist the physician
in knowing how to proceed, likely including knowing whether a referral
for psychotherapy would be helpful. Assuming you do psychotherapy,
should you take on such a referral after you have conducted the
assessment? Such a change in roles is rarely advisable in certain
circumstances, such as conducting an assessment for forensic purposes
after having provided treatment (see S. Greenberg & Shuman, 2007). Going
from having provided an assessment to providing treatment is more
nuanced. A number of questions need to be considered. First and foremost
is the question, Is there something about the nature of the assessment,
the nature of the professional relationship that has developed, or the
individual you assessed that would make it difficult for that person to
be able to manage a shift in roles comfortably and without confusion?
This question has both to do with your relationship with Mr. Smith and
Mr. Smith's relationship with you. Has a relationship developed that
would be hard to translate into a supportive therapeutic one?
Mr. Smith's having been somewhat guarded in his responses, perhaps out
of fear of how the assessment might impact his life, would be one such
example. Or perhaps he told you more than he later felt comfortable
doing, and that would make continued therapeutic contact difficult.
Second, might there be a need for a follow-up, formal assessment at some
point that will make your taking on the whole range of psychological
services confusing or disadvantageous to being helpful? That

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

is, if the assessment process has gone well and you have developed a
good working relationship with Mr. Smith, then if there is a need for a
follow-up assessment, you would be the appropriate person to undertake
that psychological service. However, if, in the meantime, you have
switched roles from assessor to therapist, going back to being an
assessor is fraught with complications (see Greenberg & Shuman, 2007).
Third, might your approach to doing the initial assessment be influenced
by the prospect of providing therapy after the assessment has been
concluded? That is, might you be biased in the sense that you would be
more inclined to conclude there are problems present for which therapy
would be helpful, if you had in mind that you might be able to provide
that therapy, whether that is because you want the experience, as a
trainee or newly licensed psychologist, or because you want the
additional income from providing what could be long-term therapy? If the
answer to any of these questions is yes, you should keep these roles
clearly separate.

Case 3---Anne Sanchez The case of Ms. Sanchez is different from the
first two cases in that it is strictly an assessment case, and the
probability of it being a forensic case is fairly high. That is, it is
likely that your report will be used by the referring attorney as part
of a case she or he makes for federal income support, especially if your
report is favorable to Ms. Sanchez's potential legal case, which
immediately raises a question for you of role and objectivity. If there
is pressure from the attorney or from Ms. Sanchez, even subtle pressure
in the sense that you come to like her and want to be helpful to her,
can you remain objective in your role as an independent evaluator,
rather than coloring your findings to fit your hopes to be helpful? That
is a dilemma that every psychologist who does assessments faces with
virtually every case. It takes a good deal of self-awareness and honesty
with oneself, as well as a thorough understanding of the APA Ethics Code
Standard 3.05 (a)(1) (APA, 2010), to remain within an acceptable range
of objectivity. The probability is also well above zero that you could
be called to testify. Most cases settle before going to court, but if
you do this kind of work, sooner or later you will be called to testify,
both in a deposition and live in court. This raises the question of
competence: Do you have experience and training in providing forensic
services? Forensic psychology is a specialty area unto itself and
requires a considerable amount of knowledge, skill, and supervised
experience, not only about a specific type of assessment but also about
the law, to provide forensic

125

126

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

services competently. If you have such competence, proceed. If you do
not, either decline the referral or seek consultation with the goal of
learning a new area of practice (APA Ethics Code, Standard 2.01c; CPA
Code, Ethical Standard II.8). Note the language in the APA (2010)
Standard 2.01c about what is necessary to become competent in a new
area: "Psychologists planning to provide services, teach, or conduct
research involving populations, areas, techniques, or technologies new
to them undertake relevant education, training, supervised experience,
consultation, or study" (p. 5). Conducting a psychological assessment
raises a number of ethical issues, some of which have not yet been fully
considered in this chapter. First, are the data-gathering methods used
appropriate to the case? This means are the tests and methods used
current (the latest version with validity data appropriate to current
use) and consistent with the psychological literature, and are the tests
and methods valid for the purposes being used (APA Ethics Code, Standard
9.02; CPA Code Ethical Standard II.21)? These issues were discussed
earlier, specifically when examining the specific psychological tests
with the case of Lynn. In addition, the case description states that
Ms. Sanchez is Mexican American. Does that mean that Spanish is her
first language? If yes, how fluent is she in English? Even if fluent, is
she more comfortable in Spanish and should Spanish tests be used? Are
you fluent in Spanish, or if English is the appropriate language, do you
have sufficient background in understanding and working with Mexicans or
Mexican Americans that you can do so competently (APA, 1990, 2010)?
Ethnic and language backgrounds can influence results on psychological
tests and in assessment behaviors more generally in a host of ways (APA,
1990, 2002b). Second, are the methods being used to gather information
sufficient to answer the referral question or questions (APA Ethics
Code, Standard 9.01; CPA Code Ethical Standard II.13)? The types of
testing needed and the degree to which the tests chosen are adequate are
discussed in Chapter 6 (this volume). So, this issue is both an ethical
and a clinical question. Third, does the written report adequately
document the procedures used, the bases for any conclusions drawn or
recommendations made, and any limitations of the conclusions and
recommendations, based on the availability of data, the limitations of
the tests used, or the level of involvement by the client in the
assessment process (APA Ethics Code, Standard 9.01; CPA Code, Ethical
Standards II.21 and III.8)? Here, it is also important to be honest with
oneself. As stated in Chapter 2 (this volume), as human beings, we are
quite capable of convincing ourselves that our opinions have validity
even when they do not. Being clear not only about the limitations in
general of what we do as psychologists but also about the specific
limitations inherent in our tests or other methods

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

is an absolute requirement of competent and ethical practice. Every
psychological evaluation report should have a paragraph including the
limitations of the assessment, because every psychological assessment
has limitations. Nearly every psychological assessment also has
conflicting evidence, where one source of information suggests one
conclusion and another source, a different conclusion. It is important
to include a discussion of those differences and to provide a rationale
for why one set of data is given preference over the other in reaching
the ultimate conclusions. All evaluees have an ethical right to receive
feedback on the results of the testing (APA Ethics Code, Standard 9.10;
CPA Code, Ethical Stan­ dard III.15). Whether patients want or seek out
feedback or not might be a function of many factors, including the
setting of the service offered. In the experience of one of the authors
of this text, having completed a few thousand assessments during his
career, it is not unusual for patients not to seek feedback sessions.
The point, however, is that you have an ethical obligation to offer and
provide feedback if the patient would like to hear your evaluation. In
fact, some patients will actively seek feedback, and when you provide
them this session, it is wise to think about feedback as a process of
two-way communication (Finn, 1996; Fischer, 2000; Levak, Siegel,
Nichols, & Stolberg, 2011). You will be providing information, but you
will also be receiving considerable information in the form of the
person's reactions to your information. Take note; those reactions could
be valuable in your understanding of the person. It is best to start
with questions regarding the person's goals and concerns for the session
and focus much of what you say on those issues. It usually works best to
pick a limited number of major interpretations, rather than trying to
cover everything. Doing the latter will likely only confuse or overwhelm
the person. Pick those interpretations or conclusions that are most
related to the stated goals of the person. Avoid psychological jargon as
much as possible. The goal is to provide feedback that will be
understandable and useful to the person, not to impress him or her with
your knowledge or command of the material. It typically works best to
start with information that is consistent with the person's beliefs
about himself or herself, then to add information that might be new, and
last to provide conclusions that could be threatening to the person's
selfconcept or self-esteem or difficult for the person to hear. If the
person perceives your feedback in that way, she or he may reject your
interpretations. If you experience resistance, do not try to convince
the person that you are right. Start by listening. It is useful to ask
if there is anything in the interpretation that does seem correct. But,
it is also perfectly acceptable in the face of ongoing resistance to
say, "Well, that is what the test indicated, but sometimes our tests are
wrong." It is acceptable to say this, because it is a very true
statement!

127

128

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

For many tests, including the MMPI--2, computerized interpretations can
be obtained. Be cautious about their use (APA Ethics Code, Standard
9.06). Although they can provide helpful language to use in your report,
they are typically based on a prototypical profile. Virtually every
real-life profile will have differences from the prototypical profile,
which will result in different characteristics or problems. It is your
job to interpret the tests, not simply to rely on a computerized
interpretation. Both authors of this text have seen cases in which
psychologists have been disciplined by licensing boards for using
computerized reports verbatim in their reports without attribution of
the source and for using language from a computerized report that did
not fit the overall data from the testing of the person. This is another
situation where the adage "just don't do it" might apply. In broader
terms, what we are suggesting with our use of the language "just don't
do it" is that you develop practice habits early in your career that are
based on a sound ethical foundation, on developing competence, and on
good risk management practices (see Chapter 8). For a discussion of the
neuroscience of habits and why they can be difficult to change once
developed, see Graybiel and Smith (2014). Now we come to a part of this
case that is critical in the practice of psychology: response to a
flirtatious or sexualized interaction with a client (see Barnett, 2014).
You have noticed that Ms. Sanchez acted in a sexualized manner,
including provocative dress and flirtatious behaviors. What is the
appropriate response on your part? The only part of the answer to that
question that is easy and unambiguous is that you do not, under any
circumstances, react in a parallel sexualized manner (APA Ethics Code,
Standard 10.05; CPA Code, Ethical Standard II, 27). What do you do,
then? The very first thing you should think about is consultation with
trusted colleagues. In this case description, you as the psychologist
are lucky to have two colleagues with whom you meet regularly---Use
them! Your discussion with them should include a description of
Ms. Sanchez's behavior, including its frequency, intensity, and
consistency over time, as well as an honest description of what your
reactions, all of them, were. The discussion should include a
consideration of the potential meaning and purpose of her behavior; what
your reactions mean; and in particular, a consideration of whether you
can work with her in an objective, unbiased manner. Beyond the general
recommendation of consultation, one question that will be helpful in
deciding what to do is to ask yourself what meaning her behavior might
have. Does her behavior have a purpose? For example, is she trying to
gain your favor and simply has a limited repertoire of behavior to
choose from, with sexualized behaviors being one form of interaction
with which she has experience? Is she lonely, such that it is a more
social act than meaningful in the context of the profes-

Ethics of Assessment---Protecting Your Patients

sional interaction? Is it more blatantly an attempt at a bribe to cause
you to write a report that will be helpful to her? Is she intellectually
capable of devising such a scheme? Is it possible that it is a strategy
devised by her attorney? Or by someone else close to her? Does she seem
to be aware of her own behavior or does she seem oblivious? The answers
to those questions could provide you with valuable insight into her
psychological and intellectual functioning, so the behavior has
importance beyond the impact that it has or might have on you. That
impact also plays a role, however. What is your reaction? Do you find
her behavior attractive? Does it confuse you? Does it repulse you? Do
you feel manipulated? Does it make you feel attractive? Is it
distracting to you? Is it hard to concentrate on the verbal information
she is providing you? What you decide to do will depend in part on the
answers to some or all of these questions. You should thoroughly discuss
any of the questions that are relevant with your colleagues, or if it
occurs while you are a student, with a supervisor. If the behavior is
distracting or affects your concentration, you need to tell the patient
that and ask her to stop. If her behavior is such, or your reactions are
such, that you feel some risk of crossing a boundary, or if you believe
her behavior might escalate such that you will have a more difficult
situation to deal with later, you need to be very clear with her about
boundaries and about your lack of tolerance for any attempts on her part
to cross boundaries. Mind you, "lack of tolerance" does not mean
intolerance, that is, punishing or striking back at her in some way. It
means merely that you will not accept nor respond to such boundary
crossings. Asking her to stop can be done gently and with sensitivity,
such that she might change her behavior with very little negative impact
on your professional relationship and little emotional reactivity on her
part. At most, it might result in a bit of embarrassment. The second
response, directly confronting her behavior, is much more likely to
impact her feelings about you and the assessment process, perhaps
undermining trust and making it difficult to continue the assessment.
That is not to say that is an inappropriate response. If her behavior is
clearly seductive in nature and continues despite your lack of response,
then such a response might be necessary. However, it is not without
risks. A third type of response on your part might be to do nothing
overtly. Certainly, your covert behaviors would all have to do with not
reacting to her actions. But if her behaviors are not too blatant or
overt or continuous and you are not distracted by them, noting them as
you do any other of her behaviors and including them in your
psychological interpretations of her might be the most appropriate
response. Refraining from responding in an overt way has the lowest
level of risk to the professional relationship (assuming that her
flirtations do not tempt you) and maximizes the probability that you
will be able to continue to conduct an objective assessment of her. The
two deciding points about whether

129

130

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

such a reaction could work, both clinically and ethically, will likely
be how direct and continuous her sexual behaviors are, on the one hand,
and what the nature of your internal reactions are, on the other. If
both are below some reasonable threshold, such that an appropriately
professional and objective relationship can continue, then that might be
the best option. This is another point at which unsparing honesty with
oneself, as well as consultation with one's peers or supervisors, is
critical. Clearly, ethics is a critical and complicated issue in the
practice of psychology. Our intent here has been to demonstrate, in the
context of specific cases, how ethical issues occur constantly and due
consideration of them is essential (see also Nagy, 2005, 2011). Our hope
is that you will avail yourself of the knowledge and expertise of your
faculty, super­ visors, and, eventually, consultants, as you struggle, to
use the language of Plato, to do the right thing.

Risk Management---Protecting Your Patients and Yourself

R

8

isk management is a process designed to minimize negative events and
outcomes and to maximize positive events and outcomes for both the
psychologist and the patient. It involves identifying what could go
wrong and developing an intentional plan of action to deal with the
risks inherent in the situation in the most effective manner possible.
Ethical considerations are primarily concerned with the well-being of
the patient, although risk management involves the well-being of both
the patient and the psychologist. In cases of an obvious incompatibility
of positive outcomes or avoidance of negative outcomes for both
psychologist and patient, the patient's needs and goals remain primary.
However, nothing is unethical or unprofessional per se in the
psychologist taking reasonable steps to protect himself or herself from
negative outcomes. In summary, risk management is the process by which
psychologists attempt to decrease negative outcomes to themselves while
also keeping the patient's well-being fully in mind. We see the concept
of risk management as something similar to a

http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-009 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

131

132

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

stool with four legs: (a) professional relationship, (b) ethical
practice, (c) competence, and (d) consideration of professional threats.
None of us psychologists are perfect and all of us will make mistakes,
some of which could be the occasion for a letter of complaint to a
licensing board or a malpractice lawsuit. Although neither of the
authors has been sued or had a complaint filed with a licensing board,
as licensing board members, we have participated in the adjudication of
many complaints. On the basis of this experience, we firmly believe that
one way to minimize the possibility of such an event is to have positive
professional relationships with your clients. Such relationships do not
occur spontaneously; they occur because the psychologist treats the
patient with respect, exhibits concern about the patient's well-being,
and responds to the patient's concerns. In essence, the psychologist
uses clinical competencies to develop and maintain positive relationship
with patients. Among the most helpful perspectives regarding the
development of such relationships came from Carl Rogers, with subsequent
work by Charles Truax and Robert Carkhuff (1967, 2007; Carkhuff, 2009),
suggesting that there are three central relationship factors:
congruence, empathy, and unconditional positive regard. Clients tend to
be quite forgiving when they feel respected, cared for, and understood.
If you feel tension or conflict in the relationship, or a therapeutic
rupture occurs, take heed and use your clinical skills to do what you
can to repair the rupture (Horvath & Bedi, 2002; Safran, Crocker,
McMain, & Murray, 1990). As you develop relationships through the
display of empathy, unconditional positive regard and congruence, it is
critical that you meet patients where they are. As each of your patients
will be diverse, they will all be different from you, although they will
have aspects of their personhood that are more or less similar and
familiar to your own. Many factors may make a client similar to or
different from you (Sue & Torino, 2005), including ethnic group, social
class, gender, gender orientation, and religion, as well as his or her
own histories of experience. These complexities can feel overwhelming,
but remember many resources can help you assess and treat your diverse
patients. For instance, Cornish, Schreier, Nadkarni, Metzger, and
Rodolfa (2010) created a text with specific suggestions and guidelines
to treat the increasingly diverse population in our country. Bhui and
Morgan (2007) provided an overview of "culturally capable practice" that
encourages practitioners to (a) understand their views of race and
ethnicity; (b) understand how differences in views of mental health,
family, and community and differences in communication behaviors can
affect practice; and (c) discuss similarities and differences when
needed. Guidelines from the American Psychological Association (APA) and
many books provide practitioners summaries of the issues involved in
treating an increasingly diverse population (see Chapter 10, this
volume). Thus, in addition to empathy, positive regard,

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

and congruence, a multiculturally capable mental health practitioner
will build strong clinical relationships by being sensitive not only to
who his or her patients are but also how he or she reacts to and feels
about them. In other words, self-reflexive practice is essential. The
second important aspect of protecting yourself from adverse outcomes is
to practice ethically, the second leg of the stool, which also means
practicing within the boundaries of your areas of competence, the third
leg. Do not, we repeat, do not try to do more than your role and skills
as psychologist allow you to do. We have reviewed board complaints where
psychologists got into trouble because they tried to do more than they
were competent to do and thereby overstepped the boundaries of ethical
practice. Typically, these psychologists did not have exploitative or
self-aggrandizing intent but rather lacked an adequate ethical
foundation for their actions. Practicing competently and in accordance
with ethical standards, and developing effective professional
relationships, go a long way toward decreasing the risks involved in the
practice of psychology. The fourth leg of our stool is careful
consideration of the possible professional threats that may occur when
working with each person/group/ organization. That is, what could
possibly go wrong? In a word, lots. Therefore, having considered at some
length elsewhere in this text the first three legs of our stool (see,
e.g., the Introduction and Chapters 2 and 7, this volume), in this
chapter, we spend time considering the fourth, professional threats. A
first consideration that covers all professional activities has to do
with the policies you have that govern your practice. Four issues are
particularly important to your practice each and every day, and as a
result, you should know and understand each of them. They are (a) the
laws and rules that govern the practice of psychology in your
jurisdiction, (b) the federal Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA, 1996; see U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 2015), (c) informed consent, and (d) release of information.

Laws and Rules Three categories of guiding principles govern the
practice of psychology in each jurisdiction. First are the statutes
passed by state, provincial, or territorial legislatures that place in
law the requirements and boundaries for professional practice. Taken as
a totality, such statutes are usually

133

134

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

referred to as the Practice Act. Most Practice Acts have a section that
says something like, "The Board may \[or shall\] adopt such rules as are
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act." Thus, most licensing
boards also develop a set of rules (also referred to as regulations)
that define the basis for licensure, specifications of continuing
education, and the definition of practice conduct (i.e., rules of
conduct) that constitute minimum acceptable practice and the violation
of which can lead to disciplinary action. It is essential that every
practicing psychologist knows and understands the laws and rules that
govern the practice of psychology in his or her jurisdiction. That is
the minimum level of ethical and legal conduct to which the state (in
the form of the licensing board) can hold a licensee accountable and
that can result in disciplinary action that affects the right to
practice. Although reviewing the rules of the 64 jurisdictions in the
United States and Canada seemed like an impossibly daunting task that
would only lead to a confusing amount of potentially contradictory
information, the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards
(ASPPB), the association composed of the licensing boards in the United
States and Canada, has model language regarding providing psychological
assessments that serves as a model for many jurisdictional rules in this
area. These model (ASPPB, 2002) regulations make the following points:
Psychologists should not offer a professional opinion about someone
without substantial professional contact or a formal assessment of that
person. ❚❚ Information obtained in the course of an assessment should be
considered confidential. ❚❚ Patients have a right to obtain an
explanation of the assessment procedures and of the results of the
assessment in language they can reasonably be expected to understand. ❚❚
In formal psychological reports psychologists state any reservations
they have regarding conclusions, limitations of the assessment
procedures, any conflicting information present in the assessment data,
and the use of any nonstandard assessment procedures. ❚❚ In their
communications with nonpsychologists, psychologists are careful not to
reveal information, such as test questions or answers, that would
compromise the fairness, objectivity, or integrity of the psychological
testing process. ❚❚ The publication of any testing materials by a
psychologist shall be accompanied by material that describes the
rationale for and development of the test, evidence for its reliability
and validity, and the characteristics of the normative sample. The
specific purposes and intended contexts for the tests uses should be
clearly described. ❚❚

There is a third category related to laws and rules that is more
difficult to track, because it falls more within the practice of law
than the

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

practice of psychology, yet it is important that every psychologist have
an awareness of the requirements that this category may place on
professional practice. Any psychologist can challenge the existence of
any law or rule, but such challenge can only come in the form of a
challenge to an action of a licensing board or the decision of a court.
The legal title for such a challenge is an appeal. An appeal of the
decision of a licensing board usually goes to a district court. An
appeal of the decision of a district court goes to an appellate court.
An appeal of the decision of an appellate court goes to the supreme
court. Most often, although not always, an appellate or supreme court
will publish a written opinion that offers a basis for the decision
reached. Such a written opinion, referred to as case law, unlike the
rulings of a licensing board or a district court, become precedent for
future cases, that is, they take on the force of law in the geographic
jurisdiction of the court. Thus, if there is case law in a particular
area of practice, a psychologist may be bound to practice within the
framework defined by that case law.

HIPAA The second legal requirement involves compliance with HIPAA, which
covers the practice of psychology throughout the United States. HIPAA is
a federal law with multifaceted goals, one of which was designed to
address privacy by defining consistent standards across all
jurisdictions throughout the United States regarding electronic
communication for insurance claims. Perhaps the most important goal of
HIPAA was describing the requirements to protect the privacy of
patient's personal health information. The three primary aspects of
HIPAA's requirements for health practitioners are (a) the Privacy Rule,
(b) the Security Rule, and (c) the Transaction Rule.

THE PRIVACY RULE The Privacy Rule establishes the minimum requirements
for all health professionals, including psychologists, for disclosing
private information of a patient. This rule describes the circumstances
when you can release patient information, and when patient consent is
and is not required to disclose such information. The Privacy Rule
requires that patients receive a statement from the practitioner of the
limits of the privacy of their personal health information. In addition,
the Privacy Rule provides patients the right to (a) receive notice when
their records will be released, (b) within limits access their health
record, and (c) modify their health record (APA Practice Organization,
n.d.). Figure B.1 in Appendix B

135

136

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

provides an example of a Privacy Practices statement required by the
Privacy Rule.

THE SECURITY RULE The Security Rule, the second component of HIPAA,
"outlines the steps a psychologist must take to protect confidential
information from unintended disclosure through breaches of security"
(APA Practice Organization, n.d.). The Security Rule requires that a
psychologist and other health care professionals maintain the security,
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of electronic personal
health information. To meet the standards of the Security Rule, the
psychologist should begin with an analysis of their electronic
practices. As guidance, the Security Rule has three standards that
specify minimum requirements for the Rule's implementation.
Administrative standards describe how policies and procedures, including
staff training, should be implemented to secure electronic personal
health information. Physical standards emphasize the security of the
physical space where the computer server containing the electronic
health information is stored, such as appropriate locks. Technical
standards focus on the transmission and authentication issues that may
emerge when electronic personal health information is accessed. Thus,
for example, technical standards involve the development of policies and
procedures regarding who has access to a patient's electronic personal
health information or how the computer system will be monitored for
security breaches. Because the practice of psychology for each
psychologist is unique, the Security Rule can be complied with in
various ways. Thus, we strongly recommend accessing the APA Practice
Organization (n.d.) resources or the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services website
(http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule) for
guidance.

THE TRANSACTION RULE The Transaction Rule considers the technical
aspects of transmitting an electronic message containing electronic
health care information. Thus, if a psychologist were to send electronic
personal health care information to an insurance company, the sender and
recipient would have to comply with the rules set forth in the
Transaction Rule. The technical nature of this Rule is beyond the scope
of this book, so we encourage you to seek resources to learn more about
this Rule and HIPAA in general. Information about the Transaction rule
can be downloaded from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
website at http://www.cms.
gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/HIPAA-Administrative-Simplification/
TransactionCodeSetsStands/Downloads/txfinal.pdf.

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

As you can see, HIPAA is a complex series of laws and regulations. This
brief discussion provides you an overview of its essential features. As
a student of psychology, you should understand that HIPAA provides a
floor for minimal requirements to practice, and if state requirements
are more demanding regarding patient privacy, the likelihood is that you
will need to follow the most stringent laws and regulations. For more
information, however, multiple resources are available to provide you
additional helpful information, including books and websites. Two
websites that are particularly useful are the HIPAA site of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/
privacy/) and the website developed by APA for its practitioner members
(http://www.apapracticecentral.org/business/hipaa/index.aspx). These two
sites provide additional information about the privacy and security
rules and an overview of a psychologist's obligations under HIPAA. For
the present, if you have questions about HIPAA requirements, seek advice
and consultation from your supervisor, an attorney, or an expert who
understand the complex rules and regulations of HIPAA.

Informed Consent The second policy/document that you should carefully
consider is an informed consent form. You will want your patients to
sign this, but it is first and foremost a process that includes
informing your patients, in clear, understandable language, who you are
and what you intend to do, along with all of the reasonably conceivable
consequences of the psychological service you are proposing, so that the
patient or patients can freely and intentionally decide whether they
want to continue their professional relationship with you or not. Thus,
informed consent is not only a legal issue, it is also an ethical issue.
Respecting the autonomy (APA, 2010) and the dignity of persons (Canadian
Psychological Association \[CPA\], 2000) is a fundamental ethical
principle in both the APA and CPA codes of ethics. Despite its
importance, informed consent is often not given adequate consideration.
For example, Krumholz (2010) found that the procedures to inform
patients through the use of 540 informed consent forms in 157 hospitals
were inadequate. Pope and Vasquez (2011) succinctly described the
importance of the informed consent process as follows: This fundamental
concept can trip us up if we are not careful. Nothing blocks a patient's
access to help with such cruel efficiency as a bungled attempt at
informed consent. . . . The doors to our offices and clinics are wide
open. The resources are all in place. But not even the most persistent
patients can make their way past intimidating forms (which clerks may
shove at patients

137

138

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

when they first arrive), our set speeches full of noninformative
information, and our nervous attempts to meet externally imposed
legalistic requirements such as the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act. A first step is to recognize that informed consent
is not a static ritual but a useful process. (p. 171)

Cressey (2012) reported that after receiving informed consent, 70% of
200 patients in the study did not understand that they were receiving
unproven treatments. Cressey recommended that the informed consent
process be based on interactive forms and procedures to better inform
patients. We agree. We believe that this potentially automatic process
can be performed efficiently and effectively. To do so, we have provided
a generic form as an example and, more importantly, a list of factors
that are important to include in the informed consent process, or at
least minimally should be considered as you seek to inform your patients
of the critical issues related to their assessment and treatment. In
Figure B.2 in Appendix B, we have provided a generic version of an
agency informed consent form. We believe, however, it is necessary to
provide this caveat: Do not use this form as is, rather this generic
form should be revised to include specific jurisdictional (i.e., state,
province, territory) requirements, given that each jurisdiction has its
own laws and regulations. As you develop an informed consent form to fit
your setting and develop a process to discuss the informed consent
issues, it will be helpful for you to seek supervision and consult
carefully about what the jurisdictional and ethical requirements are.
For the purposes of this text, we believe it is critical to provide you
the following list of factors that should be considered and likely
should be included in any informed consent process (note not just
included in the form). 1. A description of what your training and
background is that gives you the competence to provide the proposed
services. This could be in the form of a brief description in an
informed consent form or it could be in a separate document that
describes you and your practice. 2. Which specific services you are
proposing and the basis for those services, based on your assessment of
the person/situation and the appropriate diagnostic category from the
Clinical Modification of the International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD--10--CM; National Center for
Health Statistics, 2015). Obviously, the rationale for your services is
something that changes over time. It is best to acquire some degree of
informed consent from the very first session, but you may not yet know
exactly what your proposed treatment will be until you have gathered
more information. For example, you may well decide which psychological
tests to use or whether

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

to obtain collateral information only after the interview, which you
will use as a basis for deciding what other sources of information you
need. And you cannot decide on the ICD--10--CM diagnosis that will serve
as a basis for your proposed services until you have sufficient
information. The important point is that informed consent is an ongoing
process. It is not something that is obtained at the beginning of the
relationship and then lasts for all time. It is something that should be
reviewed anytime there are any changes in perspective, diagnosis,
direction, goals, or proposed psychological services. 3. A list of
alternative services (including therapy, assessment, consultation, or
supervision) that might be used to address the same set of problems and
why you have chosen the approaches you have. This is obviously a
somewhat gray area. Given the amount of research that has accumulated
over the past 40-plus years (see Bergin & Garfield, 1971; Hunsley & Lee,
2014; Lambert, 2013), it would not be possible to provide all of the
alternatives for which there is empirical support. To attempt to do so
would be overwhelming to your patients and would violate the first
principle of true informed consent, providing information that is
understandable and on which the person can make a free and informed
choice. What is appropriate to provide is a limited number of reasonable
options, so the patient can know that there are viable alternatives from
which to choose. 4. A description of the limitations and potentially
negative outcomes of your proposed services. This is also a difficult
component of informed consent because it is often impossible to know in
advance what the negative outcomes could be. But, just as you need to
think about what a reasonable person (the standard often used in the law
to determine whether what a professional did was acceptable or
actionable) might consider a risk to protect yourself, you need to be
direct and honest with your patients about reasonably foreseeable
limitations and negative outcomes. Such negative outcomes should include
both proximal ones (e.g., "It might be uncomfortable and distressing to
talk about certain areas of your life") and distal outcomes (e.g., "As a
result of our therapy, relationships you have with significant others
may change," or "As a result of this assessment, you could be determined
to be an unfit parent"---although the language you use to convey such an
outcome need not be quite that stark). 5. Part of your discussion about
the limitations of therapy or of an assessment process should include a
statement that you can only draw conclusions and make recommendations on
the basis of the information you are provided. You cannot be a mind
reader, so it will be important that the patient be open

139

140

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

and candid with you. Without that, your service is very unlikely to be
of much benefit. Of course, the patient has the option of declining to
talk about a specific topic, if she or he is not ready to be open about
it, but telling only partial truths or untruths is likely to be
counterproductive. 6. An alert about any duty to warn that
jurisdictional law may be required. Those usually involve either
imminent and serious risk of harm to others or the presence of abuse of
a child or vulnerable adult. We discussed this element in more detail in
Chapter 7. 7. A statement about where any results, whether in the form
of a formal report or in the form of therapy progress notes, might be
sent and what the procedures are for sending information to others (more
about this below). This should include a statement that once you have
sent information to another individual, you cannot take it back and you
cannot control what that individual might do with that information. 8. A
statement that the patient or evaluee can choose to discontinue the
service at any point without any negative consequences, other than a
report that has already been approved by the patient will be sent with a
description of what has been done and a statement, without judgment,
that the individual chose not to continue/ complete the process. 9. A
statement that consultation with another professional, including an
attorney, is acceptable before a decision is made whether to continue
the service or not. 10. A statement that the client has a right to a
nontechnical explanation of the services being provided and of any
results or conclusions drawn (the latter would most often be appropriate
in the case of a psychological assessment). In most instances (except
some court- or agency-ordered assessments), the client also has a right
to receive a copy of any report or clinical notes that are created. 11.
A statement that the client has a right to ask any questions she or he
has regarding the nature of the service and the potential consequences
of receiving the service. 12. A description of the unit costs
(typically, per hour fee) of the service, an estimate of the total costs
of agreeing to receive the service, and a description of how billing is
handled. 13. A statement of your policy and the law regarding
maintaining confidentiality of information obtained. 14. A statement of
how you handle a request that involves a change in roles. We discuss
this point in greater detail in Chapter 7 (this volume) and below in the
context of both the Lynn case and the John Smith case.

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

15. A statement of how you handle any conflicts or disputes that might
    arise during the course of the service.
16. A statement that the individual has a right to obtain a copy of the
    laws and rules governing the practice of psychology and to make a
    complaint to the licensing authority (with address and telephone
    number of the licensing board included) as required by law or rule.
17. A statement that the individual has a right to be free from any
    unlawful discrimination and has a right to expect that she or he
    will not be taken advantage of or treated in a way that is primarily
    for the benefit of the psychologist.
18. A clearly thought out policy regarding electronic communication,
    including Facebook, Twitter, or e-mail or other social media for
    communication, including use of fax or, even, telephone for sharing
    information. For example, how much time between sessions would you
    be willing to spend on the telephone with a patient? Are you
    reachable during evenings, weekends, and vacations? Those policy
    items should be clearly stated from the beginning of your
    professional relationship. You should be aware of and communicate
    any limitations to privacy in using any electronic means of
    communication.

Release of Information Unless you encounter an exception discussed
below, state laws and regulations, as well as the ethics of our
profession, require you to seek your patient's consent to provide anyone
information that you have acquired during an assessment or treatment
session or sessions. As a result, it is essential to familiarize
yourself with the basics of developing a clear form and the process used
to obtain a patient's consent to release confidential personal health
information when needed. The privilege to keep the information private
lies with the patient, and information can only be released with the
permission of the patient, through either a signed release form or an
action that brings the information into the public domain, such as
filing a lawsuit, with the information obtained by the psychologist a
basis for the suit. Obviously, in the case of an assessment requested by
some outside party, whether an attorney, as in the case of Ms. Sanchez,
or another professional, in the case of Mr. Smith, putting in the time
to do the assessment and then not being given permission to send out a
report would be problematic. What is one to do? One obtains permission
upfront, with a statement that if the person chooses to withdraw from
the assessment before it is completed,

141

142

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

a report will be sent to the designated person based on the information
that had been obtained. As we discussed at greater length in Chapter 6,
common exceptions to the requirement to obtain permission to release
information are, namely, the following four circumstances: a. To comply
with mandated reporting laws in cases of serious and imminent threat to
another person or abuse or neglect of a child or vulnerable adult, b.
when the release of information has been ordered by a court, c. when the
release of specific information is necessary to provide the
psychological service, and d. when records have been subpoenaed by a
licensing board as part of an investigation of a complaint. Figure B.3
in Appendix B contains an example of a generic release of information
form that you are able to modify as needed. For your self-protection, as
well as clarity with your client, permission to release information
should normally be obtained in writing. Getting permission to release
information is fundamental to our practices because without it no one
could be assured of being able to trust us and people would not,
therefore, be willing to share with us their private thoughts and
feelings. Insurance coverage is a special case. Logically, one would
think that if patients want to use their insurance to cover the cost of
your services, they would expect you to comply with the coverage
requirements of the insurance company. That may not always be the case,
however. This is an example of a situation that can be, at best, awkward
for you, even though you have not really done anything wrong. Thus, the
best practice is to obtain from every patient who wants to use insurance
coverage a signed limited release of information form to allow you to
share the information required by the insurance company for them to pay
you. The following elements will provide you guidance in the development
of a release of information form and process to discuss this release
with your patient: 1. The date the form was signed and the name of the
patient. 2. The name, address, and phone number of the person being
granted permission to release information. 3. The name, address, and
phone number of the person who is to receive the information. 4. A
statement that the patient has a right to maintain privacy of all
information and is under no obligation to sign the form. 5. The specific
information being authorized to be released, the form of the release
(i.e., copies of records, summary, verbal or

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

written information), dates of treatment or assessment, and limitations
upon any disclosure. 6. The reasons the information is being released.
7. The inclusive dates the release covers or that it automatically
expires after 12 months or a certain period of time specified by law or
rule. 8. A statement that the authorized release can be revoked at any
time, with the exception that such revocation of permission does not
cover any information that has already been released. 9. Signature of
the patient authorizing the release and, if not the patient, the
authority the signatory has for signing. 10. A statement that
information obtained is considered confidential and except with specific
exceptions, information will not be released without the individual's
expressed permission. 11. A statement of the potential consequences of
releasing information. Although it is difficult to foresee all
consequences, the following is a reasonable list. When you are in
independent practice, it is a good idea to consult an attorney or other
expert in your jurisdiction about releasing information if you have
questions. a. Others, even beyond those designated in the release of
information form, might obtain information that the patient would prefer
they not know about him or her. b. The information release could have an
adverse effect on any ongoing legal action. c. The information release
could have an adverse effect on employment, job opportunities, or
desired services or benefits. Providing a well-designed informed consent
process, using an easyto-understand release of information form, and
following HIPAA and state laws and regulations are excellent steps to
manage risks that may occur in your practice. Certainly not all of the
above events will occur, but the patient has a right to know with
reasonable probability what could happen, so she or he can make an
informed decision about whether to proceed with the release of
information. Now, let us turn our attention to the three cases we have
been discussing. What are the specific risks involved?

Specific Risks Although Murphy's Law (i.e., anything that can go wrong,
will) does not really apply for any specific case, sooner or later in
your career, some things will go wrong or minimally, will not go as
planned. Risk management has to do with being able to anticipate what
could go wrong and

143

144

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

to respond effectively if it does. To explore possible risks in the
cases we have discussed, it is helpful to ask yourself, What could
possibly go wrong in the case of Lynn?

Case 1---Lynn Clearly, the first and foremost thing that could go wrong
in Case 1 is that as a result of the assessment and/or treatment of
Lynn, her employability status is affected. That is certainly true if
feedback is provided to the employer, an issue that is discussed in
Chapter 7. However, it is also possible that her employability or
employment status might be affected even if you do not provide any kind
of feedback. That is, the employer who experiences stigma about
psychotherapy could conceivably decide (maybe not rationally or fairly,
but who says that rationality or fairness are considerations in a
worst-case scenario?) that being treated by a psychologist is a
tantamount admission that Lynn is not doing well. Because of a biased
view about psychotherapy, the employer could decide to fire or suspend
Lynn or to curtail her workload, any one of which could (and probably
would) upset Lynn and, potentially, may lead her to blame you. So, what
would be an appropriate risk management plan for such a scenario? There
is no guarantee that any action on the part of a psychologist could
influence the actions of the employer, so counting on his or her
rationality and fairness is not a viable game plan. An appropriate risk
management plan should rely first and foremost on actions you can take.
Neither is deciding to send a positive report on the treatment back to
the employer a viable option. First, even doing that is no guarantee
that the employment outcome for Lynn is going to be positive. To trust
in that is to rely on the actions of another person. Second, HIPAA
confidentiality and privacy considerations are involved, as previously
described. There is no ethical basis for sharing such information with
the employer, unless the patient instructs you to do so, after you have
had an extensive conversation with her about what the potential
consequences might be of doing so, both positive and negative. Third,
you should have the discussion about how to handle such a situation
before the outcome is known. A patient might, potentially, decline to
allow sharing of information and later change her mind, if the therapy
process went well. That creates a different kind of dilemma for the
psychologist, however. It puts the psychologist in the position of
agreeing to release only positive information, which can create pressure
to convey things in a positive light or, even, to be less than
completely honest. One primary goal of risk management is to avoid
situations that are awkward for the psychologist, or, even more
importantly, place

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

the psychologist in a situation which allows no good solutions, where
either harm to the patient or to the psychologist are possible. The only
viable way of engaging in appropriate risk management in such a
situation is to undertake a careful and complete informed consent
process. We again emphasize that such a process is not primarily about
providing a form to a patient and getting the patient to sign. Doing
that may be consent, although, as discussed above, just having a patient
sign a form in not adequate and truly informed consent. The informed
part of the consent means that the patient understands what the options
are and understands what the various consequences might be and, based on
those understandings, makes a decision about how s/he wants to proceed.
That does not reduce the risk to zero, but if you have engaged in such a
process and carefully documented what you did, what the issues were, and
what the decisions were and why, the probability that you will be held
accountable for some negative outcome will be extremely low. The second
risk has to do with the possible outcome itself. The case history
indicates that Lynn is concerned about the impact her psychological
issues is having on her career and worries about losing her job. She is
looking to therapy as a means of changing course and protecting her
career. That is a considerable amount of pressure on you. Her life
happiness and her vocational future depend on the outcome of the
therapy. Again, informed consent is the appropriate way to manage that
risk. Although there is research that indicates that a patient who has
positive expectations of the therapy increases the likelihood of a
positive therapeutic outcome (Constantino, Arnkoff, Glass, Ametrano, &
Smith, 2011; R. P. Greenberg, Constantino, & Bruce, 2006; J. Miller,
2009), from a risk management perspective, these expectations have to
come from the patient him/herself. The psychologist who has testimonials
on his or her website in an attempt to influence the expectations of
patients and potential patients is not only acting unethically (see APA,
2010; Ethical Standard 5.05), the psychologist may be creating undue
influence by using testimonials that come from vulnerable patients or
former patients (and, all patients are vulnerable by definition; who
wants to be a test case in court for whether the patient was vulnerable
to "undue influence" or not?). The psychologist is not engaging in
effective risk management if the patient has been led to believe that a
positive outcome is next to guaranteed. Therefore, both the wisest and
the most ethical approach is to be very clear about what the limitations
of therapy are and not to make promises that are impossible to keep. The
third primary risk in this case where services are offered by a student,
namely, you, is that the services are provided by a person who is, by
definition, not yet competent enough to practice independently. The risk
is that if the outcome in the future were negative, Lynn or someone
close to her could make the case that the services provided were
incompetent.

145

146

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Let us say, for example, that despite her protestations regarding
suicidality, Lynn ends up committing suicide. The accusation could be
made not only that the service provided was incompetent, but had the
provider of the service been competent, she would have been able to
recognize that Lynn was suicidal and would have taken action to prevent
a successful suicide. Imagine the somewhat unlikely, but not impossible,
scenario of those close to Lynn being aware of her suicidality, but you,
the graduate student, took her at her word that she was not suicidal,
and then she subsequently killed herself. Imagine the following
interaction with a licensing board member or attorney (actually, the
following questions as stated are much more likely to come from an
attorney than from a psychologist member of a licensing board). How
would you respond to these questions? Would you change the answers we
provided in any way? Attorney: Trainee A \[i.e., you\], you were not
aware that Lynn was suicidal, is that true? You:

Yes, she told me she was not.

Attorney: And, Trainee A, were you also not aware that everyone who
knows Lynn well did know that she was suicidal? You:

No, I was not aware of that.

Attorney: So, you accepted at face value her statement that she was not
suicidal, is that correct? You:

Yes.

Attorney: You also diagnosed Lynn as having a major depressive disorder,
did you not? You:

Yes. \[Likely, using ICD--10--CM code F32.1\]

Attorney: And, further, suicidality should always be considered in such
a diagnosis, isn't that true? You:

Yes, that is true.

Attorney: And, further, despite the diagnosis, you accepted her
statement about not being suicidal even though you state in your own
records that Lynn was cautious about self-disclosing, is that correct?
You: Yes, but I also stated that she became more open and candid in her
responses. Attorney: Now, Trainee A, if she was cautious about
selfdisclosing at one point in the interview, isn't it possible that
later, even though you thought she was more open, she reverted to being
more cautious, especially if you were asking her about a behavior

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

that could potentially result in your deciding you needed to hospitalize
her against her will? You:

No, I don't think she did that.

Attorney: Trainee A, please just answer the question. I didn't ask you
whether you thought she reverted to being more cautious, I asked you
whether it was possible that she did. You: Yes, that is possible
\[because that is the only true answer you can give\]. Attorney: Do you
have any specific tests or procedures that can tell you how open and
candid or cautious a person is being? You:

No \[because there are no such tests\].

Attorney: Given that fact, did you ever consider contacting any of her
family members and friends to make sure your conclusions about her
suicidality were accurate? Isn't suicide a pretty important
consideration where you would want to be very sure about your
conclusions? You: Yes, it is important, but I didn't consider doing so,
because I was taught that maintaining the patient's privacy was of
primary importance. Attorney: So, you made the decision for Lynn that
her privacy was more important than her life, is that what you are
telling me? . . . I withdraw the question. \[Thereby making the point
without giving you an opportunity to respond.\] If you were given the
opportunity to respond to this last question, what would you say? And
how do you feel in this tough situation? No doubt you would be
discussing your thoughts and feelings with your supervisor. You get an
idea of how such a process could go. This is a difficult dialogue with
the attorney who has boxed you in. In your responses, the important and
ethical way to respond is to be honest without extensive efforts to
justify your oversight or error. Once you have missed something
important, it is very difficult to go back and fix it. That is why a
carefully considered and comprehensive informed consent process is
important, both to increase the likelihood that Lynn will be candid with
you and so that you can explain exactly what you communicated to Lynn
about openness, as well as about the limitations of your efforts. It is
also why using the ICD--10--CM as a means of determining what questions
to ask and what possible symptoms/behaviors to pursue in your assessment
process is so important.

147

148

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Of course, another important element of your informed consent process
should have been conveying the information clearly that you were a
student in training, and that all sessions with Lynn would occur under
supervision. Lynn would then have the opportunity to decline the
professional service without negative consequences if she did not want
to work with a student. That circumstance also has major implications
for the nature of the supervision, that is, that you must be open and
candid with your supervisor about all elements of your interactions with
Lynn. All of us wish to hide those parts of what we do that we, upon
further consideration, decide do not reflect well on us. In supervision
this same phenomenon exists (Mehr, Ladany, & Caskie, 2010), which is
exactly the wrong thing to do. It is precisely in those areas where you
are weak that you need training, and it is by your commitment to
professional development that you will communicate actions on your part
that may be problematic that you maximize risk management. In
supervision, if you only put your best foot forward, you may find that
you step in potholes regularly. However, when you partner with your
supervisor, she or he will be most effective and helpful to you to
manage the risk of practice and to grow personally and professionally,
particularly when you feel safe and supported and can discuss your
professional concerns.

Case 2---John Smith The first risk management issue in the case of
Mr. John Smith is the same as the first ethical issue: Should you
attempt to undertake an assessment with, potentially, limited access to
data and with little idea of the specific goals of the assessment within
a period of 2 weeks? The temptations to do so are great. You are in
independent practice, and your livelihood depends on how much work you
do (or, while in school, the quality of your training depends on the
kinds of cases you see and supervision you receive). So, there is
financial (or educational) self-interest in taking on this task. In
addition, your relationship with Dr. Jones, and with the medical staff
of this hospital more generally, could possibly depend on whether you
accept this referral, and that also could have more long-term financial
implications. It is very difficult to make wise choices when the
consequences for you are as dramatic as they could be in this case.
Clearly, the easiest thing to do from a risk management perspective is
to decline the referral. However, risk management does not and cannot
mean that you reduce the level of risk to zero. So, what do you do in
this case? The most important thing is to engage in an initial process
of deciding whether you can, in a reason-

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

ably competent manner, conduct the assessment and answer the referral
question you have, which is "to determine a psychological diagnosis and
possible disposition." The case describes some methods for gathering the
information necessary to answer your own question about whether you
should accept the case. The best risk management strategy is to go
through those methods and then be honest with yourself about what the
reasonable thing to do is. Doing that creates another complicating
factor, however. If you call Dr. Jones's office and read through the
chart and then decide you cannot reasonably conduct a competent
assessment, the time you spent gathering the necessary information might
well not be reimbursable, that is, you will have just donated your time.
Based on your own value system and on Principle B of the APA Code of
Ethics (2010), you might well decide to provide some service pro bono,
that is, without remuneration, but you likely will want to have more
control over when you do that than this case allows. This situation
highlights one important general risk management component: If you are
in independent practice, do not think first and foremost about the
financial implications of clinical decisions you make. Doing so will
almost certainly lead you into very dangerous waters sooner or later.
You must believe that you will be able to earn a decent living by
behaving in an ethical and competent manner, and that, in fact, long
term you will be much better off, professionally and financially, if you
do so. You do not need to be aware of every billable minute or, even,
billable hour, for that billable time to accumulate to a level that at
the end of the month or year, you have earned enough to make a living.
So, when you confront dilemmas, think first about the ethical
considerations, that is, what do the ethics codes say, what do the laws
and rules in your jurisdiction say, and what is in the best interest of
the patient. Second, think about how best to protect yourself from
possible negative outcomes. In the vast majority of cases, if you focus
on the ethical issues of practice, you will develop a positive
reputation among providers and the financial aspects of practice will
fall into place. The second risk management issue involves your
relationship with others at Mr. Smith's place of work. Do you have a
conflict of interest because your sister's significant other works in
the same company as Mr. Smith? Will your relationship with your sister's
significant other or your sister, for that matter, influence how you
will proceed with this case? What is the worst possible outcome if you
accept this case? One negative outcome could be that you write something
in your report that reflects badly on Mr. Smith. It really wouldn't
matter what it might be, but say you make a statement that Mr. Smith's
ambition is interfering with his health (probably not a great statement
to make in any case, because ambition itself is not a behavior that can
be observed, so you are

149

150

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

making an inference, and you can't know for sure that some internal
state is causing Mr. Smith's medical problems). Mr. Smith is not furious
about that statement, although he doesn't much like it. He subsequently
finds out what the nature of your relationship is with your significant
other's brother, Mark. He then makes the allegation that you were biased
by that previous relationship and brings a complaint to the Board of
Psychology. How would you defend yourself against such an accusation? It
would be difficult. You could contend that you were not biased by your
relationship with Mark, but it would be a hard thing to prove. If your
assessment turns out to be pretty universally positive, the risk is
likely to be very low. But, you can't know from the beginning whether
your report will feel good to Mr. Smith or not, and the very last thing
you want to do is to allow your concerns about how Mr. Smith might view
your report to color what you write. That truly would be bias in your
own self-interest. Again, the safest strategy would be to decline the
referral for reasons of a conflict of interest. However, depending on
the setting in which you work (say, a relatively small community,
whether a small city or small community within a large city), it could
be difficult to avoid all such conflicts of interest. The issue is not
to avoid all risk, but to take the best steps to manage it. Therefore,
the second best risk management path for you to take (after being honest
with yourself about not allowing your self-interest to determine your
course of action) would be to consult with colleagues, just to make sure
that you are thinking clearly and objectively about the situation. And,
as we mentioned with regard to supervision when discussing the case of
Lynn, consultation with colleagues is not likely to be of maximum
benefit to you unless you are frank with them about the situation and
your reactions to it. The third risk management issue in this case is
making sure that you are competent to provide the psychological service
being requested. Although discussed previously at some length, it does
bear repeating that one of the best risk management tools you have is
only to practice within your areas of competence. Let us say that
Mr. Smith is mildly unhappy with your report and then finds out about
your relationship with Mark and accuses you of bias to the licensing
board. If the report you wrote is done competently, with a basis for
your conclusions in the data you have (remember the five potential
sources of data we discussed in Chapter 3), then another psychologist,
such as a member of the licensing board, will be able to look at the
data, compare the data with your report, and conclude that your
statements and conclusions are reasonable. So, clear documentation and
close adherence to the data are two very important risk management
tools. Another element of providing a competent report in this case has
to do with not trying to do too much, not trying to be too helpful. The

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

referral question is quite vague. Therefore, you do not know exactly
what Dr. Jones is looking for. The temptation is to try to provide as
much information and as many conclusions as possible, hoping that the
shotgun approach will at least hit part of the target. That is often a
bad idea, because you stretch yourself to say things that may not be
adequately supported by the data you have acquired. Beware of good
intentions that are not based on good information and good judgment! The
issue of informed consent is also involved in this case. The most
important aspect of risk management regarding informed consent is
ensuring that the consent is truly informed. That means having a
thorough discussion regarding the services and their risks and
limitations involved (and potential benefits, but describing potential
benefits is not a necessary risk management strategy), so that Mr. Smith
can make a decision based on all of the information he needs to decide
for himself how and if he wants to proceed. When seeking Mr. Smith's
consent for the assessment, it would be beneficial to use the steps in
the process outlined earlier in this chapter. The issue of
self-disclosure may also be an issue of potential risk. How much and
what kind of self-disclosure is ethical and appropriate? This is a
situation in which there is no easy answer and it is dependent on your
theoretical orientation and previous supervisory experiences. And, there
really are no clear standards to help us know exactly how much to
disclose, in large part because it will depend on what Mr. Smith wants
to know and how much self-disclosure would be beneficial to build a
trusting professional relationship. It will also depend on how much
selfdisclosure is too much for Mr. Smith. At what point would he be
inclined to say (even if his statement is unfair and a
misrepresentation), "All the psychologist did was talk about himself
\[or herself\]" (an unfortunate, but not infrequent, comment from
patients). On the other hand, does Mr. Smith have a right to know about
your relationship with Mark? Probably, yes. It might well be that the
best risk management approach is to determine how best to approach
Mr. Smith regarding self-disclosure, keeping in mind what is in
Mr. Smith's best interest (Bridges, 2001; Sue & Sue, 2003). Perhaps
limiting self-disclosure when it might be helpful would create a
different kind of risk, namely, a lack of trust in the professional
relationship, resulting in a lowered motivation on Mr. Smith's part to
be open and candid with you. The best strategy, in our opinion, is to be
careful about what and how you self-disclose, always trying to focus on
what is in the patient's best interest. Be willing to answer personal
questions (which actually are posed by patients relatively infrequently)
as directly as you can, being aware that revealing too much or too
little about yourself has its own risks.

151

152

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Case 3---Anne Sanchez The case of Ms. Anne Sanchez presents multiple
opportunities to manage risk. She has lived a difficult life and has
made a number of choices as she seeks to survive in a very difficult
world. You may have certain reactions to some of the choices she has
made. For example, let us assume that you are troubled by her former
lifestyle, because of your ethical principles or religious upbringing,
or perhaps because you are genuinely concerned about what impact her
lifestyle has had on her. And, perhaps you are a person who does not
hide such feelings well, so Ms. Sanchez knows you are minimally
uncomfortable or, even worse, distressed by the decisions she has made
and the life she has lead. How would you, or how could you, defend
yourself against an accusation that you treated her in a biased manner
because of her history? In addition, as we discussed previously, there
is the important ethical question of whether you have sufficient
knowledge of Ms. Sanchez's history and how that might impact her
psychologically. If you do not have this understanding of the issues she
has faced in her life, you could be accused of practicing outside your
area of competence. Unless you have gained competence, having the
required knowledge, skills, previous experience, and attitudes that
would enable you to assess and treat Ms. Sanchez, you may have
difficulty as her psychologist. The assessment that is being requested
is very complex in that there are multiple problem areas for
Ms. Sanchez. Are you competent in all of them? In our description of the
case, we have you deciding that you are not sufficiently competent in
neuropsychology and in chemical dependency to take on those two pieces,
so you suggest a referral to someone with such competence. However, that
still leaves depression, psychotic processes, and health psychology as
specialty areas involved in this case. If you are not competent in those
areas or cannot convincingly demonstrate such competence, usually
through a combination of knowledge, experience, and
supervision/consultation, it may be difficult for you to provide
competent service to Ms. Sanchez. Another potentially risky area has to
do with payment for your services. Nothing is said in the case
description about how or whether you will be paid for your services. If
you had not thought about that when you read through the case, if you
were in independent practice at some point you certainly would. And that
point should be at the initial contact with the referral source and then
when you have contact with the patient. If you discontinue a
professional relationship when the patient needs psychological treatment
or assessment only because you are not being paid, you could potentially
be accused of abandonment for your own benefit. Ms. Sanchez is
unemployed and was previously

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

homeless, and is now living in her mother's converted garage. She is
being assessed to determine whether she is eligible for financial aid,
meaning she is probably not currently receiving any. She almost
certainly is lacking in any substantial personal financial resources,
and she may well be without any kind of health insurance coverage. If
you decide to provide services to her pro bono, you should do that very
intentionally and very consciously from the very beginning. So, you need
to think through carefully what policies you will have regarding the
provision of services to indigent individuals or individuals with
significant financial problems. Mind you, we are not recommending that
you not do so. We also take seriously the APA (2010) Ethics Code
Principle D, regarding justice, and the CPA Code (2000) Principle IV,
regarding responsibility to society. We are simply recommending that you
be clear, both in your own mind and in your communications with others,
what your policies are, that is, how you will handle a whole host of
situations involving payment for your very valuable services. For
example, do you take on those who cannot pay at all? Do you continue to
see individuals after their benefits or available funds are exhausted?
Do you have a sliding scale, and if so, how do you determine what their
income is, that is, do you trust whatever they tell you or do you
require some kind of verification process? Do you require payment up
front or will you bill them? Do you have a limit on the number of
sessions/hours that they may be in the arrears before you take some kind
of clinical or legal action? If yes, what would that action be? Do you
use a collection agency, with whom you would have to share private
information (name, address, amount owed, at a minimum)? If yes, have you
informed your patient from the beginning about your policies? (You had
better!) Another major area of potential risk in this case concerns to
whom you owe primary allegiance. The referral came from an attorney.
Does that mean that the attorney is your primary client? Your only
client? What do you do if the interests of the attorney and the
interests of the examinee diverge? Let us say that the attorney decides
she or he wants to keep some finding or conclusion of yours
confidential, because it might be detrimental to the legal case. This is
especially likely to occur if the assessment is a so-called adverse
assessment, for instance, if you are hired by the state to show that
Ms. Sanchez is not eligible for any kind of taxpayer support. But either
you or Ms. Sanchez believes that it would be advantageous to her for
that information to be made known. To whom do you owe allegiance in that
situation? Would it matter, when such a difference in perspective
occurs, who is paying the bill? We have written the case in such a way
that Ms. Sanchez is unlikely to be able to pay for the assessment.
However, if she were a person of means and was paying for it herself,
would that change your allegiance? Or, if the

153

154

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

attorney (e.g., the state) were paying you in an adverse situation,
would that change your allegiance? This is a very complex issue that is
dependent not only on state law but also on HIPAA regulations.
Consultation with your own attorney to find out how best to proceed, if
you have competing directions, is recommended. Our ethical perspective,
however, is that both the referral source, especially if they pay for
the cost of the assessment, and the examinee have a right to expect that
you will act in an objective and reasonable manner, keeping in mind
their best interests. The primary determining factor should not be who
pays, but who the recipient of the psychological service you are
offering is. In the case of Ms. Sanchez, it is both the attorney and
Ms. Sanchez. As a result, you have a fiduciary responsibility to both.
Last, in this case with Ms. Sanchez, is one of the most emotionally
charged of all issues: sexuality. Are you clear in your own mind how you
will deal with provocative or flirtatious behavior such as that
exhibited by Ms. Sanchez? The answer to that question needs to include
not just, "I won't get sexually involved with a patient"; you will also
need to know how exactly you will handle such a situation. Ms. Sanchez
has acted in a flirtatious manner with you. How do you respond to her?
How does that impact your assessment and your subsequent contacts with
her, if any? How do you respond if she ups the ante and essentially
propositions you? She is beginning to act in a provocative manner with
you. Doing an assessment with her is likely to result in a different
response than if you were providing her therapy. If her behavior is
sexualized and she seems to be merely playful, does that influence your
response? To what degree can you trust your own impressions regarding
the seriousness and the intent of the behavior? This is a critical
situation and one in which you must trust your feelings. What is the
appropriate action to take that incorporates her clinical issues and
your ethical obligations, thus minimizing the risk that you could be
accused of sexually inappropriate behavior? If there is a risk, what can
you do to gather data that will support your position that you did not
act in a sexual manner? What kinds of records will you keep? If your
records are too detailed, can you be accused of being titillated by your
patient's behavior? How long should you keep your records? What is the
general statute of limitations in your jurisdiction regarding a patient
bringing a complaint or a malpractice lawsuit? Is the statute of
limitations regarding sexual behavior different? If yes (and many
jurisdictions do not have a statute of limitations for sexual contact
between a professional and a patient/client), which records do you
decide to keep indefinitely? Do you know or can you know who at some
point in the future might accuse you of sexually inappropriate behavior?
So, do you keep every record indefinitely, just those that note clearly
sexualized behavior, or records of patients with whom you believe that
there is some probability of such an accusation being made?

Risk Management---Protecting Patients and Yourself

As you can see, there is an almost unlimited list of difficult questions
that a risk-management-sensitive psychologist should ask himself or
herself. It should be said that false accusation of sexual behavior are
quite rare. Neither of us, in dealing with hundreds of complaints to
boards of psychology, have ever seen an accusation of sexual behavior on
the part of the psychologist when the evidence was anything other than
very conclusive that such behavior did occur. So, it may be reassuring
that such a false accusation is a low probability event. Assuming you
practice in an ethical, competent manner, it is neither necessary nor
helpful to be overly anxious about such an event. Nevertheless, thinking
through the issues carefully will help you prepare to deal with as wide
a range of challenging situations as is possible. One thing is sure:
During the course of your career, challenging situations, of whatever
nature, will present themselves from time to time. Your life will be
considerably easier and your risk much lower if you know your clinical,
legal, and ethical responsibilities and can think critically about what
to do when the situation arises and then follow through and do it.

155

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?

T

9

his book is not primarily a book on psychological interventions, and
yet, without some consideration of the issues that confront a
psychologist who is developing a plan for disposition (i.e., dealing
appropriately with an individual patient or a couple, family, group, or
organization) that will result in an improvement in that individual's or
group's circumstances, this book would be incomplete. At the same time,
responding with psychotherapy, consultation, or referral to the needs of
a patient is an issue whose scope goes far beyond the limits of this
book. In this chapter, we provide an introduction to how to think about
developing a plan for intervention. You will be exposed to a number of
treatment resources more fully in your other academic classes and during
supervision as you work to develop intervention plans for your patients.
As you begin supervised practice, it will benefit you and your patients
if you have a working knowledge of these resources.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-010 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

157

158

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Evidence-Based Practice We strongly support the movement in mental
health that has come to be known as evidence-based practice.
Evidence-based practice in psychology (EBPP) is defined by the American
Psychological Association Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based
Practice (APAPTF; 2006) as follows: "The integration of the best
available research with clinical expertise in the context of patient
characteristics, culture, and preferences" (p. 3). EBPP takes into
account treatment efficacy, "the systematic and scientific evaluation of
whether a treatment works" (APAPTF, 2006, p. 5), and clinical utility,
"the applicability, feasibility, and usefulness of the intervention in
the local or specific setting where it is to be offered" (APAPTF, 2006,
p. 5). This movement is certainly not without its critics, on the basis
of both a philosophy of science perspective (see Uebel, 2011; Weinberg,
2001) and a more direct critique of its use in clinical practice (see
Chambless & Ollendick, 2001; Pagoto et al., 2007; Stiles et al., 2006;
Straus & McAlister, 2000; Weston & Morrison, 2001). We believe that
although there are faults in our current scientific methodology, it
provides the best objective data that we have and that practicing
without taking evidence-based practice models into account constitutes a
potential risk to the public, questionable ethical behavior, and in turn
a regulatory risk to the practitioner. What does it mean to practice
using an evidence-based model? First, it means to conduct a competent
assessment, based on the available literature on assessment (see
Hunsley, 2007), that is, an evidence-based assessment, the primary focus
of this book. As you now know, using the Clinical Modification of the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems (ICD--10--CM; National Center for Health Statistics, 2015) is
one important means of providing an inter­nationally accepted foundation
for thinking about the appropriate questions to ask and the appropriate
means for collecting data. Second, using an evidence-based model means
consulting the treatment literature to guide your treatment planning.
Elements of practice that are consistent across models include
developing a positive working alliance with your patient and doing an
ongoing assessment as the treatment is being applied. This suggests that
if the treatment is not helping, the psychologist should revise the
treatment plan to another evidencebased model if it is available. If
another model is not available, consult with a colleague to determine
the next step in the treatment or refer to another therapist who may
work from a different therapeutic modality. Thus, ongoing treatment
planning is based on the ongoing assessment of the patient, which is, in
fact, the most important component of evidence that the psychologist has
(Woody et al., 2004). One can consult a large number of resources when
attempting to practice on the basis of the available evidence. Multiple
texts provide an

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?

overview of the literature on psychological practices that have
empirical support. We describe a few of these in Chapter 10, on
resources for the practicing psychologist. It is important to mention
here that APA's Division 12 (Society of Clinical Psychology) created a
task force to review the scientific literature regarding empirical
support for psychological treatments. The task force defined three
categories of treatments: well established, probably efficacious, and
experimental (Society of Clinical Psychology, 1993). The specific
criteria for inclusion in the wellestablished and probably efficacious
categories are clearly defined but are too complex for inclusion here
(see Society of Clinical Psychology, 1993, p. 10). This report has been
criticized on a number of grounds, not the least of which is that the
favored approach of a given critique writer was not included in the list
of well-established treatments. In addition, there was a sense that the
task force did not take into adequate consideration what has been
referred to as the common factors in psychotherapy, primarily those
components of psychological treatments that have to do with the
professional relationship (see Duncan, Miller, Wampold, & Hubble, 2009,
and Norcross, 2011b). Partially in response to that critique, APA's
Division 12 and Division 29 (Psychotherapy) formed a combined task force
(Norcross, 2011a) to explore this critical issue. The conclusions of
that task force include the following two crucial points: (a) The
therapy relationship accounts for why patients improve (or fail to
improve) at least as much as the particular treatment method, and (b)
The therapy relationship acts in concert with treatment methods, patient
characteristics, and practitioner qualities in determining
effectiveness. Thus, a comprehensive understanding of effective (and
ineffective) psychotherapy will consider all of these determinants and
their optimal combinations. In addition, the joint task force listed
those elements of the professional relationship that fall into one of
three categories: demonstrably effective, probably effective, and
promising but insufficient research to judge. For example, the three
Truax and Carkhuff (2007) variables mentioned in Chapter 8 fall in all
three categories: Empathy is categorized as demonstrably effective,
positive regard as probably effective, and congruence/genuineness as
promising but insufficient research to judge. A general
conclusion/recommendation of the task force is that "concurrent use of
evidence-based therapy relationships and evidencebased treatments
adapted to the patient is likely to generate the best outcomes"
(Norcross, 2011a). At the same time that we place considerable emphasis
on evidencebased practice, it is important to point out that we have
much to learn about psychological interventions from scientific study.
Psychologists are at an early stage in understanding scientifically the
process and elements of psychotherapy. That might be surprising, given
that one of the first texts that reviewed the scientific literature in
psychotherapy was

159

160

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

published in 1971 (Bergin & Garfield, 1971) and used by both of the
authors of this text in graduate school. However, because so many
variables have an impact on therapy outcome, a great deal of work
continues to be needed to explore comprehensively the effective
components of psychotherapy. This is surely one area in which practice
needs to inform science as much as science needs to inform practice. In
addition to the work of these task forces, there are 17 guidelines
promulgated by APA that provide psychologists an overview of relevant
issues in the treatment of specific populations or the provision of
psychological services. These guidelines are accessible from the APA
website (http:// www.apa.org/practice/guidelines/). Applicable to the
specific cases discussed in the previous chapters in this text are the
following six guidelines: (a) Guidelines on Multicultural Education,
Training, Research, Practice, and Organizational Change for
Psychologists, (b) Guidelines for Psychological Practice With Girls and
Women, (c) Record Keeping Guide­ lines, (d) Specialty Guidelines for
Forensic Psychology, (e) Guidelines for Psychological Practice in Health
Care Delivery Systems, and (f) Guide­ lines for Prevention in Psychology.
Please see Chapter 10 of this volume for a description of these
guidelines and where to find them. In addition to these resources
developed by the APA and its Divisions 12 and 29, the Canadian
Psychological Association developed a helpful resource, "The Efficacy
and Effectiveness of Psychological Treatments," also described in
Chapter 10. These documents provide a broad foundational overview of
treatment issues, utility, and efficacy that the practicing psychologist
can integrate into his or her practice. As Norcross and Wampold (2011)
stated, psychotherapy is increasingly effective when the therapy is
tailored to the individual as "different types of clients require
different treatments and relationships" (p. 131). Thus, a psychologist
will constantly make professional judgments about what the patient needs
and how the psychologist will respond.

Treatment and Theory In the process of learning how to be a
psychotherapist, some students just want to be told what to say and how
to say it during specific or difficult circumstances with patients. And
to a new student entering an initial practicum training experience,
almost all patient contacts are difficult circumstances. However,
psychotherapy does not work that way---and that is a good thing. Because
every individual is different and presents with a different set of
complex issues, a competent psychotherapist must be able to think

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?

critically and react to the unique presentation of each patient. Thus,
diagnosis is an important element of the picture, both knowing what
questions to ask, as we have described, and in the final formulation of
who the person is. However, by itself, diagnosis is not sufficient.
Hence, there are only labyrinthine paths involving a consideration of
the complexity of the person in the development of a treatment plan. To
develop a viable treatment plan, the competent psychologist must have a
firm foundation in theory. That is required for two major reasons.
First, as we discussed in Chapters 2 and 3 (this volume), a psychologist
is able to obtain an enormous, and sometimes overwhelming, amount of
information during the assessment process. Large amounts of data have
little meaning or significance in the absence of a system for organizing
and interpreting them. We argued in earlier chapters in this text that
the ICD--10--CM provides an excellent starting point for doing so.
Psychological theories provide a basis for understanding complex data
and for providing a foundation for knowing the important questions to
ask. Psychological theories also provide a basis for deciding what type
of interventions should be pursued. Even the rather stringent criteria
of the Division 12 Guidelines (Society of Clinical Psychology, 2014) do
not point directly to specific behavioral interventions, given, for
example, that for treatment of depression there are six approaches that
are deemed to have strong research support and an additional seven
approaches that have moderate research support. However, it is also not
the case that all treatments are equal (the socalled Dodo bird
hypothesis, based on Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland,
in which the Dodo bird proposes a race where everyone runs whatever
course they want, so "EVERYBODY has won, and all must have prizes,"
Carroll, 1865, p. 412). In fact, some have been shown to be harmful
(Mohr, 1995; Ogles, Lambert, & Sawyer, 1995). Therefore, we believe that
as you develop your theoretical orientation, it is important to
incorporate the recommendations from the EBPP movement. It is critical
to consider the empirical literature because a competent psychologist's
theoretical orientation will influence the intervention plans for his or
her patients. By way of full disclosure, the authors of this text have
been most influenced by the theories describing behavior therapy,
cognitive behavior therapy, and family therapy.

Standard of Care An important concept in assessing and treating your
patients is the standard of care. Many students and interns, as well as
seasoned practitioners, even after a number of years of education,
training, and practice, do not understand clearly what the standard of
care is and how it is developed.

161

162

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

The standard of care is simply the level of care that a psychologist
must provide after the development of a patient--psychologist
relationship. The standard of care is a threshold of professional
practice; it is not aspirational. It is the floor, not the ceiling. It
is a legal term, developed as a result of various legal cases, that is
generally defined as the practices that a reasonably prudent
psychologist would adopt. The standard-ofcare language originated in a
British tort case (Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee, 1957,
which has to do with the suffering that resulted from broken bones
caused by electroconvulsive therapy for depression) and has set a
standard that describes what the general professional community defines
as appropriate practice. Numerous influences help us as psychologists
create the standard of care, including our theoretical orientation, the
ethics codes of our professional association, rulings of the courts,
regulations by state and federal governmental agencies, the current
research literature, our training---in particular, our clinical
supervisor's theoretical viewpoint--- our patient's characteristics, our
own biases, perceptions and characteristics, and the agency policies and
procedures where we work. As can be seen, the development of the
standard of care is complex and needs to be taken into account as we
develop treatment plans for our patients. So, keeping in mind the
scientific literature, theoretical perspectives, and standard of care,
and the three very different patients we presented in Chapter 4 and
discussed in the subsequent chapters, we are now able to explore what
types of treatments and relationships might help them make progress
toward their goals.

Case 1---Lynn We conceptualize disposition in this case to involve
psychotherapy, given the focus of the original referral. One result of
the assessment that was done was that Lynn could benefit from
psychological interventions. For the purposes of this exercise, we are
going to assume that you (and we) have the competence required to
provide the recommended psychological treatment. What follows, then, is
an exploration of the issues to be considered and the thought process
involved in organizing what hopefully would be a successful treatment
plan for Lynn. Let us start with a review of what we know about Lynn
that may be relevant to disposition. This is best done in writing if you
are new at creating an intervention plan. An excellent beginning point
is to think about Lynn's differential diagnosis. We discussed the
implications of Lynn's signs and symptoms in Chapter 4. We mentioned a
number of diagnostic possibilities for Lynn,

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?

some of which included Major depressive disorder, single episode of
either a moderate (F32.1) or severe (F32.2) type, Generalized anxiety
disorder (F41.1), and Adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and
depressed mood (F43.23). On the basis of the information that we
currently have, we are not able to make a definitive diagnosis. A
psychologist should only make a diagnosis when there is sufficient
evidence for that diagnosis. Part of the message for disposition is that
more work is to be done in gathering additional information, in line
with the questions we asked in Chapter 4, before a complete intervention
strategy can be developed. However, what are the specific signs and
symptoms that lead to these differential diagnoses, and do they provide
us with any ideas regarding disposition? For this case, let us list
Lynn's signs and symptoms in a visually succinct manner: recently
changed behavior; growing sense of dread; ❚❚ decreased work
productivity; ❚❚ lack of energy; ❚❚ difficult to leave home and go to
work; ❚❚ decreased physical activity with mild shortness of breath; ❚❚
sad mood; ❚❚ displays visible signs of anxiety; ❚❚ communicates feelings
of helplessness; ❚❚ use of alcohol, possibly as a self-tranquilizer; and
❚❚ difficulty with concentration and focus. ❚❚ ❚❚

In addition to these specific signs and symptoms, what have we
identified as important factors that are contributing to Lynn's referral
for psychological services? Although we do not have definite answers to
the following questions, they do shed some light on how we might think
about formulating an intervention strategy. These questions explore both
Lynn's strengths and areas of concern. How does Lynn understand the
nature of her problems? Are Lynn's problems primarily related to work or
do they extend into other areas of her life? ❚❚ What specific goals does
Lynn have in seeking psychological care? ❚❚ Has she identified specific
behaviors she would like to change? ❚❚ Does she have any thoughts about
what would be helpful to her? ❚❚ How does she experience her growing
sense of dread? ❚❚ What thoughts or experiences does she link to her
feeling of dread? ❚❚ Where does Lynn turn for support or guidance? ❚❚
What or who are the potential sources of support in Lynn's life? ❚❚ What
has been helpful to Lynn in the past when she has experienced similar
feelings? ❚❚ ❚❚

163

164

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

How much social support, that is, supportive interpersonal
relationships, does she have or does she allow herself to experience? ❚❚
How much disruption is there in her life from her symptoms? ❚❚ What does
she do well and what is going well in her life? ❚❚ In which parts of her
life does she feel in control and out of control? ❚❚ What are Lynn's
major vulnerabilities? ❚❚ What environmental triggers result in her
emotional, behavioral, and cognitive difficulties or dysfunctions? ❚❚

As can be seen, we have many questions about Lynn's strengths and
weaknesses. In addition, we will want to better understand her life and
life circumstances at this point to help us search for an effective
intervention strategy. We know the following facts: Her mother, to whom
she was close, died 2 months ago. An important relationship ended 5
months ago as a result of her boyfriend becoming involved in a sexual
relationship with someone else. ❚❚ She lives alone. ❚❚ She has a
positive relationship with her sister, who, however, lives some distance
from her. ❚❚ ❚❚

Obtaining answers to these types of questions will provide us with the
foundation to arrive at the best ICD--10--CM diagnosis and to begin to
develop an appropriate treatment plan. But, even distilled down, the
amount of information and the number of questions we have may feel
overwhelming. How does one begin to make sense of all of this
information? One excellent way is to think in terms of three categories
of human experience: affect, behavior, and cognitions. How can we
understand each of these, given the data we have, and where does that
lead us? Affect. We know that Lynn is unhappy and anxious about her
future. There are other indicators related to those emotions, such as
feelings of helplessness and a growing sense of dread. ❚❚ Behavior. We
know her behavior has changed recently, although we don't know much
about exactly how; she has difficulty getting herself to work and she is
less productive at work (also a somewhat vague sign, so one that needs
follow-up); she has had a number of losses lately (mother, boyfriend,
work productivity); and she lives alone. We can hypothesize that some of
these, such as her losses, might trigger her current emotions, but we
need to find out more. ❚❚ Cognitions. We know perhaps the least about
her cognitions, so mostly, we have questions. We know she has had
increasing dif❚❚

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?

ficulty with concentration and her sense of dread certainly has
cognitive elements, although we do not know what those are. We think she
might be resistant to therapy, although what that might involve, we do
not know. We have much to learn about how she conceptualizes her life,
her goals, her problems, her abilities, and her vulnerabilities. Thus,
even after our assessment with Lynn, we have many more questions than we
have answers, but this list can still provide us with an outline of a
framework of how we might think about proceeding. We know from the
literature that the development of a trusting and safe professional
relationship is important (Norcross, 2011b). And, given the number of
questions we have, that is exactly where we should start. It will be
through exploring all, or many, of the questions we have, some of which
are listed above and others we listed in Chapter 4, that we not only can
gather useful information from Lynn, but we will also communicate our
intentions to her. We will develop a professional relationship that will
focus on her and her needs and will be one of respect and caring, one of
honesty and openness, and one in which she can feel safe enough to
reveal her vulnerabilities and explore her possibilities. This may be a
big step for Lynn, but it is one that we will take together. Beyond our
efforts to develop a strong working relationship, however, we know that
there are emotions Lynn experiences that are undesirable and disruptive
to her, so they need to change. How can that happen? We know that simple
catharsis is not always enough (Tavris, 1989), but it can be helpful
when working with uncomfortable emotions (L. S. Greenberg, 2002; Society
of Clinical Psychology, 2014). Lynn is going to need to be given a
chance to talk about and explore her various emotions. Initially, in
addition to gathering additional information, exploring her emotions
might well be the primary focus of therapy. We also know that corrective
experiences are helpful in changing undesirable emotions (Castonguay &
Hill, 2012). Therefore, sooner or later, exploring with her behavioral
changes she can make in her life and in her environment, so that she can
have more rewarding and satisfying experiences, will be important.
Exactly what those changes might be are not yet clear to us and will
need to be part of the therapeutic process, but almost certainly they
will need to deal with the nature of her interpersonal relationships;
the nature of her intimate relationships; the support she feels or does
not feel; and her relationship with her colleagues at work, about which
we also know little, except that she has become less productive in her
work responsibilities. In the cognitive arena, a whole host of
possibilities need to be explored. The fact that Lynn feels helpless and
has a growing sense of dread almost certainly means that she
conceptualizes her life as difficult and even threatening, and that she
does not believe that she has the

165

166

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

resources necessary to cope effectively. To the degree that this
hypothesis is correct, she may need to be taught some useful skills to
help her cope more effectively (note well: it is still a hypothesis
despite our statement that it is almost certain---do not ever let your
confidence in your theory or in yourself let you forget that you do not
really know until you know, that is until you get the information you
need directly from your patient). Some of those skills may be behavioral
in nature. For example, how to relate to others more effectively or how
to manage stress more effectively. Some of those skills are very likely
to be cognitive in nature. How to think about herself and her life not
only more effectively, but more realistically. What Albert Ellis (1973)
and Aaron Beck (1967) in particular taught us is that people are not
always very good about developing beliefs about themselves and their
lives that are positive and well-grounded in reality. So, Lynn may well
need to learn how to think in a more realistic way about herself, her
skills, her challenges, and her environment and see both the positives
and the challenges, see her strengths and the problems. Thus, for
example, we might have as one treatment goal the development of more
self-confidence, related to her romantic relationships with men. Perhaps
a second goal would be to enhance her ability to work more effectively,
and a third goal would be to truly grieve the death of her mother.
Although these goals would be helpful to her, they are not yet enough.
Treatment goals need to be specific, behavioral, and measurable to be of
maximum benefit. Let us take the first goal, to enhance her romantic
relationships with men, as an example. Lynn reports lack of trust in
relationships with men, given her recent painful experiences with a
breakup a few months ago. Yet, she appears to develop such
relationships. Thus, a few specific objectives of this treatment goal
might involve helping her identify and modify her emotions and
cognitions about herself and about potential romantic partners (remember
the authors' theoretical orientation includes cognitive behavior
therapy, so that frame is used as a basis for this discussion). Specific
interventions would include validating her emotional experience and
helping her challenge her negative automatic thoughts, and in turn, her
intermediate and core beliefs about herself and about men. Interventions
would also include steps for behavioral activation, asking her to reduce
any negative reactions to loneliness, perhaps by accepting invitations
or asking someone to join her for lunch or dinner. What these behavioral
steps might be would depend very much on what she has tried, what she
wants, what opportunities she sees available, what she is willing to
try, and so on. The development of a treatment plan is an interactive
process between you and your patient. Developing treatment plans based
on the other two goals mentioned would be similar. The plan and
intervention strategies must be developed collaboratively with the
patient.

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?

As you can see, this is not yet a comprehensive treatment plan, but it
is a beginning, based on the information and questions we have. We might
not even have enough information to know how to adjust our preferred
theoretical approach to the needs of this particular patient, so we do
not yet know whether we should emphasize intervention on the affective,
behavioral, or cognitive elements of Lynn's presentation. What we hope
this discussion does, however, is to provide a schematic, based on the
information we have and the scientific literature, that shines a light
on the way forward. One general framework for most all treatment plans
we develop will include the following four elements: Set well-defined
and clearly understood treatment goals tied to the particular signs and
symptoms that compose the ICD--10--CM diagnosis. More specifically,
although treatment goals can certainly include changes in affect and
cognitions, they should also have behavioral implications, that is,
specific and concrete behavioral changes should be included. This is
true not only to satisfy insurance companies, which often require such
specific goals, but also to make sure you are making practical progress
as you work with your patients. ❚❚ Have a discussion with your patient
or patients beforehand about your and their treatment goals. Such a
discussion should precede the finalization of the treatment goals, both
so the patient has a chance for significant input into what the goals
will be and also as a means of getting the patient's buy-in to the
stated goals. ❚❚ Decide beforehand with the patient how progress toward
treatment goals will be measured and evaluated. Again, that evaluation
should be concrete, specific, and objective and should include the means
by which progress will be monitored. ❚❚ Review the treatment plan on a
regular basis (every five sessions, or so, give or take a session or
two, depending on the specific circumstances involved) and make
modifications as needed. These modifications should occur when treatment
goals change, resulting from changes in the life circumstances of the
patient; when progress has been made (or deterioration occurred); or
when the specific goals of the patient change. ❚❚

Case 2---John Smith As part of the preparation for this discussion, we
(the authors of this text) made a list of signs and symptoms for John
Smith, along with questions we have and life circumstances we have
assessed, similar to

167

168

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

that provided above for the case of Lynn. Because of space limitations,
we decided to discuss the major issues in disposition for Mr. Smith
rather than provide those lists here. We do, however, recommend that you
make exactly that type of list as you begin to think about how to
proceed with Mr. Smith or any patient you are working with. What we
provide here is a list of those characteristics or factors that seem
particularly and directly relevant to the issue of disposition for
Mr. Smith. First we must say that we do not yet know what a
"disposition" for Mr. Smith exactly means. The referral was requested to
provide information regarding "psychological diagnosis and possible
disposition." That could mean the provision of psychotherapy following
the assessment, but for reasons already discussed, that should not be
assumed from the beginning. As the psychologist providing the
assessment, it is your responsibility to provide a competent and
thorough psychological assessment. Focusing the assessment on the
assumption that you will provide treatment afterwards is a conflict of
interest and an ethical dilemma. As we acknowledged in the discussion in
Chapter 5, due to the limited information we have, it will be helpful to
gather additional information by administering psychological testing. We
do have some information about Mr. Smith, however, that could help us
formulate an outline of a possible approach to treatment to include in
the report for Dr. Jones. What do we currently know about Mr. Smith? We
know that he is a fairly highly strung person. We know this from an
observation of his behavior, from the high expectations and high stress
he regularly experiences, and from the amount of time he spends at work.
His tension, which may well reflect an underlying anxiety disorder,
suggesting a working diagnosis of Generalized anxiety disorder (F41.1).
This diagnosis with accompanying emotions, cognitions, and behaviors
will certainly need to be a major consideration in his psychological
treatment, in particular because of its potential contribution to, or
relationship with, his angina. So, what are the specific circumstances
related to his tension? high job-related stress involving both long work
hours and high expectations, ❚❚ major feelings of anxiety related to
concerns about his health, ❚❚ high expectations of himself learned in
his family of origin, ❚❚ feelings of self-doubt involving inadequacy and
inferiority, ❚❚ mild financial stress, and ❚❚ minor family conflict. ❚❚

On the basis of these six issues, what general recommendations are we
able to provide in the psychological report? The first two major

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?

concerns listed above have an external quality, as well as internal
implications. That is, the reality that his job is demanding and
stressful and his health are realistic concerns. Those factors exist
independent of Mr. Smith's personal reactions to them. His particular
history and view of the world are unique to him and shape the way he
experiences emotions and cognitions. Some people would respond to such
concerns in a different, psychologically and medically healthier,
manner. As a result, part of the intervention needs to focus on helping
Mr. Smith understand how to perceive and manage the stressors in his
life differently and more effectively. This will certainly involve
working on making changes in his environment, as well as learning how to
adapt his behavior and his thinking regarding those things in his life
over which he has control and those over which he has no control. Two
classic works that we, the authors of this text, have found particularly
helpful are Lazarus and Folkman (1984) and Meichenbaum (1985; see also
more recent literature: Barlow, 2014; Lehrer, Woolfolk, Sime, & Barlow,
2008; Mate, 2011; McGrady & Moss, 2013; Rehm, 2010). The second two
concerns, high expectations and self-doubt, are internal and not
connected in an obvious way to Mr. Smith's presenting medical problems.
This does not mean that the concerns are less important than the first
two issues, but it may mean that Mr. Smith might be somewhat more
skeptical of discussing something so personal. That is certainly an
issue that the psychologist would need to explore with Mr. Smith.
However, an effective treatment plan for his psychological issues would
almost certainly need to include a review of his cognitions about
himself and his life and work to help him develop more realistic and
reasonable thoughts about who he is and what he does. This is an area in
which cognitive behavioral approaches have been shown to be particularly
effective (Butler, Chapman, Forman, & Beck, 2006; Hofmann, Asnaani,
Vonk, Sawyer, & Fang, 2012; Hofmann, & Smits, 2008). An exploration of
his childhood experiences, where he learned to create high
self-expectations developing into his core beliefs about the world,
himself, and his relationship with others, will likely need to be part
of Mr. Smith's treatment. The last two issues, the stresses he
experiences in his family and with his finances, are also realistic ones
for which both behavioral and cognitive strategies might be helpful.
That is, one useful approach is a problem-solving approach (D'Zurilla &
Nezu, 1999), consistent with what we said above regarding learning to
control the things we can. In the case of conflict over child
responsibilities by two very busy parents, couples therapy could also be
indicated to negotiate how those responsibilities can reasonably be
shared (see Stuart, 1980). In addition, it might be helpful for
Mr. Smith to consider his cognitions about his realistic stressors.
Based on the information available, we don't know much

169

170

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

about what those cognitions are, but one could easily hypothesize that
there is a certain amount of overreactivity present, a cognitive
reaction that Albert Ellis (1973) referred to as catastrophizing.
Additional assessment would be necessary to specify what his cognitions
are and how they may contribute to his disease. Overall, are there any
other interventions that could be useful to help Mr. Smith deal more
effectively with his concerns and life problems? We do not know much
about Mr. Smith's experience in the inpatient unit, but issues worthy of
psychological consideration often arise, either in the way a patient
feels treated or concerns that the staff has about the psychological
status of a patient. Therefore, although there may not be specific
interventions to undertake in this case, consultation with a hospital
staff member---or the staff of some other agency that is involved with a
given patient---is warranted and, even, necessary to support the
improvement the patient is making. In essence, without intervening in
the environment, it will be challenging for a patient to make necessary
changes. The behavioral way of saying that is that without some control
over the environmental contingencies, behavior change has a low
probability of occurring or of being maintained over time. Therefore, a
psychologist should always think more broadly than just one-on-one
individual psychotherapy and decide whether other resources will be
useful to incorporate into the treatment plan.

Case 3---Anne Sanchez The first issue regarding Anne Sanchez's case is
to decide what disposition means. The referral question was very clearly
restricted to the issue of her employability and involved providing a
psychological assessment with report. We argued strongly in Chapters 7
and 8 that it is advisable to restrict oneself to the referral question,
particularly in a case that could end up in court, and not attempt to
perform a variety of roles--- for example, moving from being in the role
of evaluator to that of a therapist, or even more problematic, being in
the role of therapist and then attempting to conduct a formal
evaluation. As a result, we strongly contend that the evaluator in this
case should not take on the role of the therapist, but rather, if
therapy is indicated, should refer Ms. Sanchez to an appropriate mental
health provider for needed treatment. This means that, as a practicing
psychologist, you do not practice in a vacuum. It is critical that you
know the referral resources in your community because you will need to
refer or collaborate on treatment with these colleagues. Thus,
"disposition" in this case means providing a written report that answers
the referral questions as best a psychologist can and making a

Disposition---The Assessment Is Done, What's Next?

referral, if necessary and appropriate, to another provider for
treatment. A strong case can be made that in a case like this, based on
a referral from an attorney with a specific referral question regarding
employ­ ability, that a recommendation for referral for treatment is
inappropriate. This could be the case for two reasons. First, it is
stepping beyond the specific referral question, which in a legal context
is often fraught with risk. Second, it is taking an (unasked for)
position that could cause complications in the legal case. Let us assume
for a moment that the referring attorney in this case works for the
insurance company that is involved. Depending upon the kind of insurance
involved (e.g., health vs. disability), if you make a recommendation for
treatment, you may in effect be saying that there is a mental health
disorder and treatment is necessary. The implication could be that the
insurance company should be liable for the cost of that treatment.
Depending on circumstances, such a statement may well guarantee that
this is the last referral you get from that insurance company, as your
report made their lives more complicated. The major point is that you
need to understand not only the specific referral questions but also
something of the context of the referral to avoid potentially damaging
pitfalls. But, you might argue, what if Ms. Sanchez really does need
treatment? The answer is that in this case, given a number of factors,
including the referral question, the referral source, your role as
evaluator, and who is actually your client (as discussed in Chapter 8,
Ms. Sanchez, but also the referral source), the determination of the
necessity for treatment may not be your role. Your role may be just to
answer the referral question and in doing that, you can and should
discuss the psychological issues involved in the case, as they are
relevant to Ms. Sanchez's employability. But you also need to remember
that being a competent psychologist means recognizing the limits of what
you do in the various aspects of your practice. What if the referral
comes from Ms. Sanchez's attorney, who is trying to advocate for her in
response to a decision by the insurance provider (in this case, an
agency of the federal government)? If you are contracted by her
attorney, who is her advocate, certainly it is acceptable and
appropriate for you to provide as much information as possible to that
attorney to assist in that advocacy? We would respond, probably so, but
possibly not. If a question about treatment had been included in the
referral, some response to that question would be appropriate. In the
absence of such a question, we believe it is better not to provide
unasked-for information, unless you also know the background of the
question, have expertise in that area, and have had enough communication
with the attorney to know what he or she wants. So, you may ask, if the
referral does ask for a treatment recommendation, is it appropriate to
state that psychological treatment is necessary?

171

172

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

We would still encourage you to be cautious. If you state in your report
that treatment is psychologically necessary, you may be, in effect,
providing more information than was requested, and that information may
not be helpful to your referral source and, in turn, to your client.
However, even if the information would be helpful to the referral
source, it is still not an appropriate role to extend your report beyond
the referral question. This is a complex issue, and we caution you in
writing reports to respond to and focus on the referral questions. What
would be appropriate, when a recommendation regarding treatment
necessity is not requested, is to provide a description of the
psychological problems that are present and how psychological treatments
could be of benefit to Ms. Sanchez, without stating or implying that
such treatment is necessary. Focusing on the benefits rather than the
necessity of treatment might provide the referral source and Ms. Sanchez
latitude in the next step they take without overstepping the boundaries
of your appropriate role. So, in terms of disposition with Ms. Sanchez,
we are left with writing the report, along the lines suggested in
Chapter 6 and recommending three referrals to the attorney, two of which
were also mentioned in Chapter 6. These referrals are for a
neuropsychological assessment and a chemical dependency assessment,
because it was decided that the evaluator did not have sufficient
competency in those two areas. In this case, it can reasonably be
assumed that a focused employability assessment will also be conducted,
but in a different, nonforensic context; thus, a referral to an
employment expert for determination of what types of employment might be
possible for this patient would also be indicated. In a non­ forensic
context, a referral to a psychiatrist for determination of whether
pharmaco­therapy for her depression and hallucinations might also be
indicated but has some risks in a forensic context, for reasons
discussed above. As is true with our discussion of ethical issues in
practice, disposition is a major topic in the training of psychologists.
We anticipate that you will have multiple courses in how to provide
effective psychological interventions, and we encourage you to avail
yourself of the expertise your supervisors have.

Resources---To Prepare for the Work of a Psychologist

T

10

his chapter briefly describes some resources we hope will be useful to
trainees in psychology. It offers a snapshot of the material a
practicing psychologist should know is available and should consult when
needed. We have decided to focus on the following resources: (a) the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems (ICD; see, e.g., World Health Organization \[WHO\], 2016) and
diagnosis, (b) additional resources for diagnosis, (c) assessment, (d)
clinical interviewing, (e) practice guidelines, (f) evidence-based
practice, (g) ethics and risk management, and (h) resource for other
resources.

ICD and Diagnosis Although the Blue Book (WHO, 1993) provides useful
guidance for diagnosis, it is not as thorough, comprehensive, or
up-to-date as a textbook on psychopathology. The ICD system
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14778-011 A Student's Guide to Assessment and
Diagnosis Using the ICD--10--CM: Psychological and Behavioral
Conditions, by J. Schaffer and E. Rodolfa Copyright © 2016 by the
American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

173

174

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

assumes a degree of expertise in diagnosis that the professional brings
to the process of assessment. For additional information about the ICD,
we provide you with these four easily accessible resources: ICD--10
Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical
Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines. This document, commonly referred
to as the Blue Book, provides a description of the main clinical
features of all of the mental health diagnoses in the ICD--10. This is
free and accessible at http://www.who.int/classifications/
icd/en/bluebook.pdf. ❚❚ ICD--10--CM. This manual and related documents,
produced by the U.S. government through the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) (2015a) and National Center for Health
Statistics, is based on the ICD--10 and approved by the WHO, for use in
clinical settings. The ICD--10 is intended primarily to provide a system
for gather­ing health related data and as a common diagnostic system for
research, whereas the ICD--10--CM is intended to provide a system that
will track the presenting problem of every visit by a patient to a
health care professional. The 2015 update of the ICD--10--CM is free at
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ICD/ICD10cm.htm#ICD2015 ❚❚ The U.S. government
has provided a website through the CMS that offers up-to-date
information about the ICD--10 implementation and use:
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10/ index.html?redirect=/ICD10 ❚❚
A Primer for ICD--10--CM Users, Washington DC: American Psychological
Association. Dr. Carol Goodheart has written an overview of the
implementation of the ICD--10--CM to help psychologists and other mental
health practitioners comply with the federal law. ❚❚

Additional Resources for Diagnosis For additional information about
diagnosis, most readers of this book have taken or will take a course in
psychopathology that used textbooks, which along with supervised
clinical experience, will help them achieve competence in diagnosis. For
students who wish to gain additional foundational knowledge in
diagnosis, the following commonly used, excellent texts are noted.
Beauchaine, T., & Hinshaw, S. (Eds.). (2013). Child and adolescent
psychopathology (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. This text provides a
thorough discussion of childhood and adolescent disorders and examines

To Prepare for the Work of a Psychologist

genetic, neurobiological, and environmental factors within a
developmental perspective. Beidel, D., Frueh, C., & Hersen, M. (Eds.).
(2014). Adult psychopathology and diagnosis (7th ed.). New York, NY:
Wiley. This text provides a comprehensive introduction to existing views
of psychopathology and its use and relevance in practice.

Assessment Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (Eds.). (2011). Handbook of
assessment and treatment planning for psychological disorders (2nd ed.).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. This text provides an overview of the
science-based assessment and treatment planning issues for all major
psychological disorders, with an extensive list of appropriate
psychological measures. Groth-Marnat, G. (2009). Handbook of
psychological assessment (5th ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. This book has
long been considered the introductory, graduate-level text on
psychological assessment, covering a broad range of basic topics, such
as interviewing, the foundational issues involved in assessment, and an
overview of some of the major psychological tests used in assessments.
Rust, J., & Golombok, S. (2009). Modern psychometrics: The science of
psychological assessment (3rd ed.). Florence, KY: Routledge. This book
is a useful overview of the science behind competent psychological
assessment. Sattler, J. M. (2014). Foundations of behavioral, social,
and clinical assessment of children (6th ed.). La Mesa, CA: Author.
Often referred to as the bible of child psychological assessment, this
text provides a comprehensive overview of the issues involved in a
thorough assessment of children.

Clinical Interviewing Fontes, L. (2009). Interviewing clients across
cultures: A practitioner's guide. New York, NY: Guilford Press. This
book offers useful guidance to help practitioners conduct effective
interviews with culturally and linguistically diverse clients and
patients. Strategies to avoid common crosscultural microaggressions and
misunderstanding are explored. McConaughy, S. (2013). Clinical
interviews for children and adolescents: Assessments to intervention
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press. This valuable book provides
guidelines for interviewing children

175

176

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

and adolescents, as well as their parents and teachers, to assess
school, relational, emotional, and family issues, in addition to problem
behaviors. Sommers-Flanagan, J., & Sommers-Flanagan, R. (2013). Clinical
interviewing (5th ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. This comprehensive text on
interviewing provides a practical guide to a wide range of interviewing
situations, from basic to more advanced situations.

Practice Guidelines Practice guidelines, approved by the American
Psychological Association (APA), are developed to provide psychologists
with specific information to guide their professional behaviors and
conduct. Guidelines are not standards, which provide a mandatory code of
conduct that can be enforced by the profession or by a regulatory body.
Guidelines are aspirational and provide a behavioral frame and set of
goals that psychologists should strive to attain. They are developed to
enhance the practice of psychologists and the development of the
profession. It is important to emphasize that guidelines are not
intended to take precedence over the professional judgment of
psychologists; they are developed to assist the psychologist in using
their professional judgment. APA has approved 17 guidelines (APA, 2014)
for the practice of various aspects of psychology. To be approved by
APA, guidelines must go through a rigorous process of development and
then be approved by APA's Council of Representatives, its governing body
(APA, 2002a). The following six guidelines appear to be most relevant to
the practice of psychology broadly covered in this book or are
particularly relevant to training. Guidelines on Multicultural
Education, Training, Research, Practice, and Organizational Change for
Psychologists (2002b). This document addresses the United States'
"ethnic and racial minority groups as well as individuals, children, and
families from biracial, multi­ ethnic and multiracial backgrounds" (APA,
2003). ❚❚ Guidelines for Psychological Practice With Girls and Women
(APA, 2007a). This document articulates guidelines that will enhance
gender- and culture-sensitive psychological practice with women and
girls from all social classes, ethnic and racial groups, sexual
orientations, and ability/disability statuses in the United States. ❚❚
Record Keeping Guidelines (APA, 2007b). "These guidelines are intended
to provide psychologists with a general framework for ❚❚

To Prepare for the Work of a Psychologist

considering appropriate courses of action or practice in relation to
record keeping." ❚❚ Specialty Guidelines for Forensic Psychology (APA,
2012b). Forensic psychology refers to the practice of psychology when
applying the knowledge of psychology to the law in addressing legal,
contractual, and administrative matters. ❚❚ Guidelines for Psychological
Practice in Health Care Delivery Systems (APA, 2012a). These guidelines
address psychologists' roles and responsibilities related to service
provision and clinical care, including teaching and administrative
duties within a diverse range of health care delivery systems. ❚❚
Guidelines for Prevention in Psychology (APA, 2013). As these guidelines
themselves describe, they "offer guidance to psychologists on several
levels, including supporting the value of prevention as important work
of psychologists and providing recommendations that give greater
visibility to prevention among psycho­logists regardless of specialty
area or work setting (Snyder & Elliott, 2005)."

Evidence-Based Practice Barlow, D. H. (Ed.). (2014). Clinical handbook
of psychological disorders: A step-by-step treatment manual (5th ed.).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. This is a comprehensive text on major
psychiatric disorders, including diagnostic criteria, assessment issues,
and evidence-based inter­ ventions for each disorder, with a strong dose
of practical clinical wisdom. Castonguay, L. G., & Oltmanns, T. F.
(2013). Psychotherapy: From science to clinical practice. New York, NY:
Guilford Press. This text integrates the science and practice regarding
the more common forms of psychological disorders by presenting the
science associated with dis­orders and drawing clinical implications from
that science. Duncan, B. L., Miller, S. D., Wampold, B. E., & Hubble, M.
A. (Eds.). (2009). The heart and soul of change: Delivering what works
in therapy (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. This text discusses the evidence-base of the common factors
in psycho­ therapy, including relationship factors and is a must read for
all psychotherapists. Lambert, M. J. (Ed.). (2013). Bergin and
Garfield's handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (6th ed.). New
York, NY: Wiley. The classic

177

178

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

and standard text for what research has shown us about what works and
does not work in psychotherapy across the broad range of issues in
therapy, including research issues, therapeutic factors, theoretical
approaches, and special settings. Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (2011b).
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-based responsiveness.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press. The standard book on what the
research shows about how the professional relationship contributes to
change in psychotherapy. Website for the Society of Clinical Psychology,
APA Division 12 (Society of Clinical Psychology;
http://www.psychologicaltreatments.org). This website provides a great
deal of information about evidence-based practice, including the
criteria they used for categorizing treatments as having strong or
moderate research support. The site provides a tab that lists
evidence-based treatments alphabetically and a tab that lists treatments
that have research support for each of the major psychological
diagnoses. Website for APA Practice Directorate
(http://www.apa.org/practice/ resources/evidence/index.aspx). This
website provides the APA Policy Statement on Evidence-Based Practice,
the APA Report that appeared in the 2006 American Psychologist on
Evidence-Based Practice in Psychology, and the Report of the 2005
Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice. These three
resources provide a foundation for competent and effective practice
based on the science of the profession. Website for APA's Public
Interest Directorate (http://www.apa.org/
pi/families/resources/task-force/evidence-based.aspx). This website
provides the report of the Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice With
Children and Adolescents, which describes challenges in developing and
enhancing evidence-based practice for families and children/
adolescents. Canadian Psychological Association's "The Efficacy and
Effectiveness of Psychological Treatments," provides a wealth of
information for the practicing psychologist. This excellent document is
available online at
http://www.cpa.ca/docs/File/Practice/TheEfficacyAndEffectiveness
OfPsychologicalTreatments_web.pdf.

Ethics and Risk Management ETHICS Bersoff, D. N. (2008). Ethical
conflicts in psychology (4th ed.). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. This comprehensive

To Prepare for the Work of a Psychologist

resource presents ethical dilemmas encountered by psychologists as they
assess, intervene, and conduct research. Dr. Bersoff provides helpful
perspectives on critical ethical issues that have no easy answers.
Fisher, C. B. (2012). Decoding the ethics code: A practical guide for
psychologists (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Dr. Fisher, chair of the task force that revised the
Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct, has written a
book for students and psychologists to help them understand this code.
This book provides guidance on professional behavior, how to avoid
ethical violations, and how to protect the welfare of clients and
patients. Knapp, S. J., Gottlieb, M. C., Handelsman, M. M., &
VandeCreek, L. D. (2012). APA handbook of ethics in psychology.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. This two-volume set
provides coverage of the philosophical foundations of professional
ethics and a resource for ethical issues that can arise in virtually any
context, including professional practice, education, and research. Pope,
K., & Vasquez, M. (2011). Ethics in psychotherapy and counseling: A
practical guide (4th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Psychologists
will encounter many ethical dilemmas without obvious or simple
solutions. This is a terrific book that not only explores the ethical
issues we encounter as psychologists but also encourages us to explore
our own values and attitudes, that is, who we are as psychologists.
Pope, K., Sonne, J., & Greene, B. (2006). What therapists don't talk
about and why: Understanding the taboos that hurt us and our clients
(2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Pope and
his coauthors wrote this book to help psychologists explore the myths
and taboos that interfere with their practice. The authors provide
provocative questions to help practitioners assess who they are,
recognize myths they hold, and challenge taboos that interfere with
their ability to be authentic with their clients and patients.

RISK MANAGEMENT Knapp, S., Younggren, J. N., VandeCreek, L., Harris, E.,
& Martin, J. N. (2013). Assessing and managing risk in psychological
practice: An individualized approach (2nd ed.), Washington DC: American
Psychological Association Insurance Trust. Some areas of psychological
practice result in ambiguity regarding ethical practice and professional
liability for psychologists. This book, developed by the American
Psychological Association Insurance Trust, helps psychologists identify
and understand ethical and legal implications of the practice of
psychology.

179

180

GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS USING THE ICD--10--CM

Resource for Other Resources We close this chapter by mentioning
PsycEssentials: A Pocket Resource for Mental Health Practitioners
(2012), written by Dr. Janet Sonne and published by APA. This useful
book provides resource information on a range of practice issues having
to do with assessment, intervention, ethics, and risk management.
PsycEssentials also has a mobile app that has up-to-date information for
a psychologist's practice.

Appendix A: Interview Protocol

Name: Age: Ethnicity:

REASON FOR REFERRAL Symptoms: When first occur, what happening then; how
cope with, effectiveness of coping; situational precipitants; thoughts,
physical sensations, affect accompanying; effect on work, relationships,
recreation; severity, when worst, best, situational or coping factors
associated with; changes over time; effect on of talking about

FAMILY OF ORIGIN AND BACKGROUND Where born and raised; Developmental
history Father, mother, siblings; relationships with family in the past;
current relationships; early memories Communication style/expression of
affect; conflict resolution/ decision-making style Rules/punishment;
history of abuse; losses/traumatic experiences Psychiatric history in
family 181

182

APPENDIX A

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS Childhood relationships; Current
friendships/supports Relationships with opposite sex, sexual history
Present family situation---married, children, etc. Nature of
relationships Child care issues---if work, or if return to work Other
significant relationships Current living situation

EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND Schools attended, graduation dates Academic
performance Behavior/learning problems; subjects enjoyed Extracurricular
activities; vivid memories Role models; favorite, least favorite
teachers

VOCATIONAL HISTORY Work history, jobs, when Reasons for changes in past
Ever fired? Current job, relationships, satisfaction Stresses---burnout,
conflicts, dissatisfactions, expectations about future Quality of work
performance Quality of professional relationships Vocational goals
Recent job seeking

INTERESTS/HOBBIES Areas of enjoyment, recreation Volunteer activities,
past, present

SUBJECTIVE STRENGTHS/WEAKNESSES Best thing done in life; worst thing
done in life What change in life if could If three wishes granted, what
would they be?

OTHER IMPORTANT LIFE EVENTS/ TRAUMATIC EXPERIENCES CURRENT PSYCHOLOGICAL
STATE Mood, affect (duration, frequency, intensity) Sleeping patterns

Appendix A

Appetite/weight changes Concentration Persistence Memory Sexual
functioning Energy level Self-esteem Suicidal ideation, strange
feelings, feelings of hopelessness

LEGAL HISTORY Juvenile record Arrests, charges, convictions, sentences,
parole

AGGRESSIVE HISTORY Fights; how deal with anger

MEDICAL HISTORY Major illnesses, high fevers, convulsions, poisonings
Injuries (head), unconscious, amnesia Surgeries, anesthesia
Hospitalizations (birthing) Developmental history Pain/secondary gains,
limitations on activity Stresses related to symptoms When first
experience current symptoms/course When seek treatment and why
Treatments and providers (addresses and phone numbers), efficacy
Treatment plan Medications, past and present, dosages, response On
medical leave, job impairment, any improvement, anticipated return to
work

PSYCHOLOGICAL TREATMENT HISTORY Outpatient, inpatient dates, providers
in past When first experience current symptoms/course When seek
treatment and why Treatments and providers (addresses and phone
numbers), efficacy Treatment plan Medications, past and present,
dosages, response On psychological leave, job impairment, any
improvement, anticipated return to work

183

184

APPENDIX A

CHEMICAL USE Time of use, age, amount, frequency, physical symptoms,
loss of control, treatment (inpatient, outpatient), current status
Alcohol, marijuana, hallucinogens, barbiturates, amphetamines,
narcotics, cocaine, prescription medications

DAILY ACTIVITIES Typical day (TV, music, reading, games, telephone,
social events, movies, religious services) Level of independence
Impairments

CURRENT FUNCTIONING Personal hygiene (bathing, change clothes) Cooking
(frequency, types food, difficulties) Cleaning (make bed, wash dishes,
laundry, vacuum, mow lawn) Shopping (frequency, make list, handle money)
Budgeting (handle own money, problems, jobs) Mobility (drive, take bus
independently, follow directions, get lost)

PERSONAL GOALS

Appendix B: Relevant Forms

FIGURE B.1 Department Agency NOTICE OF PRIVACY PRACTICES THIS DOCUMENT
APPLIES TO HOW INFORMATION AND RECORDS REGARDING YOUR HEALTH CARE AT THE
AGENCY MAY BE USED AND DISCLOSED AND HOW YOU CAN GET ACCESS TO THIS
INFORMATION. PLEASE REVIEW THIS DOCUMENT CAREFULLY. About us The Agency
is a teaching and research health care facility. All care is provided by
a team of health care professionals. Residents, fellows, interns,
students, and graduate students of health care professions schools may
provide treatment to you or participate in examinations or procedures
under the supervision of a licensed health care professional.

Example of the Privacy Practices Statement

185

186

APPENDIX B

F I G U R E B . 1 (Continued) Your health care information The Agency is
committed to protecting counseling/psychological information about you
("health care information"). To the degree possible under the law, we
will maintain confidentiality on all information you provide to us. We
will generally only disclose your information when permitted by law or
when specifically authorized by you. However, there are certain
situations in which we are allowed or required to disclose information
about you that you should know about. To the degree possible, even in
these circumstances we will discuss disclosure with you before it
happens. Please discuss your thoughts about these circumstances with
your provider. How we are allowed or required to use and disclose health
care information about you The following sections describe different
ways that we are allowed or required by law to use and disclose your
health care information. Some information, such as certain drug and
alcohol information, HIV information, and mental health information, is
entitled to special restrictions related to its use and disclosure. •

For treatment. When other agency personnel are involved in your
treatment, such as supervisors or other health providers who are also
providing services to you, they may have access to your health care
information.

•

For payment. We may use and disclose your health care information,
including proposed treatment plans, to any insurance company or a third
party you choose to use to cover the costs of the services provided you
by the Agency.

•

Research. The Agency is a research institution. All research projects
conducted by the Agency staff must be approved through a special review
process to protect patient safety, welfare and confidentiality. We may
use and disclose information about our patients for research purposes,
subject to the confidentiality provisions of federal and state law. That
means, however, that your identity will not be revealed without your
permission.

•

As permitted by law. We may use and disclose health care information
about you when required or permitted to do so by federal or state law,
such as the following:

•

To avert a serious threat to health or safety. We may use and disclose
health care information about you when necessary to prevent or lessen a
serious and imminent threat

Example of the Privacy Practices Statement

Appendix B

F I G U R E B . 1 (Continued)

to your health and safety or the health and safety of the public or
another person. Any disclosure would be to someone able to help stop or
reduce the threat. •

Military and veterans. If you are or were a member of the armed forces,
we may release health care information about you to military command
authorities as authorized or required by law.

•

Workers' compensation. We may use or disclose health care information
about you for workers' compensation or similar programs as authorized or
required by law. These programs provide benefits for work-related
injuries or illness.

•

Public-health disclosures. We may use and disclose health care
information about you for public-health purposes. These purposes
generally include the following: •

preventing or controlling disease, injury, or disability;

•

reporting vital events, such as births and deaths;

•

reporting adverse events related to food, medications, or defects or
problems with products;

•

notifying a person who may have been exposed to a disease or may be at
risk of contracting or spreading a disease or condition; and

•

notifying the appropriate government authority if we believe a patient
has been the victim of abuse, neglect, or domestic violence.

•

Legal proceedings. We may use and disclose health care information about
you to courts, attorneys, and court employees in the course of
conservatorship and certain other judicial or administrative
proceedings.

•

Lawsuits and other legal actions. We may use and disclose health care
information about you in response to a court or administrative order, or
in response to a subpoena, discovery request, warrant, summons or other
lawful process.

Your rights regarding health care information about you Your information
is the property of the Agency. You have the following rights, however,
regarding information we maintain about you.

Example of the Privacy Practices Statement

187

188

APPENDIX B

F I G U R E B . 1 (Continued) •

Right to inspect and copy. With certain exceptions, you have the right
to inspect and/or receive a copy of your electronic health record (EHR).
•

To inspect and/or to receive a copy of your EHR, you must submit your
request in writing to Custodian of Records at the Agency. If you request
a copy of the information, there is a fee for these services.

•

Right to request an amendment or addendum. If you feel that information
we have about you is incorrect or incomplete, you may ask us to amend
the information or add an addendum (addition to the record). Your
request must be made in writing and submitted to Custodian of Records at
the Agency.

•

Right to request restrictions. You have the right to request a
restriction or limitation on the health care information we use or
disclose about you for treatment, payment, or healthcare operations. To
request a restriction, you must make your request in writing to
Custodian of Records at the Agency.

•

Right to request confidential communications. You have the right to
request that we communicate with you about health care related matters
in a certain way or at a certain location. For example, you may ask that
we contact you only at home or only by mail. To request confidential
communications, you must make your request in writing to Custodian of
Records at the Agency.

•

Right to receive an accounting. Patients have a right to receive a
record of specific types of disclosures made by the Agency. To request
an accounting of disclosure, you must make your request in writing to
Custodian of Records at the Agency.

•

Right to receive a paper copy of this document. You have the right to
obtain a paper copy of this document upon your request.

Complaints. If you believe that your privacy rights have been violated
or if you have questions about your rights, you should contact the
Agency Clinical Director. We will not take action against you for filing
a complaint. Certain patients may also file a complaint with the
Director, Office for Civil Rights of the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. Effective date July 1, 2015

Example of the Privacy Practices Statement

Appendix B

FIGURE B.2 Department Agency CLINIC INFORMATION AND TREATMENT
AUTHORIZATION

Name:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
DOB:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (please print
legibly) Welcome to our department. Our goal is to promote your health,
growth, and well-being. Please review and sign this document, as it
provides you information about important issues related to the services
we provide. When you meet with your service provider, please discuss any
questions or concerns you may have. SERVICES AND ELIGIBILITY: Our
department provides confidential, short-term psychological and
psychiatric services to eligible individuals. The department does not
provide assessment or treatment for legal purposes. Based on our
resources, your individual therapeutic goals and your counseling needs,
you may be referred to individual psychotherapy, group counseling, or to
community providers for ongoing longer-term treatment. STAFFING:
Professional services are provided by licensed psychologists,
psychiatrists, marriage and family therapists, and social workers. This
facility trains psychology interns, residents and other health care
professional trainees, who may provide services and participate in your
care under supervision of a licensed health care provider.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY: Our staff will keep a summary of our
contacts with you in an electronic mental health record that is
maintained in a safe, confidential manner. Your information will only be
released as permitted by law (for example, if you present an imminent
danger to yourself or others; if there is a reasonable suspicion of
child/elder abuse; if you are gravely disabled; if records are
subpoenaed) or if authorized by you. The Agency Privacy Policy, which
you received to review, identifies how your information may be used or
disclosed. APPOINTMENTS: Since demand for services is high, we ask that
you only schedule appointments that you are confident you will keep. If
you are unable to keep an appointment, please call our appointment line
at least 24 hours in advance, so that we may make the time slot
available to another individual seeking service. Please assist us in
achieving maximum utilization

Example of an Informed Consent Form

189

190

APPENDIX B

F I G U R E B . 2 (Continued) of this important health resource.
Repeated rescheduling and/or canceling of appointments without advance
notice will likely result in termination of care from this clinic. If
staff cannot keep an appointment with you, or has other need to contact
you, our staff will attempt to contact you by calling or texting the
telephone number you provided and indicated that you preferred.
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND MEDICAL SERVICES WORKING TOGETHER WITH YOU: The
mission of the Agency is to enhance the physical and mental health of
citizens in order to help them achieve personal development and lifelong
wellness. To do this, psychology and medical providers work together in
a team approach to promote your well-being, which may include the
exchange of information. Medical providers follow a "need to know"
guideline, which means that they will only access information in your
psychological record if they believe it will benefit the care they are
providing you. TREATMENT AUTHORIZATION: I understand that the department
provides psychology and medical providers who work collaboratively to
provide health and mental health services. I understand that my mental
health provider will collaborate with medical providers involved in my
care, which may include consulting and sharing my treatment record,
including psychotherapy notes. \_\_\_\_ (initial) I have read this
information about the department and give my consent to be treated by a
health service student or licensed professional. \_\_\_\_ (initial) I
give my consent for my mental health information to be shared for the
purposes described above. \_\_\_\_ (initial) I was able to discuss any
questions and concerns them with my provider prior to signing this form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Signature

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Date

You may request a copy of this form or the Privacy Policy at
registration Please return this signed form to the Registration Staff

Example of an Informed Consent Form

Appendix B

FIGURE B.3 Department Agency AUTHORIZATION FOR RELEASE OF PSYCHOLOGY
CLINIC INFORMATION

Name Phone City

Date of Birth / /

Perm/ID \# Address State

Zip code

I authorize: (Person or facility which has medical and mental health
information)

Name: Address:

Phone: FAX: to release medical and/or mental health information to:
(Person or facility to receive health information) Name: Address:

Phone: FAX:

Generic Release of Information Form

191

192

APPENDIX B

F I G U R E B . 3 (Continued) Type of disclosure:

Verbal Information

Copies of records

Letter/Summary

Please specify the information you authorize to be released: Mental
health information Medical (This may include drug/alcohol and mental
health information documented by a primary care practitioner in the
medical record) Drug and alcohol abuse, diagnosis or treatment
information subject to federal law (42 C.F.R. §§2.34 and 2.35). HIV/AIDS
test results (Health and Safety Code §120980(g)). Type(s) of
information, if not specified above (e.g. Summary Report)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Specify date(s) of treatment, time period or condition: Limitations upon
disclosure: The purpose of this release is: At the request of the
client/patient/patient representative Other (state reason) EXPIRATION OF
AUTHORIZATION: Unless otherwise revoked, this Authorization expires on:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
If no date is indicated, the Authorization will expire 12 months after
the date of my signing this form. Patient/Patient Representative Printed
Name:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Client/Patient/Patient Representative Signature:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Relationship to Client/Patient:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Generic Release of Information Form

Appendix B

F I G U R E B . 3 (Continued) NOTICE: This Agency and many other
organizations and individuals such as physicians, psychologists,
hospitals and health plans are required by law to keep your personal
health information confidential. If you have authorized the disclosure
of your health information to someone who is not legally required to
keep it confidential, it may no longer be protected by state or federal
confidentiality laws. YOUR RIGHTS: This Authorization to release health
information is voluntary. Treatment, payment, enrollment or eligibility
for benefits may not be conditioned on signing this Authorization except
in the following cases: (1) to conduct research-related treatment, (2)
to obtain information in connection with eligibility or enrollment in a
health plan, (3) to determine an entity's obligation to pay a claim, or
(4) solely to create health information to provide to a third party.
This Authorization may be revoked at any time. The revocation must be in
writing, signed by you or your client/patient representative, and
delivered to our Agency. The revocation will take effect when the Agency
receives it, except to the extent the Agency or others have already
relied on it. You are entitled to receive a copy of this Authorization.
You have the right to receive written acknowledgment from a non-medical
recipient of the information being released pursuant to this
authorization agreeing to abide by the restrictions contained in this
release. By signing here, you waive the right to receive such a signed
written agreement from the intended recipient:
Signature\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Date\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Generic Release of Information Form

193

References

Abelson, R. P., Aronson, E., McGuire, W. J., Newcomb, T. M., Rosenberg,
M. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1968). Theories of cognitive consistency: A
sourcebook. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally. Ægisdóttir, S., White, M. J.,
Spengler, P. M., Maugherman, A. S., Anderson, L. A., Cook, R. S., . . .
Rush, J. D. (2006). The meta-analysis of clinical judgment project:
Fifty-six years of accumulated research on clinical versus statistical
prediction. The Counseling Psychologist, 34, 341--382. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0011000005285875 Aetna. (2015). Behavioral health
provider manual. Retrieved from
http://www.aetnabehavioralhealth.com/i/A/ABHProvider Manual.pdf Alarcón,
R. D. (2009). Culture, cultural factors, and psychiatric diagnosis:
Review and projections. World Psychiatry: Official Journal of the World
Psychiatric Association, 8, 131--139. American Psychiatric Association.
(1952). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (1st ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1968).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1980).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. 195

196

REFERENCES

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American
Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author. American
Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American
Psychological Association. (1990). Guidelines for providers of
psychological services to ethnic, linguistic, and culturally diverse
populations. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/pi/oema/resources/policy/
provider-guidelines.aspx American Psychological Association. (2002a).
Criteria for practice guideline development and evaluation. American
Psychologist, 57, 1048--1051.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.57.12.1048 American Psychological
Association. (2002b). Guidelines on multicultural education, training,
research, practice, and organizational change for psychologists.
Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/pi/oema/
resources/policy/multicultural-guidelines.aspx American Psychological
Association. (2003). Guidelines on multi­ cultural education, training,
research, practice, and organizational change for psychologists.
American Psychologist, 58, 377--402. American Psychological Association.
(2007a). Guidelines for psychological practice with girls and women.
American Psychologist, 62, 949--979.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.9.949 American Psychological
Association. (2007b). Record keeping guidelines. American Psychologist,
62, 993--1004. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0003-066X.62.9.993 American
Psychological Association. (2010). Ethical principles of psychologists
and code of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010). Retrieved from
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx American Psychological
Association. (2012a). Guidelines for psychological practice in health
care delivery systems. American Psychologist, 68, 1--6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029890. American Psychological Association.
(2012b). Specialty guidelines for forensic psychology. American
Psychologist, 68, 7--19. http://dx.doi. org/10.1037/a0029889. American
Psychological Association. (2013). Guidelines for prevention in
psychology. American Psychologist, 69, 285--296. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/a0034569. American Psychological Association. (2014). APA
guidelines for practitioners. Retrieved from
http://www.apa.org/practice/guidelines/ American Psychological
Association Practice Organization. (n.d.). The HIPAA security rule
primer. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. American
Psychological Association Presidential Task Force on EvidenceBased
Practice. (2006). Evidence-based practice in psychology. Ameri­

References

can Psychologist, 61, 271--285. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.
61.4.271 Americans With Disabilities Act. (2014). Retrieved from
http://www.eeoc. gov/laws/types/disability.cfm Anthem Blue Cross.
(2013). Behavioral health medical necessity criteria. Retrieved from
https://www.anthem.com/ca/provider/f1/s0/t0/pw\_ a115176.pdf. Army
Individual Test Battery. (1944). Manual of directions and scoring.
Washington, DC: War Department, Adjutant General's Office. Association
of State and Provincial Psychology Boards. (2002). ASPPB model
regulations. Montgomery, AL: Author. Association of State and Provincial
Psychology Boards. (2014a). Competencies expected of psychologists at
the point of licensure. Retrieved from http://
c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.asppb.net/resource/resmgr/Guidelines/
ASPPB_Competencies_Expected\_.pdf Association of State and Provincial
Psychology Boards. (2014b). Disciplinary actions: 1974--2010. Retrieved
from http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/
www.asppb.net/resource/resmgr/dds/dds_historical_report_2010.
pdf?hhSearchTerms=%22discipline+and+actions%22 Barlow, D. H. (Ed.).
(2014). Clinical handbook of psychological disorders: A step-by-step
treatment manual (5th ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199328710.001.0001 Barnett, J. E.
(2014). Sexual feelings and behaviors in the psychotherapy relationship:
An ethics perspective. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 70, 170--181.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22068 Battistin, L., & Cagnin, A. (2010).
Vascular cognitive disorder. A biological and clinical overview.
Neurochemical Research, 35, 1933--1938.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11064-010-0346-5 Beck, A. T. (1967).
Depression: Clinical, experimental, and theoretical aspects.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. Beck A. T., Steer, R.
A., & Brown G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II.
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. Beidel, D., Frueh, C., &
Hersen, M. (Eds.). (2014). Adult psychopathology and diagnosis (7th
ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. Benedict, R. (1934). Anthropology and the
abnormal. The Journal of General Psychology, 10, 59--82.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00221309. 1934.9917714 Bergin, A. E., &
Garfield, S. L. (Eds.). (1971). Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior
change. New York, NY: Wiley. Bersoff, D. N. (2008). Ethical conflicts in
psychology (4th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Bersoff, D. N., DeMatteo, D., & Foster, E. E. (2012).
Assessment and testing. In S. J. Knapp, (Ed.). APA handbook of ethics in
psychology (pp. 45--74). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

197

198

REFERENCES

Bhugra, D., Easter, A., Mallaris, Y., & Gupta, S. (2011). Clinical
decision making in psychiatry by psychiatrists. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 124, 403--411.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.2011.01737.x Bhui, L., & Morgan,
N. (2007). Effective psychotherapy in a racially and culturally diverse
society. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 13, 187--193.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/apt.bp.106.002295 Bolam v Friern Hospital
Management Committee. (1957). Retrieved from
http://oxcheps.new.ox.ac.uk/casebook/Resources/BOLAMV\_ 1%20DOC.pdf
Borchard, B., Gnoth, A., & Schulz, W. (2003). Persönlichkeitsstörungen
und "Psychopathy bei Sexualstraftätern im Maßregelvollzug---SKID-- II-
und PCL--R Befunde von Impulskontrollgestörten und Paraphilen
\[Personality disorders and "psychopathy" in sex offenders imprisoned in
forensic-psychiatric hospitals---SKID--II- and PCL--R results in
patients with impulse control disorder and paraphilia\]. Psychiatrische
Praxis, 30, 133--138. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-2003-38607 Borsboom,
D., Cramer, A. O. J., Schmittmann, V. D., Epskamp, S., & Waldorp, L. J.
(2011). The small world of psychopathology. PLoS ONE, 6, e27407.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0027407 Bram, A., & Peebles, M.
J. (2014). Psychological testing that matters: Creating a road map for
effective treatment. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14340-000 Bridges, N. A. (2001). Therapist's
self-disclosure: Expanding the comfort zone. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, and Training, 38, 21--30.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-3204.38.1.21 Brookfield, S. (1987).
Critical thinking: Challenging adults to explore alternative ways of
thinking and acting. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Brown, G. S.,
Jones, E. R., Betts, E., & Wu, J. (2003). Improving suicide risk
assessment in a managed-care environment. Crisis: The Journal of Crisis
Intervention and Suicide Prevention, 24, 49--55. Brown, K., Keel, P. K.,
& Striegel, R. H. (2012). Feeding and eating conditions not elsewhere
classified (NEC) in the DSM--5. Psychiatric Annals, 42, 421--425.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3928/00485713-20121105-08 Butcher, J. N.,
Dahlstrom, W. G., Graham, J. R., Tellegen, A., & Kaemmer, B. (1989). The
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory---2 (MMPI--2): Manual for
administration and scoring. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Butcher, J. N., Graham, J. R., & Ben-Porath, Y. S. (1995).
Methodological problems and issues in MMPI, MMPI--2, and MMPI--A
research. Psychological Assessment, 7, 320--329.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10403590.7.3.320 Butcher, J. N., Ones, D. S.,
& Cullen, M. (2006). Personnel screening with the MMPI--2. In J. N.
Butcher (Ed.). MMPI--2: A practitioner's guide (pp. 381--406).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association

References

Butler, A., Chapman, J., Forman, E., & Beck, A. (2006). The empirical
status of cognitive--behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses.
Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 17--31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.cpr.2005.07.003 California Department of Corrections and
Rehabilitation. (2010). 2010 adult institutions outcome evaluation
report. Retrieved from http://www.
cdcr.ca.gov/adult_research_branch/research_documents/arb_fy0506\_
outcome_evaluation_report.pdf Canadian Psychological Association.
(2000). Canadian code of ethics for psychologists (3rd ed.). Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada: Canadian Psychological Association. Retrieved from
http://www.cpa.ca/docs/File/Ethics/ cpa_code_2000_eng_jp_jan2014.pdf
Carkhuff, R. R. (2009). The art of helping (9th ed.). Amherst, MA: Human
Resource Development Press. Carlson, J. F., Geisinger, K. F., & Jonson,
J. L. (Eds.). (2014). The nineteenth mental measurements yearbook.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press Carroll, L. (1865). Alice's
adventures in wonderland. Retrieved from http://
literature.org/authors/carroll-lewis/alices-adventures-in-wonderland/
index.html Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E. (Eds.). (2012).
Transformation in psychotherapy: Corrective experiences across
cognitive, behavioral, humanistic, and psychodynamic approaches.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/13747-000 Cattell, R. B., Cattell, A. K., &
Cattell, H. E. P. (2002). 16PF (5th ed.). San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Retrieved from http://www.pearsonclinical.
com/psychology/products/100000483/16pf-fifth-edition.html#tabdetails
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2015a). ICD--10--CM.
Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10/2015ICD-10-CM-and-GEMs.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2015b). Mental health
services. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/
Medicare-Learning-Network-MLN/MLNProducts/Downloads/Mental\_
Health_Services_ICN903195.pdf Chambless, D. L., & Ollendick, T. H.
(2001). Empirically supported psychological interventions: Controversies
and evidence. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 685--716.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev. psych.52.1.685 Clayton, C. (2007). A
guide to the lost art of critical thinking. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse.
Colli, A., Tanzilli, A., Dimaggio, G., & Lingiardi, V. (2014). Patient
personality and therapist response: An empirical investigation. The
American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 102--108.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi. ajp.2013.13020224

199

200

REFERENCES

Collins, K. A., & Clément, R. (2012). Language and prejudice: Direct and
moderated effects. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 31,
376--396. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0261927X12446611 Constantino, M. J.,
Arnkoff, D. B., Glass, C. R., Ametrano, R. M., & Smith, J. Z. (2011).
Expectations. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 67, 184--192.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20754 Cornish, J., Schreier, B.,
Nadkarni, L., Metzger, L., & Rodolfa, E. (Eds.). (2010). Handbook of
multicultural competencies. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Costa, P. T., Jr., &
McCrae, R. R. (2005). NEO Personality Inventory---III (NEO-PI--III).
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. Craig, R. J. (1999).
Overview and current status of the Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 72, 390--406.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15327752JP720305 Cressey, D. (2012, February
2). Informed consent on trial. Nature, 482, 16. Retrieved from
http://www.nature.com/news/informed-consenton-trial-1.9933 Cronbach, L.
J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests.
Psychological Bulletin, 52, 281--302. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
h0040957 D'Zurilla, T. J., & Nezu, A. M. (1999). Problem-solving
therapy: A social competence approach to clinical intervention. New
York, NY: Springer. Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes' error: Emotion,
reason, and the human brain. New York, NY: Penguin Books. Damasio, A.
(2000). The feeling of what happens: Body and emotion in the making of
consciousness. Boston, MA: Mariner Books. Damasio, A. (2010). Self comes
to mind: Constructing the conscious brain. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
Davies, M. F. (2003). Confirmatory bias in the evaluation of personality
descriptions: Positive test strategies and output interference. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 736--744.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0022-3514.85.4.736 Dawes, R. (1988). Rational
choice in an uncertain world. San Diego, CA: Harcourt. DeClue, G.
(2013). Years of predicting dangerously. Open Access Journal of Forensic
Psychology, 5, 16--28. Deese, J., & Kaufman, R. A. (1957). Serial
effects in recall of unorganized and sequentially organized verbal
material. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54, 180--187.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0040536 Derlega, V. J., & Berg, J. H. (Eds.).
(1987). Self-disclosure: Theory, research, and therapy. New York, NY:
Plenum Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ 978-1-4899-3523-6 DeRubeis, R.
J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, R. C., Young, P. R.,
Salomon, R. M., . . . Gallop, R. (2005). Cognitive therapy
vs. medications in the treatment of moderate to severe depression.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 409--416.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.62.4.409

References

Detrick, P., Chibnall, J. T., & Rosso, M. (2001). Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory---2 in police officer selection: Normative data
and relation to the Inwald Personality Inventory. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 32, 484--490.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0735-7028.32.5.484 Disease. (2014). In Oxford
Dictionary of American English. Retrieved from
http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/us/definition/american_english/
disease Duncan, B. L., Miller, S. D., Wampold, B. E., & Hubble, M. A.
(Eds.). (2009). The heart and soul of change: Delivering what works in
therapy (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Elliott, C. D. (2007). Differential Abilities Scale---II. San Antonio,
TX: Pearson. Ellis, A. (1973). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy.
Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart. Evans, J. St. B. T. (1989). Bias in human
reasoning: Causes and consequences. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum. Evans,
N., Gilpin, L., Holmes, G., Rafique, Z., & Yates, I. (2010). Power and
status in groups. Therapy Today, 21, 26--29. Facione, N. (2013).
Critical thinking: What it is and why it counts---2013 update. Milbrae,
CA: Measured Reasons and The California Academic Press. Retrieved from
https://spu.edu/depts/health-sciences/grad/ documents/CTbyFacione.pdf
Farber, B. A. (2006). Self-disclosure in psychotherapy. New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson. Finn, S. E. (1996). Manual for using the
MMPI--2 as a therapeutic intervention. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press. First, M., Williams, J., Karg, R., & Spitzer, R.
(2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM--5 (SCID-5-CV), Clinician
Version. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. Fischer, C. T.
(2000). Collaborative, individualized assessment. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 74, 2--14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15327752 JPA740102
Fisher, C. B. (2003). Decoding the ethics code: A practice guide for
psychologists. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Flanagan, D. P., & Harrison, P.
L. (Eds.). (2005). Contemporary intellectual assessment: Theories,
tests, and issues (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Frankl, V. E.
(1963). Man's search for meaning. New York, NY: Pocket Books. Gazzaniga,
M. S. (2011). Who's in charge? Free will and the science of the brain.
New York, NY: HarperCollins. Goldberg, L. R. (1968). Simple models or
simple processes? Some research on clinical judgments. American
Psychologist, 23, 483--496. http://dx.doi. org/10.1037/h0026206

201

202

REFERENCES

Gordijn, E., Finchilescu, G., Brix, L., Wijnants, N., & Koomen, W.
(2008). The influence of prejudice and stereotypes on anticipated
affect: Feelings about a potentially negative interaction with another
ethnic group. South African Journal of Psychology/Suid-Afrikaanse
Tydskrif vir Sielkunde, 38, 589--601.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/008124630803800401 Gottschall, J. (2012). The
storytelling animal: How stories make us human. New York, NY: Houghton
Mifflin. Gough, H. G. (1987). California Psychological Inventory
administrator's guide. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Graham, J. R. (1990). MMPI--2: Assessing personality and psychopathology
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Graham, J. R. (2000).
MMPI--2: Assessing personality and psychopathology (3rd ed.). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press. Graybiel, A. M., & Smith, K. S. (2014).
Good habits, bad habits. Scientific American, 310, 38--43.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/scientificamerican 0614-38 Greenberg, L. S.
(2002). Emotion-focused therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Greenberg, R. P., Constantino, M. J., & Bruce, N. (2006).
Are patient expectations still relevant for psychotherapy process and
outcome? Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 657--678.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.cpr.2005.03.002 Greenberg, S., & Shuman, D.
(1997). Irreconcilable conflict between therapeutic and forensic roles.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 28, 50--57.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.28.1.50 Greenberg, S., & Shuman, D.
(2007). When worlds collide: Therapeutic and forensic roles.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 38, 129--132.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.38.2.129 Greene, R. L. (2011). The
MMPI--2/MMPI--2--RF: An interpretive manual (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn
& Bacon. Grove, W. M. (2005). Clinical versus statistical prediction:
The contribution of Paul E. Meehl. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 61,
1233--1243. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20179 Grove, W. M., Zald, D.
H., Lebow, B. S., Snitz, B. E., & Nelson, C. (2000). Clinical versus
mechanical prediction: A meta-analysis. Psychological Assessment, 12,
19--30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.12.1.19 Hanson, R. K., &
Bussière, M. T. (1998). Predicting relapse: A metaanalysis of sexual
offender recidivism studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 66, 348--362. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0022-006X.66.2.348
Harris, A. J. R., & Hanson, R. K. (2004). Sex offender recidivism: A
simple question (Cat No. PS3-1/2004-3). Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: Public
Works and Government Services.

References

Hatch-Maillette, M. A., Scalora, M. J., Huss, M. T., & Baumgartner, J.
V. (2001). Criminal thinking patterns: Are child molesters unique?
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology,
45, 102--117. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0306624X01451007 Hathaway, S.
R., & McKinley, J. C. (1942). Manual for the Minnesota Multi­ phasic
Personality Disorder. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Hayne,
Y. M. (2003). Experiencing psychiatric diagnosis: Client perspectives on
being named mentally ill. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health
Nursing, 10, 722--729. http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2850.
2003.00666.x Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996, Pub. L. 104--191, 1110 Stat. 1936. Heller, J. (1961). Catch-22.
New York, NY: Simon & Schuster. Herbert, P. B., & Young, K. A. (2002).
Tarasoff at twenty-five. The Journal of the American Academy of
Psychiatry and the Law, 30, 275--281. Hester, R., & Miller, W. (2002).
Handbook of alcoholism treatment approaches (3rd ed.). Boston, MA:
Pearson. Hofmann, S., Asnaani, A., Vonk, I., Sawyer, A., & Fang, A.
(2012). The efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy: A review of
meta-analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 36, 427--440.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ s10608-012-9476-1 Hofmann, S., & Smits, J.
(2008). Cognitive--behavioral therapy for adult anxiety disorders: A
meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 621--632. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/a0016032
Hogg, M. A., & Williams, K. D. (2000). From I to we: Social identity and
the collective self. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 4,
81--97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1089-2699.4.1.81 Holt, R. R. (1958).
Clinical and statistical prediction; a reformulation and some new data.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 56, 1--12.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0041045 Horvath, A. O., & Bedi, R. P. (2002).
The alliance. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that
work (pp. 37--69). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Hoyt, W. T., &
Kerns, M.-D. (1999). Magnitude and moderators of bias in observer
ratings: A meta-analysis. Psychological Methods, 4, 403--424.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.4.4.403 Hulkower, R. (2010). The
history of the Hippocratic oath: Outdated, inauthentic, and yet still
relevant. The Einstein Journal of Biology and Medicine, 25/26, 41--44.
Hunsley, J. (2007). Training psychologists for evidence-based practice.
Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 48, 32--42. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/cp2007_1_32

203

204

REFERENCES

Hunsley, J., & Lee, C. M. (2014). Introduction to clinical psychology:
An evidence based approach (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. Hurd, K., &
Noller, P. (1988). Decoding deception: A look at the process. Journal of
Nonverbal Behavior, 12, 217--233. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ BF00987489
Jackson, J. C., Sinnott, P. L., Marx, B. P., Murdoch, M., Sayer, N. A.,
Alvarez, J. M., . . . Speroff, T. (2011). Variation in practices and
attitudes of clinicians assessing PTSD-related disability among
veterans. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 24, 609--613.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jts.20688 Jankowski, D. (2002). A beginner's
guide to the MCMI--III. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 10446-000 Kahneman, D. (2011).
Thinking, fast and slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective probability: A judgment
of representativeness. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 430--454. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(72)90016-3 Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L.
(1993). Manual for the Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test
(KAIT). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. Kaufman, A. S., &
Lichtenberger, E. (2006). Assessing adolescent and adult intelligence
(3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Kelley, H. H. (1967). Attribution theory
in social psychology. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 15, 192--238.
Kleck, R. E., & Strenta, A. (1980). Perceptions of the impact of
negatively valued physical characteristics on social interaction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 861--873.
http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0022-3514.39.5.861 Krumholz, H. M. (2010).
Informed consent to promote patient-centered care. JAMA: Journal of the
American Medical Association, 303, 1190--1191.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2010.309 Lambert, M. J. (Ed.). (2013).
Bergin and Garfield's handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (6th
ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress,
appraisal, and coping. New York, NY: Springer. Lee, E. (2014). A
therapist's self-disclosure and its impact on the therapy process in
cross-cultural encounters: Disclosure of personal self, professional
self, and/or cultural self? Families in Society, 95, 15--23. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1606/1044-3894.2014.95.3 Lehrer, P. M., Woolfolk, R. L.,
Sime, W. E., & Barlow, D. H. (2008). Principles and practice of stress
management (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford. Levak, R. W., Siegel, L.,
Nichols, D. S., & Stolberg, R. (2011). Therapeutic feedback with the
MMPI--2: A positive psychology approach. New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.

References

Luhrmann, T. M. (2011). Hallucinations and sensory overrides. Annual
Review of Anthropology, 40, 71--85.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurevanthro-081309-145819 Luhrmann, T. M.,
Padmavati, R., Tharoor, H., & Osei, A. (2014). Differences in
voice-hearing experiences of people with psychosis in the USA, India,
and Ghana: Interview-based study. The British Journal of Psychiatry,
205, 1--4. Lyons, C., Hopley, P., & Horrocks, J. (2009). A decade of
stigma and discrimination in mental health: Plus ça change, plus c'est
la même chose (the more things change, the more they stay the same).
Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 16, 501--507.
http://dx.doi. org/10.1111/j.1365-2850.2009.01390.x Machiavelli, N.
(2008). Machiavelli's the Prince: Bold-faced principles on tactics,
power, and politics (R. McMahon, Ed., & W. K. Marriott, Trans.). New
York, NY: Sterling. (Original work published 1532) MacIntyre, A. (1998).
Short history of ethics: A history of moral philosophy from the Homeric
Age to the 20th century (2nd ed.). Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press. Mate, G. (2011). When the body says no: Exploring the
stress--disease connection. New York, NY: Wiley. Matuszak, J., &
Piasecki, M. (2012, October 5). Interrater reliability in psychiatric
diagnosis. Psychiatric Times, 29, 12--13. Retrieved from
http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/dsm-5-0/inter-rater-reliabilitypsychiatric-diagnosis
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1987). Validation of the five-factor
model of personality across instruments and observers. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 81--90.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 0022-3514.52.1.81 McDermott, P. A., Watkins,
M. W., & Rhoad, A. M. (2014). Whose IQ is it?---Assessor bias variance
in high-stakes psychological assessment. Psychological Assessment,
26(1), 207--214. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ a0034832 McGrady, A., &
Moss, D. (2013). Pathways to illness, pathways to health. New York, NY:
Springer. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-1379-1 McGrew, K., &
Flanagan, D. (1998). The intelligence test desk reference: Gf-Gc
cross-battery assessment. New York, NY: Allyn & Bacon. Medicare. (2013).
What Part B covers. Retrieved from http://www.
medicare.gov/what-medicare-covers/part-b/what-medicare-part-bcovers.html
Meehl, P. E. (1954). Clinical versus statistical prediction: A
theoretical analysis and a review of the evidence. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/11281-000 Meehl, P.
E. (1986). Causes and effects of my disturbing little book. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 50, 370--375. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/
s15327752jpa5003_6

205

206

REFERENCES

Mehr, K. E., Ladany, N., & Caskie, G. I. L. (2010). Trainee non­
disclosure in supervision: What are they not telling you? Counselling &
Psychotherapy Research, 10, 103--113. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
14733141003712301 Meichenbaum, D. (1985). Stress inoculation training.
New York, NY: Pergamon Press. Meyer, G. J., Finn, S. E., Eyde, L. D.,
Kay, G. G., Moreland, K. L., Dies, R. R., . . . Reed, G. M. (2001).
Psychological testing and psychological assessment. A review of evidence
and issues. American Psychologist, 56, 128--165. Miller, A. K., Rufino,
K. A., Boccaccini, M. T., Jackson, R. L., & Murrie, D. C. (2011). On
individual differences in person perception: Raters' personality traits
relate to their psychopathy checklist-revised scoring tendencies.
Assessment, 18, 253--260. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 1073191111402460
Miller, J. (2009). The effects of expectations on experiences with
psycho­ therapy. Counselling Psychology Quarterly, 22, 343--346.
http://dx.doi. org/10.1080/09515070903265454 Miller, P. R., Dasher, R.,
Collins, R., Griffiths, P., & Brown, F. (2001). Inpatient diagnostic
assessments: 1. Accuracy of structured vs. unstructured interviews.
Psychiatry Research, 105, 255--264. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0165-1781(01)00317-1 Millon, T. (1969). Modern psychopathology:
A biosocial approach to maladaptive learning and functioning.
Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders. Millon, T. (2006). Millon Clinical
Multiaxial Inventory---III (3rd ed.). Minneapolis, MN: National Computer
Systems. Millon, T., & Bloom, C. (2008). The Millon Inventories second
edition: A practitioner's guide. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Mohr, D.
C. (1995). Negative outcome in psychotherapy: A critical review.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 2, 1--27. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1468-2850.1995.tb00022.x Morey, L. C. (1991). Personality
Assessment Inventory professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources. Motiuk, L., & Porporino, F. (1992). The
prevalence, nature, and severity of mental health problems among federal
male inmates in Canadian penitentiaries. Report no 24. Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada: Correctional Services of Canada. Murdock, B. B. (1962). The
serial position effect of free recall. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 64, 482--488. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ h0045106 Murphy, L.
M., Geisinger, K. F., Carlson, J. F., & Spies, R. S. (2011). Tests in
print VIII. Lincoln, NE: Buros Institute of Mental Measurements. Murphy,
M. C., Richeson, J. A., Shelton, J. N., Reinschmidt, M. L., &
Bergsieker, H. B. (2013). Cognitive costs of contemporary prejudice.

References

Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 16, 560--571. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/1368430212468170 Murray, H. A. (1943). Thematic Apperception
Test manual. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Myers, N. L.
(2011). Update: Schizophrenia across cultures. Current Psychiatry
Reports, 13, 305--311. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11920011-0208-0
Naglieri, J. A., Das, J. P., & Goldstein, S. (2014). Cognitive
assessment system-- Second edition. Chicago, IL: Riverside. Nagy, T. F.
(2005). Ethics in plain English: An illustrative casebook for
psychologists (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Nagy, T. F. (2011). Essential ethics for psychologists: A
primer for understanding and mastering core issues. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/12345-000
National Center for Health Statistics. (2015). International
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems---10 Clinical
Modification. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Retrieved
from http://www.cdc. gov/nchs/icd/icd10cm.htm#icd2015 Neumann, C. S., &
Hare, R. D. (2008). Psychopathic traits in a large community sample:
Links to violence, alcohol use, and intelligence. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 76, 893--899. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/0022-006X.76.5.893 Nickerson, R. (1998). Confirmation bias:
A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises. Review of General Psychology, 2,
175--220. http://dx.doi. org/10.1037/1089-2680.2.2.175 Norcross, J. C.
(2011a). Conclusions and recommendations of the Interdivisional (APA
Divisions 12 & 29) Task Force of Evidence-Based Therapy Relationships.
Washington, DC: Society for the Advancement of Psycho­therapy, American
Psychological Association. Retrieved from
http://www.divisionofpsychotherapy.org/continuing-education/
task-force-on-evidence-based-therapy-relationships/conclusionsof-the-task-force/
Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (2011b). Psychotherapy relationships that work:
Evidence-based responsiveness. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199737208.001.0001 Norcross, J.
C., & Wampold, B. (2011). Evidence-based therapy relation­ ships:
research conclusions and clinical practices. Psychotherapy, 48, 98--102
Northup, S. (1855). Twelve years a slave. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State.
Ogles, B. M., Lambert, M. J., & Sawyer, J. D. (1995). Clinical
significance of the National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of
Depression Collaborative Research Program data. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 63, 321--326.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.63.2.321 Owen, J., Wong, J. Y., &
Rodolfa, E. (2010). The relationship between clients' conformity to
masculine norms and their perceptions of

207

208

REFERENCES

helpful therapist actions. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 57, 68--78.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0017870 Oyebode, F. (2008). Sims' symptoms in
the mind. New York, NY: Elsevier. Pagoto, S. L., Spring, B., Coups, E.
J., Mulvaney, S., Coutu, M. F., & Ozakinci, G. (2007). Barriers and
facilitators of evidence-based practice perceived by behavioral science
health professionals. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 63, 695--705.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20376 Paul, G. L. (1967). Strategy of
outcome research in psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 31,
109--118. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ h0024436 Pope, K. S. (2014). 10
fallacies in psychological assessment. Retrieved from
http://kspope.com/fallacies/assessment.php Pope, K. S., & Vasquez, M. J.
T. (2011). Ethics in psychotherapy and counseling: A practical guide
(4th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass/Wiley.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118001875 Proulx, T., & Inzlicht, M.
(2012). The five "A"s of meaning maintenance: Finding meaning in the
theories of sense-making. Psychological Inquiry, 23, 317--335. Rabin, L.
A., Barr, W. B., & Burton, L. A. (2005). Assessment practices of
clinical neuropsychologists in the United States and Canada: A survey of
INS, NAN, and APA Division 40 members. Archives of Clinical Neuro­
psychology, 20, 33--65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acn.2004.02.005
Randolph, C. (2012). Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of
Neuropsychological Status Update (RBANS Update). San Antonio, TX:
Pearson. Rapaport, D., Gill, M. M., & Schafer, R. (1974). Diagnostic
psychological testing. New York, NY: International Universities Press.
Ready, R. E., & Veague, H. B. (2014). Training in psychological
assessment: Current practices in clinical psychology programs.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 45, 278--282.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ a0037439 Reed, G. (2013, May). Improving the
clinical utility of WHO's ICD--11: Concepts and evidence. Presentation
at the 166th Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, San
Francisco, CA. Rehm, L. P. (2010). Depression: Advances in
psychotherapy---Evidence-based practice. Boston, MA: Hogrefe. Reich, J.,
Zautra, A., & Hall, J. (2010). Handbook of adult resilience. New York,
NY: Guilford Press. Reitan, R. M., & Wolfson, D. (1993). The
Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Test Battery: Theory and clinical
interpretation (2nd ed.). Tucson, AZ: Neuropsychology Press Richeson, J.
A., & Shelton, J. N. (2007). Negotiating interracial interactions:
Costs, consequences, and possibilities. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 16, 316--320.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.14678721.2007.00528.x

References

Rodolfa, E., Greenberg, S., Hunsley, J., Smith-Zoeller, M., Cox, D.,
Sammons, M., Caro, C. (2013). A competency model for the practice of
psychology. Training and Education in Professional Psychology, 7,
71--84. Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin. Rogers, R. (2003). Forensic use and abuse of psychological
tests: Multi­ scale inventories. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 9,
316--320. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1097/00131746-200307000-00008 Roid, G.
(2003). Stanford--Binet Intelligence Scales (5th ed.). Itasca, IL:
Riverside. Rorschach, H. (1927). Rorschach Test---Psychodiagnostic
plates. Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe. Rowe, R., & Clark, T. (2008). A survey
of psychiatrists' attitudes to schizoaffective disorder. International
Journal of Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 12, 25--30.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13651500701330916 Safran, J. D., Crocker, P.,
McMain, S., & Murray, P. (1990). Therapeutic alliance rupture as a
therapy event for empirical investigation. Psycho­ therapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, and Training, 27, 154--165. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-3204.27.2.154 Sattler, J. M., & Schaffer, J. B.
(2014). Introduction to the behavioral, social, and clinical assessment
of children. In J. M. Sattler (Ed.), Assessment of children: Behavioral,
social, and clinical foundations (6th ed., pp. 1--46). La Mesa, CA:
Jerome M. Sattler, Publisher. Saulsman, L. M. (2011). Depression,
anxiety, and the MCMI--III: Construct validity and diagnostic
efficiency. Journal of Personality Assessment, 93, 76--83.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223891.2010.528481 Schachter, S., & Singer,
J. E. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of
emotional state. Psychological Review, 69, 379--399.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0046234 Schneider, W. J. (2013).
Misunderstanding regression to the mean \[Video file\]. Retrieved from
http://assessingpsyche.wordpress.com/2013/12/16/
video-tutorial-misunderstanding-regression-to-the-mean/ Schrank, F. A.,
Mather, N., & McGrew, K. S. (2014). Woodcock--Johnson III Tests of
Cognitive Abilities. Itasca, IL: Riverside Schretlen, D. J., Munro, C.
A., Anthony, J. C., & Pearlson, G. D. (2003). Examining the range of
normal intraindividual variability in neuro­ psychological test
performance. Journal of the International Neuro­ psychological Society,
9, 864--870. Scriven, M., & Paul, R. (1987, July). Statement defining
critical thinking. Paper presented at the 8th Annual International
Conference on Critical Thinking and Education Reform, Sonoma State
University, Rohnert Park, CA. Retrieved from
http://www.criticalthinking.org/pages/ defining-critical-thinking/766
Sellbom, M., Fischler, G. L., & Ben-Porath, Y. S. (2007). Identifying
MMPI--2 predictors of police officer integrity and misconduct.

209

210

REFERENCES

Criminal Justice and Behavior, 34, 985--1004. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0093854807301224 Serres, C. (2015, February 9). "Monumental" sex
offender trial begins in St. Paul. Minneapolis Star and Tribune.
Retrieved from http://www.
startribune.com/trial-testing-minnesota-s-sex-offender-commitmentprogram-begins-in-st-paul/291267051/
Silver, N. (2012). The signal and the noise: Why most predictions
fail---but some don't. New York, NY: The Penguin Press. Smith, T. W., &
Ruiz, J. M. (2002). Psychosocial influences on the development and
course of coronary heart disease: Current status and implications for
research and practice. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
70, 548--568. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022006X.70.3.548 Snyder, C. R.,
& Elliott, T. R. (2005). Twenty-first century graduate education in
clinical psychology: A four level matrix model. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 61, 1003--1054. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20164 Society
of Clinical Psychology. (1993). Task Force on Promotion and
Dissemination of Psychological Procedure: Report. Retrieved from http://
www.div12.org/sites/default/files/InitialReportOfTheChamblessTask
Force.pdf Society of Clinical Psychology. (2014). Research-supported
psychological treatments. Retrieved from
http://www.psychologicaltreatments.org Sommers-Flanagan, R., &
Sommers-Flanagan, J. (2007). Becoming an ethical helping professional:
Cultural and philosophical foundations. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Son, L. K.,
& Kornell, N. (2010). The virtues of ignorance. Behavioural Processes,
83, 207--212. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2009.12.005 Stansfeld,
S. A., Fuhrer, R., Shipley, M. J., & Marmot, M. G. (2002). Psychological
distress as a risk factor for coronary heart disease in the Whitehall II
Study. International Journal of Epidemiology, 31, 248--255.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ije/31.1.248 Steger, M. F. (2012). Making
meaning in life. Psychological Inquiry, 23, 381--385 Stiles, W. B.,
Hurst, R. M., Nelson-Gray, R., Hill, C. E., Greenberg, L. S., & Watson,
J. C., . . . Hollon, S. D. (2006). What qualifies as research on which
to judge effective practice? In J. C. Norcross, L. E. Beutler, & R. F.
Levant (Eds.), Evidence-based practices in mental health: Debate and
dialogue on the fundamental questions (pp. 57--131). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. Strack, S. (2008). Essentials of the
Millon Inventories Assessment (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Strasburger, L. H., Gutheil, T. G., & Brodsky, B. A. (1997). On wearing
two hats: Role conflict in serving as both psychotherapist and expert
witness. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 448--456

References

Straus, S. E., & McAlister, F. A. (2000). Evidence-based medicine: A
commentary on common criticisms. Canadian Medical Association Journal,
163, 837--841. Stuart, R. B. (1980). Helping couples change: A social
learning approach to marital therapy. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Sue,
D., & Sue, D. (2003). Counseling the culturally diverse: Theory and
practice (4th ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. Sue, D., & Torino, G. (2005).
Racial-cultural competence: awareness, knowledge, and skills. In R. T.
Carter (Ed.), Handbook of racial-cultural psychology and counseling:
Training and practice (Vol. 2, pp. 3--18). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Szasz, T.
S. (1961). The myth of mental illness. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of
intergroup behavior. In S. Worchel & W. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of
intergroup relations (2nd ed., pp. 7--24). Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall.
Tarasoff v. The Regents of the University of California, 551 P.2d 334
(1976). Tavris, C. (1989). Anger: The misunderstood emotion. New York,
NY: Simon & Schuster. Tavris, C., & Aronson, E. (2007). Mistakes were
made (but not by me): Why we justify foolish beliefs, bad decisions, and
hurtful acts. San Diego, CA: Harcourt. Teixeira, R., & Halpin, J.
(2013). Building an all-in nation: A view from the American public.
Center for American Progress. Retrieved from http://
www.americanprogress.org/issues/race/report/2013/10/22/77665/
building-an-all-in-nation/ Tellegen, A., Ben-Porath, Y. S., McNulty, J.
L., Arbisi, P. A., Graham, J. R., & Kaemmer, B. (2003). MMPI--2
Restructured Clinical (RC) Scales: Development, validation, and
interpretation. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Tracey, T.
J., Lichtenberg, J. W., Goodyear, R. K., Claiborn, C. D., & Wampold, B.
E. (2003). Concept mapping of therapeutic common factors. Psychotherapy
Research, 13, 401--413. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ ptr/kpg041 Truax, C.
B., & Carkhuff, R. R. (1967). Toward effective counseling and
psychotherapy. New York, NY: Aldine Truax, C. B., & Carkhuff, R. R.
(2007). Toward effective counseling and psychotherapy: Training and
practice. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction. Trull, T. (2005). Clinical
psychology (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth. Turner, J. S., &
Leach, D. J. (2012). Behavioural activation therapy: Theory, concepts,
and techniques. Behaviour Change, 29, 77--96. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/bec.2012.3 Tyrer, P., Crawford, M., Mulder, R.,
Blashfield, R., Farnam, A., Fossati, A., . . . Reed, G. (2011). The
rationale for the reclassification of

211

212

REFERENCES

personality disorder in the 11th revision of the International
Classification of Diseases (ICD--11). Personality and Mental Health, 5,
246--259. Uebel, T. (2011). Vienna circle. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Retrieved from
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ vienna-circle/#VieCirHis U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). Health information
privacy. Retrieved from http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/ U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services. (2015). Summary of the HIPAA privacy rule.
Retrieved from http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/
hipaa/understanding/summary/index.html Van Horne, B. A. (2004).
Psychology licensing board disciplinary actions: The realities.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 35, 170--178.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.35.2.170 Walfish, S., Vance, D., &
Fabricatore, A. N. (2007). Psychological evaluation of bariatric surgery
applicants: Procedures and reasons for delay or denial of surgery.
Obesity Surgery, 17, 1578--1583. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s11695-007-9274-0 Wechsler, D. (2008). Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale---IV technical and interpretive manual. San Antonio,
TX: Pearson. Wechsler, D. (2009). Wechsler Memory Scales---Fourth
Edition (WMS--IV). San Antonio, TX: Pearson. Wechsler, D. (2014).
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children---V technical and interpretive
manual. San Antonio, TX: Pearson. Weinberg, J. R. (2001). An examination
of logical positivism. London, England: Routledge. Weiner, B. (1986). An
attribution theory of motivation and emotion. New York, NY:
Springer-Verlag. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-4948-1 Weiner, I.
B. (2013). Psychological assessment is here to stay. Archives of
Assessment Psychology, 3, 11--21. Weston, D., & Morrison, K. (2001). A
multidimensional meta-analysis of treatments for depression, panic, and
generalized anxiety dis­order: an empirical examination of the status of
empirically supported therapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 69, 875--899. White, K., Nielson, W., Harth, M., Ostbye, T.,
Speechley, M. (2002). Chronic widespread musculoskeletal pain with or
without fibromyalgia: psychological distress in a representative
community adult sample. The Journal of Rheumatology, 29, 588--594.
Wiener, C., Fauci, A., Braunwald, E., Kasper, D., & Hauser, S. (2012).
Harrison's principles of internal medicine: Self-assessment and board
review (18th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Wiggins, J. S. (Ed.).
(1996). The five-factor model of personality: Theoretical perspectives.
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Wood, J. M., Nezworski, M. T., Lilienfeld,
S. O., & Garb, H. N. (2003). What's wrong with the Rorschach? Science
confronts the controversial inkblot test. New York, NY: Jossey-Bass.

References

Woody, S., Detweiler-Bedell, B., Teachman, B., & O'Hearn, T. (2004).
Treatment planning in psychotherapy: Taking the guesswork out of
clinical care. New York, NY: Guilford Press. World Health Organization.
(1949). International statistical classification of diseases, injuries,
and causes of death, 6th revision. Geneva, Switzerland: Author. World
Health Organization. (1993). ICD--10 classification of mental and
behavioural disorders (blue book). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Retrieved from http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/bluebook.pdf
World Health Organization. (2016). International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems---10. Geneva,
Switzerland: Author. Retrieved from
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/ Yang, M., Wong, S. C. P., &
Coid, J. (2010). The efficacy of violence pre­ diction: A meta-analytic
comparison of nine risk assessment tools. Psycho­logical Bulletin, 136,
740--767. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0020473 Zander, T. K. (2005). Civil
commitment without psychosis: The law's reliance on the weakest links in
psychodiagnosis. The Journal of Sexual Offender Civil Commitment,
Science and the Law, 1, 17--82. Zubin, J. (1956). Clinical versus
actuarial prediction: A pseudo-problem. In N. Sanford, C. C. McArthur,
J. Zubin, L. G. Humphreys, & P. E. Meehl (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Conference on Testing Problems (pp. 625--637). Princeton, NJ:
Educational Testing Service.

213

Index

A "Abnormal," 25--28 and deviation from societal norms, 27--28 and
frequency of behavior, 26--27 and interference with social functioning,
28 and risk, 28 and subjective distress, 27 Actuarial (statistical)
prediction, clinical prediction vs., 43 Address, forms of, 8--9 Adverse
assessment, 153 Affect in Anne Sanchez case study, 92 in Lynn case
study, 67, 164 Alcmaeon, 29 Allegiance, with referrals, 153--154
American Psychiatric Association, 4 American Psychological Association
(APA) diversity guidelines, 132 Ethics Code, 52, 108, 109, 111. See also
Ethics HIPAA information from, 137 Practice Directorate website, 178
practice guidelines, 160, 176--177 Public Interest Directorate website,
178 Specialty Guidelines for Forensic Psychology, 58 task force on
common factors in psychotherapy, 159 task force on evidence-based
practice, 159 American Psychological Association Presidential Task Force
on Evidence-Based Practice (APAPTF), 158

American Public Health Association, 12 Americans With Disabilities Act,
34 Anne Sanchez case study, 89--105 assessment considerations, 95--101
diagnostic considerations, 101--105 disposition, 170--172 ethics,
125--130 psychological testing, 92--94 risk management, 152--155 Antony,
M. M., 175 APA. See American Psychological Association APA Ethics Code.
See Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct APA Practice
Directorate website, 178 APAPTF (American Psychological Association
Presidential Task Force on EvidenceBased Practice), 158 APA Public
Interest Directorate website, 178 Appeals, 135 Aronson, E., 46--47 ASPPB
(Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards), 7, 134
Assessment(s), 5, 25--47 basic questions in, 77 conducting. See
Conducting assessments defined, 9 and diagnosis, 29--36 diagnosis vs., 9
error in. See Error in assessment ethics of. See Ethics and
identification of "abnormal," 25--28

215

216

INDEX

Assessment(s) continued model language for, 134 potential for error in,
36--47 resources for, 175 and understanding the patient, 69--70
Assessment considerations Anne Sanchez case study, 95--101 John Smith
case study, 81--86 Lynn case study, 68--70 Assessor error, 55--56
Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB), 7, 134
Assumption of dual directional causality, 56 Attorney referral. See Anne
Sanchez case study Attribution of causality, misplaced, 46 Availability
heuristic, 42 B Barlow, D. H., 175, 177 Base rate of
conditions/behaviors, 37--41 and error in assessment, 37--41 importance
of, 61--62 Batteries of tests, 56 BDI--II, 94, 99, 101 Beauchaine, T.,
174--175 Beck, A., 166 Behavior base rates of, 37--41, 61--62
environment and differences in, 26 in John Smith case study, 170 in Lynn
case study, 164, 166 Behavioral observation in Anne Sanchez case study,
95 data from, 52--53 Beidel, D., 175 Beliefs, 166 Beneficence and
nonmaleficence (ethics principle), 109 Bersoff, D. N., 178--179 Bhui,
L., 132 Bias about psychotherapy, 144 assessor, 55--56 in behavioral
observation, 53 and communication from other professionals, 61 defending
against accusations of, 152 and error in assessment, 42, 46--47 Blue
Book (ICD--10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders:
Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines), 14, 51 for case
studies, 64 in John Smith case study, 87--88 in Lynn case study, 72--74
as resource, 173, 174 Boll, T. J., ix, x, 56 Brackets (in codes), 19
Brain, 43--44, 46 Bram, A., 50

Buros Mental Measurement Yearbook (Carlson, Geisinger, & Jonson), 98 C
California Personality Inventory---Revised (CPI--R), 85, 112 Canadian
Code of Ethics for Psychologists (Code; Canadian Psychological
Association), 111 applying principles of. See Ethics confidentiality,
115 discrimination based on sexual orientation, 124 feedback on results
of testing, 127 informed consent, 137 payment for services, 153
Principles in, 108--111 psychological testing, 113, 114, 126 response to
flirtatious/sexualized interaction, 128 Canadian Psychological
Association (CPA), 52 "The Efficacy and Effectiveness of Psychological
Treatments," 160, 178 ethical principles of, 108--111. See also Canadian
Code of Ethics for Psychologists Carkhuff, R. R., 132, 159 Carlson, J.
F., 98 Case law, 135 Case studies Anne Sanchez (case 3). See Anne
Sanchez case study forms of address in, 8 John Smith (case 2). See John
Smith case study Lynn (case 1). See Lynn case study Castonguay, L. G.,
177 Catastrophizing, 170 Cattell--Horn--Carroll theory, 98 Causality and
diagnostic categories, 32 dual directional, assumption of, 56 misplaced
attributions of, 46 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 14
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), 13 "Classified
elsewhere" (phrase), 20 Clients (term), 8 Clinical analysis, steps in,
49--50 Clinical interviews in Anne Sanchez case study, 95 data from,
50--52 ethics for, 52 in John Smith case study, 83--85 in Lynn case
study, 68--69 protocol for, 51 resources for, 175--176 Clinical
Modifications (CM), 3, 13 Clinical prediction, actuarial (statistical)
prediction vs., 43 Clinical utility, 158 CM (Clinical Modifications), 3,
13 CMS (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services), 13, 174

Index

Code also (term), 19--20 Code first (term), 19 Coding system
(ICD--10--CM), 16--20 brackets and parentheses in, 19 code also, 19--20
code first, 19 considerations in diagnosing, 20--22 finding codes,
14--15 inclusions and exclusions, 18--19 Cognitions/cognitive
functioning in Anne Sanchez case study, 93--94 in John Smith case study,
169--170 in Lynn case study, 67, 164--166 Cognitive Assessment
System--Second Edition (CAS2), 98 Collateral interviews in Anne Sanchez
case study, 95 data from, 57--58 ethics related to, 123--124 in John
Smith case study, 123--124 in Lynn case study, 118 Committee on Joint
Causes of Diseases, 12 Common factors in psychotherapy, 159
Communication with patients, limits on, 141 between professionals, 61
value of diagnosis in, 31--32 Comorbidity, variance in diagnosis and,
33, 34 Competence to assess, 97 and critical thinking, 7 as ethical
issue, 113--114, 120--121 in forensic cases, 125--126 limits of, 133,
171 and referrals time frame, 119--120 and risk management, 133,
145--148, 150--152 and understanding of patient's life issues, 152
Competencies Expected of Psychologists at the Point of Licensure, 7
Competency models, 7 Complaints against providers and limits of
competence, 133 mistakes leading to, 132. See also Risk management and
release of information, 117 Conducting assessments, 49--62 data
collection, 50--58 intervention or disposition plan development, 60--62
making sense of data, 58--60 Confabulation, error in assessment and,
44--45 Confidence levels, 60 Confidentiality. See also Privacy
exceptions to, 115--118, 142 HIPAA Security Rule, 136 in John Smith case
study, 124 limits of, 118 in Lynn case study, 114--118

Confirmation bias, 42 Confirmation bias effect, 42 Conflict of interest,
82 ethics related to, 121 and risk management, 149--150 in testing, 113
Congruence, in relationship with patients, 132 Cornish, J., 132 CPA. See
Canadian Psychological Association CPA Code. See Canadian Code of Ethics
for Psychologists CPI--R (California Personality Inventory---Revised),
85, 112 Cressey, D., 138 Criminal behavior, 27 Critical thinking, 7,
160--161 Cultural differences in behavior, 26 D Damasio, A., 43--44, 46
Data guidelines for making sense of, 58--60 inclusion/exclusion
decisions about, 59 major sources of, 50 oversimplification of, 45--46
on reliability of diagnoses, 33, 34 for standardization, 54--55
weighting, 61 Data collection, 50--58 in Anne Sanchez case study,
126--127 from behavioral observation, 52--53 from clinical interviews,
50--52 from collateral interviews, 57--58 ethics of, 126--127 in John
Smith case study, 86--87, 168 in Lynn case study, 69--70 from
psychological testing, 53--57 from records, 52 Descriptive diagnosis, 9
Deviation from societal norms, 27--28 Diagnosis(-es), 5, 29--36
arbitrary nature of, 35 assessment vs., 9 comorbidity and variance in,
33, 34 data on reliability of, 33, 34 defined, 9, 29 discrete
vs. continuous behaviors, 34 descriptive, 9 and development of treatment
plan, 161 dynamic, 9 ethical implications of, 111. See also Ethics
formulating hypotheses about, 61 ICD--10--CM coding system, 16--22 ICD
as standard for, 11, 13 medical, 81--82. See also John Smith case study
pitfalls of, 33--36 and potential for assessment error, 36--47 primary,
18 primary value of, 31

217

218

INDEX

Diagnosis(-es) continued process leading to, 71. See also Conducting
assessments; Diagnostic process purposes of, 30--33 resources for,
173--175 rule-out, 103 stigma attached to, 34 subcategories of, 17 using
ICD, 174 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), 4,
20, 35 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (fourth
ed.; DSM--IV), 29 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(fifth ed.; DSM--5), 13, 20, 29 Diagnostic process in Anne Sanchez case
study, 101--105 in John Smith case study, 86--88 in Lynn case study,
70--77 Differential Abilities Scale, 98 Differential diagnosis, in Lynn
case study, 71--72, 74, 162--163 Disconfirming evidence, 59--60 Disease
(term), 35 Disposition (treatment plan), 157--172 in Anne Sanchez case
study, 170--172 developing plan for, 60--62 evidence-based models of
practice, 158--160 general framework for, 167 in John Smith case study,
167--170 in Lynn case study, 162--167 standard of care, 161--162
theoretical orientation, 160--161 Distress, subjective, 27 Diversity,
25, 26, 132--133 Dodo bird hypothesis, 161 DSM. See Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM--IV See Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (fourth ed.), 29 DSM--5. See
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (fifth ed.) Dual
diagnoses, 102 Dual directional causality, assumption of, 56 Duncan, B.
L., 177 Dynamic diagnosis, 9 E EBPP (evidence-based practice in
psychology ), 158, 161 "The Efficacy and Effectiveness of Psychological
Treatments" (CPA), 160, 178 Ellis, A., 166, 170 Embedded measures of
dissimulation, 56--57 Emotions in Anne Sanchez case study, 94 in
behavioral observation, 53 in Lynn case study, 165

Empathy, 132, 159 Employment input, from therapists, 119, 144
Environment, and differences in behavior, 26 Error in assessment, 36--47
actuarial vs. clinical prediction, 43 assessor error, 55--56 assumption
of dual directional causality, 56 and base rate of conditions/behaviors,
37--41 bias and self-deception, 46--47 confabulation, 44--45
confirmation bias effect, 42 misplaced attributions of causality, 46
oversimplification of data, 45--46 primacy effect, 41--42 System
1/System 2 thinking, 42--44 Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code
of Conduct (Ethics Code; American Psychological Association), 52
applying principles of. See Ethics and competency, 126 and
confidentiality, 115 and discrimination based on sexual orientation, 124
and feedback on results of testing, 127 and informed consent, 137 and
objectivity, 125 and payment for services, 153 Principles in, 108, 109,
111 and psychological testing, 113, 114, 126 and response to
flirtatious/sexualized interaction, 128 and supervision/consultation
with every patient, 120 and website testimonials, 145 Ethics, 107--130
in Anne Sanchez case study, 125--130 clinical interviews, 52 collateral
interviews, 118, 123--124 competence, 113--114, 120--121
confidentiality, 114--118, 124 conflict of interest, 82, 113, 121 data
collection, 126--127 ethics codes principles, 108--111 implication of
diagnoses, 111 informed consent, 114, 118, 121--123, 137 in John Smith
case study, 119--125 in Lynn case study, 111--119 primary goal of, 111
professional roles, 118--119, 124--125 psychological records, 118--119
psychological testing, 111--114, 126--128 referral source expectations,
119--120 release of information, 115--118, 142 resources for, 178--179
response to sexualized interaction with clients, 128--130 and risk
management, 131 self-disclosure, 122--123

Index

Ethnic background psychological testing and, 126 relationships with
patients and, 132--133 Evidence-based practice, 158--160 APA taskforce
on, 159 and common factors in psychotherapy, 159 components of, 158
resources for, 158--159, 177--178 Evidence-based practice in psychology
(EBPP), 158, 161 Excludes (term), 18 Exclusion categories, 18--19 F
"Factors Influencing Health Status and Contact With Health Services," 21
Feedback on testing results, 127 Fidelity and responsibility (ethics
principle), 109 Financial implications of clinical decisions, 149
Fisher, C. B., 179 Flirtatious interaction with clients, response to,
128--130 Folkman, S., 169 Fontes, L., 175 Formal assessments, 54, 56
Forms, 185--193 informed consent, 189--190 privacy practices statement,
185--188 release of information, 191--193 Frequency of behavior,
abnormality and, 26--27 Frueh, C., 175 G Gazzaniga, M., 44, 47
Geisinger, K. F., 98 Gender, relationships with patients and, 132--133
Gender orientation, relationships with patients and, 132--133 Goal of
services, in Lynn case study, 68--69, 166--167 Golombok, S., 175
Goodheart, C., 174 Gottlieb, M. C., 179 Greene, B., 179 Groth-Marnat,
G., 175 Guiding principles, for practice of psychology, 133--135, 160,
176--177. See also Legal requirements for practice H Habits, 128
Hallucination, 35 Handelsman, M. M., 179 Harris, E., 179 Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), 13, 22,
135--137 in Lynn case study, 144 Privacy Rule, 135--136

Security Rule, 136 Transaction Rule, 136 Heller, J., 98 Hersen, M., 175
Heuristics availability heuristic, 42 representative heuristic, 42--43
Hinshaw, S., 174--175 HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 Homer, 108 Homosexuality, 35 Hubble, M. A.,
177 Hunsley, J., 57 Hypothesis generation, 61, 86 I ICD. See
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems ICD--10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders:
Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines. See Blue Book
ICD--10--CM, 3, 11--23. See also individual topics and case studies
coding system of, 16--20 considerations in diagnosing, 20--22
description of, 14--16 history of, 12--13 reasons for use of, 22--23 as
resource, 174 ICD--11, 22 Includes (term), 18 Inclusion categories, 18
Informal assessments, 54 Informed consent about patient's right to
refuse services, 123 for collateral interviews, 58 as ethical
imperative, 114, 137 factors in process of, 138--141 generic form for,
189--190 for limits of confidentiality, 118 in medical settings,
121--122 to release information, 118 in risk management, 137--141, 145,
147--148, 151 and therapist self-disclosure, 122--123, 151 Informed
consent forms, 138, 189--190 In other diseases classified elsewhere
(term), 19 Instructors, note to, 9 Insurance companies diagnosis needed
for, 30, 31 releasing information to, 117, 142 Integrity (ethics
principle), 109 Integrity in relationships (ethics principle), 110
Intellectual functioning, in Anne Sanchez case study, 93, 98
Interference with social functioning, in identifying abnormality, 28

219

220

INDEX

International List of Causes of Death, 12 International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), 3--4,
11--13, 22--23, 173--174. See also individual ICD editions, e.g.:
ICD--10--CM International Statistical Congress, 12 Intervention
development, 60--62. See also Disposition Interviews clinical, 50--52,
175--176. See also Clinical interviews collateral, 57--58. See also
Collateral interviews data from, 50--52, 57--58 protocol for, 181--184
Involvement in therapy, in Lynn case study, 77 J John Smith case study,
79--88 assessment considerations, 81--86 diagnostic considerations,
86--88 disposition, 167--170 ethics, 119--125 risk management, 148--151
Jonson, J. L., 98 Justice (ethics principle), 109 K Kahneman, D.,
41--42, 46, 62 Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test, 98 Knapp,
S., 179 Knapp, S. J., 179 Krumholz, H. M., 137 L Labels, diagnoses as,
34 Lambert, M. J., 177--178 Language (of patients) psychological testing
and, 126 relationships with patients and, 132--133 Laws governing
practice of psychology, 133--135 Lazarus, R. S., 169 Legal input, from
therapists, 119, 125--126 Legal records, 52 Legal requirements for
practice categories of laws and rules, 135 HIPAA, 135--137 informed
consent, 137--141 release of information, 141--143 Licensing boards, 7.
See also Complaints against providers Licensing regulations, 134 Lynn
case study, 63--78 assessment considerations, 68--70 current
functioning/mental status, 66--68 diagnostic considerations, 70--77
disposition, 162--167 ethics, 111--119 presenting concern, 65

relevant history, 65--66 risk management, 144--148 M Mandated reporting,
115--116 Martin, J. N., 179 Martindale, D., 97 McConaughy, S., 175--176
MCMI--III (Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory---III), 112--113
Medicaid, 13 Medically necessary services, 31 Medical records, 52 in
Anne Sanchez case study, 91, 95--96 ethics in use of, 121 in John Smith
case study, 82, 121 Medical referral case study. See John Smith case
study Medicare, 13, 22 Meehl, P., 43 Meichenbaum, D., 169 Memory, 43--44
Mental status, in Lynn case study, 66--68 Mental status examination,
52--53 Metzger, L., 132 Miller, S. D., 177 Millon, T., 49 Millon
Clinical Multiaxial Inventory---III (MCMI--III), 112--113 Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), 55 Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory--- 2 (MMPI--2), 54--56 for Anne Sanchez case
study, 94, 98--99, 101 computerized interpretations of, 128 ethical use
of, 112 for John Smith case study, 85--86 Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory--- Restructured Clinical (MMPI-RC), 85 Misplaced
attributions of causality, 46 Mistakes Were Made (But Not by Me) (Tavris
and Aronson), 46--47 MMPI (Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory),
55 MMPI--2. See Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory---2 MMPI--RC
(Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory---Restructured Clinical),
85 Mood, in Lynn case study, 67 Morey, L. C., 99 Morgan, N., 132
Motivation for treatment, in Lynn case study, 67--68 N Nadkarni, L., 132
Names of patients, 8--9 National Center for Health Statistics, 13 NEC
(Not elsewhere classified), 20

Index

NEO Personality Inventory--III (NEO-PI-III), 85, 86, 112
Neuropsychological screening, 99 Norcross, J. C., 160, 178 Norms
deviation from, 27--28 for psychological tests, 55 Not elsewhere
classified (NEC), 20 Not otherwise specified (NOS), 20, 21 Nursing
notes, 82 O Objectivity, 75--76, 125 Oltmanns,T. F., 177 Orientation in
Anne Sanchez case study, 92 in Lynn case study, 67 Oversimplification of
data, 45--46 P PAI. See Personality Assessment Inventory Parentheses (in
codes), 19 Pathognomonic signs, 35 Patient encounter, 18 Patients
addressing, 8--9 clients vs., 8 Paul, G., 32 Payment for services, as
risk area, 152--153 Peebles, M. J., 50 Personality Assessment Inventory
(PAI), 85, 86, 99, 112 Personality factors, in Anne Sanchez case study,
94 Personality tests, in Anne Sanchez case study, 96 Piles of tests, 56
Pope, K. S., 137--138, 179 Power, of mental health professionals, 114
Practice Acts, 134 Practice guidelines APA, 160, 176--177 legal. See
Legal requirements for practice Prediction, actuarial vs. clinical, 43
Presenting concern in Anne Sanchez case study, 90 in Lynn case study, 65
Primacy effect, 41--42 Privacy. See also Confidentiality of collateral
interviews, 57--58 release of private information, 116. See also Release
of information Privacy practices statement, 185--188 Privacy Rule
(HIPAA), 135--136 Probable (term), 21 Professional roles in Anne Sanchez
case study, 170--171 of assessor vs. therapist, 119, 124--125 in
forensic cases, 125

in John Smith case study, 119, 124--125 in Lynn case study, 118--119
Professional threats, 133, 149. See also Complaints against providers
Psychological records, 52, 118--119 Psychological testing in Anne
Sanchez case study, 91--98, 127--128 assessor error in, 55--56 batteries
vs. piles of tests, 56 computerized interpretations of, 128 data from,
53--57 embedded measures of dissimulation in, 56--57 ethics of,
111--114, 127--128 and ethnic/language backgrounds, 126 feedback on, 127
in John Smith case study, 85--86 limitations of, 126--127 in Lynn case
study, 111--114 reasons for using, 54 "substantial resemblance" in,
54--55 Psychological theories, 161 PsycEssentials (Sonne), 180 R RBANS,
93 RBANS Update, 99, 101 Rebelliousness, 27--28 Records, data from, 52
Referral question and accuracy of data, 61--62 in Anne Sanchez case
study, 91, 94, 97, 100, 104, 170--172 and choice of psychological tests,
56, 126 creating your own list of, 81 in John Smith case study, 82, 120,
149, 151 in Lynn case study, 68 nonspecific, 68 and right to privacy, 52
Referrals, 68 accepting or not accepting, 148--149 in Anne Sanchez case
study, 89--90, 97, 170--172 in John Smith case study, 79--81, 148--149
in Lynn case study, 68 primary allegiance with, 153--154 and
recommendations for treatment, 170--172 time frame in, 119--120 Referral
source expectations, ethics related to, 119--120 Regulations, 134
Relationship with patients, 132, 159 in Lynn case study, 165 and
standard of care, 162 Release of information with complaints against
providers, 117 to employers, 144--145 ethics of, 116--118 exceptions to
confidentiality, 115--118, 142 HIPAA Privacy Rule, 135--136 HIPAA
Transaction Rule, 136 to insurance companies, 117, 142

221

222

INDEX

Release of information continued patient permission for, 117--118,
141--142 risk management in, 141--143 Release of information form,
142--143, 191--193 Reliability of procedures/techniques, 60 of
psychological tests, 54 Religion, relationships with patients and,
132--133 Representative heuristic, 42--43 Resources, 173--180 for
assessment, 175 for clinical interviewing, 175--176 for diagnosis,
173--175 for ethics, 178--179 for evidence-based practice, 158--159,
177--178 for ICD, 173--174 for other resources, 180 for practice
guidelines, 176--177 for risk management, 179 Respect for people's
rights and dignity (ethics principle), 109 Respect for the dignity of
persons (ethics principle), 110 Responsibility to society (ethics
principle), 110 Responsible caring (ethics principle), 110 Risk(s) as
factor in abnormality, 28 and human prejudice, 25, 26 Risk management,
131--155 accepting or not accepting referrals, 148--149 in Anne Sanchez
case study, 152--155 categories of laws and rules, 135 and competence,
133, 145--148, 150--152 and conflict of interest, 149--150 defined, 131
ethics in, 131, 133 and financial implications of clinical decisions,
149 HIPAA requirements, 135--137 and informed consent, 137--141, 145,
147--148, 151 in John Smith case study, 148--151 in Lynn case study,
144--148 with payment for services, 153 professional threats in, 133,
149 and relationship with patients, 132--133 and release of information,
141--143 resources for, 179 Rodolfa, E., 132 Rogers, C., 70, 132
Rorschach test, 85 Rule out (term), 21 Rule-out diagnosis, 103 Rules
governing practice of psychology, 133--135 Rust, J., 175 S Sattler, J.
M., 175 School records, 52 Schreier, B., 132

Security Rule (HIPAA), 136 Self-deception, error in assessment and,
46--47 Self-disclosure, 122--123, 151 Sexualized interaction with
clients, response to, 128--130, 154 Sexual offenders, 37--39, 43 Sexual
orientation, 124, 132--133 16 PF, 85 Social class, relationships with
patients and, 132--133 Social functioning in Anne Sanchez case study, 94
interference with, 28 Societal norms, abnormality as deviation from,
27--28 Society of Clinical Psychology, APA Division 12, website, 178
Sommers-Flanagan, J., 176 Sommers-Flanagan, R., 176 Sonne, J., 179--180
Specialty Guidelines for Forensic Psychology (APA), 58 Standardization
data, 54--55 Standard of care, 161--162 Stanford--Binet Intelligence
Scales, 98, 113 Statistical prediction, clinical prediction vs., 43
Statutes, 133--134 Stigma, attached to diagnoses, 34 Storytelling,
making sense through, 44--45 Structured Clinical Interview for DSM--5,
51 Subjective distress, in identifying abnormality, 27 "Substantial
resemblance," 54--55 Suspected (term), 21 System 1 thinking, 42--44
System 2 thinking, 42--44 Szasz, T., 36 T Tarasoff case, 115--116 TAT
(Thematic Apperception Test), 85 Tavris, C., 46--47 Testimonials, 145
Testing. See Psychological testing Tests in Print (Murphy, Geisinger,
Carlson, & Spies 2011), 98 Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), 85
Theoretical orientation, 160--161 Thinking critical, 7, 160--161
realistic, 166 System 1/System 2, 42--44 Thinking, Fast and Slow
(Kahneman), 42 Thought processes/content, in Lynn case study, 67
Transaction Rule (HIPAA), 136 Treatment efficacy, 158 Treatment plan.
See Disposition Truax, C. B., 132, 159 Trust confidentiality and, 115
informed consent and, 122

Index

Tversky, A., 42 Tyrer, P., 3 U Unconditional positive regard, in
relationship with patients, 132 Unconscious automatic processes, 46
United Healthcare, 31 Unspecified (term), 21 U.S. Alcohol, Drug
Abuse,and Mental Health Administration, 13 U.S. Committee on Joint
Causes of Death, 12 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 136,
137 V Validity of procedures/techniques, 60 of psychological tests, 54
VandeCreek, L. D., 179 Variability in behavior, abnormality and, 40, 41
Variable-axis classification system, ICD as, 14 Vasquez, M. J. T.,
137--138, 179

W WAIS--IV. See Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale--- Fourth Edition
Wampold, B. E., 160, 177 Website for APA Practice Directorate, 178
Website for APA Public Interest Directorate, 178 Website for the Society
of Clinical Psychology, APA Division 12, 178 Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale---Fourth Edition (WAIS--IV), 92, 93, 98--101 Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale---IV (WAIS--IV), 55 Wechsler tests, 54, 56, 98
Weighting data, 61 Western moral philosophy, 110 WHO. See World Health
Organization WMS--IV, 93, 99 Woodcock--Johnson test, 98 Work records, 52
World Health Assembly, 13 World Health Organization (WHO), 3, 11--13, 22
Y Younggren, J. N., 179

223

About the Authors

Jack Schaffer, PhD, spent 17 years in independent practice and 16 years
as faculty in two medical schools and a professional school. His private
practice specialized in clinical and neuropsychological assessments and
psychotherapy with adults and families. He received his doctorate in
clinical psychology from The University of North Dakota and is certified
by the American Board of Professional Psychology in clinical psychology
and clinical health psychology. He is a fellow and past president of the
Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards and a past chair
of the State of Minnesota Board of Psychology. He currently serves on
the American Psychological Association's Commission on Accreditation.
Dr. Schaffer's professional interests include psychological assessment,
defining and assessing professional competence, and ethical and legal
issues. He enjoys woodworking, bicycling, and spending time with his
wife, his two children, and four grandchildren. Emil Rodolfa, PhD, is a
professor of psychology at Alliant International University's California
School of Professional Psychology (CSPP) in Sacramento. He received his
doctorate from Texas A&M University and was training director and
director of the University of California Counseling and Psychological
Services prior to joining the faculty at CSPP. He 225

226

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

is the founding editor of Training and Education in Professional
Psychology and was Associate Editor of Professional Psychology Research
and Practice. Dr. Rodolfa is a fellow of the American Psychological
Association, a fellow and past president of the Association of State and
Provincial Psychology Boards, a Board Member Emeritus and past chair of
the Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers, and a
past president of the State of California Board of Psychology. His
professional interests include defining and assessing professional
competence, ethical and legal issues, supervision and training, college
student mental health, and the assessment and treatment of anxiety and
depression. He enjoys spending time with his family, playing horseshoes
and BBQing (some might call it grilling) at his cabin in the mountains.


