See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328122601

Schema therapy conceptualization of personality functioning and traits
in ICD-11 and DSM-5 Article in Current Opinion in Psychiatry · October
2018 DOI: 10.1097/YCO.0000000000000464

CITATIONS

READS

88

13,254

2 authors, including: Bo Bach University of Copenhagen and Psychiatric
Research Unit - Region Zealand 157 PUBLICATIONS 5,603 CITATIONS SEE
PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Bo Bach on 10 October
2018. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

REVIEW URRENT C OPINION

Schema therapy conceptualization of personality functioning and traits
in ICD-11 and DSM-5 Bo Bach a and David P. Bernstein b

Purpose of review Schema therapy conceptualizes personality disorders in
terms of modes and underlying schemas. This article reviews the
literature on schema therapy conceptualization of personality disorder
functioning and traits, and proposes how these findings apply to novel
personality disorder classification in ICD-11 and the DSM-5 Alternative
Model of Personality Disorders (AMPD). Recent findings Maladaptive
schemas and modes are generally associated with personality dysfunction
and traits in conceptually coherent ways. The healthy adult mode, a
transdiagnostic core concept in schema therapy, corresponds to the
ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD features of core personality functioning. Modes
and underlying schemas substantially overlap with specific ICD-11 and
DSM-5-AMPD traits, which denote individual themes and styles of
personality dysfunction. Summary The dimensional personality disorder
framework in ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD is largely compatible with the schema
therapy model. The ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD provide a scientifically
derived and theory-free framework for all practitioners, which may be
connected to clinical theory of schema therapy in a coherent manner.
Level of personality functioning can be conceptualized as healthy adult
functioning (e.g. sense of identity, self-worth, emotion regulation,
intimacy, and fulfillment), which inform intensity of treatment. Trait
qualifiers can be conceptualized by associated modes and underlying
schemas (e.g. subjugation, entitlement, or unrelenting standards), which
inform focus and style of treatment. Keywords DSM-5, ICD-11, personality
functioning, personality traits, schema therapy

INTRODUCTION The DSM-5 Alternative Model of Personality Disorders
(DSM-5-AMPD) in Section III and the nearly identical ICD-11
Classification of Personality Disorders (which must be used for coding
purposes by all WHO member countries) provide a scientifically derived
approach to diagnosing personality disorders, which should address the
scientific and clinical shortcomings of the established personality
disorder categories in DSM-IV/5 and ICD-10 \[1 ,2\]. However, the ICD-11
and DSM-5-AMPD frameworks are theory-free without explicit causal
mechanisms or treatment implications. Therefore, it seems important to
understand how the ICD-11 and DSM-5 frameworks align with concepts in
evidence-based treatment models in order to tailor treatment to these
new classification systems. As one of the most recently developed
approaches, schema therapy provides a theoretically integrative
framework of personality disorder psychopathology aimed at guiding
conceptualization and treatment \[3\].

The goal of the present article is to review the most important and
recent research on associations of schema therapy core concepts
(i.e. schemas and modes) with aspects of personality disorder
functioning and traits. On this empirical ground, we aim to propose how
the Schema therapy model may be used to conceptualize the ICD-11 and
DSM-5-AMPD classifications of personality disorders. We suggest that
this may add clinical theory to the new

&

a Center of Excellence on Personality Disorder, Psychiatric Research
Unit, Slagelse Psychiatric Hospital, Region Zealand, Denmark and
bExpertise Center for Forensic Psychiatry, De Rooyse Wissel Forensic
Psychiatric Center, Forensic Psychology Section, Department of Clinical
Psychological Science, Maastrict University, The Netherlands

Correspondence to Bo Bach, PhD, Center of Excellence on Personality
Disorder, Psychiatric Research Unit, Slagelse Psychiatric Hospital,
Region Zealand, Fælledvej 6, Bygning 3, 4. Sal., Slagelse, Denmark. Tel:
+45 30 29 33 81; e-mail: bobachsayad@gmail.com Curr Opin Psychiatry
2018, 32:000--000 DOI:10.1097/YCO.0000000000000464

0951-7367 Copyright ß 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved.

www.co-psychiatry.com

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Personality disorders

KEY POINTS  The novel approaches to personality disorders in ICD11 and
DSM-5-AMPD, including global level of personality functioning and
specific stylistic traits, align with schema therapy concepts of healthy
adult functioning and specific schemas/modes, respectively.  Level of
personality functioning in ICD-11 and DSM-5AMPD may be used to denote
healthy adult functioning (e.g. capacity for coherent identity,
self-worth, emotion regulation, intimacy, and fulfillment). 
Classification of personality disorder severity (e.g. mild, moderate,
severe) may help schema therapists consider intensity and style of
treatment according to level of healthy adult capacities (e.g. how to
apply 'limited reparenting').  Specification of trait qualifiers
(e.g. submissiveness, grandiosity, or rigid perfectionism) may be used
to inform focus of treatment including targeting associated modes
(e.g. compliant surrenderer, self-aggrandizer, or perfectionistic
overcontroller) and underlying schemas (e.g., subjugation, entitlement,
or unrelenting standards).  Since the ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD models
provide information related to capacity for mentalization (i.e. internal
emotional experience and understanding others' perspective), the schema
therapy framework may benefit from emphasizing such features in the
conceptualization of personality disorders.

behavioural manifestations (e.g. emotion regulation, impulse control,
distortions in situational appraisals, and paranoid ideas or
dissociation), and associated distress or functional impairment
(e.g. personal, educational, occupational, and family areas of
functioning) \[4 ,5\]. The AMPD, in DSM5 Section III, includes a nearly
identical approach to personality disorders, involving assessment of
level of personality functioning (Criterion A) and description of 25
trait facets organized in five domains of Negative Affectivity,
Detachment, Antagonism, Disinhibition, and Psychoticism (Criterion B).
The DSM-5-AMPD is not in Section III's 'Conditions for Further Study'
chapter. Therefore, practitioners can regard it as a true 'alternative'
to the standard approach in Section II and can use it for patient
assessment and diagnosis. For this reason, the DSM5-AMPD is prominently
featured in recent clinicianoriented textbooks and handbooks \[6--8\],
and structured interviews and patient-report measures have been
developed to assist practitioners \[9,10 ,11\]. As presented in Table 1,
the severity of global personality impairment is measured dimensionally
and a certain level of impairment is a diagnostic requirement for a
personality disorder diagnosis, whereas trait qualifiers contribute to
the specific expression of personality dysfunction. The
functioning/severity component is particularly based on the
psychodynamic tradition of personality organization \[10 ,12\] as well
as the empirical identification of a general personality disorder factor
\[13 ,14\], whereas the trait component constitutes a pathological
variant of the empirically derived Five-Factor Model (FFM) (Negative
Affectivity corresponds to Neuroticism, Detachment corresponds to low
Extraversion, Dissociality/Antagonism corresponds to low Agreableness,
Disinhibition corresponds to low Conscientiousness, and Anankastia
corresponds to high Conscientiousness) \[15 ,16 ,17,18 ,19 \]. To date,
this approach has been supported by a large body of empirical evidence
\[see reviews \[19 ,20,21 \]\]. Table 1 presents the overall aspects of
the ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD models, whereas specific features of
personality functioning and traits are elaborated in the respective
diagnostic guidelines. &&

&

&

&&

diagnostic classifications and advance research on cause and treatment.

future

PERSONALITY DISORDER CLASSIFICATION IN ICD-11 AND DSM-5 ALTERNATIVE
MODEL OF PERSONALITY DISORDERS The ICD-11 includes a classification of
personality disorders according to severity of personality dysfunction
(i.e. mild, moderate, severe), which also allows the option of
specifying one or more trait qualifiers (i.e. negative affectivity,
disinhibition, detachment, dissociality, and anankastia; to facilitate
clinical utility and continuity, the user of ICD11 is also allowed to
specify a borderline pattern qualifier corresponding to the familiar
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder). Essentially, this
classification relies on impairment of core personality functioning
including the degree and pervasiveness of disturbances in
self-functioning (i.e. identity, accuracy of self-view, self-worth,
self-direction), interpersonal functioning (e.g. parent--child, romantic
relationships, school/work, family, friendships, peer contexts),
emotional, cognitive, and 2

www.co-psychiatry.com

&

&

&

&&

&&

&

SCHEMA THERAPY MODEL OF PERSONALITY DISORDERS The schema therapy model
of personality disorders is essentially based on a taxonomy of schemas
(inner models of self and others) and modes (activated schemas and
coping responses; 'self-states'), which are derived from clinical
observations and theory, and subsequently empirically supported \[22\].
See Tables 2 and 3 for a detailed overview of schemas and modes. Volume
32  Number 00  Month 2018

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Schema therapy conceptualization Bach and Bernstein Table 1. ICD-11 and
DSM-5 Alternative Model of Personality Disorders classifications of
personality disorders Diagnosis

ICD-11 severity of personality dysfunction

DSM-5 AMPD Criterion A: level of personality functioning

No disorder

None

0: No impairment (healthy functioning)

Personality difficulty

1: Some impairment

Disorder

Mild personality disorder

2: Moderate impairment

Moderate personality disorder

3: Severe impairment

Severe personality disorder

4: Extreme impairment

Higher Order

ICD-11 trait domain qualifiers

DSM-5 AMPD Criterion B: trait domains

Internalizing

Negative Affectivity

Negative Affectivity

Externalizating

Detachment

Detachment

Anankastia

(Rigid Perfectionism and Perseveration)a

Dissociality

Antagonism

Disinhibition

Disinhibition

Borderline patternb

Psychoticismc

AMPD, Alternative Model of Personality Disorders. a These are facets
from the domains of (low) Disinhibition and (high) Negative Affectivity,
respectively. b This additional pattern is not a trait domain, but was
included for the purpose of continuity with clinical practice. c These
domain features are only included in the DSM-5 model consistent with the
DSM tradition of considering schizotypal disorder as a personality
disorder feature.

Table 2. Definitions of schemas and their organization into higher order
domains Disconnection and Rejection domain Emotional deprivation

Other people are not going to meet my emotional needs

Social isolation/alienation

I am different from other people and not a part of a group

Emotional inhibition

Inhibition in expression of emotions and spontaneity

Defectiveness/shame

I am worthless because of feelings of being bad, inferior, or invalid

Mistrust/abused

Other people will harm, abuse or take advantage of me

Pessimism/negativity

I expect that everything will turn out badly

Impaired Autonomy and Performance domain Dependence/incompetence

I am unable to handle daily tasks without help from others

Failure to achieve

I am a failure in school/career and will eventually fail in life

Subjugation

I must comply with others in order to avoid feared consequences

Abandonment/instability

Significant others will be lost or leave me emotionally or physically

Enmeshment

I must constantly be involved with or have support from close others

Vulnerability to harm

Bad things will happen and I cannot prevent it or cope with it

Excessive Responsibility and Standards domain Self-sacrifice

I prefer taking care of others instead of myself

Unrelenting standards

I must always follow a certain standard of productivity, performance, or
behaviour

Self-punitiveness

I expect and deserve negative consequences for my imperfection

Impaired Limits domain Entitlement

I am entitled to special rights, I am superior

Approval/admiration-seeking

My worth/significance depends on positive attention from others

Insufficient self-control

Delayed gratification and perseverance is hard for me

Schemas are described from condensing item-content from the Young Schema
Questionnaire 3 -- Short Form (YSQ-S3). Domain organization is defined
according to recent revision and research \[23,24\].

0951-7367 Copyright ß 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved.

www.co-psychiatry.com

3

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Personality disorders Table 3. Definition of modes Child modes
Vulnerable child (abused, abandoned, humiliated, dependent)

Frequently feeling sad, afraid, or worthless representing the
distressing negative emotions a person experiences when schemas are
triggered. As the core of schema therapy, this mode is what the
therapist wants to get to, which usually is complicated by the remaining
modes.

Lonely child

Feeling loneliness and emptiness; the feeling that no one can
understand, soothe, comfort, or make real contact with the person.

Angry child

Frequently feeling anger because of frustration of needs representing
the underlying vulnerability seen in the vulnerable child, but
externalized so that individuals in this mode may act demanding and
hostile.

Enraged child

A more externalized form of angry child involving more extreme emotions
of rage often resulting in destroying objects as well as hurting or even
killing another person.

Impulsive child

Attempts to have a need fulfilled but done in an almost childlike
impulsive and immediate manner without considering consequences.

Undisciplined child

Not being capable of completing routine or boring tasks; gets easily
frustrated and gives up.

Maladaptive parent modes Punitive parent/critical parent

Shame and self-disgust considered as internalized childhood experiences
of criticism or punishment; closely related to vulnerable child.

Demanding parent

Perfectionism and pursuit of high standards considered as internalized
experiences of too high demands; closely related to vulnerable child.

Avoidant and surrender coping modes Compliant surrender

Often being complicit with authority figures in an automated manner,
which is triggered in any situation of power imbalance.

Detached protector

Withdraws from others and disconnects emotions; often associated with
depersonalization, feelings of emptiness, and use of cannabis or heroin;
avoids distress associated with schema-activation.

Avoidant protector

Interpersonal and situational avoidance.

Angry protector

Involves keeping others, who are perceived as threatening or dangerous,
at a distance by using a 'wall of anger.' Unlike the angry and enraged
child mode, this anger is quite controllable and serves a goal of
'protecting' the self from others.

Detached self-soother/self-stimulator

Disconnects emotions by means of high level of soothing, distracting or
stimulation; often associated with workaholism, binging, promiscuity,
and use of cocaine or amphetamine; avoidance of distress associated with
schemas

Overcompensatory coping modes Self-aggrandizer

Behaving selfish, entitled, or root; over-compensating for distress
associated with schemaactivation.

Bully and attack

Strategically dominating, bullying, or hurting others; over-compensating
for distress associated with schema-activation.

Conning and manipulative

Lies to, manipulates with, or cons others to achieve specific goals,
such as victimizing others, gaining power, or escaping punishment.

Predator

Using ruthless, cold, and calculating behaviours to eliminate real or
potential obstacles or threats.

Perfectionistic overcontroller

Exercising extreme control and order, repetition, or rituals to divert
attention from or protect one self from real or perceived threats.

Attention-seeker

Seeks other people's attention and approval by extravagant, exaggerated,
and inappropriate behaviour. Usually compensates for underlying
loneliness.

Suspicious overcontroller

Seeks to protect the self from real or perceived threat through
overcontrol while concerned with locating or uncovering hidden, real, or
perceived treat.

Adapted from Bernstein and Clercx \[3\] and Bamelis et al. \[32\].

Schemas are trait-like dysfunctional inner models of self and others
developed from an interaction between innate temperament and childhood
experiences. As presented in Table 2, the current schema therapy-model
includes 18 schemas, which are best 4

www.co-psychiatry.com

organized into four domains that are consistent with empirical evidence
and theory \[23,24\]: Disconnection and Rejection, Impaired Autonomy and
Performance, Excessive Responsibility and Standards, and Impaired
Limits. Each domain reflects a theme of Volume 32  Number 00  Month 2018

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Schema therapy conceptualization Bach and Bernstein

unfulfilled needs that may have contributed to the development of the
subordinate schemas. Modes constitute state-like and fluctuating
features of personality disorders reflecting a configuration of
activated schemas, associated affect, and coping responses. The mode
concept was introduced into schema therapy because the trait-like
schemas were inadequate for working with severe/complex personality
disorder patients who exhibit frequent shifts of state-like modes
related to a poorly integrated personality \[3,25\]. Thus, modes are
regarded as dynamic and moment-to-moment self-states of personality
problems, which can be even of dissociative proportions (e.g. Detached
Protector) \[3\]. Research supports the validity of both schemas \[23,26
,27,28 ,29 ,30 \] and modes \[31--33,34 ,35 , 36--39,40 \] including
their ability to differentiate personality disorders from
non-personality disorders \[33,41 ,42 ,43\]. Like other measures of
personality problems, schemas are associated with various kinds of
psychopathology including depression \[44 ,45 \], OCD \[46 \], ADHD \[47
\], and psychotic symptoms \[48 ,49 \]. Moreover, a number of studies
indicate that schemas account for the association between childhood
adversity and current psychopathology, including personality disorder
\[48 ,50,51--58,59 , 60,61\], and that the link between schemas and
psychopathology is further mediated by dysfunctional modes \[62 \]. For
a complete description of the roles of schemas and modes in schema
therapy treatment of personality disorders, we refer to contemporary
literature on this topic \[3,63 \]. &

&

&

&

&&

&

&

&

&

&

&

&

&

&

&&

&

&&

&

&

CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF CONCEPTUALIZING HEALTHY ADULT FUNCTIONING IN
SCHEMA THERAPY Most healthy people have the capacity to reflect on and
modulate their emotional responses. By contrast, people with personality
disorders seem to lack some of this capacity, especially when they are
schematically triggered. In schema therapy terms, they lack a Healthy
Adult mode that can integrate their various emotional states
(i.e. modes) and keep them from going to extremes \[3\]. As exemplified
in Table 4, this Healthy Adult part of the patient is able to see the
patient's needs, detect and regulate emotions and impulses, understand
reality, maintain a coherent and positive self-concept, and be
selfdirected. A central goal of schema therapy is to assess and empower
the Healthy Adult mode so that it may take care of the needs experienced
by the vulnerable part of the self \[64\]. Notably, when the Healthy
Adult mode is undeveloped, compromised, or impaired, there is weak
''control'' over the remaining modes, including

activated schemas, which typically result in emotional turmoil and
harmful coping. Therefore, dominance of various dysfunctional modes
(e.g. Enraged Child, Self-Aggrandizer) and underlying schemas
(e.g. domain of Disconnection and Rejection) usually indicates a weakly
established Healthy Adult mode \[3\]. Finally, experimental research
shows that the Healthy Adult mode is less fluctuating (i.e. more stable)
than all other modes during therapy segments \[65 \], which might
underscore its everpresent nature. &&

HEALTHY ADULT MODE AS TRANSDIAGNOSTIC FEATURE OF PERSONALITY FUNCTIONING
Recent research supports that the Healthy Adult mode is not so much a
disorder-specific mode, but rather a transdiagnostic mode that reflects
the core of healthy functioning, including the ability to regulate own
emotions and impulses, and to ensure own fulfillment in life \[10 ,66
\]. Accordingly, the Healthy Adult mode is substantially associated with
quality of life \[38\] and global psychopathology \[36\], which may
reflect aspects of fulfillment and general distress. Moreover,
psychotherapy research has shown that the level of Healthy Adult mode
increases during and after effective treatment of mixed personality
disorders (including at followup) \[67\], which may underscore that the
Healthy Adult functioning is what psychotherapists should aim to boost
in all types of patients. Despite the anticipated transdiagnostic
features, research also suggests that Healthy Adult functioning is most
compromised in borderline personality disorder patients compared with
non-borderline personality disorder patients \[33,42 ,68--70\].
Moreover, research supports that personality disorder patients generally
have lower levels of Healthy Adult functioning in comparison with
matched patients without personality disorder \[39,42 \]. According to
Kernberg's traditional conceptualization of borderline-level and
neurotic-level organization, these general findings suggest that the
level of Healthy Adult functioning somewhat denotes level of personality
disorder severity or impairment \[71\]. In support of this way of
framing it, empirical research also suggests that Borderline personality
disorder is best conceptualized as a personality disorder severity index
rather than a distinct homogenous personality disorder type \[14\].
Moreover, borderline personality disorder patients with parasuicidal
behavior have been found to show lower levels of Healthy Adult
functioning than borderline personality disorder patients without
parasuicidal behavior \[72\]. This may indicate that the Healthy Adult
mode

0951-7367 Copyright ß 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved.

&

&

&

&

www.co-psychiatry.com

5

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Personality disorders Table 4. Tentative correspondence of healthy adult
mode with ICD-11 and DSM-5- Alternative Model of Personality Disorder
personality functioning Healthy Adult Mode

ICD-11 personality functioning

DSM-5 personality functioning

Sense of coherent self and identity

Having a good sense of who one is, and what is needed to make one happy
(Item 118).

Stability and coherence of one's sense of identity.

Experience of oneself as unique, with clear boundaries between self and
others.

Stability of self-worth

Capacity for having a positive self-concept (Item 114).

Ability to maintain an overall positive and stable sense of self-worth;
accuracy of one's view of one's characteristics, strengths, limitations.

Stability of self-esteem and accuracy of self-appraisal.

Capacity for emotion regulation

Ability to solve own problems without being overwhelmed by emotions
(Item 28); ability to express emotions appropriately (Item 58);
nurtures, validates and affirms the vulnerable child mode (i.e. the part
of the person experiencing hurtful emotions and unfulfilled needs).

Ability to experience a range of appropriate emotional experiences and
expressions, without being emotionally overreactive or underreactive.

Capacity for, and ability to regulate, a range of emotional experience.

Ability to set and pursue goals

Persevering in and taking responsibility for solving own problems (Item
20); capable of taking care of self (Item 76); ability to learn, grow,
and change (Item 81); enduring demanding or boring tasks in order to
accomplish valued things (Item 115); performs appropriate adult
functions such as working, parenting, taking responsibility, and
committing; intellectual, esthetic, and cultural interests; health
maintenance and athletic activities.

Capacity for self-direction (ability to plan, choose, and implement
appropriate goals); ability to set appropriate goals and to work towards
them; exhibits genuine interest in or efforts toward sustained
employment.

Pursuit of coherent and meaningful short-term and life goals based on
realistic assessment of own capacities; capacity for attaining
fulfillment and authenticity.

Prosocial internal standards

Expressing own needs without going overboard (Item 69); sets limits for
the angry and impulsive child modes.

Appropriateness of behavioural responses to intense emotions and
stressful circumstances; flexibility in controlling impulses and
modulating behaviour based on the situation and consideration of the
consequences.

Utilization of constructive and prosocial internal standards of behavior
while attaining own fulfillment in multiple realms.

Capacity for intimacy and mutuality

Ability to stand up for one self when feeling unfairly criticized,
abused, or taken advantage of (Item 111); pursues pleasurable adult
activities such as sex.

Ability to develop and maintain close and mutually satisfying
relationships; ability to manage conflict in relationships without just
giving into others at the cost to oneself.

Mutuality of regard reflected in interpersonal behavior (e.g. social/
interpersonal behavior is reciprocal and seeks fulfillment of basic
needs or escape from pain); desires and engages in a number of caring,
close, and reciprocal relationships.

Healthy Adult Mode is defined by item content from the Healthy Adult
Mode scale (indicated with specific item numbers) and supplemented with
the original definition of the Healthy Adult Mode by Young and First
\[64\], whereas DSM-5 and ICD-11 definitions of personality functioning
are adapted from designated and abbreviated features from the two
diagnostic models \[5,12\].

denotes important aspects of functioning in terms of capacity for
healthy emotion regulation. Notably, the ICD-11 diagnostic guidelines
for personality disorders explicitly takes frequency and severity of 6

www.co-psychiatry.com

harm to self or others into account when classifying global personality
disorder severity \[5\]. In addition to the Healthy Adult mode, other
specific modes have also been found to capture Volume 32  Number 00 
Month 2018

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Schema therapy conceptualization Bach and Bernstein

aspects of personality functioning, which applies to nonsuicidal
self-injury (e.g. Punitive Parent) \[73\] and dissociation
(e.g. Detached Protector) \[74 ,75\]. This may indicate impaired
capacities for emotion regulation and appropriate situational
appraisals, respectively. As previously mentioned, the dominance of such
dysfunctional modes usually reflects a weakly developed Healthy Adult
mode. Table 4 proposes a tentative cross-walk between Healthy Adult
functions and capacities of ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD personality
functioning. &&

DISCONNECTION AND REJECTION SCHEMAS ARE RELATED TO PERSONALITY
FUNCTIONING Recent research shows that impaired personality functioning,
as defined in the ICD-11 and DSM-5AMPD, is predominantly associated with
the schema domain of Disconnection and Rejection \[10 ,66 \]. This is
consistent with a systematic review highlighting that schemas of
Disconnection and Rejection are most prevalent in borderline personality
disorder \[76\], a disorder characterized by considerably impaired
personality functioning \[71\]. This is partially supported by a recent
study, which identified schemas of Disconnection and Rejection
(i.e. Mistrust/Abuse and Defectiveness/Shame) to uniquely differentiate
borderline personality disorder from other personality disorders \[42
\]. Likewise, another recent study among borderline personality disorder
patients found Disconnection and Rejection to predict suicidal ideation,
physical/overt aggressiveness, psychotic-like symptoms, comorbidity with
eating disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder \[77 \]. These
findings may support the proposition that the activation of
Disconnection and Rejection schemas (e.g. Defectiveness and
Mistrust/Abused) compromises the patient's ability to function as a
Healthy Adult, which is typically seen in borderline personality
disorder patients in terms of impaired personality functioning and
-integration \[3\]. &

&

&

&&

SCHEMAS AND MODES IN RELATION TO SPECIFIC PERSONALITY TRAITS Several
studies suggest that the majority of schemas are substantially
associated with trait features of Negative Affectivity or Neuroticism
\[34 ,78--83\], which naturally reflects the vulnerability and emotional
distress related to most schemas. However, specific associations with
other traits have also been identified. For example, research among
psychiatric outpatients \[82\] found Neuroticism to be predominantly
related to schemas of Defectiveness, Subjugation, Dependence, and
Subjugation; Extraversion was &&

negatively related to schemas of Emotional inhibition, Social isolation,
and Failure; Agreeableness was positively related to Self-sacrifice and
negatively related to Entitlement, Insufficient self-control, and
Mistrust; Conscientiousness was positively related to Unrelenting
standards and Self-sacrifice, and negatively related to Insufficient
self-control. Recently, a team of researchers and schema therapists
developed a model of adaptive schemas \[84 \], which describes the
positive counterpart of a schema, corresponding to the adaptive features
that naturally emerge when emotional needs are fulfilled during
upbringing. Accordingly, Neuroticism is negatively associated with
positive schemas of Stable Attachments and Basic Health/Optimism;
Aggreableness is associated with Social Belonging and Empathic
Consideration; Conscientiousness is associated with Healthy
Self-Control/Discipline, Healthy Self-Reliance/Competence,
Self-Directedness, and Success; Extraversion is associated with schemas
of Social Belonging and Emotional Openness and Spontaneity. In a recent
study \[34 \], modes were empirically organized into three higher order
domains that were related to FFM traits. A domain of internalization
(e.g. Abandoned Child and Avoidant Protector) was primarily related to
Neuroticism and low Extraversion. A domain of externalization
(e.g. Impulsive Child and Bully and Attack) was primarily related to low
Agreeableness, low Conscientiousness, and Extraversion. Finally, a
domain of Compulsivity (e.g. Perfectionistic Overcontroller and
Demanding Parent) was primarily related to Conscientiousness and
Neuroticism. Notably, this three-factor structure of modes not only
aligns with higher order ICD11 and DSM-5-AMPD traits \[16 ,18 \], but
also with the novel Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP)
framework \[34 ,85 \]. Essentially, the aforementioned pattern of
alignment with conventional FFM traits have also been supported when
using a pathological variant of the FMM model (i.e. DSM-5-AMPD traits),
which delineates the trait qualifiers included in the ICD-11 and
DSM-5-AMPD classification \[83\]. The most substantial associations
identified in this study are presented in Tables 5 and 6. In support of
the considerable overlap, the DSM-5-AMPD traits account for 89.4% of the
variance in schema therapy concepts \[83\]. &&

&&

&

&&

&

&

SCHEMA THERAPY CONCEPTUALIZATION OF ICD-11 AND DSM-5 ALTERNATIVE MODEL
OF PERSONALITY DISORDERS The transdiagnostic quality of Healthy Adult
functioning (e.g. self-direction and ability to stand up for

0951-7367 Copyright ß 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved.

www.co-psychiatry.com

7

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Personality disorders Table 5. Correspondence of ICD-11 and DSM-5
Alternative Model of Personality Disorders trait domains with schemas
and modes Trait domains

Underlying schema

Manifest mode

Negative affectivity (e.g. facets of emotional lability, anxiousness,
depressivity, suspiciousness, separation insecurity)

Vulnerable child (abandoned or lonely child) Angry child Punitive parent
Compliant surrender Suspicious overcontroller

Detachment (e.g. facets of withdrawal, intimacy avoidance, restricted
affectivity, anhedonia)

Defectiveness Vulnerable to harm Dependence Subjugation
Self-punitiveness Abandonment Pessimism Self-punitiveness Mistrust/abuse
Enmeshment Emotional inhibition Mistrust/abused Social
isolation/alienation

Anankastia (e.g. facets of rigid perfectionism and perseveration)

Unrelenting standards Emotional inhibition

Demanding parent Perfectionistic overcontroller Angry child

Antagonism/dissociality (e.g. facets of callousness, attention-seeking,
grandiosity, hostility, manipulativeness, deceitfulness)

Entitlement Admiration-seeking

Bully and attack Self-aggrandizer Angry child Angry protector Predator
Conning and manipulative

Disinhibition (e.g. facets of impulsivity, risktaking, distractibility,
irresponsibility)

Insufficient self-control

Impulsive child Undisciplined child

Detached protector Vulnerable child (abused or humiliated child)
Avoidant protector

The patterns of association have been empirically supported \[83\],
except for the modes marked with an asterisk, which represent
hypothesized associations that have not yet been empirically tested.

oneself in relation to others) seems consistent with established
research identifying a general personality disorder factor of
severity/functioning, separable from specific personality disorder
factors of styles/ traits \[14,86,87\]. Such a general factor is most
predictive of psychosocial impairment, long-term prognosis, and clinical
outcome \[88,89\]. Thus, whereas the Healthy Adult mode resembles the
general severity factor of personality disturbance (i.e. functioning),
the specific modes and schemas are comparable with different personality
disorder factors (i.e. traits). For more than two decades ago, before
the official plans of turning ICD and DSM into dimensional
classification systems, Young and Gluhoski \[90\] proposed a so-called
schema-focused diagnosis for personality disorders, which involved
dimensional assessment of a global functioning factor followed by a
separate portrayal of specific schemas. Likewise, the most recently
updated schema therapy case conceptualization form (version 2.22)
instructs the clinician to rate the patient's functioning in different
life areas (e.g. intimate and long-term relationships; occupational
roles; solitary functioning and aloneness). Subsequently, the therapist
is requested to list the most prominent schemas, modes, and triggering
situations \[91\]. This two-component procedure is not 8

www.co-psychiatry.com

very different from the diagnostic procedure in the ICD-11 and
DSM-5-AMPD classification of personality disorders, in which the overall
functioning/severity is rated first, followed by specification of
prominent trait dimensions. In line with this, it has specifically been
proposed that the DSM-5-AMPD dimensions will improve future schema
therapy research by providing more reliable and valid targets for
intervention, rather than targeting empirically questionable personality
disorder categories that combine a mixture of traits (e.g. anxiousness)
and symptom-level functioning (e.g. self-harm) that do not go together,
empirically speaking \[7,92,93 \]. As proposed in Table 4, the
conceptual content of the Healthy Adult mode is highly comparable with
the transdiagnostic measure of core personality functioning as
operationalized in the ICD-11 and DSM-5AMPD classifications of
personality disorders. As evident from the correspondence between the
Healthy Adult mode features and the severity of personality dysfunction
(i.e. impaired personality capacities), the ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD
classification of personality disorder severity may be carried out by
practitioners with Healthy Adult functioning in mind, and vice versa.
Likewise, as evident from the conceptual correspondence between
schemas/modes and maladaptive &&

Volume 32  Number 00  Month 2018

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Schema therapy conceptualization Bach and Bernstein Table 6.
Correspondence of designated DSM-5- Alternative Model of Personality
Disorders trait facets with schemas and modes Trait facets

Underlying schema

Manifest mode

Separation insecurity

Abandonment

Vulnerable child (lonely/abandoned child)

Submissiveness

Subjugation

Compliant surrender Vulnerable child (dependent child)

Depressivity

Pessimism Self-punitiveness Defectiveness/shame

Vulnerable child Punitive parent

Anxiousness

Vulnerable to harm

Avoidant protector Vulnerable child

Suspiciousness

Mistrust/abused

Suspicious overcontroller Vulnerable child (abused or humiliated child)

Withdrawal

Social isolation

Detached protector

Restricted affectivity

Emotional inhibition

Rigid perfectionism

Unrelenting Standards

Perfectionistic over-controller Demanding parent

Grandiosity

Entitlement/Grandiosity

Self-aggrandizer

Attention seeking

Admiration-Seeking

Attention/approval seeker

Deceitfulness

- 

Conning and manipulative

Manipulativeness

- 

Hostility

- 

Angry protector Angry child Bully and attack

Callousness

- 

predator Bully and attack

Impulsivity

- 

Impulsive child

Distractibility

Insufficient self-control

- 

The patterns of association have been empirically supported \[83\],
except for the modes marked with an asterisk, which represent
hypothesized associations that have not yet been empirically tested.

traits, shown in Tables 5 and 6, it appears straight forward to use
ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD traits as treatment targets reflecting associated
modes and underlying schemas. For example, the trait facet of Separation
Insecurity may be 'treated' in terms of an underlying Abandonment
schema. Finally, in regards to treatment planning, classification of
personality disorder severity/ impairment may help schema therapists
choose intensity of treatment according to Healthy Adult capacities \[93
,94\], whereas specification of trait qualifiers may inform focus of
treatment in terms of associated modes and schemas \[7,83\].
Furthermore, the schema domain of Disconnection and Rejection may also
be employed as an index of impaired personality and Healthy Adult
functioning based on its well established association with borderline
personality disorder. &&

sufficiently covered by schema therapy concepts. For example, both
ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD provide information related to capacity for
mentalization (mentalization is the ability to make sense of self and
others in terms of mental processes and subjective states \[95\]),
empathy, or reflective functioning (i.e. understanding internal
experience and others' perspective), which is not emphasized in the
schema therapy model. Yet, the schema therapy focus on integrating and
regulating modes from a healthy adult perspective may be viewed as
processes that foster mentalizing capacities \[96\]. Thus, the
conceptualization and treatment of modes, schemas, and their learning
history may serve as a foundation for improving mentalization through
impowerment of Healthy Adult capacities (e.g. capacity to reflect on and
modulate own emotional responses).

CONCLUSION LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS Certain aspects of the
ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD models of personality disorders do not seem to be

The schema therapy model seems compatible with the new dimensionally
oriented personality disorder frameworks in ICD-11 and DSM-5-AMPD. Level

0951-7367 Copyright ß 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved.

www.co-psychiatry.com

9

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Personality disorders

of core personality functioning can be conceptualized as Healthy Adult
functioning, whereas trait dimensions can be conceptualized by
associated modes and underlying schemas. Additionally, the schema domain
of Disconnection and Rejection also seems related to impaired
personality functioning. Acknowledgements None. Financial support and
sponsorship None. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of
interest.

REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READING Papers of particular interest,
published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:
& of special interest && of outstanding interest 1. Pull CB, Janca A.
Personality disorders: three classifications with a fly in the &
ointment. Curr Opin Psychiatry 2018; 31:40--42. Provides a brief updated
and critical overview of the new dimensional models of personality
disorders in DSM-5 Section III and the forthcoming ICD-11. 2. American
Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders 5th edition (DSM-5). Arlington: American Psychiatric
Publishing, Inc; 2013. 3. Bernstein DP, Clercx M. Schema therapy. In:
Livesley WJ, Larstone R, editors. Handbook of personality disorders:
theory, research, and treatment. New York, NY, US: Guilford Press; 2018.
4. Bach B, First MB. Application of the ICD-11 Classification of
Personality && Disorders. BMC Psychiatry 2018. \[Epub ahead of print\]
Provides a brief introduction to the approved ICD-11 classification of
personality disorders and illustrates how it may me applied in clinical
practice using five cases. 5. WHO. ICD-11 clinical descriptions and
diagnostic guidelines for mental and behavioural disorders,
gcp.network/en/private/icd-11-guidelines/disorders (2018). 6. Skodol AE,
Bender DS, Oldham JM. An alternative model for personality disorders.
2nd ed. Washington DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc; 2014. 7.
Bach B, Presnall-Shvorin J. Using DSM-5 and ICD-11 personality traits in
clinical treatment. In: Gratz KL, Lejuez C, editors. Cambridge handbook
of personality disorders. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2019.
8. Skodol A, Bender D, Gunderson J, Oldham J. Personality Disorders. In:
Hales RE, Yudofsky SC, Roberts LW, editors. The American Psychiatric
Publishing Textbook of Psychiatry. Arlington, VA: US: American
Psychiatric Publishing; 2014. pp. 851--894. 9. Bach B, Maples-Keller
JLJL, Bo S, Simonsen E. The alternative DSM--5 personality disorder
traits criterion: a comparative examination of three selfreport forms in
a Danish population. Personal Disord 2016; 7:124--135. 10. Bach B,
Hutsebaut J. Level of personality functioning scale--brief form 2.0: &
utility in capturing personality problems in psychiatric outpatients and
incarcerated addicts. J Pers Assess 2018. \[Epub ahead of print\]
Demonstrates that patient-reported core personality impairment
particularly captures schemas of Disconnection and Rejection and
dysfunctional modes including lack of Healthy Adult mode. 11. First MB,
Skodol A, Bender DS, et al. Structured clinical interview for the DSM-5
Alternative Model for Personality Disorders (SCID-AMPD). Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Association; 2018. 12. Bender DS, Morey LC, Skodol
AE. Toward a model for assessing level of personality functioning in
DSM-5, part I: a review of theory and methods. J Pers Assess 2011;
93:332--346. 13. Williams TF, Scalco MD, Simms LJ. The construct
validity of general && and specific dimensions of personality pathology.
Psychol Med 2018; 48: 834--848. Provides support for a model with both a
general personality disorder impairment dimension and separate
individual differences dimensions -- based on interviewerrelated and
patient-rated data from 628 psychiatric patients.

10

www.co-psychiatry.com

14. Sharp C, Wright AGC, Fowler JC, et al. The structure of personality
    pathology: both general ('g') and specific ('s') factors? J Abnorm
    Psychol 2015; 124:387--398.
15. Bach B, Sellbom M, Skjernov M, et al. ICD-11 and DSM-5 personality
    trait & domains capture categorical personality disorders: finding a
    common ground. Aust N Z J Psychiatry . \[Epub ahead of print\]
    Demonstrates how the ICD-11 and the alternative DSM-5 model for
    classifying personality disorders may be used to delineate features
    of familiar categorical personality disorder types.
16. Lotfi M, Bach B, Amini M, Simonsen E. Structure of DSM-5 and ICD-11
    & personality domains in Iranian community sample. Personal Ment
    Health 2018; 12:155--169. Shows that DSM-5-AMPD trait domains align
    with ICD-11 trait domains in an Iranian community sample.
17. Krueger RF, Derringer J, Markon KE, et al. Initial construction of a
    maladaptive personality trait model and inventory for DSM-5. Psychol
    Med 2012; 42:1879--1890.
18. Bach B, Sellbom M, Kongerslev M, et al. Deriving ICD-11 personality
    disorder & domains from dsm-5 traits: initial attempt to harmonize
    two diagnostic systems. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2017; 136:108--117.
    Shows how ICD-11 trait domains may be delineated using designated
    DSM-5 Section III trait facets by means of an algorithm developed
    for that purpose.
19. Zimmermann J, Kerber A, Rek K, et al. New developments in the
    classification && of personality disorders: DSM-5 and ICD-11. Curr
    Psychiatry Rep. In press. Provides a brief updated review of the
    large body of research on functioning/ severity and traits according
    to the DSM-5 and ICD-11 dimensional classification of personality
    disorders.
20. Morey LC, Benson KT, Busch AJ, et al. Personality disorders in
    DSM-5: emerging research on the alternative model. Curr Psychiatry
    Rep 2015; 17:558.
21. Watters CA, Bagby RM. A meta-analysis of the five-factor internal
    structure of & the Personality Inventory for DSM--5. Psychol Assess
    2018; 30: 1255--1260. Provides meta-analytical support for the
    five-factor structure of the DSM-5-AMPD traits across 14 independent
    samples (N ¼ 14 743).
22. van Genderen H, Rijkeboer M, Arntz A. Theoretical model: schemas,
    coping styles, and modes. In: The Wiley Blackwell handbook of schema
    therapy. New Jersey: Wiley; 2012. pp. 27--40.
23. Bach B, Lockwood G, Young JE. A new look at the schema therapy
    model: organization and role of early maladaptive schemas. Cogn
    Behav Ther 2018; 47:328--349.
24. Young JE. Early maladaptive schemas - revised. New York: Schema
    Therapy Institute; 2014.
25. Young JE, Klosko JS, Weishaar ME. Schema therapy: a practitioner's
    guide. New York: The Guilford Press; 2003.
26. Bach B, Simonsen E, Christoffersen P, et al. The Young Schema Ques&
    tionnaire 3 Short Form (YSQ-S3): psychometric properties and
    association with personality disorders in a Danish mixed sample. Eur
    J Psychol Assess 2017; 33:134--143. Supports the 18-factor empirical
    structure of schemas and associations personality disorders in a
    sample of psychiatric outpatients.
27. Oei TPS, Baranoff J. Young schema questionnaire: review of
    psychometric and measurement issues. Aust J Psychol 2007; 59:78--86.
28. Saggino A, Balsamo M, Carlucci L, et al. Psychometric properties of
    the Italian & version of the Young Schema Questionnaire L-3:
    preliminary results. Front Psychol . \[Epub ahead of print\]
    Provides some support for the psychometric properties of the Italian
    version of the YSQL3, including 18 schema factors. The authors
    conclude that it could represent a useful tool in clinical practice.
29. Yan Y, Wang J, Yu W, et al. Young schema questionnaire: factor
    structure and & specificity in relation to anxiety in Chinese
    adolescents. Psychiatry Investig 2018; 15:41--48. This study
    partially supported the empirical structure of maladaptive schemas
    in Chinese adolescents.
30. Phillips K, Brockman R, Bailey PE, et al. Young Schema Questionnaire
    -- & Short Form Version 3 (YSQ-S3): preliminary validation in older
    adults. Aging Ment Health 2017. \[Epub ahead of print\] Evaluates
    the YSQ-S3 in older adults and concludes that it may be of use in
    work establishing the utility of schema therapy in this population.
    However, some redevelopment of certain schema items may be required
    for the YSQ-S3 to be more relevant to older people.
31. Jacob GA, Arntz A. Schema therapy for personality disorders-a
    review. Int J Cogn Ther 2013; 6:171--185.
32. Bamelis LLM, Renner F, Heidkamp D, Arntz A. Extended schema mode
    conceptualizations for specific personality disorders: an empirical
    study. J Pers Disord 2011; 25:41--58.
33. Lobbestael J, Van Vreeswijk MF, Arntz A. An empirical test of schema
    mode conceptualizations in personality disorders. Behav Res Ther
    2008; 46:854--860.
34. Jacobs I, Lenz L, Wollny A, et al. The higher-order structure of
    schema modes. && J Pers Disord. Demonstrates the hierarchical
    structure of schemas modes and its alignment with the novel
    Hierarchical Structure of Psychopathology (HiTOP) and the DSM-5
    Alternative Model of Personality Disorders.

Volume 32  Number 00  Month 2018

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Schema therapy conceptualization Bach and Bernstein 35. Simpson SG,
Pietrabissa G, Rossi A, et al. Factorial Structure and Preliminary
Validation of the Schema Mode Inventory for Eating Disorders (SMI-ED).
Front Psychol; 9. 2018 \[Epub ahead of print\]. Found some differences
between borderline patients and chronic depressed patients, in terms of
schemas, however, no specific patterns were identified for the two
different disorders. 36. Reiss N, Krampen D, Christoffersen P, et
al. Reliability and validity of the Danish version of the Schema Mode
Inventory (SMI). Psychol Assess 2016; 28:e19--e26. 37. Reiss N, Dominiak
P, Harris D, et al. Reliability and validity of the German version of
the schema mode inventory. Eur J Psychol Assess 2012; 28:297--304. 38.
Roelofs J, Muris P, Lobbestael J. Acting and feeling like a vulnerable
child, an internalized 'bad' parent, or a healthy person: the assessment
of schema modes in non-clinical adolescents. J Pers Disord 2016;
30:469--482. 39. Lobbestael J, van Vreeswijk M, Spinhoven P, et
al. Reliability and validity of the Short Schema Mode Inventory (SMI).
Behav Cogn Psychother 2010; 38:437--458. 40. Keulen-de Vos M, Bernstein
DP, Clark LA, et al. Validation of the schema & mode concept in
personality disordered offenders. Leg Criminol Psychol 2017;
22:420--441. Supports that borderline personality disorder is
predominantly related to internalizing modes (e.g. Vulnerable child,
Lonely child, Punitive parent, Detached selfsoother). Antisocial
personality disorder is predominantly related to externalizing modes
(e.g. Bully and attack, Impulsive child, Angry child, and
Self-aggrandizer). Narcissistic personality disorder is approximately
equally related to both internalizing and externalizing modes. 41. Flink
N, Honkalampi K, Lehto SM, et al. Comparison of early maladaptive &
schemas between borderline personality disorder and chronic depression.
Clin Psychol Psychother 2018; 25:532--539. Found some differences
between borderline patients and chronically depresssed patients, in
terms of schemas, however, no specific patterns were identified for the
two different disorders. 42. Bach B, Farrell JM. Schemas and modes in
borderline personality disorder: & the mistrustful, shameful, angry,
impulsive, and unhappy child. Psychiatry Res 2018; 259:323--329. Shows
how the heterogeneity and instability of borderline personality disorder
features can be elucidated with particular schemas and modes including
schemas of Mistrust/Abused and Defectiveness/Shame along with modes of
Angry Child, Impulsive Child, and (lack of) Happy Child. 43. Nilsson
AKK, Jorgensen CR, Straarup KN, et al. Severity of affective temperament
and maladaptive self-schemas differentiate borderline patients, bipolar
patients, and controls. Compr Psychiatry 2010; 51:486--491. 44. Davoodi
E, Wen A, Dobson KS, et al. Early maladaptive schemas in depres& sion
and somatization disorder. J Affect Disord 2018; 235:82--89. Found that
depressed patients exhibited significantly higher levels of all five
schema domains and specific maladaptive schemas in comparison with
patients with somatization disorder. 45. Ahmadpanah M, Astinsadaf S,
Akhondi A, et al. Early maladaptive schemas of & emotional deprivation,
social isolation, shame and abandonment are related to a history of
suicide attempts among patients with major depressive disorders. Compr
Psychiatry 2017; 77:71--79. Shows that patients with depression have
more pronounced schemas than controls. This particularly applied to
patients with a history of suicide attempts. 46. Khosravani V, Sharifi
Bastan F, Samimi Ardestani M, et al. Early maladaptive & schemas and
suicidal risk in an Iranian sample of patients with obsessivecompulsive
disorder. Psychiatry Res 2017; 255:441--448. Shows that schemas are
associated with OCD and that the schema of mistrust/ abused explains
explained a considerable part of suicide attempts in OCD patients. 47.
Philipsen A, Lam AP, Breit S, et al. Early maladaptive schemas in adult
patients & with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. ADHD Atten
Deficit Hyperact Disord 2017; 9:101--111. This study showed that
patients with ADHD scored significantly higher than controls on almost
all schemas in particularly schemas of Failure, Defectiveness/Shame,
Subjugation, and Emotional Deprivation. 48. Boyda D, McFeeters D,
Dhingra K, et al. Childhood maltreatment and & psychotic experiences:
Exploring the specificity of early maladaptive schemas. J Clin Psychol ;
2018:. \[Epub ahead of print\] This study shows that schemas explain the
association between experienced child maltreatment and psychotic
symptoms. 49. Sundag J, Ascone L, Lincoln TM. The predictive value of
early maladaptive && schemas in paranoid responses to social stress.
Clin Psychol Psychother 2018; 25:65--75. Shows that stress-related
paranoid responses in patients with personality disorders are accounted
for by the influence of schemas. 50. Lumley MN, Harkness KL, Lumley MN.
Specificity in the relations among childhood adversity, early
maladaptive schemas, and symptom profiles in adolescent depression.
Cognit Ther Res 2007; 31:639--657. 51. Roelofs J, Lee C, Ruijten T, et
al. The mediating role of early maladaptive schemas in the relation
between quality of attachment relationships and symptoms of depression
in adolescents. Behav Cogn Psychother 2011; 39:471--479. &

52. Turner HM, Rose KS, Cooper MJ. Parental bonding and eating disorder
    symptoms in adolescents: the meditating role of core beliefs. Eat
    Behav 2005; 6:113--118.
53. Waller G, Meyer C, Ohanian V, et al. The psychopathology of bulimic
    women who report childhood sexual abuse: the mediating role of core
    beliefs. J Nerv Ment Dis 2001; 189:700--708.
54. Wright MOO, Crawford E, Del Castillo D. Childhood emotional
    maltreatment and later psychological distress among college
    students: the mediating role of maladaptive schemas. Child Abuse
    Negl 2009; 33:59--68.
55. Rezaei M, Ghazanfari F, Rezaee F. The role of childhood trauma,
    early maladaptive schemas, emotional schemas and experimental
    avoidance on depression: a structural equation modeling. Psychiatry
    Res 2016; 246:407--414.
56. Langhinrichsen-Rohling J, Thompson K, Selwyn C, et al. Maladaptive
    schemas mediate poor parental attachment and suicidality in college
    students. Death Stud 2017; 41:337--344.
57. Smyth EJ, Gardner FL, Marks DR, et al. An exploration of the
    mediators between childhood maltreatment and intimate partner
    violence. Violence Vict 2017; 32:567--583.
58. Estévez A, Jauregui P, Ozerinjauregi N, et al. The role of early
    maladaptive schemas in the appearance of psychological
    symptomatology in adult women victims of child abuse. J Child Sex
    Abus 2017; 26:889--909.
59. Bortolon C, Seillé J, Raffard S. Exploration of trauma,
    dissociation, maladap&& tive schemas and auditory hallucinations in
    a French sample. Cogn Neuropsychiatry 2017; 22:468--485. Findings in
    this study suggest that maladaptive schemas may help explain the
    link between childhood trauma and auditory hallucinations.
60. Thimm JC. Mediation of early maladaptive schemas between perceptions
    of parental rearing style and personality disorder symptoms. J Behav
    Ther Exp Psychiatry 2010; 41:52--59.
61. Carr SN, Francis AJP. Do early maladaptive schemas mediate the
    relationship between childhood experiences and avoidant personality
    disorder features? a preliminary investigation in a nonclinical
    sample. Cognit Ther Res 2010; 34:343--358.
62. van Wijk-Herbrink MF, Bernstein DP, Broers NJ, et al. Internalizing
    and & externalizing behaviors share a common predictor: the effects
    of early maladaptive schemas are mediated by coping responses and
    schema modes. J Abnorm Child Psychol 2018; 46:907--920. Shows that
    associations between schemas and psychopathological problems in
    adolescents are partially mediated via dysfunctional modes.
63. Dadomo H, Panzeri M, Caponcello D, et al. Schema therapy for
    emotional & dysregulation in personality disorders. Curr Opin
    Psychiatry 2018; 31:43--49. Provides an updated review on how schema
    therapy targets emotional dysregulation in personality disorders.
64. Young JE, First MB. Schema mode listing. Schema Therapy Institute.
    Available at: www.schematherapy.com/id72.htm. 2003.
65. Peled O, Bar-Kalifa E, Rafaeli E. Stability or instability in
    avoidant personality && disorder: mode fluctuations within schema
    therapy sessions. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 2017; 57:126--134.
    This experimental study investigated the instability/stability of
    modes in therapy segments, and showed that the healthy adult mode
    was more stable (i.e. less fluctuating) than all other modes.
66. Bach B, Anderson JL. Patient-reported ICD-11 personality disorder
    severity & and DSM-5 level of personality functioning. J Pers Disord
    2018; 1-19:. Shows that the DSM-5 LPFS is better than the initially
    proposed ICD-11 model of personality disorder severity in terms of
    capturing various personality problems. This finding supports the
    most recent revision of the ICD-11 personality disorder severity
    classification, which is now very similar to the DSM-5 LPFS.
67. Skewes SA, Samson RA, Simpson SG, van Vreeswijk M. Short-term group
    schema therapy for mixed personality disorders: a pilot study. Front
    Psychol 2015; 5:1592.
68. Sempértegui GA, Karreman A, Arntz A, et al. Schema therapy for
    borderline personality disorder: a comprehensive review of its
    empirical foundations, effectiveness and implementation
    possibilities. Clin Psychol Rev 2013; 33:426--447.
69. Lobbestael J, Arntz A, Sieswerda S. Schema modes and childhood abuse
    in borderline and antisocial personality disorders. J Behav Ther Exp
    Psychiatry 2005; 36:240--253.
70. Arntz A, Klokman J, Sieswerda S. An experimental test of the schema
    mode model of borderline personality disorder. J Behav Ther Exp
    Psychiatry 2005; 36:226--239.
71. Kernberg OF. Severe personality disorders: psychotherapeutic
    strategies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press; 1984.
72. Leppänen V, Vuorenmaa E, Lindeman S, et al. Association of
    parasuicidal behaviour to early maladaptive schemas and schema modes
    in patients with BPD: the Oulu BPD study. Personal Ment Health 2016;
    10:58--71.
73. Saldias A, Power K, Gillanders DT, et al. The mediatory role of
    maladaptive schema modes between parental care and nonsuicidal
    self-injury. Cogn Behav Ther 2013; 42:244--257.
74. Barazandeh H, Kissane DW, Saeedi N, et al. Schema modes and
    dissociation && in borderline personality disorder/traits in
    adolescents or young adults. Psychiatry Res 2018; 261:1--6. This
    study particularly identified the schema of Detached Protector Mode
    as related to features of dissociation in a sample of Borderline
    personality disorder patients.

0951-7367 Copyright ß 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved.

www.co-psychiatry.com

11

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited.

CE: Tripti; YCO/320103; Total nos of Pages: 12;

YCO 320103

Personality disorders 75. Johnston C, Dorahy MJ, Courtney D, et
al. Dysfunctional schema modes, childhood trauma and dissociation in
borderline personality disorder. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 2009;
40:248--255. 76. Barazandeh H, Kissane DW, Saeedi N, et al. A systematic
review of the relationship between early maladaptive schemas and
borderline personality disorder/traits. Pers Individ Dif 2016;
94:130--139. 77. Frı́as Á, Navarro S, Palma C, et al. Early maladaptive
schemas associated with && dimensional and categorical psychopathology
in patients with borderline personality disorder. Clin Psychol
Psychother 2018; 25:e30--e41. Identified the schema domain of
Disconnection and Rejection as predictor of suicidal ideation,
psychotic-like symptoms, physical/overt aggressiveness, comorbidity with
eating disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder -- in a sample of
borderline personality disorder patients. 78. Glaser BA, Campbell LF,
Calhoun GB, et al. The Early Maladaptive Schema Questionnaire - Short
Form: a construct validity study. Meas Evalutation Couns Dev 2002;
35:2--13. 79. Schmidt NB, Joiner TE Jr, Young JE, et al. The schema
questionnaire: investigation of psychometric properties and the
hierarchical structure of a measure of maladaptive schemas. Cognit Ther
Res 1995; 19:295--321. 80. Muris P. Maladaptive schemas in nonclinical
adolescents: relations to perceived parental rearing behaviours, big
five personality factors and psychopathological symptoms. Clin Psychol
Psychother 2006; 13:405--413. 81. Sava FA. Maladaptive schemas,
irrational beliefs, and their relationship with the five-factor
personality model. J Cogn Behav Psychother 2009; 9:135--147. 82. Thimm
JC. Personality and early maladaptive schemas: a five-factor model
perspective. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 2010; 41:373--380. 83. Bach B,
Lee C, Mortensen EL, et al. How do DSM-5 personality traits align with
schema therapy constructs? J Pers Disord 2016; 30:502--529. 84. Louis
JP, Wood AM, Lockwood G, et al. Positive clinical psychology and &&
schema therapy (ST): the development of the Young Positive Schema
Questionnaire (YPSQ) to complement the Young Schema Questionnaire 3
Short Form (YSQ-S3). Psychol Assess 2018. \[Epub ahead of print\] In
this study, the authors developed and evaluated a measure of
positive/adaptive schemas as a 'positive clinical psychology' complement
to the established 18 maladaptive schemas, and associations with
Five-Factor Model traits were investigated.

12

www.co-psychiatry.com

85. Widiger TA, Bach B, Chmielewski M, et al. Criterion A of the AMPD in
    HiTOP. J Pers Assess 2018. \[Epub ahead of print\] This critical
    review highlights the alignment between the DSM-5-AMPD model and the
    Hierarchical Structure of Psychopathology (HiTOP) in terms of a
    global factor of psychopathology and lower-order trait features.
86. Hopwood CJ, Malone JC, Ansell EB, et al. Personality assessment in
    DSM-5: empirical support for rating severity, style, and traits. J
    Pers Disord 2011; 25:305--320.
87. Crawford MJ, Koldobsky N, Mulder R, et al. Classifying personality
    disorder according to severity. J Pers Disord 2011; 25:321--330.
88. Wright AGC, Hopwood CJ, Skodol AE, et al. Longitudinal validation of
    general and specific structural features of personality pathology. J
    Abnorm Psychol 2016; 125:1120--1134.
89. Conway CC, Hammen C, Brennan PA. Optimizing prediction of
    psychosocial and clinical outcomes with a transdiagnostic model of
    personality disorder. J Pers Disord 2016; 30:545--566.
90. Young JE, Gluhoski VL. Schema-focused diagnosis for personality
    disorders. In: Kaslow FW, editor. Handbook of relational diagnosis
    and dysfunctional family patterns. New York: Wiley; 1996.
    pp. 300--321.
91. International Society of Schema Therapy (ISST). Schema Therapy Case
    Conceptualization Form - version 2.22. 2nd ed. 2018.
92. Hopwood CJ, Thomas KM. Schema therapy is an effective treatment for
    avoidant, dependent and obsessive--compulsive personality disorders.
    Evid Based Ment Heal 2014; 17:90--91.
93. Hopwood CJ. A framework for treating DSM-5 alternative model for
    person&& ality disorder features. Personal Ment Health 2018;
    12:107--125. Elucidates how the DSM-5 Alternative Model of
    Personality Disorders may be used as a framework for
    psychotherapists.
94. Simonsen S, Simonsen E. Contemporary directions in theories and
    psychotherapeutic strategies in treatment of personality disorders:
    relation to level of personality functioning. J Contemp Psychother
    2014; 44:141--148.
95. Bateman A, Fonagy P. Mentalization-based treatment. Psychoanal Inq
    2013; 33:595--613.
96. Montgomery-Graham S. DBT and schema therapy for borderline
    personality disorder: mentalization as a common factor. J Contemp
    Psychother 2016; 46:53--60. &

Volume 32  Number 00  Month 2018

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction
of this article is prohibited. View publication stats


