Psychopathology

Psychopathology History, Diagnosis, and Empirical Foundations

Third Edition

W. EDWARD CRAIGHEAD, DAVID J. MIKLOWITZ, AND LINDA W. CRAIGHEAD EDITORS

Copyright © 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by Jossey-Bass A Wiley Brand One Montgomery Street, Suite
1000, San Francisco, CA 94104-4594---www.josseybass.com No part of this
publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act,
without either the prior written permission of the publisher, or
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com.
Requests to the publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street,
Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at
www.wiley.com/go/permissions. Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty:
While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing
this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and
specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or
fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended
by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You
should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages. Readers should be aware that Internet
Web sites offered as citations and/or sources for further information
may have changed or disappeared between the time this was written and
when it is read. Jossey-Bass books and products are available through
most bookstores. To contact Jossey-Bass directly call our Customer Care
Department within the U.S. at 800-956-7739, outside the U.S. at
317-572-3986, or fax 317-572-4002. Wiley publishes in a variety of print
and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included
with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books
or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD
that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this
material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about
Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com. Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Craighead, W. Edward, author. \|
Miklowitz, David Jay, 1957- author. \| Craighead, Linda W., author.
Title: Psychopathology : history, diagnosis, and empirical foundations /
W. Edward Craighead, David J. Miklowitz, Linda W. Craighead.
Description: Third edition. \| Hoboken : Wiley, 2017. \| Revised edition
of Psychopathology, \[2013\] \| Includes bibliographical references and
index. Identifiers: LCCN 2016033868\| ISBN 9781119221739 (hardback) \|
ISBN 9781119221746 (Adobe PDF) \| ISBN 9781119221753 (epub) Subjects:
LCSH: Psychology, Pathological. \| BISAC: PSYCHOLOGY / Psychopathology /
General. Classification: LCC RC454 .C73 2017 \| DDC 616.89---dc23 LC
record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016033868 Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © Malcolm MacGregor/Getty Images, Inc. Printed in the
United States of America THIRD EDITION

HB Printing

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

W. Edward Craighead---To Christine and Glynn Craighead and J. Rex Fuqua
David J. Miklowitz---To Mary Yeager and Ariana Miklowitz Linda W.
Craighead---To Ben and Margo Wilcoxon

Contents

Chapter 1

Preface

ix

Acknowledgments

xiii

List of Contributors

xv

Diagnosis: Conceptual Issues and Controversies

1

Scott O. Lilienfeld, Sarah Francis Smith, and Ashley L. Watts

Chapter 2

Social Anxiety Disorder

39

Deborah Roth Ledley, Brigette A. Erwin, Amanda S. Morrison, and Richard
G. Heimberg

Chapter 3

Panic Disorder

85

Joanna J. Arch, Alex Kirk, and Michelle G. Craske

Chapter 4

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

149

Karen Rowa, Stephanie Waechter, Heather K. Hood, and Martin M. Antony

Chapter 5

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

187

Jonathan S. Abramowitz and Shannon M. Blakey

Chapter 6

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

216

Patricia A. Resick, Candice M. Monson, and Stefanie T. LoSavio

Chapter 7

Depressive Disorders

262

W. Edward Craighead, Daniel N. Klein, Charles F. Gillespie, Lorie A.
Ritschel, and Katherine E. Phillips

Chapter 8

Bipolar Disorder

317

David J. Miklowitz and Sheri L. Johnson

Chapter 9

Sleep-Wake Disorders

364

Lu Dong, Jennifer C. Kanady, and Allison G. Harvey

Chapter 10 Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum Arthur T. Ryan,
Hanan D. Trotman, Vijay A. Mittal, Kevin D. Tessner, and Elaine F.
Walker

vii

392

viii

Contents

Chapter 11 Alcohol Use Disorder

429

Lara A. Ray, Kelly E. Courtney, ReJoyce Green, and Guadalupe A. Bacio

Chapter 12 Eating Disorders

465

Linda W. Craighead, Margaret A. Martinez, Kelly L. Klump, James Lock,
and Nina Kirz

Chapter 13 Sexual Dysfunctions

520

Cindy M. Meston and Amelia M. Stanton

Chapter 14 Borderline Personality Disorder

562

Jill M. Hooley and Sara R. Masland

Chapter 15 Psychopathy as Psychopathology: Key Developments in
Assessment, Etiology, and Treatment

612

Jennifer E. Vitale and Joseph P. Newman Index

651

Preface This book provides a basic description and evaluation of
clinical theory and research regarding psychopathology. It is intended
primarily as an advanced text for psychopathology courses taught to
graduate students in clinical, counseling, and school psychology, as
well as neuroscience, psychiatry, and social work. Some instructors may
find it appropriate for an upper-level undergraduate course in abnormal
psychology or psychopathology. This book also provides updated and
refresher materials for mental health professionals engaged in
assessment, diagnosis, and treatment of psychological disorders. The
first edition of this book emerged from our many discussions regarding
how best to provide reading materials for the graduate psychopathology
course when we were all professors at the University of Colorado,
Boulder. From time to time different faculty members had been called
upon to teach this course, and each time this occurred we had lengthy
discussions about the most appropriate reading lists and books. In
addition to the standard materials regarding psychopathology, we wanted
to include clinically relevant materials that focused on vulnerability
and stress, genetic markers, human development, affective neuroscience,
translational research, and empirically supported treatments including
efficacy and effectiveness outcomes. We faced repeated difficulties in
assembling such materials and requesting readings from colleagues around
the world. We concluded that it was an appropriate time to ask several
of our clinical science colleagues to help us create a resource that
would incorporate these current and critical areas of interest. We asked
them to provide a broad range of information drawn from psychopathology
and related basic research for each disorder, so the reader would have a
35- to 45-page comprehensive view of each of the topics. Although we
have now moved to other universities and venues for our work, we believe
there is still a need in the psychopathology area for an integrative set
of reading materials. In order to reflect enormous changes in
psychopathology research, we have updated, revised, and produced this
third edition of the book. The initial version of the DSM-5 was
published in May 2013, and this edition of the book is organized around
the disorders as defined in DSM-5. Nevertheless, most of the relevant
psychopathology literature is based on earlier editions of the DSM.
Additional DSM-5--based psychopathology research will supply the basis
of future editions. Furthermore, psychopathology research is beginning
to take a somewhat different focus. Future books on this topic may
present a quite different organizational structure, perhaps surrounding
constructs underlying DSM categories of psychopathology (see the
National Institute of Mental Health \[NIMH\], at
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/research-priorities/ rdoc).

Historical Perspective Although descriptions of psychopathological
disorders, at least on a nonscientific basis, have existed for hundreds
of years, the first modern attempts to classify behaviors,

ix

x

Preface

thoughts, biology, and feelings within a formal classification system
are usually attributed to the prominent German psychiatrist Emil
Kraepelin, who did most of his work at the end of the 19th century.
Psychology emerged as a discipline at about that same time, and except
for learning disabilities and a few of the childhood disorders,
psychology was largely unconcerned with psychopathology. It was a
half-century later that psychiatry (via the American Psychiatric
Association \[APA\]) offered the first full-scale and systematic modern
classification manual---the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders---in 1952. As Lilienfeld, Smith, and Watts note in the first
chapter in this book, this diagnostic manual has undergone extensive
revision and reorganization over the past half-century. In order to
understand the slow development of psychology's role in the evolution of
theories and research in psychopathology, it is important to have at
least a glimpse of the history of professional developments within
psychology. By the time of World War I (1914--1918), psychologists had
emerged on mental health teams as professionals who primarily conducted
formal clinical assessments. Psychologists' activities proliferated
during World War I, though the emphasis remained on assessment.
Psychologists had originally focused primarily on intellectual
assessment, but during World War I this focus shifted to include
assessment of personality, largely in order to assess and predict what
is now known as posttraumatic stress disorder. Between World War I and
World War II, clinical psychology continued to emphasize the development
of intelligence tests and assessments of intelligence, but the
discipline also began in earnest to develop instruments and methods to
assess personality. It was only during World War II and subsequent years
that psychologists began conducting psychotherapy on more than a minimal
basis, initially under the supervision of psychiatrists and only later,
during the 1960--1970 era, as independent professionals. This movement
toward broader involvement in clinical, counseling, and school
intervention brought with it an interest in psychopathology as well as
psychotherapy. A number of theoretical and practical developments
(ranging from insurance reimbursement for clinical practice to National
Institutes of Health funding for research) contributed to wide-scale
acceptance of the DSM classification system, even though this framework
has been associated with much controversy, as will be evident throughout
this book. During the preceding professional developments, it was
psychiatrists who first directed and led most mental health teams in
child hygiene clinics and community mental health centers. Psychologists
only gradually became genuinely concerned with more broadly defined
psychopathology and its assessment as they became involved in the
delivery of therapeutic services. The field of psychopathology has thus
emerged over the past five decades to reflect advances in psychology,
psychiatry, and neuroscience. There have been very few books since
Maher's Principles of Psychopathology (1968) that have provided
extensive, comprehensive, and scientifically based overviews of theories
and empirical foundations of psychopathology at the graduate level. It
is our hope that this tightly coordinated book will be a step toward
filling that vacuum. This book begins with a chapter that picks up where
the preceding brief historical review leaves off, as Lilienfeld, Smith,
and Watts present an overview of the major issues that arise in the
study of psychopathology at an advanced level. This introductory chapter

Preface

xi

is followed by overviews of most of the major clinical disorders. In
order to ensure consistency in the material presented in each chapter,
we asked the authors to follow a specific format, though some chapter
topics and their associated research fit less easily within that format
than others. The general outline for each chapter is as follows: (a) a
description of the diagnostic criteria for each disorder examined in the
chapter, including a brief history and a case example; (b) prevalence
and epidemiological findings; (c) empirical foundations of each
disorder, including findings regarding behavioral, cognitive, emotional,
and neurobiological factors; (d) assessment of each disorder, including
interviews, clinical rating scales, self-reports, and neurobiological
assessments; (e) a brief description and evaluation of the current
interventions for each disorder; and (f) a summary and discussion of
future directions. We greatly appreciate the willingness of the authors
to adhere to this uniform outline. This approach improved our ability to
provide consistent coverage across disorders, which makes this volume
particular suitable for coursework. It also makes it easier for readers
to find the needed information when using this volume as a reference or
resource book. Based on feedback from professors who use this book as a
text and reviewers of the prior editions, and in order to better match
an academic semester, this third edition has been reduced to 15
chapters. Following a long tradition that dates back to Freud's view of
the centrality of anxiety in psychopathology, the DSM traditional
anxiety disorders are presented first. These include social anxiety
disorder, including avoidant personality disorder (discussed by Ledley,
Erwin, Morrison, and Heimberg in Chapter 2); panic disorder (Arch, Kirk,
and Craske, Chapter 3); and generalized anxiety disorder (Rowa,
Waechter, Hood, and Antony, Chapter 4). Both obsessive-compulsive and
related disorders (Abramowitz and Blakey, Chapter 5) and posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) (Resick, Monson, and LoSavio, Chapter 6), which
were formerly treated as subtypes of anxiety disorders, are given
separate diagnostic status in DSM-5 and therefore separate chapters
here. This book then continues with two chapters related to what have
previously been labeled mood disorders: major depressive and persistent
depressive disorder (W. E. Craighead, Klein, Gillespie, Ritschel, and
Phillips, Chapter 7) and bipolar disorders (Miklowitz and Johnson,
Chapter 8). Sleep-wake disorders, discussed by Dong, Kanady, and Harvey
in Chapter 9, are important dysregulations in their own right, but are
also particularly important as they relate to mood disorders. Chapter
10, by Ryan, Trotman, Mittal, Tessner, and Walker, provides a thorough
discussion of schizophrenia and the psychotic spectrum disorders.
Chapter 11, by Ray, Courtney, Green, and Bacio, reports on
substance-related disorders, with a focus on alcohol. Just as with mood
disorders in Chapter 7, Chapter 12 (L. W. Craighead, Martinez, Klump,
Lock, and Kirz), reporting on eating disorders, combines and updates two
chapters from the previous edition (on binge eating and bulimia and on
anorexia). The remainder of the book presents chapters on sexual
dysfunction, by Meston and Stanton (Chapter 13); borderline personality
disorder, by Hooley and Masland (Chapter 14); and key developments in
the assessment, etiology, and treatment of psychopathy, by Vitale and
Newman (Chapter 15), As is apparent from this list, the chapter authors
were chosen because of their and their colleagues' and students' major
contributions to our knowledge of psychopathology; this is also apparent
in the materials included in each chapter.

xii

Preface

References American Psychiatric Association. (1952). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (1st ed.). Washington, DC:
Author. American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC:
Author. Maher, B. (1968). Principles of psychopathology: An experimental
approach. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Acknowledgments A very large number of people have contributed to the
development and publication of this book. First, we acknowledge our own
mentors: Leonard Ullmann and Gordon Paul (WEC), Michael Goldstein (DJM),
and Alan Kazdin and Carolyn Sherif (LWC) are greatly appreciated.
Colleagues, students, and friends who have contributed to our
understanding of psychopathology, assessment, and interventions are just
too numerous to mention, but fortunately they know who they are. We are
especially appreciative to the Craighead and Miklowitz families for
their support and caring while we completed this project. Specifically,
we thank Ben, Wade (along with Tara and Sawyer), and Daniel Craighead
and Margaret Craighead Shuster (along with Justin, Lily, and Zoey
Shuster), and Mary Yaeger and Ariana Miklowitz. We would like to thank
our staff members, especially Lara Alexander, Valeria Tretyak, and Sean
Carey. Both have been very helpful, efficient, and punctual in their
assistance during the many phases of the development of this edition of
the book. We would also like to thank the Fuqua Family Foundations and
the Mary and John Brock Foundation for their continued support of the
Emory CAMP program. Their support contributed to the completion of this
book. We cannot imagine a better editor than Wiley's Patricia Rossi, who
has been of great help from our very earliest conceptualization of the
first edition right through the production of this third edition. She
has been involved in every phase of its production, and in this process
we have come to appreciate her insights and professional expertise in
every phase of the editing process. It is a pleasure to work with such a
talented person and genuinely fine human being. We also appreciate the
help of the other cooperative and helpful people at John Wiley & Sons.
Finally, we would like to express our gratitude to the authors of the
various chapters in this book. Each chapter's author team includes at
least one of the established international leaders studying the topic.
Coauthors were carefully chosen in their areas of expertise. As planned,
the chapters reflect not only the contributions of the authors but also
detailed reviews of the larger literature pertinent to each disorder.
Thus, the reader can enjoy the detailed review of the psychopathology of
the disorder in each chapter as well as the interesting commentary and
thoughts about future directions for research and clinical issues from
the perspective of individuals who are intimately involved in ongoing
clinical psychopathology research. Our hope is that this will inform
readers and also stimulate the thinking of developing research
investigators and students to inspire them to ask important questions
regarding psychopathology. These outstanding scholars, in composite,
have done what no one individual (or even three) can do today---namely,
provide a thorough and comprehensive summary of the current state of
knowledge regarding psychopathology.

xiii

List of Contributors Jonathan S. Abramowitz, PhD University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, NC

Charles F. Gillespie, MD, PhD Emory University Atlanta, GA ReJoyce
Green, BA University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, California

Martin M. Antony, PhD Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Allison G. Harvey, PhD University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA

Joanna J. Arch, PhD University of Colorado, Boulder Boulder, CO

Richard G. Heimberg, PhD Temple University Philadelphia, PA

Guadalupe A. Bacio, PhD University of California, Los Angeles Los
Angeles, CA

Heather K. Hood, PhD Homewood Health Centre Guelph, Ontario, Canada

Shannon M. Blakey, MS University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Chapel
Hill, NC

Jill M. Hooley, DPhil Harvard University Cambridge, MA

Kelly E. Courtney, MA University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles,
CA

Sheri L. Johnson, PhD University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA

Linda W. Craighead, PhD Emory University Atlanta, GA

Jennifer C. Kanady, MA University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, CA

W. Edward Craighead, PhD Emory University Atlanta, GA

Alex Kirk, MA University of Colorado, Boulder Boulder, CO

Michelle G. Craske, PhD University of California, Los Angeles Los
Angeles, California

Nina Kirz, MD Stanford University Stanford, CA

Lu Dong, PhD, MHS University of California, Berkeley Berkeley,
California

Daniel N. Klein, PhD Stony Brook University Stony Brook, NY

Brigette A. Erwin, PhD The Anxiety and OCD Center Exton, PA

xv

xvi

List of Contributors

Kelly L. Klump, PhD Michigan State University East Lansing, MI

Joseph P. Newman, PhD University of Wisconsin, Madison Madison, WI

Deborah Roth Ledley, PhD Children's Center for OCD and Anxiety Plymouth
Meeting, PA

Katherine E. Phillips, BS Emory University Atlanta, GA

Scott O. Lilienfeld, PhD Emory University Atlanta, GA

Lara A. Ray, PhD University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, CA

James Lock, MD, PhD Stanford University Stanford, CA

Patricia A. Resick, PhD, ABPP Duke University Durham, NC

Stefanie T. LoSavio, PhD Duke University Durham, NC

Lorie A. Ritschel, PhD University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, GA

Margaret A. Martinez, MA Emory University Atlanta, GA Sara R. Masland,
MA Harvard University Cambridge, MA Cindy M. Meston, PhD University of
Texas at Austin Austin, TX David J. Miklowitz, PhD University of
California, Los Angeles Los Angeles, CA Vijay A. Mittal, PhD
Northwestern University Evanston, IL Candice M. Monson, PhD Ryerson
University Toronto, Ontario, Canada Amanda S. Morrison, PhD Stanford
University Stanford, CA

Karen Rowa, PhD McMaster University Hamilton, Ontario, Canada Arthur T.
Ryan, PhD Emory University Atlanta, GA Sarah Francis Smith, PhD Emory
University Atlanta, GA Amelia M. Stanton, BA University of Texas at
Austin Austin, TX Kevin D. Tessner, PhD Erie VA Medical Center Erie, PA
Hanan D. Trotman, PhD Mercer University Atlanta, GA

List of Contributors

Jennifer E. Vitale, PhD Hampden-Sydney College Hampden-Sydney, VA

Elaine F. Walker, PhD Emory University Atlanta, GA

Stephanie Waechter, PhD St. Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada

Ashley L. Watts, MA Emory University Atlanta, GA

xvii

Psychopathology

Chapter 1 Diagnosis Conceptual Issues and Controversies Scott O.
Lilienfeld, Sarah Francis Smith, and Ashley L. Watts

P

sychiatric diagnosis is fundamental to the understanding of mental
illness. Without it, the study, assessment, and treatment of
psychopathology would be in disarray. In this chapter, we examine (a)
the raison d'être underlying psychiatric diagnosis, (b) widespread
misconceptions regarding psychiatric classification and diagnosis, (c)
the present system of psychiatric classification and its strengths and
weaknesses, and (d) fruitful directions for improving this system. A
myriad of forms of abnormality are housed under the exceedingly broad
umbrella of mental disorders. Indeed, the current psychiatric
classification system, as described in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), contains well over 300 diagnoses
(American Psychiatric Association \[APA\], 2013). In addition, Chapter V
of the International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10),
contains approximately 100 diagnoses housed within 26 categories (World
Health Organization, 1992). The enormous heterogeneity of
psychopathology makes a formal system of organization imperative. Just
as in the biological sciences, where Linnaeus's hierarchical taxonomy
categorizes fauna and flora, and in chemistry, where Mendeleev's
periodic table orders the elements, a psychiatric classification system
helps to organize the bewildering subforms of abnormality. Such a
system, if effective, permits us to parse the variegated universe of
psychological disorders into more homogeneous, and ideally more
clinically meaningful, categories. From the practitioner's initial
inchoate impression that a patient's behavior is aberrant to his or her
later and better-elaborated case conceptualization, diagnosis plays an
integral role in the clinical process. Indeed, the essential reason for
initiating assessment and treatment is often the observer's sense that
"something is just not quite right" about the person. Meehl (1973)
commented that the mental health professional's core task is to answer
the question: "What does this person have, or what befell him, that
makes him different from those who have not developed clinical
psychopathology?" (p. 248). Therein lies the basis for psychiatric
diagnosis.

1

2

Diagnosis

General Terminological Issues Before proceeding, a bit of terminology is
in order. It is crucial at the outset to distinguish two frequently
confused terms: classification and diagnosis. A system of classification
is an overarching taxonomy of mental illness, whereas diagnosis is the
act of placing an individual, based on a constellation of signs
(observable indicators, like crying in a depressed patient) or symptoms
(subjective indicators, like feelings of guilt in a depressed patient),
or both, into a category within that taxonomy. Classification is a
prerequisite for diagnosis. Another key set of terminological issues
concerns the distinctions among syndrome, disorder, and disease. As
Kazdin (1983) observed, we can differentiate among these three concepts
based on our levels of understanding of their pathology---the underlying
pathophysiology that may accompany the condition---and etiology, that
is, causation (Gough, 1971; Lilienfeld, Waldman, & Israel, 1994). At the
lowest rung of the hierarchy of understanding there are syndromes, which
are typically constellations of signs and symptoms that co-occur across
individuals (syndrome means "running together" in Greek). In classical
syndromes, neither pathology nor etiology is well understood, nor is the
syndrome's causal relation to other conditions established. Antisocial
personality disorder is a relatively clear example of a syndrome because
its signs (e.g., the use of an alias) and symptoms (e.g., lack of
remorse) tend to covary across individuals. Nevertheless, its pathology
and etiology are largely unknown, and its causal relation to other
conditions is poorly understood (Lykken, 1995). In contrast, some
authors (e.g., Lilienfeld, 2013; but see Lynam & Miller, 2012) argue
that psychopathic personality (psychopathy) may not be a classical
syndrome. These researchers contend that psychopathy is instead a
configuration of several largely independent constructs, such as
boldness, coldness, and disinhibition, that come together in an
interpersonally malignant fashion (Patrick, Fowles, & Krueger, 2009; see
also Vitale & Newman, Chapter 15, in this book). In other cases,
syndromes may also constitute groupings of signs and symptoms that
exhibit minimal covariation across individuals but that point to an
underlying etiology (Lilienfeld et al., 1994). For example, Gerstmann's
syndrome in neurology (Benton, 1992) is marked by four major features:
agraphia (inability to write), acalculia (inability to perform mental
computation), finger agnosia (inability to differentiate among fingers
on the hand), and left-right disorientation. Although these indicators
are negligibly correlated across individuals in the general population,
they co-occur dependably following certain instances of parietal lobe
damage. At the second rung of the hierarchy of understanding there are
disorders, which are syndromes that cannot be readily explained by other
conditions. For example, in the present diagnostic system,
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) can be diagnosed only if its
symptoms (e.g., recurrent fears of contamination) and signs (e.g.,
recurrent hand washing) cannot be accounted for by a specific phobia
(e.g., irrational fear of dirt). Once we rule out other potential causes
of OCD symptoms, such as specific phobia, anorexia nervosa, and
trichotillomania (compulsive hair pulling), we can be reasonably certain
that an individual exhibiting marked obsessions or compulsions, or both,
suffers from a well-defined disorder (APA, 2000, p. 463).

Functions of Psychiatric Diagnosis

3

At the third and highest rung of the hierarchy of understanding there
are diseases, which are disorders in which pathology and etiology are
reasonably well understood (Kazdin, 1983; McHugh & Slavney, 1998).
Sickle-cell anemia is a prototypical disease because its pathology
(crescent-shaped erythrocytes containing hemoglobin S) and etiology (two
autosomal recessive alleles) have been conclusively identified (Sutton,
1980). For other conditions that approach the status of bona fide
diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, the primary pathology (senile
plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and granulovacuolar degeneration) has
been identified, while their etiology is evolving but incomplete
(Selkoe, 1992). With the possible exception of Alzheimer's disease and a
handful of other organic conditions, the diagnoses in our present system
of psychiatric classifications are almost exclusively syndromes or, in
rare cases, disorders (Kendell & Jablensky, 2003). This fact is a
sobering reminder that the pathology in most cases of psychopathology is
largely unknown, and their etiology is poorly understood (Kendler, 2005;
Kendler, Zachar, & Craver, 2011). Therefore, although we genuflect to
hallowed tradition in this chapter by referring to the major entities
within the current psychiatric classification system as mental
"disorders," readers should bear in mind that few are disorders in the
strict sense of the term.

Functions of Psychiatric Diagnosis Diagnosis serves three principal
functions for practitioners and researchers alike. We discuss each in
turn.

Diagnosis as Communication Diagnosis furnishes a convenient vehicle for
communication about an individual's condition. It allows professionals
to be reasonably confident that when they use a diagnosis (such as
persistent depressive disorder or borderline personality disorder) to
describe a patient, other professionals will recognize it as referring
to the same condition. Moreover, a diagnosis distills relevant
information, such as frantic efforts to avoid abandonment and chronic
feelings of emptiness, in a shorthand form that aids in other
professionals' understanding of a case. Blashfield and Burgess (2007)
described this role as "information retrieval." Just as botanists use
the name of a species to summarize distinctive features of a specific
plant, psychologists and psychiatrists rely on a diagnosis to summarize
distinctive features of a specific mental disorder (Blashfield &
Burgess, 2007). Diagnoses succinctly convey important information about
a patient to clinicians, investigators, family members, managed care
organizations, and others.

Establishing Linkages With Other Diagnoses Psychiatric diagnoses are
organized within the overarching nosological structure of other
diagnoses. Nosology is the branch of science that deals with the
systematic classification of diseases. Within this system, most
diagnostic categories are arranged in relation

4

Diagnosis

to other conditions; the nearer in the network two conditions are, the
more closely related they ostensibly are as disorders. For example,
social anxiety disorder (social phobia) and specific phobia are both
classified as anxiety disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; APA, 2013), and are presumably more closely
linked etiologically than are social anxiety disorder and narcissistic
personality disorder, the latter of which is classified as a personality
disorder in DSM-5. Thus, diagnoses help to locate the patient's
presenting problems within the context of both more and less related
diagnostic categories.

Provision of Surplus Information Perhaps most important, a diagnosis
helps us to learn new things; it affords us surplus information that we
did not have previously. Among other things, a diagnosis allows us to
generate predictions regarding case trajectory. As Goodwin and Guze
(1996) noted, perhaps hyperbolically, "diagnosis is prognosis" (Kendler,
1980). The diagnostic label of bipolar I disorder describes a
distinctive constellation of indicators (e.g., one or more manic or
mixed episodes) that discriminates the course, rate of recovery, and
treatment response from such related conditions as major depression and
bipolar II disorder, the latter of which is marked by one or more
episodes of hypomania and disabling depression. But a valid diagnosis
does considerably more than predict prognosis. Robins and Guze's (1970)
landmark article delineated formal criteria for ascertaining whether a
diagnosis is valid. Validity refers to the extent to which a diagnosis
measures what it purports to measure. More colloquially, validity is
truth in advertising: A valid diagnosis is true to its name in that it
correlates in expected directions with external criteria. Specifically,
Robins and Guze outlined four requirements for the validity of
psychiatric diagnoses. According to them, a valid diagnosis offers the
following: 1. Clinical description, including symptomatology,
demographics, precipitants, and differences from seemingly related
disorders. The last-named task of distinguishing a diagnosis from
similar diagnoses is called differential diagnosis. 2. Laboratory
research, including data from psychological, biological, and laboratory
tests. 3. Natural history, including course and outcome. 4. Family
studies, especially studies examining the prevalence of a disorder in
the first-degree relatives of probands---that is, individuals identified
as having the diagnosis in question. As a further desideratum, some
authors have suggested that a valid diagnosis should ideally be able to
predict the individual's response to treatment (Waldman, Lilienfeld, &
Lahey, 1995). Nevertheless, this criterion should probably not be
mandatory given that the treatment of a condition bears no necessary
implications for its etiology. For example, although both schizophrenia
and nausea induced by food poisoning generally respond to
psychopharmacological agents that block the action of the
neurotransmitter dopamine, these two conditions spring from entirely
distinct causal mechanisms. Some authors (e.g., Ross & Pam, 1996) have
invoked the felicitous phrase ex juvantibus reasoning (reasoning

Functions of Psychiatric Diagnosis

5

backward from what works) to describe the error of inferring a
disorder's etiology from its treatment. Headaches, as the hoary example
goes, are not caused by a deficiency of aspirin in the bloodstream, and
similarly, bipolar I disorder is not caused by a lithium deficiency.
There is reasonably strong evidence that diagnoses of many mental
disorders fulfill Robins and Guze's (1970) criteria for validity. When
these criteria are met, the diagnosis offers additional information
about the patient, information that was not available before this
diagnosis was made. For example, if we correctly diagnose a patient with
schizophrenia, we have learned that this patient • Is likely to exhibit
psychotic symptoms that are not solely a consequence of a severe mood
disturbance, such as major depressive disorder. • Has a higher than
expected likelihood of exhibiting abnormalities on several laboratory
measures, including indices of sustained attention, smooth pursuit eye
tracking, and detection of biological motion (Kim, Park, & Blake, 2011).
• Has a higher than average probability of having close biological
relatives with schizophrenia and schizophrenia-spectrum disorders, such
as schizotypal and paranoid personality disorders. • Is likely to
exhibit a chronic course, with few or no periods of entirely normal
functioning, but approximately a 30% chance of overall improvement. • Is
likely to respond positively to medications that block the action of
dopamine, although this is most likely to be the case for the positive
symptoms (e.g., delusions, hallucinations) but not the negative symptoms
(e.g., anhedonia, loss of motivation) of the disorder (Subotnick et al.,
2011). Andreasen (1995) extended the Robins and Guze (1970) framework to
incorporate indicators from molecular genetics, neurochemistry, and
functional and structural brain imaging as additional validating
indicators for psychiatric diagnoses (Kendell & Jablensky, 2003). Her
friendly amendment to the Robins and Guze criteria allows us to use
endophenotypic indicators to assist in the validation of a diagnosis.
Endophenotypes are typically biomarkers or laboratory indicators, that
is, "measurable components unseen by the unaided eye along the pathway
between disease and distal genotype" (Gottesman & Gould, 2003, p. 636;
Gottesman & McGue, 2015; Waldman, 2005). They are often contrasted with
exophenotypes, the traditional signs and symptoms of a disorder. We can
view the process of validating psychiatric diagnoses within the
overarching framework of construct validity (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955;
Loevinger, 1957; Messick, 1995; but see Borsboom, Cramer, Kievit, Zand
Scholten, & Franic, 2009, for a different perspective on construct
validity), which refers to the extent to which a measure assesses a
hypothesized attribute of individuals. As Morey (1991) noted,
psychiatric classification systems are collections of hypothetical
constructs; thus, the process of validating psychiatric diagnoses is
also a process of construct validation. More broadly, we can
conceptualize most or even all psychiatric diagnoses as open concepts
(Meehl, 1977, 1990). Open concepts are marked by (a) fuzzy boundaries,
(b) a list of indicators (signs and symptoms) that are indefinitely
extendable, and (c) an unclear inner nature. Recalling that psychiatric
diagnoses are open concepts helps us to avoid the perils of premature
reification of diagnostic entities (Faust & Miner, 1986). For example,
the

6

Diagnosis

present diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia are not isomorphic with
the construct of schizophrenia; they are merely fallible, albeit
somewhat valid, indicators of this construct. Yet, the past few decades
have occasionally witnessed a troubling tendency to reify and deify the
categories within the current classification system, with some authors
regarding them as fixed Platonic essences rather than as rough
approximations to the true state of nature (Ghaemi, 2003; Kendler, 2005;
Michels, 1984). This error is manifested, for example, when journal or
grant reviewers criticize researchers for examining alternative
operationalizations of mental disorders that depart from those in the
current diagnostic manual (see the section "Psychiatric Classification
from DSM-I to the Present," later in this chapter). It is also
manifested by the common error of referring to measures of certain
psychiatric conditions as "gold standards" (see Skeem & Cooke, 2010, for
a discussion of this tendency in the field of psychopathy). This
phrasing is erroneous in view of the fact that all signs and symptoms of
psychopathology are at present fallible---in that they are necessarily
imperfect indicators of the constructs of interest---and provisional. In
a classic article, Cronbach and Meehl (1955) adopted from neopositivist
philosophers of science the term nomological network to designate the
system of lawful relationships conjectured to hold between theoretical
entities (states, structures, events, dispositions) and observable
indicators. They selected the network metaphor to emphasize the
structure of such systems in which the nodes of the network,
representing the postulated theoretical entities, are connected by the
strands of the network, representing the lawful relationships
hypothesized to hold among the entities (Garber & Strassberg, 1991). For
Cronbach and Meehl (1955), construct validation is a progressive and
never-ending process of testing the links between hypothesized strands
of the nomological network, especially those that connect latent
constructs, which include psychiatric diagnoses (e.g., schizophrenia and
major depression), to manifest indicators, which include the external
criteria (e.g., laboratory tests and family history) laid out by Robins
and Guze (1970). The more such construct-to-manifest indicator links are
corroborated, the more certain we can be that our conception of the
diagnosis in question is accurate. From this perspective, the approach
to diagnostic validation outlined by Robins and Guze is merely one
specific instantiation of construct validation. One limitation of the
Robins and Guze (1970) approach to construct validation is its exclusive
emphasis on external validation, that is, the process of ascertaining
the construct's associations with correlates that lie outside the
construct itself. As Skinner (1981, 1986; also Loevinger, 1957)
observed, internal validation, ascertaining the construct's inner
structure, is also a key component of construct validation. Internal
validation can help investigators to test hypotheses regarding a
construct's homogeneity (versus heterogeneity) and factor structure
(Waldman et al., 1995). For example, if analyses suggest that a
diagnosis consists of multiple subtypes that are largely or entirely
statistically independent, the validity of the diagnosis would be called
into question. Alternatively, factorial validity (i.e., the extent to
which the factor structure of a diagnosis comports with theoretical
predictions) can inform debates regarding the validity of a diagnosis.
For example, factor analyses of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) generally support the separation of inattention from impulsivity
and hyperactivity, as implied by the DSM criteria for this disorder
(Martel, Von Eye, & Nigg, 2010).

Misconceptions Regarding Psychiatric Diagnosis

7

In summary, valid psychiatric diagnoses serve three primary
functions: 1. They summarize distinctive features of a disorder and
thereby allow professionals to communicate clearly with one another. 2.
They place each diagnosis under the umbrella structure of other
diagnoses. This nosological framework links one diagnosis to both more
and less related diagnoses. 3. They provide practitioners and
researchers with surplus information regarding a diagnosed patient's
clinical profile, laboratory findings, natural history, family history,
and possible response to treatment; they may also offer information
regarding endophenotypic indicators.

Misconceptions Regarding Psychiatric Diagnosis Beginning psychology
graduate students and many among the general public hold a plethora of
misconceptions regarding psychiatric diagnosis; we examine five such
misconceptions here. Doing so will also permit us to introduce a number
of key principles of psychiatric diagnosis. As we will discover,
refuting each misconception regarding psychiatric diagnosis affirms at
least one important principle.

Misconception #1: Mental Illness Is a Myth The person most closely
associated with this position is the late psychiatrist Thomas Szasz
(1960), who argued famously for over 40 years that the term mental
illness is a false and misleading metaphor (Schaler, 2004). For Szasz,
individuals whom psychologists and psychiatrists term mentally ill
actually suffer from problems in living (i.e., difficulties in adjusting
their behaviors to the demands of society). Moreover, Szasz contended
that mental health professionals often apply the mental illness label to
nonconformists who jeopardize the status quo (Sarbin, 1969; Szasz,
1960). This label serves as a convenient justification for forcing
maladjusted, malcontented, and maverick members of society to comply
with prevailing societal norms. Specifically, Szasz maintained that
medical disorders can be clearly recognized by a lesion to the
anatomical structure of the body, but that the disorder concept cannot
be imported to the mental realm because there is no such lesion to
indicate deviation from the norm. According to him only the body can
become diseased, so mentally ill people do not suffer from an illness
akin to a medical disorder. It is undeniable that psychiatric diagnoses
are sometimes misapplied. Nevertheless, this legitimate pragmatic
concern must be logically separated from the question of whether the
mental illness concept itself exists (Wakefield, 1992). We should recall
the logical principle of abusus non tollit usum (abuse does not take
away use): Historical and sociological misuses of a concept do not
negate its validity. Wakefield (1992) and others (e.g., Kendell, 1975)
have observed that the Szaszian argument is problematic on several
fronts. Among other problems, it assumes that

8

Diagnosis

medical disorders are in every case traceable to discernible lesions in
an anatomical structure, and that all lesions give rise to medical
disorders. Yet identifiable lesions cannot be found in certain clear-cut
medical diseases---such as trigeminal neuralgia and senile
pruritis---and certain identifiable lesions, such as albinism, are not
regarded as medical disorders (Kendell, 1975; Wakefield, 1992). Szasz's
assertion that identifiable lesions are essentially synonymous with
medical disorders is false; therefore, his corollary argument that
mental disorders cannot exist because they are not invariably associated
with identifiable lesions is similarly false.

Misconception #2: Psychiatric Diagnosis Is Merely Pigeonholing According
to this criticism, when we diagnose people with a mental disorder, we
deprive them of their uniqueness: we imply that all people within the
same diagnostic category are alike in all important respects. To the
contrary, a psychiatric diagnosis does nothing of the sort; it implies
only that all people with that diagnosis are alike in at least one
important way, namely, that they display the signs and symptoms of that
condition. In this respect, psychiatric diagnosis is no different from
medical diagnosis. Physicians understand that all patients with
essential hypertension are linked by high blood pressure, but can differ
in myriad other ways. Similarly, psychologists and psychiatrists are
well aware that even within a given diagnostic category, such as
schizophrenia or bipolar I disorder, people differ dramatically in their
race and cultural background, personality traits, co-occurring
psychological conditions, interests, and cognitive skills (APA, 2013).

Misconception #3: Psychiatric Diagnoses Are Unreliable Reliability
refers to the consistency of a diagnosis. As many textbooks in
psychometrics remind us, reliability is a prerequisite for validity but
not vice versa. Just as a bathroom scale cannot validly measure weight
if it yields dramatically different weight estimates for the same person
over brief periods of time, a diagnosis cannot validly measure a mental
disorder if it yields dramatically different scores on measures of
psychopathology across times, situations, and raters. Because validity
is not a prerequisite for reliability, extremely high reliability can
exist without validity. A researcher who based diagnoses of
schizophrenia on patients' heights would end up with extremely reliable
but entirely invalid diagnoses of schizophrenia. There are three major
subtypes of reliability. Contrary to popular (mis)conception, these
subtypes are frequently discrepant with one another, so high levels of
reliability for one metric do not necessary imply high levels for the
others. Test-retest reliability refers to the stability of a diagnosis
following a relatively brief time interval, typically about a month. In
other words, after a short time lapse, will patients receive the same
diagnoses? Note that we wrote brief and short in the previous sentences;
marked changes following lengthy time lapses, such as several years, may
reflect genuine changes in patient status rather than the measurement
error associated with test-retest unreliability.

Misconceptions Regarding Psychiatric Diagnosis

9

In general, we assess test-retest reliability using either a Pearson
correlation coefficient or, more rigorously, an intraclass correlation
coefficient. Intraclass correlations tend to provide the most stringent
estimates of test-retest reliability because, in contrast to Pearson
correlations, they are influenced not merely by the rank ordering and
differences among people's scores, but by their absolute magnitude. Our
evaluation of the test-retest reliability of a diagnosis hinges on our
conceptualization of the disorder. We should anticipate high test-retest
reliability only for diagnoses that are traitlike, such as personality
disorders, or that tend to be chronic (long-lasting), such as
schizophrenia. In contrast, we should not necessarily anticipate high
levels of test-retest reliability for diagnoses that tend to be episodic
(intermittent), such as major depression. Internal consistency refers to
the extent to which the signs and symptoms comprising a diagnosis hang
together---that is, correlate highly with one another. We generally
assess internal consistency using such metrics as coefficient alpha
(Cronbach, 1951), or the mean inter-item correlation. Cronbach's alpha
can overestimate the homogeneity of a diagnosis, however, if the
relevant diagnosis contains numerous signs and symptoms, because this
statistic is affected by test length (Schmidt, Le, & Ilies, 2003;
Sijtsma, 2009). We should anticipate high levels of internal consistency
for most conditions in the current classification system given that most
are syndromes, most of which are constellations of signs and symptoms
that covary across people. Interrater reliability is the degree to which
two or more observers, such as different psychologists or psychiatrists,
agree on the diagnosis of a set of individuals. High interrater
reliability is a prerequisite for all psychiatric diagnoses, because
different observers must agree on the presence or absence of a condition
before valid research on that condition can proceed. Many early studies
of psychiatric diagnosis operationalized interrater reliability in terms
of percentage agreement, that is, the proportion of cases on which two
or more raters agree on the presence or absence of a given diagnosis.
Nevertheless, measures of percentage agreement tend to overestimate
interrater reliability. Here's why: Imagine two diagnosticians working
in a setting (e.g., an outpatient phobia clinic) in which the base rate
(prevalence) of the diagnosis of specific phobia is 95%. The finding
that they agree with each other on the diagnosis of specific phobia 95%
of the time would hardly be impressive and could readily be attributed
to chance. As a consequence, most investigators today operationalize
interrater reliability in terms of the kappa coefficient, which assesses
the degree to which raters agree on a diagnosis after correcting for
chance, with chance being the base rate of the disorder in question.
Nevertheless, the kappa coefficient often provides a conservative
estimate of interrater reliability, as the correction for chance
sometimes penalizes raters for their independent expertise (Meyer,
1997). Many laypersons and even political pundits believe that
psychiatric diagnoses possess low levels of reliability, especially
interrater reliability. This perception is probably fueled by
high-profile media coverage of dueling expert witnesses in criminal
trials in which one expert diagnoses a defendant as schizophrenic, for
example, and another diagnoses him as normal. After the widely
publicized 1982 trial of John Hinckley, who was acquitted on the basis
of insanity for his attempted assassination of then-president Ronald
Reagan, political commentator George Will maintained (on national
television) that the disagreements among expert witnesses regarding
Hinckley's diagnosis merely bore out what most people already knew: that
psychiatric diagnosis is wildly unreliable (Lilienfeld, 1995).

10

Diagnosis

Yet there is a straightforward explanation for such disagreement: Given
the adversarial nature of our legal system, the prosecution and defense
typically go out of their way to find expert witnesses who will support
their point of view. This inherently antagonistic arrangement virtually
guarantees that the interrater reliabilities of experts in criminal
trials will be modest at best. Certainly, the interrater reliability of
psychiatric diagnoses is far from perfect. Yet for most major mental
disorders, such as schizophrenia, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, and
alcohol use disorder (alcoholism), interrater reliabilities are
typically about as high---with intraclass correlations between raters of
0.8 or above, out of a maximum of 1.0---as those for most
well-established medical disorders (Lobbestael, Leurgans, & Arntz, 2011;
Matarazzo, 1983). Still, the picture is not entirely rosy. For many
personality disorders, in particular, interrater reliabilities tend to
be considerably lower than for other conditions (Maffei et al., 1997;
Zimmerman, 1994), probably because most of these disorders comprise
highly inferential constructs (e.g., lack of empathy) that raters find
difficult to assess during the course of brief interviews.

Misconception #4: Psychiatric Diagnoses Are Invalid From the standpoint
of Szasz (1960) and other critics of psychiatric diagnosis (Eysenck,
Wakefield, & Friedman, 1983), psychiatric diagnoses are largely useless
because they do not provide us with new information. According to them,
diagnoses are merely descriptive labels for behaviors we do not like.
Even the most recent director of the National Institute of Mental
Health, psychiatrist Thomas Insel (2013), stated that the major problem
with the DSM was its "lack of validity." In this regard, Millon (1975)
proposed a helpful distinction between psychiatric labels and diagnoses;
a label simply describes behaviors, whereas a diagnosis helps to explain
them. When it comes to a host of informal "pop psychology" labels, like
sexual addiction, Peter Pan syndrome, codependency, shopping disorder,
Internet addiction, road rage disorder, and the relatively new
"condition" of affluenza (a sense of malaise, anxiety, and unfulfillment
supposedly stemming from excessive materialism; James, 2007), Szasz and
his fellow critics probably have a point. Most of these labels merely
describe collections of socially problematic behavior and do not provide
us with much, if any, new information (McCann, Shindler, & Hammond,
2003; Smith, Winiarski, & Lilienfeld, 2015). The same may hold for some
personality disorders in the current classification system. For example,
the diagnosis of dependent personality disorder, which has been retained
in DSM-5 (APA, 2013), arguably appears to do little more than describe
ways in which people are pathologically dependent on others, such as
relying excessively on others for reassurance and expecting others to
make everyday life decisions for them. Yet, as we have already seen,
many psychiatric diagnoses, such as schizophrenia, bipolar I disorder,
and panic disorder, do yield surplus information (Robins & Guze, 1970;
Waldman et al., 1995) and, therefore, possess adequate levels of
validity. Nevertheless, because construct validation, like all forms of
theory testing in science, is a never-ending process, the validity of
these diagnoses is likely to improve over time with subsequent revisions
to the present classification system.

Misconceptions Regarding Psychiatric Diagnosis

11

Misconception #5: Psychiatric Diagnoses Stigmatize People, and Often
Result in Self-Fulfilling Prophecies According to advocates of labeling
theory, including Szasz (1960), Sarbin (1969), and Scheff (1975),
psychiatric diagnoses produce adverse effects on labeled individuals.
They argue that diagnostic labels not only stigmatize patients, but also
frequently become self-fulfilling prophecies, leading observers to
interpret ambiguous and relatively mild behaviors (e.g., occasional
outbursts of anger) as reflecting serious mental illness. A sensational
1973 and widely cited (over 3,100 citations as of this writing) study by
Rosenhan appeared to offer impressive support for labeling theory.
Rosenhan, along with seven other normal individuals, posed as
pseudopatients (fake patients) in 12 U.S. psychiatric hospitals (some of
the pseudopatients presented at more than one hospital). They informed
the admitting psychiatrist only that they were hearing a voice saying,
"empty," "hollow," and "thud." All were promptly admitted to the
hospital and remained there for an average of 3 weeks, despite
displaying no further symptoms or signs of psychopathology. In 11 of
these 12 cases, they were discharged with diagnoses of schizophrenia in
remission (the 12th pseudopatient was discharged with a diagnosis of
manic depression in remission). Rosenhan (1973) noted that the hospital
staff frequently interpreted pseudopatients' innocuous behaviors, such
as note taking, as indicative of abnormality. In case summaries, these
staff also construed entirely run-of-the-mill details of pseudopatients'
life histories, such as emotional conflicts with parents during
adolescence, as consistent with their present illness. These striking
results led Rosenhan to conclude that psychiatric labels color
observers' perceptions of behavior, often to the point that they can no
longer distinguish mental illness from normality. Even today, some
writers interpret Rosenhan's findings as a resounding affirmation of
labeling theory (e.g., Slater, 2004; but see Spitzer, Lilienfeld, &
Miller, 2005, for a critique of Slater, 2004). Yet, the evidence for
labeling theory is less impressive than it appears. As Spitzer (1975)
observed, the fact that all 12 of Rosenhan's pseudopatients were
released with diagnoses in remission (meaning showing no indications of
illness) demonstrates that the psychiatrists who treated them were in
all cases able to distinguish mental illness from normality. Spitzer
went further, demonstrating in a survey of psychiatric hospitals that
in-remission diagnoses of previously psychotic patients are exceedingly
infrequent, showing that the psychiatrists in Rosenhan's study
successfully made an extremely rare judgment with perfect consensus.
Although incorrect psychiatric diagnoses can engender stigma, at least
in the short run (Harris, Milich, Corbitt, Hoover, & Brady, 1992;
Milich, McAninich, & Harris, 1992), there is scant evidence to support
the popular claim that correctly applied psychiatric diagnoses do so.
The lion's share of the research suggests that stigma is a consequence
not of diagnostic labels, but rather of disturbed and sometimes
disturbing behavior that precedes labeling (Link & Cullen, 1990; Ruscio,
2004). For example, within 30 minutes or less, children begin to react
negatively to children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) who have joined their peer group (Milich et al., 1992; Pelham &
Bender, 1982). Contrary to the tenets of labeling theory, there is
evidence that accurate psychiatric diagnoses sometimes reduce stigma,
because they provide observers with at least a partial

12

Diagnosis

explanation for otherwise inexplicable behaviors (Ruscio, 2004). For
example, adults tend to evaluate intellectually disabled children more
positively when these children are labeled as mentally retarded than
when they are not (Seitz & Geske, 1976), and peers rate the essays of
children with ADHD more positively when these children are labeled with
ADHD than when they are not (Cornez-Ruiz & Hendricks, 1993).

What Is Mental Disorder? Our discussion up to this point presupposes
that the boundaries of the higher-order concept of "disorder," including
mental disorder, are clear-cut or at least reasonably well delineated.1
To develop a classification system of disorders, one must first be able
to ascertain whether a given condition is or is not a disorder. Yet the
answer to the question of how best to define disorder, including mental
disorder, remains elusive (Gorenstein, 1992). The issues here are of
more than academic interest, because each revision of psychiatry's
diagnostic manual has been marked by contentious disputes regarding
whether such conditions as ADHD, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and,
more recently, binge eating disorder, attenuated psychosis syndrome, and
hypersexual disorder are genuine disorders (Frances & Widiger, 2012;
Wakefield, 1992). The fact that homosexuality was removed from the
formal psychiatric classification system in 1974 by a majority vote of
the membership of the American Psychiatric Association (Bayer & Spitzer,
1982) further demonstrates that these debates are frequently resolved
more by group consensus than by scientific research. Here we evaluate
several influential attempts to delineate the boundaries of disorder. As
we will discover, each approach has its limitations but each captures
something important about the concept of disorder. As we will also
discover, these approaches differ in the extent to which they embrace an
essentialist as opposed to a nominalist view of disorder (Ghaemi, 2003;
Scadding, 1996). Advocates of an essentialist view (Widiger & Trull,
1985) believe that all disorders share some essence or underlying
property, whereas advocates of a nominalist view (Lilienfeld & Marino,
1995, 1999; Rosenhan & Seligman, 1995) believe that the higher-order
concept of disorder is a social construction that groups together a
variety of largely unrelated conditions for the purposes of social or
semantic convenience.

Statistical Model Advocates of a statistical model, such as Cohen
(1981), equate disorder with statistical rarity. According to this view,
disorders are abnormal because they are infrequent in the general
population. This definition accords with findings that many mental
disorders are indeed rare; schizophrenia, for example, is found in about
1% of the population across much of the world (APA, 2013). Yet, a purely
statistical model falls short on at least three grounds. First, it
offers no guidance for where to draw cutoffs between normality and
abnormality. In many cases, these cutoffs are scientifically arbitrary.
Second, it is silent on the crucial question of which 1 In our
discussion of the definition of disorder, we use the term disorder,
including mental disorder, generically to refer to all

medical and psychological conditions and do not distinguish disorder
from disease (Wakefield, 1992).

What Is Mental Disorder?

13

dimensions are relevant to abnormality. As a consequence, a statistical
model misclassifies high scores on certain adaptive dimensions (like
intelligence, creativity, and altruism) as inherently abnormal.
Moreover, it does not explain why high scores on certain dimensions
(e.g., anxiety) but not on others (e.g., hair length) are pertinent to
psychopathology. Third, by definition a statistical model assumes that
all common conditions are normal (Wakefield, 1992). Yet the common cold
is still an illness despite its essentially 100% lifetime prevalence in
the population, and the Black Death (bubonic plague) was still an
illness in the mid-1300s despite wiping out approximately one third of
the European population.

Subjective Distress Model Proponents of a subjective distress model
maintain that the core feature distinguishing disorder from nondisorder
is psychological pain. This model unquestionably contains a large kernel
of truth; many serious mental illnesses (such as major depression,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and gender
identity disorder) are marked by considerable distress, even anguish.
The subjective distress model also falls short of an adequate definition
of mental illness, because it fails to distinguish ego-dystonic
conditions (those that conflict with one's self-concept) from
ego-syntonic conditions (those that are consistent with one's
self-concept). Although most mental disorders (such as major depression
and generalized anxiety disorder) are typically ego-dystonic, some (such
as antisocial personality disorder and bipolar I disorder, at least in
its manic phase) are largely or entirely ego-syntonic, because
individuals with these conditions frequently see little or nothing wrong
with their behavior. They experience little or no distress in
conjunction with their condition, and frequently seek treatment only
when that is demanded by courts or significant others, or when their
condition is complicated by a secondary condition that generates
interpersonal difficulties (e.g., alcohol use disorder). Moreover,
approximately half of patients with schizophrenia and other severe
psychotic conditions are afflicted with anosognosia, meaning that they
are unaware of the fact that they are ill (Amador & Paul-Odouard, 2000).

Biological Model Proponents of a biological model (Kendell, 1975)
contend that disorder can be defined in terms of a biological or
evolutionary disadvantage to the organism, such as reduced lifespan or
fitness (i.e., the ability to pass on genes to subsequent generations).
Indeed, some mental disorders are associated with biological
disadvantages; for example, major depression is associated with a
dramatically increased risk for completed suicide (Joiner, 2006), and
between 5% and 10% of patients with anorexia nervosa eventually die from
complications due to starvation (Goodwin & Guze, 1996). A biological
model, however, also falls prey to numerous counterexamples. For
example, being a soldier in frontline combat is not a disorder despite
its average adverse effect on longevity and fitness. Nor is priesthood
an illness even though it is associated with lower direct evolutionary
fitness. Conversely, some relatively mild psychological conditions, such
as specific phobia, are probably not associated with decreased longevity
or fitness, yet are still mental disorders.

14

Diagnosis

Need for Treatment One parsimonious definition is simply that disorders
are a heterogeneous class of conditions all characterized by a perceived
need for medical intervention on the part of health (including mental
health) professionals (Kraupl Taylor, 1971). Like other definitions,
this definition captures an important truth: many or most mental
disorders, such as schizophrenia, bipolar I disorder, and
obsessive-compulsive disorder, are indeed viewed by society as
necessitating treatment. Nevertheless, this definition also falls victim
to counterexamples. For example, pregnancy clearly is associated with a
perceived need for medical intervention, yet it is not regarded as a
disorder.

Harmful Dysfunction In an effort to remedy the shortcomings of extant
models of disorder, Wakefield (1992) proposed a hybrid definition that
incorporates both essentialist and nominalist features. According to
Wakefield, all disorders, including all mental disorders, are harmful
dysfunctions: socially devalued (harmful) breakdowns of evolutionarily
selected systems (dysfunctions). For example, according to Wakefield,
panic disorder is a mental disorder because it (a) is negatively valued
by society and often by the individual afflicted with it, and (b)
reflects the activation of the fight-flight system in situations for
which that system was not evolutionary selected, namely those in which
objective danger is absent. In other words, panic attacks are false
alarms (Barlow, 2001). Wakefield's operationalization of disorder has
its strengths; for example, it acknowledges (correctly) that most and
perhaps all disorders are viewed negatively by others. The concept of
disorder, including mental disorder, is clearly associated with social
values. As Wakefield (1992) noted, however, social devaluation is not
sufficient to demarcate disorder from nondisorder, claims by Szasz
(1960) to the contrary. For example, rudeness, laziness, slovenliness,
and even racism are viewed negatively by society, but are not disorders
(for a dissenting view regarding racism, see Poussaint, 2002).
Therefore, Wakefield contends that something else is necessary to
distinguish disorder from nondisorder, namely evolutionary dysfunction.
Nevertheless, the dysfunction component of Wakefield's analysis appears
to fall prey to counterexamples. In particular, many medical disorders
appear to be adaptive defenses against threat or insult. For instance,
the symptoms of influenza (flu), such as vomiting, coughing, sneezing,
and fever, are all adaptive efforts to expel an infectious agent rather
than failures or breakdowns in an evolutionarily selected system
(Lilienfeld & Marino, 1999; Neese & Williams, 1994). Such
counterexamples appear to falsify the harmful dysfunction analysis.
Similarly, many psychological conditions appear to be adaptive reactions
to perceived threat. For example, in contrast to other forms of specific
phobia, blood/injection/injury phobia is marked by a coordinated set of
dramatic parasympathetic reactions---especially rapid decreases in heart
rate and blood pressure---that were almost surely evolutionarily
selected to minimize blood loss (Barlow, 2001). Although these responses
may not be especially adaptive in the early 21st century, they were
adaptive prior to the advent of Band-Aids, tourniquets, and
anticoagulants (Lilienfeld & Marino, 1995).

Psychiatric Classification From DSM-I to the Present

15

Roschian Analysis An alternative approach to defining disorder, Roschian
analysis, is radically different. According to a Roschian analysis, the
attempt to define disorder explicitly is sure to fail because disorder
is intrinsically undefinable (Gorenstein, 1992). Drawing on the work of
cognitive psychologist Eleanor Rosch (Rosch, 1973; Rosch & Mervis,
1975), advocates of a Roschian analysis contend that the concept of
mental disorder lacks defining (i.e., singly necessary and jointly
sufficient) features and possesses intrinsically fuzzy boundaries. In
this respect, mental disorder is similar to many other concepts. For
example, the concept of a chair lacks strictly defining features (e.g.,
a human-made object with four legs that someone can sit on does not
succeed as a defining feature, because one can sit on a table and many
chairs do not have four legs) and displays unclear boundaries. In
addition, the concept of mental disorder, like many other concepts, is
organized around a prototype that shares all the features of the
category. Just as certain chairs (e.g., a typical office chair) are more
chairlike than others (e.g., a beanbag), certain mental disorders (e.g.,
schizophrenia, panic disorder) are more disorder-like than others (e.g.,
hypersexual disorder, premenstrual dysphoric disorder). Not
surprisingly, it is at the fuzzy boundaries of disorder where
controversies concerning whether a psychological condition is really a
disorder most frequently arise. According to the Roschian analysis,
these controversies are not only inevitable but are also unresolvable by
scientific data. Even if the Roschian analysis is correct (for
criticisms of this approach, see Cooper, 2011; Wakefield, 1999; and
Widiger, 1997), it would not imply that specific mental disorders
themselves are not amenable to scientific inquiry. As Gorenstein (1992)
noted, the concept of a drug is inherently undefinable; there are no
scientific criteria for deciding whether caffeine, nicotine, and many
other widely used but addictive substances are drugs. Yet, this problem
has not stopped psychopharmacologists from studying specific drugs'
properties, modes of action, or behavioral effects. Nor should the
absence of an explicit definition of mental disorder preclude
psychopathology researchers from investigating the diagnosis, etiology,
treatment, and prevention of schizophrenia, major depression, panic
disorder, and other conditions.

Psychiatric Classification From DSM-I to the Present Prior to the 1950s,
the state of psychiatric classification in the United States was largely
disorganized, as no standard system was in place for operationalizing
specific mental disorders. Indeed, prior to World War I, there was scant
interest in developing a systematic classification of mental disorders
(Grob, 1991), and even after World War I, it took over three decades to
put in place a consensual system of classification. As a consequence,
what one diagnostician meant by major depression might bear minimal
correspondence to what another diagnostician meant by the same term.

DSM-I and DSM-II This situation gradually began to change in 1918, when
the U.S. Bureau of the Census released the Statistical Manual for the
Use of Institutions of the Insane, which divided

16

Diagnosis

mental disorders (largely psychoses) into 22 groups; this manual was
revised 10 times through 1942 (Grob, 1991). It was not until 1952,
however, that the American Psychiatric Association released the first
edition of its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
abbreviated as DSM-I (APA, 1952). Although DSM-I was a slim 132 pages in
length, it was a landmark. For the first time, it offered reasonably
clear, albeit brief, descriptions of major psychiatric diagnoses,
thereby facilitating interrater reliability among clinicians and
researchers. Here, for example, is the description for "Manic Depressive
Reaction, Depressed type" (later to be called major depression) in
DSM-I: Here will be classified those cases with outstanding depression
of mood and with mental and motor retardation and inhibition; in some
cases there is much uneasiness and apprehension. Perplexity, stupor or
agitation may be prominent symptoms, and may be added to the diagnosis
as manifestations. (APA, 1952, p. 25) DSM-II appeared 16 years later
(APA, 1968) and was similar in approach and scope to DSM-I, although it
provided somewhat greater detail concerning the signs and symptoms of
many diagnoses. Despite their strengths, DSM-I and DSM-II suffered from
several notable weaknesses, three of which we discuss here: 1. The
interrater reliabilities of many of their diagnoses were still
problematic, probably because these manuals consisted of global and
often vague descriptions of mental illnesses that necessitated
considerable subjective judgment on the part of diagnosticians. For
example, returning to the description of manic depressive reaction,
depressed type, DSM-I is silent on what qualifies as "outstanding
depression," and how much motor retardation and inhibition are necessary
for the diagnosis. 2. DSM-I and DSM-II were not theoretically agnostic.
In particular, they were influenced by psychoanalytic concepts of mental
disorders and often made references to defense mechanisms and other
concepts derived from Freudian theory. As a consequence, diagnosticians
whose orientation was not psychoanalytic, such as behaviorists,
cognitive behaviorists, or humanistic-existential psychologists, found
these classification systems difficult to use. Interestingly, a recent
effort to revive psychoanalytic conceptions within psychiatric diagnosis
has emerged in the form of the Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual (Alliance
of Psychoanalytic Organizations, 2006), which conceptualizes mental
disorders largely in terms of psychodynamic concepts, such as
unconscious drives and defense mechanisms. Nevertheless, this manual
appears to have exerted little impact outside of psychoanalytic circles.
DSM-I and DSM-II also conceptualized mental disorders largely from the
perspective of psychiatrist Adolf Meyer (1866--1950), who regarded most
forms of psychopathology as aberrant reactions to life events (Lief,
1948), hence the use of the term reaction in the diagnosis of manic
depressive reaction, depressed type, and many other DSM-I and DSM-II
diagnoses. Nevertheless, this assumption was based more on plausible
theoretical conjecture than on evidence. 3. Despite their Meyerian
emphasis, DSM-I and DSM-II focused almost exclusively on patients'
mental disorders per se, and largely neglected to consider contextual
factors, such as co-occurring medical conditions, life stressors, and
adaptive functioning, which can play key roles in the etiology and
maintenance of psychopathology.

Psychiatric Classification From DSM-I to the Present

17

DSM-III and Beyond Largely in response to these criticisms, the American
Psychiatric Association, with the late psychiatrist Robert Spitzer at
the helm, released DSM-III in 1980. As most historians of psychiatric
classification and diagnosis now recognize, DSM-III was an important
revision of the diagnostic manual; it represented a radical change in
thinking and approach from all that came before, and has provided the
template for all that has come since (Klerman, 1984; Mayes & Horwitz,
2005), including the newest revision, DSM-5 (APA, 2013). In this
respect, it was every bit as much a landmark, if not more, than was
DSM-I. Coming in at a hefty 494 pages, a nearly fourfold increase from
DSM-II, DSM-III not only dramatically increased the coverage of mental
disorders---from 163 to 224---but also presented far more detailed
guidelines for establishing diagnoses than did its predecessors. The
operational and philosophical approach of DSM-III is often termed
neo-Kraepelinian (Compton & Guze, 1995) because it followed in the
footsteps of the great German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin (1856--1926),
who grouped and differentiated psychological conditions on the basis on
their signs, symptoms, and natural histories. By and large, this
neo-Kraepelinian approach has been carried over in the development of
DSM-5.

Diagnostic Criteria, Algorithms, Hierarchical Exclusion Rules, and a
Multiaxial Approach In accord with its neo-Kraepelinian emphasis,
DSM-III instituted several major changes in psychiatric classification
and diagnosis. First and foremost, DSM-III introduced (a) standardized
diagnostic criteria and (b) algorithms, or decision rules, for each
diagnosis. For a number of major disorders, the interrater reliability
and validity of the proposed DSM-III criterion sets were pilot-tested in
systematic field trials. Rather than merely describing each diagnosis as
DSM-I and DSM-II had done, DSM-III explicitly delineated the signs and
symptoms comprising each diagnosis and the method by which these signs
and symptoms needed to be combined to establish each diagnosis. In these
respects, it was influenced heavily by the pioneering efforts of the
St. Louis group at Washington University (including Robins, Guze,
Winokur, and other giants of descriptive psychopathology), who had
introduced preliminary diagnostic criteria and algorithms for 14 major
mental disorders in the early 1970s (the "Feighner criteria"; see
Feighner et al., 1972). Another major precursor of DSM-III was the
Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC), which expanded the Feighner criteria
by adding criteria for several other disorders (Spitzer, Endicott, &
Robins, 1978). As an example of DSM-III's highly structured approach to
diagnosis, we can examine its criteria for a major depressive episode
(MDE). To meet diagnostic criteria for MDE, DSM-III required that
clients (a) experience "dysphoric mood or loss of interest or pleasure
in all or almost all activities" (p. 213; with dysphoric mood described
in terms of seven symptoms, including depression, hopelessness, and
irritability), and (b) experience at least four of eight signs and
symptoms, such as poor appetite, insomnia, loss of energy, and
difficulty thinking and concentrating, nearly every day for at least a
2-week period. Compare the specificity of these criteria with the skimpy
and highly impressionistic description in DSM-I presented earlier.
DSM-III also outlined hierarchical exclusion rules for many diagnoses;
such rules prevent clinicians and researchers from making these
diagnoses if other diagnoses can account for the clinical picture. For
example, DSM-III forbade clinicians and researchers

18

Diagnosis

from making a diagnosis of major depressive episode if the episode was
superimposed on schizophrenia, a schizophreniform disorder, or a
paranoid disorder, or if it appeared to be due to either an organic
mental disorder (e.g., hypothyroidism) or uncomplicated bereavement (a
prolonged grief reaction). Among other things, hierarchical exclusion
rules remind diagnosticians to "think organic": that is, to rule out
potential physical causes of mental disorders before diagnosing them
(Morrison, 1997; Schildkrout, 2011). DSM-III's use of diagnostic
criteria, algorithms, and hierarchical exclusion rules has been maligned
by many commentators as the "Chinese menu" approach to diagnosis (choose
three from column A, two from column B, four from column C). Despite
these criticisms, there is evidence that this approach markedly
decreased the subjectivity of diagnostic decision making and increased
the interrater reliabilities of many diagnoses (Spitzer, Forman, & Nee,
1979). However, some authors argue that these increases were exaggerated
by DSM-III's proponents (Kirk & Kutchins, 1992). The interrater
reliability of DSM diagnoses has also been enhanced by the development
of structured and semistructured diagnostic interviews, such as the
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM (SCID; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, &
Williams, 2002), which are coordinated explicitly around DSM criteria.
These interviews consist of standardized questions---to be read verbatim
by interviewers---and required and suggested follow-up probes with which
to assess specific diagnostic criteria. For example, the SCID provides
the following question to assess the criterion of current, unexpected
panic attacks in the DSM-IV diagnosis of panic disorder: "Have you ever
had a panic attack, when you suddenly felt frightened or anxious or
suddenly developed a lot of physical symptoms?" If the respondent
replies yes, the SCID instructs the interviewer to ask, "Have these
attacks ever come on completely out of the blue---in situations where
you didn't expect to be nervous or uncomfortable?" (First et al., 2002).
Finally, DSM-III adopted a multiaxial approach to diagnosis, which was
dropped from DSM-5 (APA, 2013) but had been retained in somewhat
different form in ICD-10 (Michels et al., 1996). In a multiaxial
approach, clients are described along a series of axes (that is,
dimensions). A multiaxial approach encourages clinicians to adopt a more
holistic approach to diagnosis by considering variables in addition to
the individuals' mental disorders. In DSM-III (and its revision), the
first two axes are restricted to mental illnesses (with Axis I
containing major mental disorders, such as schizophrenia and major
depression, and Axis II containing personality disorders and mental
retardation, the latter now termed intellectual disability in DSM-5),
and the last three axes assess other dimensions (e.g., medical
conditions, life stressors, global adaptive functioning) often relevant
to psychological adjustment. Nevertheless, DSM-5 jettisoned the
multiaxial system of its predecessors, largely in response to the fact
that the rationale for the Axis I--Axis II distinction was never
grounded in high-quality scientific evidence (Harkness & Lilienfeld,
1997). As discussed later, there is increasing evidence that some Axis I
conditions, including mood and anxiety disorders, are underpinned by
dimensions (e.g., high levels of negative emotionality) similar or
identical to those that underpin many Axis II conditions. Moreover,
there is little or no compelling evidence for a qualitative
(black-and-white) difference between Axis I and Axis II conditions.

Psychiatric Classification From DSM-I to the Present

19

Theoretical Agnosticism In sharp contrast to its predecessors, DSM-III
was agnostic with respect to etiology (with the principal exception of
one diagnosis, posttraumatic stress disorder, which required the
presence of a traumatic event ostensibly tied to the resulting symptoms
of the disorder). In particular, DSM-III assiduously shunned concepts,
such as defense mechanisms, that were tied to psychoanalysis or other
specific theoretical orientations. By doing so, it permitted
practitioners and researchers of varying persuasions to use the manual
with equal ease and comfort. It also facilitated scientific progress by
allowing researchers to pit differing theoretical orientations against
each other to determine which offers the most scientifically supported
etiological explanations for specific disorders (Wakefield, 1998).

DSM-III-R and DSM-IV DSM-III--Revised (DSM-III-R), which appeared in
1987, and DSM-IV, which appeared in 1994 (and in an expanded text
revision in 2000, which with minor exceptions was identical to DSM-IV in
its diagnostic criteria), retained all the major features and
innovations of DSM-III (APA, 1987, 1994, 2000). Nevertheless, the
manual's developers continued to increase the DSM's coverage of
psychopathology; DSM-IV, which was 943 pages long, contained 374
diagnoses (APA, 2000). DSM-III-R and DSM-IV gradually moved away from a
monothetic approach to diagnosis, emphasized in much of DSM-III, toward
a polythetic approach. In a monothetic approach, the signs and symptoms
are singly necessary and jointly sufficient for a diagnosis. In
contrast, in a polythetic approach the signs and symptoms are neither
necessary nor sufficient for a diagnosis. The potential disadvantage of
a polythetic approach is extensive heterogeneity at the symptom and
(perhaps) etiological levels. In DSM-IV, for example, 256 different
symptom combinations are compatible with a diagnosis of borderline
personality disorder. It is implausible that the etiologies of all of
these combinations are similar, let alone identical. It is even possible
for two people to meet criteria for obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder yet share no criteria (Widiger, 2007). Nevertheless, many
scholars argue that the potential disadvantage of symptomatic
heterogeneity is outweighed by the higher interrater reliability of the
polythetic approach (Widiger, Frances, Spitzer, & Williams, 1991). In a
monothetic approach, a disagreement about the presence or absence of
only one criterion necessarily leads to a disagreement about the
presence or absence of the diagnosis. In contrast, in a polythetic
approach, such disagreement often has no impact on levels of agreement
about the presence or absence of the diagnosis, because raters can still
agree on the presence or absence of the diagnosis even if they disagree
on one or more of the specific criteria. The shift toward a polythetic
approach is also an implicit nod to the finding that few, if any, signs
and symptoms of psychopathology are pathognomonic. A pathognomonic
indicator is one that can be used by itself to establish the presence or
absence of a disorder. For example, Koplik's spots---tiny spots in the
mouth that look much like grains of sand surrounded by red rings---are
essentially pathognomonic for measles. A sign or symptom

20

Diagnosis

can in principle be one-way pathognomonic, meaning that it is a perfect
inclusion test (the sign's or symptom's presence always indicates the
presence of the disorder), or two-way pathognomonic, meaning that it is
both a perfect inclusion test and a perfect exclusion test (the sign's
or symptom's presence always indicates the presence of the disorder, and
the sign's or symptom's absence always indicates the absence of the
disorder). With the possible exception of certain organic brain
disorders, no DSM diagnoses boast a one-way, let alone a two-way,
pathognomonic indicator. DSM-III-R and DSM-IV also witnessed a
relaxation of many, though not all, of DSM-III's hierarchical exclusion
rules (Pincus, Tew, & First, 2004). This change largely reflected the
paucity of research evidence concerning the causal primacy of certain
disorders above others. In addition, many of these exclusion rules
proved difficult to apply in practice, because they required subjective
and highly inferential judgments of causal primacy on the part of
diagnosticians. Finally, DSM-IV added an appendix for culture-bound
syndromes, recognizing the fact that some conditions vary, or at least
vary markedly in their expression, across cultures (Draguns &
Tanaka-Matsumi, 2003). Most of these culture-bound syndromes are widely
known in non-Western cultures, although their etiology and relation to
conditions diagnosed in Western cultures are poorly understood. For
example, koro, an epidemic condition observed in parts of China and
Malaysia, is marked by abrupt and intense fears that the penis (in men)
or vulva or breasts (in women) are receding into the body. Still other
culture-bound syndromes appear to be variants of diagnoses that we
readily recognize in Western culture. For example, taijin kyofusho,
common in Japan, refers to a fear of offending others by one's
appearance, body odor, nonverbal behavior, and so on. It may be a
subspecies of social phobia that is especially prevalent in cultures,
especially in Asia, that stress group harmony above individual autonomy
(Kleinknecht, Dinnel, Tanouye-Wilson, & Lonner, 1994).

DSM-5 Following the publication of DSM-IV in 1994 and its text revision
in 2000, a great deal of data accumulated regarding the prevalence and
correlates of various DSM diagnoses. In an effort to accommodate these
new data, DSM-5, spearheaded by psychiatrists David Kupfer and Darrel
Regier, was published in May 2013 (APA, 2013), amid a host of
controversies. By and large, DSM-5 retained most of the major categories
of DSM-IV but, as noted earlier, dropped the multiaxial system. In
addition, one goal of DSM-5 was to stem the tide of the perceived
proliferation of new diagnoses by relying on rigorous validity data for
potential new conditions. As will be discussed later, however, DSM-5 has
already been widely criticized on a number of grounds, including its
decision to lower the threshold for several diagnostic categories
(Batstra & Frances, 2012a). Moreover, others have charged that the field
trials for DSM-5 were inadequate, focusing largely on clinical
feasibility and interrater reliability, with scant examination of the
validity of new diagnostic categories or the potential effects of
alterations in extant categories on the prevalence of DSM disorders
(Frances & Widiger, 2012). Although DSM-5 is now the predominant system
of psychiatric classification in the world, Chapter V of ICD-10 (World
Health Organization, 1992) is an increasingly influential alternative;
indeed, as of the fall of 2015, an ICD-10 diagnosis has been required by
most insurers for reimbursement for mental health services. ICD-11 is
under construction

Criticisms of the Current Classification System

21

as of this writing. Although there is substantial overlap in diagnostic
coverage between the two systems, ICD-10 consists of clinical
prototypes, much as did DSM-I and DSM-II (Goldberg, 2012). Therefore,
its diagnoses may hinge more on clinical judgment than do those of
DSM-5. Despite their similarities, many DSM and ICD categories differ in
nontrivial ways, with only one condition (transient tic disorder) being
identical in its criteria (First, 2009). In a study of over 1,300
patients using earlier (DSM-IV) criteria, the concordance between ICD-10
and DSM-IV ranged from only 33% for substance abuse to 87% for dysthymic
disorder (which is similar to persistent depressive disorder in DSM-5);
we are unaware of comparable comparisons between ICD-10 and DSM-5.

Criticisms of the Current Classification System Recent versions of the
diagnostic manual, from DSM-III through DSM-5, have helped to place the
field of psychopathology on firmer scientific grounds, largely because
they have established reasonably reliable operationalizations for most
mental disorders and furthered the development of standardized
instruments, such as structured psychiatric interviews, to assess these
disorders. The theoretical agnosticism of recent DSMs has also
facilitated research comparing the scientific support for competing
theoretical conceptualizations of psychopathology (Wakefield, 1998).
Despite the undeniable advances of DSM-III and its progeny, many critics
have argued that these manuals are scientifically problematic in several
respects. Here we examine four key criticisms of the DSM-5
classification system, many of which also applied to DSM-III, DSM-III-R,
and DSM-IV: comorbidity, medicalization of normality, neglect of the
attenuation paradox, and unsupported retention of a categorical model.2

Comorbidity DSM-5, like DSM-III and its other progeny, is marked by high
levels of co-occurrence and covariation among many of its diagnostic
categories, a phenomenon known, perhaps misleadingly, as comorbidity
(Caron & Rutter, 1991; Lilienfeld et al., 1994; Pincus et al., 2004). We
say misleadingly because it is premature in most cases to assume that
comorbidity reflects the overlap among etiologically distinct
conditions, as opposed to slightly different variants of the same
underlying condition (Drake & Wallach, 2007). Although comorbidity is
frequent among all mental disorders, it is especially rampant among
personality disorders (Widiger & Rogers, 1989). In one analysis based on
multiple sites, patients who met criteria for one personality disorder
on average met criteria for 2 One frequent criticism of the DSM revision
process (e.g., Caplan, 1995) that we do not discuss at length here is
the reliance on

committee consensus in settling on both (a) the inclusion and exclusion
of specific disorders from the manual and (b) the diagnostic criteria
for specific disorders, largely because we find this criticism to be
without substantial merit. Although expert consensus inevitably
introduces subjective and political considerations into the diagnostic
revision process (Ghaemi, 2003; Kirk & Kutchins, 1992) and has almost
certainly resulted in flawed decisions, it is almost surely superior to
a system in which one appointed expert adjudicates scientifically
complex disputes without the benefit of input from other experts. As
Widiger and Clark (2000) observed, "no diagnostic manual can be
constructed without a group of fallible persons interpreting the results
of existing research" (p. 948). To paraphrase Winston Churchill's famous
wisecrack about democracy, the DSM revision process is probably the
worst system possible except for every other system.

22

Diagnosis

approximately two additional personality disorders---with 10% meeting
criteria for four or more personality disorders (Stuart et al., 1998).
One patient in a research study met criteria for all 10 DSM personality
disorders (Widiger et al., 1998). The extent of comorbidity among mental
disorders, including personality disorders, is often underestimated in
routine clinical practice (Zimmerman & Mattia, 2000), in part because of
a phenomenon known as diagnostic overshadowing. Diagnostic overshadowing
refers to the tendency for a more florid disorder to draw attention away
from less florid co-occurring disorders, thereby leading diagnosticians
to either overlook them or attribute them to the more florid disorder.
For example, the dramatic symptoms of borderline personality disorder
frequently lead clinicians to underdiagnose commonly co-occurring but
less salient conditions, such as narcissistic and dependent personality
disorders (Garb, 1998). The full extent of comorbidity among personality
disorders typically becomes evident only when structured and
semistructured diagnostic interviews, which force assessors to inquire
about all diagnostic criteria, are administered (Zimmerman & Mattia,
2000). There are multiple potential explanations for comorbidity---some
primarily substantive, others primarily methodological (for reviews, see
Cramer, Waldorp, van der Maas, & Borsboom, 2010; Klein & Riso, 1993; and
Lilienfeld, 2003). On the substantive front, one disorder (e.g.,
generalized anxiety disorder) may predispose to another disorder (e.g.,
dysthymic disorder), the two disorders may mutually influence each
other, or both disorders may be slightly different expressions (formes
frustes) of the same latent liability, such as neuroticism or negative
emotionality. On the methodological front, comorbidity may result from
overlapping diagnostic criteria or from clinical selection bias (du
Fort, Newman, & Bland, 1993), that is, the tendency for psychiatric
patients with one disorder, such as alcohol use disorder, to seek
treatment only when they develop a co-occurring disorder, such as major
depression. Comorbidity can also arise from Berksonian bias (Berkson,
1946), a selection bias resulting from the tendency of people with
multiple conditions to be selected for research. For example,
individuals with both specific phobia and major depression, most of whom
are experiencing intense distress, may be more likely to volunteer for
research on anxiety disorders than are people with specific phobia
alone, who often exhibit relatively mild impairment. In addition,
comorbidity can be produced by "logical errors" (Guilford, 1936), that
is, mistakes stemming from the tendency of diagnosticians to assume that
two largely unrelated conditions are correlated. Whatever its causes,
extensive comorbidity is potentially problematic for the DSM, because an
ideal classification system yields largely mutually exclusive categories
with few overlapping cases (Lilienfeld, VanValkenburg, Larntz, &
Akiskal, 1986; Sullivan & Kendler, 1998). As a consequence, such
comorbidity may suggest that the current classification system is
attaching multiple labels to differing manifestations of the same
underlying condition. Defenders of the current classification system are
quick to point out that high levels of comorbidity are also prevalent in
organic medicine, and often indicate that certain conditions (e.g.,
diabetes) increase individuals' risk for other conditions (e.g.,
blindness), a phenomenon that Kaplan and Feinstein (1974) termed
pathogenetic comorbidity. Nevertheless, in stark contrast to organic
medicine, in which the causal pathways contributing to pathogenetic
comorbidity are often well understood, the causal pathways contributing
to pathogenetic comorbidity in the domain of psychopathology generally
remain unknown.

Criticisms of the Current Classification System

23

Medicalization of Normality A number of critics have raised concerns
that recent DSMs, DSM-5 in particular, have overmedicalized normality
(Frances, 2013; Sommers & Satel, 2005). They have done so, these authors
contend, in two ways: (1) by increasing the number of diagnoses and (2)
by lowering the threshold for a number of extant diagnoses. In this way,
recent DSMs, including DSM-5, may risk opening the floodgates to a
pathologizing of largely normative behaviors, emotions, and thoughts.
Probably the most vocal critic in this regard has been psychiatrist
Allen Frances, who was the principal architect of DSM-IV. In a number of
publications, Frances and others have decried DSM-5's apparently lowered
diagnostic thresholds for a number of conditions, as well as its
introduction of new and largely unvalidated disorders (Batstra &
Frances, 2012a; Frances, 2013). Historically, one dramatic change from
DSM-I to DSM-IV was the massive increase in the sheer number of
diagnoses, a trend potentially reversed by DSM-5. Some critics have
argued that this increase reflects the tendency for successive editions
of the DSM to expand their range of coverage into new and largely
uncharted waters (Houts, 2001). Many of these novel diagnoses, which
describe relatively mild problems, may be of questionable validity. For
example, the new DSM-5 diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, which is intended to capture many cases of what some authors
believe to be pediatric bipolar disorder, has been harshly criticized by
Frances (2012) and others for "turn\[ing\] temper tantrums into a mental
disorder" (see Dobbs, 2012). Another potential example is the DSM-5
category of minor neurocognitive disorder, which some authors contend
may unduly pathologize mild forgetfulness and other largely normative
cognitive problems often associated with aging. As Wakefield (2001)
noted, however, there is little evidence that DSM actually expanded its
range of coverage from DSM-III to DSM-IV. Although it is unclear at
present, the same conclusion may hold for DSM-5. As Wakefield observed,
most increases in the number of diagnoses across previous DSMs, and
since then possibly stabilized by DSM-5, reflect an increased splitting
of broader diagnoses into progressively narrower subtypes. The
distinction between splitting and lumping derives from biological
taxonomy (Mayr, 1982) and refers to the difference between two
classificatory styles: the tendency to subdivide broad and potentially
heterogeneous categories into narrower and presumably more homogeneous
categories (splitting) or the tendency to combine narrow and presumably
more homogeneous categories into broad and potentially heterogeneous
categories (lumping). For example, given evidence that bipolar I
disorder and bipolar II disorder are related (although by no means
identical) conditions with relatively similar family histories,
laboratory correlates, prognoses, and treatment responses, should we
keep these diagnoses separate or combine them into a more encompassing,
albeit more heterogeneous, category? In the case of autism and allied
conditions, the developers of DSM-5 elected to embrace a lumping
approach, combining several conditions, such as autistic disorder,
Asperger's disorder, and childhood disintegrative disorder, into the
broader domain of what is now termed autism spectrum disorder.
Nevertheless, some authors have argued that this change will incorrectly
exclude children with milder forms of autism spectrum conditions from
the DSM (McPartland, Reichow, & Volkmar, 2012). The splitting
preferences of the architects of DSM-III, DSM-III-R, and DSM-IV in
particular have been widely maligned (Houts, 2001). Herman van Praag
(2000)

24

Diagnosis

even humorously "diagnosed" the DSM's predilection for splitting as the
disorder of "nosologomania" (also see Ghaemi, 2003). Nevertheless, a
preference for splitting is defensible from the standpoint of research
and nosological revision. A key point is that the relation between
splitting and lumping is asymmetrical: If we begin by splitting
diagnostic categories, we can always lump them later if research
demonstrates that they are essentially identical according to the Robins
and Guze (1970) criteria for validity. Yet, if we begin by lumping, it
will often be difficult or impossible to split later. As a consequence,
we may overlook potentially crucial distinctions among etiologically
separable subtypes that bear differing implications for treatment and
prevention. At the same time, it is unclear whether DSM-5's new
diagnoses, such as disruptive mood regulation disorder, reflect merely a
splitting of the diagnostic pie into narrower slices or an actual
enlargement of the pie. If the latter, DSM-5 may risk extending the
umbrella of pathology to relatively mild and normative problems. As
noted earlier, a second way in which recent DSMs, including DSM-5, may
overmedicalize normality is by lowering the threshold for a number of
conditions (Batstra & Frances, 2012a; Frances & Widiger, 2012). For
example, by increasing the age of onset from 7 to 12 years of age and
decreasing the proportion of symptoms for the diagnosis, DSM-5 appears
to have made it easier to meet criteria for ADHD (Batstra & Frances,
2012b). Even more controversial was the decision in DSM-5 to remove the
bereavement criterion for major depression, allowing individuals to be
diagnosed with this condition as soon as 2 weeks following the death of
a loved one (APA, 2013). We believe the concerns of Frances and others
regarding the potential overmedicalization of normality are important
and worth raising. Nevertheless, the ultimate question is whether the
changes in DSM-5 increase or decrease the construct validity of the
resultant disorders, not whether they alter the prevalence of
individuals diagnosed with these disorders (cf. Batstra & Frances,
2012a). The answer to the latter question will surely vary by disorder,
and at present awaits clarification in light of future research.

Neglect of the Attenuation Paradox Much of the impetus behind DSM-III
was the laudable attempt to increase the reliability of psychiatric
diagnosis and, thereby, place the fields of psychiatry and clinical
psychology on firmer scientific footing. The importance of the
reliability of diagnostic categories continues to be recognized in
DSM-5. Nevertheless, reliability is only a means to an end, namely
validity; moreover, as noted earlier, validity is limited not by
reliability per se, but by its square root (Meehl, 1986). Therefore,
diagnoses of even modest reliability can, in principle, achieve high
levels of validity. Ironically, efforts to achieve higher reliability,
especially internal consistency, can sometimes produce decreases in
validity, a phenomenon that Loevinger (1957) referred to as the
attenuation paradox (also see Clark & Watson, 1995). This paradox can
result when an investigator uses a narrowly circumscribed pool of items
to capture a broad and multifaceted construct. In such a case, the
measure of the construct may exhibit high internal consistency yet low
validity, because it does not adequately tap the full breadth and
richness of the construct. Some authors have argued that this state of
affairs occurred with several DSM diagnoses. Putting it a bit
differently, they have suggested that DSM-III and its descendants

Criticisms of the Current Classification System

25

sacrificed validity at the altar of reliability (Vaillant, 1984). For
example, the current DSM diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder
(ASPD) is intended to assess the core interpersonal and affective
features of psychopathic personality (psychopathy) delineated by
Cleckley (1941), Karpman (1948), and others. Indeed, the accompanying
text of DSM-5 even refers misleadingly to ASPD as synonymous with
psychopathy (APA, 2013, p. 659). Because the developers of DSM-III (APA,
1980) were concerned that the personality features of psychopathy---such
as guiltlessness, callousness, and self-centeredness---were difficult to
assess reliably, they opted for a diagnosis emphasizing overt and easily
agreed on antisocial behaviors---such as vandalism, stealing, and
physical aggression (Hare, 2003; Lilienfeld, 1994). These changes may
have resulted in a diagnosis with greater internal consistency and
interrater reliability than the more traditional construct of
psychopathy (although evidence for this possibility is lacking).
Nevertheless, they may have also resulted in a diagnosis with lower
validity, because the DSM diagnosis of ASPD largely fails to assess the
personality features central to psychopathy (Lykken, 1995; Skeem,
Polaschek, Patrick, & Lilienfeld, 2011). Indeed, accumulating evidence
suggests that measures of ASPD are less valid for predicting a number of
theoretically meaningful variables---including laboratory
indicators---than are measures of psychopathy (Hare, 2003; also see
Vaillant, 1984, for a discussion of the reliability trade-off in the
case of the DSM-III diagnosis of schizophrenia).

Unsupported Retention of a Categorical Model Technically, the DSM is
agnostic on the question of whether psychiatric diagnoses are truly
categories in nature, or what Meehl (Meehl & Golden, 1982) termed taxa,
as opposed to continua, or dimensions. Taxa differ from normality in
kind, whereas dimensions differ in degree. Pregnancy is a taxon, as a
woman cannot be slightly pregnant; in contrast, height is almost always
a dimension (although certain rare taxonic conditions, like hormonal
abnormalities, can lead to heights that differ qualitatively from the
general population). The opening pages of DSM-IV state: "There is no
assumption that each category of mental disorder is a completely
discrete entity with absolute boundaries dividing it from other mental
disorders or from no mental disorder" (p. xxxi). Yet at the measurement
level, the DSM embraces an exclusively categorical model, classifying
individuals as either meeting criteria for a disorder or not meeting
them. In a highly contentious move, DSM-5 passed on an opportunity to
embrace a dimensional model of personality disorders, leaving the
current categorical model in place and relegating a proposed dimensional
alternative to Section III of the manual (devoted to provisional
criterion sets meriting future consideration). The DSM categorical model
is problematic for at least two reasons. First, there is growing
evidence from taxometric analyses (Meehl & Golden, 1982)---namely, those
that allow researchers to ascertain whether a single observed
distribution is decomposable into multiple independent
distributions---that many or even most DSM diagnoses are underpinned by
dimensions rather than taxa (Kendell & Jablensky, 2003), with
schizophrenia and schizophrenia-spectrum disorders being notable
probable exceptions (Lenzenweger & Korfine, 1992). This is particularly
true for most personality disorders (Cloninger, 2009; Trull & Durrett,
2005), including antisocial personality disorder (Marcus, Lilienfeld,
Edens, & Poythress, 2006). Even many or most other mental
disorders---such as major depression (Slade & Andrews, 2005), social
anxiety disorder

26

Diagnosis

(Kollman, Brown, Liverant, & Hofmann, 2006), and ADHD (Marcus, Norris, &
Coccaro, 2012)---appear to be dimensional as opposed to taxonic in
structure. Second, setting aside the ontological issue of taxonicity
versus dimensionality, there is good evidence that measuring most
disorders (especially personality disorders) dimensionally by using the
full range of scores almost always results in higher correlations with
external validating variables than does measuring them categorically in
an all-or-none fashion (Craighead, Sheets, Craighead, & Madsen, 2011;
Markon, Chmielewski, & Miller, 2011; Ullrich, Borkenau, & Marneros,
2001). Such findings are not surprising given that artificial
dichotomization of variables almost always results in a loss of
information and, hence, statistical power (Cohen, 1983; MacCallum,
Zhang, Preacher, & Rucker, 2002).

The DSM: Quo Vadis? In some respects, DSM-III-R and DSM-IV were
disappointments, as they did not resolve many of the serious problems
endemic to DSM-III (Ghaemi, 2003). If anything, comorbidity in DSM-III-R
and DSM-IV mushroomed, due to the dismantling of many hierarchical
exclusion rules (Lilienfeld & Waldman, 2004). Moreover, some diagnostic
categories of questionable validity (e.g., dependent personality
disorder) remained. It is too early to tell whether DSM-5 will help to
resolve these and other problems. DSM-5 presents both challenges and
opportunities: challenges because many conceptual and methodological
quandaries regarding psychiatric diagnosis remain unresolved, and
opportunities because a new manual opens the door for novel approaches
to the classification of psychopathology. With these considerations in
mind, we sketch out two promising future directions for psychiatric
diagnosis: adoption of a dimensional approach and the incorporation of
endophenotypic markers into psychiatric diagnosis (see Widiger & Clark,
2000, for other proposals for DSM-5 and future DSMs).

A Dimensional Approach The accumulating evidence for the dimensionality
of many psychiatric conditions, particularly personality disorders, has
led many authors to suggest replacing or at least supplementing the DSM
with a set of dimensions derived from the basic science of personality
(Krueger et al., 2011; Widiger & Clark, 2000). One early candidate for a
dimensional model is the five-factor model (FFM; Goldberg, 1993), which
consists of five major dimensions that have emerged repeatedly in factor
analyses of omnibus (broad) measures of personality: extraversion,
neuroticism, agreeableness, conscientiousness, and openness to
experience (the FFM, incidentally, can easily be recalled using the
waterlogged mnemonics of OCEAN or CANOE). These five dimensions also
contain lower-order facets that provide a fine-grained description of
personality; for example, the FFM dimension of extraversion contains
facets of warmth, gregariousness, assertiveness, excitement seeking, and
so on (Costa & McCrae, 1992). The framers of DSM-5 considered a
dimensional model for personality disorders influenced substantially by
research on the FFM, and by the work of Harkness and his colleagues (see
Harkness & McNulty, 1994), which has yielded a somewhat similar set of
five dimensions that bears greater relevance to psychopathology. In this
model, five broad

The DSM: QUO VADIS?

27

dimensions of antagonism, detachment, negative affectivity (similar to
but broader than neuroticism), disinhibition, and psychoticism are used
to describe all personality variation in the abnormal range.
Nevertheless, this bold proposal was ultimately vetoed by the American
Psychiatric Association board of trustees, in part because its clinical
feasibility was deemed to be insufficiently demonstrated. As noted
earlier, however, these dimensions appear in Section III of DSM-5, in an
effort to encourage further research with an eye toward DSM-6. In
addition, research on the correlates of a self-report measure of these
dimensions, the Personality Inventory for DSM-5 (PID-5), is beginning to
accumulate (e.g., Fossati et al., in press; Thomas et al., 2012). In
addition to concerns about its clinical feasibility, there are other
potential objections to a dimensional model. For example, there is
disagreement regarding both the precise nature and the number of the
personality dimensions to be used, with some authors advocating for
alternative (e.g., three-dimensional) models. Another objection derives
from the often-neglected distinction between basic tendencies and
characteristic adaptations in personality psychology (Harkness &
Lilienfeld, 1997; McCrae & Costa, 1995). Basic tendencies are core
personality traits, whereas characteristic adaptations are the
behavioral manifestations of these traits. A large body of personality
research suggests that basic tendencies can often be expressed in a wide
variety of different characteristic adaptations depending on the
upbringing, interests, cognitive skills, and other personality traits of
the individual. For example, the scores of firefighters on a
well-validated measure of the personality trait of sensation seeking (a
construct closely related to, although broader than, risk taking) are
significantly higher than those of college students, but comparable to
those of incarcerated prisoners (Zuckerman, 1994). This finding
dovetails with the notion that the same basic tendency, in this case
sensation seeking, can be expressed in either socially constructive or
destructive outlets, depending on yet unidentified moderating
influences. The distinction between basic tendencies and characteristic
adaptations implies that personality dimensions may never be sufficient
to capture the full variance in personality disorders. This is because
these dimensions (basic tendencies) do not adequately assess many key
aspects of psychopathological functioning, many of which can be viewed
as maladaptive characteristic adaptations (Sheets & Craighead, 2007).
This theoretical conjecture is corroborated by findings that the FFM
dimensions do not account for a sizable chunk of variance in many DSM
personality disorders. For example, in one study the correlations
between FFM prototype scores of DSM personality disorders (derived from
expert ratings of the FFM facets most closely associated with each
disorder) and structured interview-based measures of these disorders
were high for some disorders (e.g., avoidant personality disorder, r =
.67) and modest or even negligible for others (e.g.,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, r = .13) (Miller, Reynolds, & Pilkonis,
2004). The latter finding may reflect the fact that some
obsessive-compulsive traits---such as perfectionism---may be adaptive in
certain settings and, therefore, may not lead inevitably to personality
pathology. Moreover, Skodol et al. (2005) reported that the dimensions
of the Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality (SNAP; Clark,
1993)---a measure that assesses many pathological behaviors associated
with personality disorders---displayed incremental validity above and
beyond the FFM dimensions in distinguishing among DSM personality
disorders (also see Reynolds & Clark, 2001). This finding suggests that
the FFM overlooks crucial distinctions captured by the SNAP,

28

Diagnosis

perhaps in part because the SNAP assesses not only basic tendencies but
also the maladaptive characteristic adaptations of many personality
disorders (Lilienfeld, 2005). The findings reviewed here imply that a
dimensional model may be useful in capturing core features of many DSM
personality disorders. Nevertheless, they raise the possibility that
personality dimensions may not be sufficient by themselves to capture
personality pathology, because they cannot tell us whether individuals'
behavioral adaptations to these dimensions are adaptive or maladaptive,
nor can they express the phenotypic (behavioral) manifestations these
adaptations have assumed.

Research Domain Criteria Despite their noteworthy research achievements,
the DSM and ICD have not borne witness to clear-cut reductions in the
morbidity or mortality related to major mental disorders (Insel, 2009).
Furthermore, many, and arguably most, DSM and ICD categories appear to
lack treatment utility: different diagnoses are often not linked to
differential recommendations for evidence-based interventions. Indeed,
interventions are often the same for different diagnoses; for example,
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors appear to be efficacious for a
broad class of conditions, including a number of mood, anxiety, and
eating disorders. All of these anomalies have led many scholars to
contend that the DSM-ICD approach has not "carved nature at its joints"
and that a system more closely tied to psychobiological systems is more
likely to yield fruit (Lilienfeld & Treadway, 2016). In this vein, the
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) launched the Research Domain
Criteria (RDoC) in 2009 as a research program that might ultimately
provide an alternative to the DSM, ICD, and similar diagnostic manuals.
As of this writing, RDoC is more of an envisioned research approach than
a proposed system in its own right. Nevertheless, its long-term goal is
to identify well-established psychobiological systems that undergird
psychopathology (Morris & Cuthbert, 2012), along with promising markers
of these systems. Examples of such systems include negative valence
systems (e.g., acute threat), positive valence systems (e.g., approach),
and cognitive systems (e.g., working memory). In turn, each of these
systems can be measured using indicators at different levels of
analysis, including observable behavior, self-report indices, laboratory
measures, and brain imaging findings (Insel et al., 2010; Sanislow et
al., 2010). Ultimately, such a system could supplement or even supplant
the extant DSM system, but as of this writing, progress along these
lines remains preliminary. In contrast to the DSM, which adopts a
categorical system for measurement purposes, RDoC embraces a dimensional
system, although it does not preclude the existence of taxa. RDoC was
substantially informed by the endophenotype approach to psychopathology
research, which, as noted earlier, strives to identify promising markers
of mental disorders that lie "beneath the skin" (Andreasen, 1995;
Waldman, 2005). RDoC goes beyond these approaches, however, in shifting
the focus from mental disorders themselves to neural circuitry
putatively associated with risk for these disorders. Nevertheless, with
the exception of certain sleep disorders (e.g., narcolepsy),
endophenotypic markers have thus far been excluded from DSM diagnostic
criterion sets, which consist almost entirely of the classical signs and
symptoms of disorders (exophenotypes). This omission is noteworthy,
because endophenotypes may lie closer to the etiology of many disorders
than do exophenotypes. This situation may change in coming years with
accumulating evidence

Summary and Future Directions

29

from studies of biochemistry, brain imaging, and performance on
laboratory tasks; this evidence holds the promise of identifying more
valid markers of certain mental disorders (Patrick & Hajcak, 2016;
Widiger & Clark, 2000). Nevertheless, at least two potential obstacles
confront the use of endophenotypic markers in psychiatric diagnosis and
the RDoC initiative more broadly, the first conceptual and the second
empirical. First, the widespread assumption that endophenotypic markers
are more closely linked to underlying etiological processes than
exophenotypic markers (Kihlstrom, 2002) is just that: an assumption. For
example, the well-replicated finding that diminished amplitude of the
P300 (a brain event--related potential appearing approximately 300
milliseconds following stimulus onset) is dependably associated with
externalizing disorders---such as conduct disorder and substance
dependence (Patrick et al., 2006)---could reflect the fact that P300 is
merely a sensitive indicator of attention. As a consequence, diminished
P300 amplitude, as well as several other event-related potential
findings, such as diminished error-related negativity (see Olvet &
Hajcak, 2008), could be a downstream consequence of the inattention and
low levels of motivation often associated with externalizing disorders
(Lilienfeld & Treadway, 2016). This possibility would not necessarily
negate the incorporation of P300 amplitude into diagnostic criterion
sets, although it could raise questions concerning its specificity to
externalizing disorders, let alone specific externalizing disorders.
Second, no endophenotypic markers yet identified are close to serving as
inclusion tests for their respective disorders. Even smooth pursuit eye
movement dysfunction, which is perhaps the most dependable biological
marker of schizophrenia, is present only in anywhere from 40% to 80% of
patients with schizophrenia, so it would miss many individuals with the
disorder. It may come closer, however, to serving as a good exclusion
test, as it is present in only about 10% of normal individuals (Clementz
& Sweeney, 1990; Keri & Janka, 2004). Thus, although endophenotypic
markers may eventually add to the predictive efficiency of some
diagnostic criterion sets, they are likely to be fallible indicators,
just as traditional signs and symptoms are. These markers also hold out
the hope of assisting in the identification of more etiologically pure
subtypes of disorders; for example, schizophrenia patients with abnormal
smooth pursuit eye movements may prove to be separable in important ways
from other patients with this disorder. Alternatively, and broadly
consistent with the RDoC approach, such markers may be more helpful in
assessing individual differences in neural circuits, such as those
relevant to threat systems, than in identifying DSM and ICD disorders
themselves. Such individual differences might in turn eventually inform
the selection of the most efficacious treatment. In the next decade, we
should have a better gauge of this approach's scientific status and its
promise for informing psychiatric classification and diagnosis.

Summary and Future Directions We conclude this chapter with 10 take-home
messages: 1. A systematic system of psychiatric classification is a
prerequisite for psychiatric diagnosis. 2. Psychiatric diagnoses serve
important, even essential, communicative functions.

30

Diagnosis

3.  A valid psychiatric diagnosis gives us new information---for
    example, it tells about the diagnosed individual's probable family
    history, performance on laboratory tests, natural history, and
    perhaps response to treatment---and it also distinguishes that
    person's diagnosis from other, related diagnoses.
4.  The claim that mental illness is a myth rests on a misunderstanding
    of the role of lesions in medical disorders.
5.  Prevalent claims to the contrary, psychiatric diagnoses often
    achieve adequate levels of reliability and validity, and do not
    typically pigeonhole or stigmatize individuals when correctly
    applied.
6.  There is no clear consensus on the correct definition of mental
    disorder, and some authors have suggested that the higher-order
    concept of mental disorder is intrinsically undefinable. Even if
    true, this should have no effect on the scientific investigation,
    assessment, or treatment of specific mental disorders (e.g.,
    schizophrenia, panic disorder), which undeniably exist.
7.  Early versions of the diagnostic manual (DSM-I and DSM-II) were
    problematic because they provided clinicians and researchers with
    minimal guidance for establishing diagnoses and required high levels
    of subjective judgment and clinical inference.
8.  DSM-III, which appeared in 1980, helped to alleviate this problem by
    providing diagnosticians with explicit diagnostic criteria,
    algorithms (decision rules), and hierarchical exclusion criteria,
    leading to increases in the reliability of many psychiatric
    diagnoses.
9.  The current classification system, DSM-5, is a clear advance over
    DSM-I and DSM-II. Nevertheless, from initial reports, DSM-5
    continues to be plagued by a variety of problems, especially
    extensive comorbidity, reliable diagnoses that are nevertheless of
    questionable validity, and retention of a categorical model in the
    absence of compelling scientific evidence. ICD-10 is an alternative
    to DSM-5 used in many parts of the world; many of its diagnoses
    overlap substantially with those of DSM-5, although there are
    noteworthy differences for others.
10. Fruitful potential directions for psychiatric classification include
    the development of a dimensional model of personality to replace or
    supplement the existing categorical system of personality disorders,
    and the adoption of a system based on neural circuitry tied to risk
    for psychopathology, consistent with the recently launched NIMH RDoC
    initiative.

References Alliance of Psychoanalytic Organizations. (2006).
Psychodynamic diagnostic manual. Silver Spring, MD: Author. Amador, X.
F., & Paul-Odouard, R. (2000). Defending the Unabomber: Anosognosia in
schizophrenia. Psychiatric Quarterly, 71, 363--371. American Psychiatric
Association. (1952). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders. Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association.
(1968). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1980).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1987).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., rev.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1994).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (2000).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text
rev.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (2013).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. Andreasen, N. C. (1995). The validation of
psychiatric diagnosis: New models and approaches. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 152, 161--162. Barlow, D. H. (2001). Anxiety and its
disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Batstra, L., & Frances, A. (2012a). Diagnostic
inflation: Causes and a suggested cure. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 200, 474--479. Batstra, L., & Frances, A. (2012b). Holding the
line against diagnostic inflation in psychiatry. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 81, 5--10. Bayer, R., & Spitzer, R. L. (1982). Edited
correspondence on the status of homosexuality in DSM-III. Journal of the
History of the Behavioral Sciences, 18, 32--52. Benton, A. L. (1992).
Gerstmann's syndrome. Archives of Neurology, 49, 445--447.

Berkson, J. (1946). Limitations of the application of fourfold table
analysis to hospital data. Biometrics Bulletin, 2, 47--53. Blashfield,
R., & Burgess, D. (2007). Classification provides an essential basis for
organizing mental disorders. In S. O. Lilienfeld & W. T. O'Donohue
(Eds.), The great ideas of clinical science: 17 Principles that every
mental professional should understand (pp. 93--118). New York, NY:
Routledge. Borsboom, D., Cramer, A. O., Kievit, R. A., Zand Scholten,
A., & Franic, S. (2009). The end of construct validity. In R. W. Lissitz
(Ed.), The concept of validity: Revisions, new directions, and
applications (pp. 135--170). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Caplan, P. J. (1995). They say you're crazy: How the world's most
powerful psychiatrists decide who's normal. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Caron, C., & Rutter, M. (1991). Comorbidity in child psychopathology:
Concepts, issues and research strategies. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 32, 1063--1080. Clark, L. A. (1993). Manual for the
Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality (SNAP). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press. Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1995).
Constructing validity: Basic issues in objective scale development.
Psychological Assessment, 7, 309--319. Cleckley, H. (1941). The mask of
sanity. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Clementz, B. A., & Sweeney, J. A. (1990).
Is eye movement dysfunction a biological marker for schizophrenia? A
methodological review. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 77--92. Cloninger,
C. R. (2009). Foreword. In W. O'Donohue, K. A. Fowler, & S. O.
Lilienfeld (Eds.), Personality disorders: Toward the DSM-V
(pp. vii--xv). Los Angeles, CA: Sage. Cohen, H. (1981). The evolution of
the concept of disease. In A. L. Caplan, H. T. Engelhardt, Jr., & J. J.
McCartney (Eds.), Concepts of health and disease: Interdisciplinary
perspectives (pp. 209--220). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Cohen, J.
(1983). The cost of dichotomization. Applied Psychological Measurement,
7, 249--253.

31

32

Diagnosis

Compton, W. M., & Guze, S. B. (1995). The neo-Kraepelinian revolution in
psychiatric diagnosis. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 245, 196--201. Cooper, R. (2011). Mental health and
disorder. In H. T. Have, R. Chadwick, & E. M. Meslin (Eds.), The Sage
handbook of health care ethics (pp. 251--260). London, England: Sage.
Cornez-Ruiz, S., & Hendricks, B. (1993). Effects of labeling and ADHD
behaviors on peer and teacher judgments. Journal of Educational
Research, 86, 349--355. Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992).
Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO FiveFactor
Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources. Craighead, W. E., Sheets, E. S., Craighead, L. W.,
& Madsen, J. W. (2011). Recurrence of MDD: A prospective study of
personality pathology and cognitive distortions. Personality Disorders:
Theory, Research, and Treatment, 2, 83--97. Cramer, A. O., Waldorp, L.
J., van der Maas, H. L., & Borsboom, D. (2010). Comorbidity: A network
perspective. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 137--150. Cronbach, L.
J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests.
Psychometrika, 16, 297--335. Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955).
Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin, 52,
281--302. Dobbs, D. (2012, December 7). The new temper tantrum disorder.
Slate. Retrieved from http://
www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2012/12/
disruptive_mood_dysregulation_disorder_in_dsm\_
5_criticism_of_a_new_diagnosis.html Draguns, J. G., & Tanaka-Matsumi, J.
(2003). Assessment of psychopathology across and within cultures: Issues
and findings. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 755--776. Drake, R.
E., & Wallach, M. A. (2007). Is comorbidity a psychological science?
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 14, 20--22. du Fort, G. G.,
Newman, S. C., & Bland, R. C. (1993). Psychiatric comorbidity and
treatment seeking: Sources of selection bias in the study of clinical
populations. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 181, 467--474.
Eysenck, H. J., Wakefield, J., & Friedman, A. (1983). Diagnosis and
clinical assessment: The DSM-III. Annual Review of Psychology, 34,
167--193.

Faust, D., & Miner, R. A. (1986). The empiricist in his new clothes:
DSM-III in perspective. American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 962--967.
Feighner, J., Robins, E., Guze, S., Woodruff, R., Winokur, G., & Munoz,
R. (1972). Diagnostic criteria for use in psychiatric research. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 26, 57--63. First, M. B. (2009). Summaries of the
DSM-V research planning conferences. Retrieved from www.psych
.org/MainMenu/ Research/DSMIV/DSMV/DSM RevisionActivities/
ResearchPlanningatHigher Magnification.aspx First, M. B., Spitzer, R.
L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J.B.W. (2002). Structured clinical interview
for DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders, Research Version, Patient Edition. New
York, NY: Biometrics Research, New York State Psychiatric Institute.
Fossati, A., Somma, A., Borroni, S., Maffei, C., Markon, K. E., &
Krueger, R. F. (in press). A head-to-head comparison of the Personality
Inventory for DSM-5 (PID-5) with the Personality Diagnostic
Questionnaire-4 (PDQ-4) in predicting the general level of personality
pathology among community dwelling subjects. Journal of Personality
Disorders. Frances, A. J. (2012, December 2). The DSM-5 is not a bible:
Ignore its ten worst changes. Psychology Today. Retrieved from
http://www.psychologytoday
.com/blog/dsm5-in-distress/201212/dsm-5-isguide-not-bible-ignore-its-ten-worst-changes
Frances, A. J. (2013). Saving normal: An insider's look at what caused
the epidemic of mental illness and how to cure it. New York, NY:
HarperCollins. Frances, A. J., & Widiger, T. (2012). Psychiatric
diagnosis: Lessons from the DSM-IV past and cautions for the DSM-5
future. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 109--130. Garb, H. N.
(1998). Studying the clinician: Judgment research and psychological
assessment. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Garber,
J., & Strassberg, Z. (1991). Construct validity: History and application
to developmental psychopathology. In W. M. Grove & D. Cicchetti (Eds.),
Personality and psychopathology (pp. 218--258). Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press. Ghaemi, N. (2003). The concepts of psychiatry: A
pluralistic approach to the mind and mental illness. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press. Goldberg, D. P. (2012). Comparison
between ICD and DSM diagnostic systems for mental disorders.

References In E. Sorel (Ed.), 21st century global mental health
(pp. 37--53). Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning. Goldberg, L. R.
(1993). The structure of phenotypic personality traits. American
Psychologist, 48, 266--275. Goodwin, D. W., & Guze, S. B. (1996).
Psychiatric diagnosis (5th ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gorenstein, E. E. (1992). The science of mental illness. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press. Gottesman, I. I., & Gould, T. D. (2003). The
endophenotype concept in psychiatry: Etymology and strategic intentions.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 636--645. Gottesman, I. I., &
McGue, M. (2015). Endophenotype. In R. Cautin & S. O. Lilienfeld (Eds.),
The encyclopedia of clinical psychology. Chichester, England: Wiley.
Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/9781118625392.wbecp423/abstract;
jsessionid=A5F00C051923257412DB666CC4525
BE3.f04t02?userIsAuthenticated=false&denied AccessCustomisedMessage=
Gough, H. (1971). Some reflections on the meaning of psychodiagnosis.
American Psychologist, 26, 160--167. Grob, G. N. (1991). Origins of
DSM-I: A study in appearance and reality. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 148, 421--431. Guilford, J. P. (1936). Psychometric methods.
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Hare, R. D. (2003). Manual for the Revised
Psychopathy Checklist (2nd ed.). Toronto, ON: Multi-Health Systems.
Harkness, A. R., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (1997). Individual differences
science for treatment planning: Personality traits. Psychological
Assessment, 9, 349--360. Harkness, A. R., & McNulty, J. L. (1994). The
Personality Psychopathology Five (PSY-5): Issue from the pages of a
diagnostic manual instead of a dictionary. In S. Strack & M. Lorr
(Eds.), Differentiating normal and abnormal personality (pp. 291--315).
New York, NY: Springer. Harris, M. J., Milich, R., Corbitt, E. M.,
Hoover, D. W., & Brady, M. (1992). Self-fulfilling effects of
stigmatizing information on children's social interactions. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 41--50. Houts, A. C. (2001). The
diagnostic and statistical manual's new white coat and circularity of
plausible

33

dysfunctions: Response to Wakefield, part 1. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 39, 315--345. Insel, T. R. (2009). Translating scientific
opportunity into public health impact: A strategic plan for research on
mental illness. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66, 128--133. Insel, T.
(2013, April 29). Director's blog: Transforming diagnosis. National
Institute of Mental Health. Retrieved from http://www.nimh.nih.gov/
about/director/2013/transforming-diagnosis.shtml Insel, T., Cuthbert,
B., Garvey, M., Heinssen, R., Kozak, M., Pine, D. S., ... Wang, P.
(2010). Research Domain Criteria (RDoC): Developing a valid diagnostic
framework for research on mental disorders. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 167, 748--751. James, O. (2007). Affluenza---a contagious
middle class virus causing depression, anxiety, addiction and ennui.
London, England: Random House. Joiner, T. (2006). Why people die by
suicide. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Kaplan, M. H., &
Feinstein, A. R. (1974). The importance of classifying initial
co-morbidity in evaluating the outcome of diabetes mellitus. Journal of
Chronic Diseases, 27, 387--404. Karpman, B. (1948). The myth of the
psychopathic personality. American Journal of Psychiatry, 104, 523--524.
Kazdin, A. E. (1983). Psychiatric diagnosis, dimensions of dysfunction,
and child behavior therapy. Behavior Therapy, 14, 73--99. Kendell, R., &
Jablensky, A. (2003). Distinguishing between the validity and utility of
psychiatric diagnoses. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 4--12.
Kendell, R. E. (1975). The concept of disease and its implications for
psychiatry. British Journal of Psychiatry, 127, 305--315. Kendler, K. S.
(1980). The nosologic validity of paranoia (simple delusional disorder):
A review. Archives of General Psychiatry, 37, 699--706. Kendler, K. S.
(2005). Toward a philosophical structure for psychiatry. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 433--440. Kendler, K. S., Zachar, P., &
Craver, C. (2011). What kinds of things are psychiatric disorders?
Psychological Medicine, 41, 1143--1150. Keri, S., & Janka, Z. (2004).
Critical evaluation of cognitive dysfunctions as endophenotypes of
schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 110, 83--91.

34

Diagnosis

Kihlstrom, J. F. (2002). To honor Kraepelin ... : From symptoms to
pathology in the diagnosis of mental illness. In L. Beutler & M. Malik
(Eds.), Rethinking the DSM: A psychological perspective (pp. 279--303).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Kim, J., Park, S., &
Blake, R. (2011). Perception of biological motion in schizophrenia and
healthy individuals: A behavioral and fMRI study. PloS One, 6(5),
e19971. Kirk, S. A., & Kutchins, H. (1992). The selling of DSM: The
rhetoric of science in psychiatry. New York, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Klein, D., & Riso, L. P. (1993). Psychiatric disorders: Problems of
boundaries and comorbidity. In C. G. Costello (Ed.), Basic issues in
psychopathology (pp. 19--66). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Kleinknecht,
R. A., Dinnel, D. L., Tanouye-Wilson, S., & Lonner, W. J. (1994).
Cultural variation in social anxiety and phobia: A study of taijin
kyofusho. Behavioral Therapist, 17(8), 175--178. Klerman, G. (1984). The
advantages of DSM-III. American Journal of Psychiatry, 141, 539--542.
Kollman, D. M., Brown, T. A., Liverant, G. I., & Hofmann, S. G. (2006).
A taxometric investigation of the latent structure of social anxiety
disorder in outpatients with anxiety and mood disorders. Depression and
Anxiety, 23, 190--199. Kraupl Taylor, F. (1971). A logical analysis of
medicophysiological concept of disease. Psychological Medicine, 1,
356--364. Krueger, R. F., Eaton, N. R., Clark, L. A., Watson, D.,
Markon, K. E., Derringer, J., ... Livesley, W. J. (2011). Deriving an
empirical structure of personality pathology for DSM-5. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 25, 170--191. Lenzenweger, M. F., & Korfine, L.
(1992). Confirming the latent structure and base rate of schizotypy: A
taxometric analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 567--571.
Lief, A. A. (Ed.). (1948). The commonsense psychiatry of Dr. Adolf
Meyer: Fifty-two selected papers. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Lilienfeld,
S. O. (1994). Conceptual problems in the assessment of psychopathy.
Clinical Psychology Review, 14, 17--38. Lilienfeld, S. O. (1995). Seeing
both sides: Classic controversies in abnormal psychology. Pacific Grove,
CA: Brooks/Cole.

Lilienfeld. S. O. (2003). Comorbidity between and within childhood
externalizing and internalizing disorders: Reflections and directions.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 31, 285--291. Lilienfeld, S. O.
(2005). Longitudinal studies of personality disorders: Four lessons from
personality psychology. Journal of Personality Disorders, 19, 547--556.
Lilienfeld, S. O. (2013). Is psychopathy a syndrome? Commentary on
Marcus, Fulton, and Edens. Personality Disorders: Theory, Practice, and
Research, 4(1), 85--86. Lilienfeld, S. O., & Marino, L. (1995). Mental
disorder as a Rochian concept: A critique of Wakefield's "harmful
dysfunction" analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 411--420.
Lilienfeld, S. O., & Marino, L. (1999). Essentialism revisited:
Evolutionary theory and the concept of a mental disorder. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 108, 400--411. Lilienfeld, S. O., & Treadway, M. T.
(2016). Clashing diagnostic approaches: DSM-ICD versus RDoC. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 12, 435--463. Lilienfeld, S. O., Van
Valkenburg, C., Larntz, K., & Akiskal, H. S. (1986). The relationship of
histrionic personality to antisocial personality and somatization
disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 718--722. Lilienfeld, S.
O., & Waldman, I. D. (2004). Comorbidity and Chairman Mao. World
Psychiatry, 3, 26--27. Lilienfeld, S. O., Waldman, I. D., & Israel, A.
C. (1994). A critical note on the use of the term and concept of
"comorbidity" in psychopathology research. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 1, 71--83. Link, B. G., & Cullen, F. T. (1990). The
labeling theory of mental disorder: A review of the evidence. Research
in Community and Mental Health, 6, 75--105. Lobbestael, J., Leurgans,
M., & Arntz, A. (2011). Inter-rater reliability of the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I disorders (SCID I) and Axis II
disorders (SCID II). Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 18, 75--79.
Loevinger, J. (1957). Objective tests as instruments of psychological
theory. Psychological Reports, 3, 635--694. Lykken, D. T. (1995). The
antisocial personalities. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

References Lynam, D. R., & Miller, J. D. (2012). Fearless dominance and
psychopathy: A response to Lilienfeld et al. Personality Disorders:
Theory, Research, and Treatment, 3, 341--353. MacCallum, R. C., Zhang,
S., Preacher, K. J., & Rucker, D. D. (2002). On the practice of
dichotomization of quantitative variables. Psychological Methods, 7,
19--40. Maffei, C., Fossati, A., Agostoni, I., Barraco, A., Bagnato, M.,
Namia, C., ... Petrachi, M. (1997). Interrater reliability and internal
consistency of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II
personality disorders (SCID-II), version 2.0. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 11, 279--284. Marcus, D. K., Lilienfeld, S. O., Edens, J. F.,
& Poythress, N. G. (2006). Is antisocial personality disorder continuous
or categorical? A taxometric analysis. Psychological Medicine, 36,
1571--1581. Marcus, D. K., Norris, A. L., & Coccaro, E. F. (2012). The
latent structure of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder in an adult
sample. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 46, 782--789. Markon, K. E.,
Chmielewski, M., & Miller, C. J. (2011). The reliability and validity of
discrete and continuous measures of psychopathology: A quantitative
review. Psychological Bulletin, 137, 856--879. Martel, M. M., Von Eye,
A., & Nigg, J. T. (2010). Revisiting the latent structure of ADHD: Is
there a "g" factor? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51,
905--914. Matarazzo, J. D. (1983). The reliability of psychiatric and
psychological diagnosis. Clinical Psychology Review, 3, 103--145. Mayes,
R., & Horwitz, A. V. (2005). DSM-III and the revolution in the
classification of mental illness. Journal of the History of the
Behavioral Sciences, 41, 249--267. Mayr, E. (1982). The growth of
biological thought: Diversity, evolution, and inheritance. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press. McCann, J. T., Shindler, K. L., & Hammond, T. R.
(2003). The science and pseudoscience of expert testimony. In S. O.
Lilienfeld, J. M. Lohr, & S. J. Lynn (Eds.), Science and pseudoscience
in contemporary clinical psychology (pp. 77--108). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1995). Trait explanations
in personality psychology. European Journal of Personality, 9, 231--252.

35

McHugh, P. R., & Slavney, P. R. (1998). The perspectives of psychiatry
(2nd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. McPartland, J.
C., Reichow, B., & Volkmar, F. R. (2012). Sensitivity and specificity of
proposed DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder. Journal
of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 51, 368--383.
Meehl, P. E. (1973). Why I do not attend case conferences. In P. E.
Meehl (Ed.), Psychodiagnosis: Selected papers (pp. 225--302).
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Meehl, P. E. (1977).
Specific etiology and other forms of strong influence: Some quantitative
meanings. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 2, 33--53. Meehl, P. E.
(1986). Diagnostic taxa as open concepts: Metatheoretical and
statistical questions about reliability and construct validity in the
grand strategy of nosological revision. In T. Millon & G. L. Klerman
(Eds.), Contemporary directions in psychopathology: Toward the DSM-IV
(pp. 215--231). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Meehl, P. E. (1990).
Schizotaxia as an open concept. In A. I. Rabin, R. Zucker, R. Emmons, &
S. Frank (Eds.), Studying persons and lives (pp. 248--303). New York,
NY: Springer. Meehl, P. E., & Golden, R. (1982). Taxometric methods. In
P. C. Kendall & J. N. Butcher (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in
clinical psychology (pp. 127--181). New York, NY: Wiley. Messick, S.
(1995). Validity of psychological assessment: Validation of inferences
from persons' responses and performances as scientific inquiry into
score meaning. American Psychologist, 50, 741--749. Meyer, G. J. (1997).
Assessing reliability: Critical corrections for a critical examination
of the Rorschach Comprehensive System. Psychological Assessment, 9,
480--489. Michels, R. (1984). A debate on DSM-III: First rebuttal.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 141, 548--553. Michels, R., Siebel, U.,
Freyberger, H. J., Stieglitz, R. D., Schaub, R. T., & Dilling, H.
(1996). The multiaxial system of ICD-10: Evaluation of a preliminary
draft in a multicentric field trial. Psychopathology, 29, 347--356.
Milich, R., McAninich, C. B., & Harris, M. J. (1992). Effects of
stigmatizing information on children's peer relations: Believing is
seeing. School Psychology Review, 21, 399--408.

36

Diagnosis

Miller, J. D., Reynolds, S. K., & Pilkonis, P. A. (2004). The validity
of the five-factor model prototypes for personality disorders in two
clinical samples. Psychological Assessment, 16, 310--322. Millon, T.
(1975). Reflections on Rosenhan's "On being sane in insane places."
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 84, 456--461. Morey, L. C. (1991).
Classification of mental disorders as a collection of hypothetical
constructs. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 289--293. Morris, S.
E., & Cuthbert, B. N. (2012). Research Domain Criteria: Cognitive
systems, neural circuits, and dimensions of behavior. Dialogues in
Clinical Neuroscience, 14, 29--37. Morrison, J. (1997). When
psychological problems mask medical disorders: A guide for
psychotherapists. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Neese, R., & Williams,
G. (1994). Why we get sick. New York, NY: Vintage. Olvet, D. M., &
Hajcak, G. (2008). The error-related negativity (ERN) and
psychopathology: Toward an endophenotype. Clinical Psychology Review,
28, 1343--1354. Patrick, C. J., Bernat, E., Malone, S. M., Iacono, W.
G., Krueger, R. F., & McGue, M. K. (2006). P300 amplitude as an
indicator of externalizing in adolescent males. Psychophysiology, 43,
84--92. Patrick, C. J., Fowles, D. C., & Krueger, R. F. (2009).
Triarchic conceptualization of psychopathy: Developmental origins of
disinhibition, boldness, and meanness. Development and Psychopathology,
21(3), 913--938. Patrick, C. J., & Hajcak, G. (2016). RDoC: Translating
promise into progress. Psychophysiology, 53, 415--424. Pelham, W. E., &
Bender, M. E. (1982). Peer relationships in hyperactive children:
Description and treatment. In K. D. Gadow & I. Bialer (Eds.), Advances
in learning and behavioral disabilities (Vol. 1, pp. 365--436).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. Pincus, H. A., Tew, J. D., & First, M. B.
(2004). Psychiatric comorbidity: Is more less? World Psychiatry, 3,
18--23. Pouissant, A. F. (2002). Is extreme racism a mental illness?
Point-counterpoint. Western Journal of Medicine, 176, 4. Reynolds, S.
K., & Clark, L. A. (2001). Predicting personality disorder dimensions
from domains and facets of the five-factor model. Journal of
Personality, 69, 199--222.

Robins, E., & Guze, S. B. (1970). Establishment of diagnostic validity
in psychiatric illness: Its application to schizophrenia. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 126, 983--987. Rosch, E. R. (1973). Natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 328--350. Rosch, E. R., & Mervis,
C. B. (1975). Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573--605. Rosenhan, D. L. (1973).
On being sane in insane places. Science, 179, 250--258. Rosenhan, D. L.,
& Seligman, M. E. (1995). Abnormal psychology. New York, NY: W. W.
Norton. Ross, C., & Pam, A. (1996). Pseudoscience in biological
psychiatry: Blaming the body. New York, NY: Wiley. Ruscio, J. (2004).
Diagnoses and the behaviors they denote: A critical evaluation of the
labeling theory of mental illness. Scientific Review of Mental Health
Practice, 3(1), 5--22. Sanislow, C. A., Pine, D. S., Quinn, K. J.,
Kozak, M. J., Garvey, M. A., Heinssen, R. K., ... Cuthbert, B. N.
(2010). Developing constructs for psychopathology research: Research
Domain Criteria. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119, 631--639. Sarbin,
T. R. (1969). On the distinction between social roles and social types,
with special reference to the hippie. American Journal of Psychiatry,
125, 1024--1031. Scadding, J. G. (1996). Essentialism and nominalism in
medicine: Logic of diagnosis in disease terminology. Lancet, 348,
594--596. Schaler, J. A. (Ed.). (2004). Szasz under fire: The
psychiatric abolitionist faces his critics. Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Scheff, T. (Ed.). (1975). Labeling madness. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall. Schildkrout, B. (2011). Unmasking psychological symptoms:
How therapists can learn to recognize the psychological presentation of
medical disorders. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Schmidt, F. L., Le, H., & Ilies,
R. (2003). Beyond alpha: An empirical examination of the effects of
different sources of measurement error on reliability estimates for
measures of individual differences constructs. Psychological Methods, 8,
206--224. Seitz, S., & Geske, D. (1976). Mothers' and graduate trainees'
judgments of children: Some effects of labeling. American Journal of
Mental Deficiency, 81, 362--370.

References Selkoe, D. J. (1992). Aging brain, aging mind. Scientific
American, 267, 134--142. Sheets, E., & Craighead, W. E. (2007). Toward
an empirically based classification of personality pathology. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 14, 77--93. Sijtsma, K. (2009). On the
use, the misuse, and the very limited usefulness of Cronbach's alpha.
Psychometrika, 74, 107--120. Skeem, J. L., & Cooke, D. J. (2010). One
measure does not a construct make: Directions toward reinvigorating
psychopathy research---reply to Hare and Neumann (2010). Psychological
Assessment, 22, 455--459. Skeem, J. L., Polaschek, D. L., Patrick, C.
J., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (2011). Psychopathic personality bridging the
gap between scientific evidence and public policy. Psychological Science
in the Public Interest, 12, 95--162. Skinner, H. A. (1981). Toward the
integration of classification theory and methods. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 90, 68--87. Skinner, H. A. (1986). Construct validation
approach to psychiatric classification. In T. Millon & G. L. Klerman
(Eds.), Contemporary directions in psychopathology: Toward the DSM-IV
(pp. 307--330). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Skodol, A. E., Oldham, J.
M., Bender, D. S., Dyck, I. R., Stout, R. L., Morey, L. C., ...
Gunderson, J. C. (2005). Dimensional representations of DSM-IV
personality disorders: Relationships to functional impairment. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 162(10), 1919--1925. Slade, T., & Andrews, G.
(2005). Latent structure of depression in a community sample: A
taxometric analysis. Psychological Medicine, 35, 489--497. Slater, L.
(2004). Opening Skinner's box: Great psychological experiments of the
20th century. New York, NY: W. W. Norton. Smith, S. F., Winiarski, D.
A., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (2015). Pop psychology diagnoses. In R. L.
Cautin & S. O. Lilienfeld (Eds.), Encyclopedia of clinical psychology.
Chichester, England: Wiley. Sommers, C. H., & Satel, S. (2005). One
nation under therapy: How the helping culture is eroding self-reliance.
New York, NY: St. Martin's. Spitzer, R. L. (1975). On pseudoscience,
logic in remission, and psychiatric diagnosis: A critique of Rosenhan's
"On being sane in insane places." Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 84,
442--452.

37

Spitzer, R. L., Endicott, J., & Robins, E. (1978). Research Diagnostic
Criteria: Rationale and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry,
35(6), 773--782. Spitzer, R. L., Forman, J.B.W., & Nee, J. (1979).
DSM-III field trials. American Journal of Psychiatry, 136, 815--820.
Spitzer, R. L., Lilienfeld, S. O., & Miller, M. B. (2005). Rosenhan
revisited: The scientific credibility of Lauren Slater's pseudopatient
diagnosis study. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 193, 734--739.
Stuart, S., Pfohl, B., Battaglia, M., Bellodi, L., Grove, W., & Cadoret,
R. (1998). The cooccurrence of DSM-III-R personality disorders. Journal
of Personality Disorders, 12, 302--315. Subotnik, K. L., Nuechterlein,
K. H., Ventura, J., Gitlin, M. J., Marder, S., Mintz, J., ... Singh, I.
R. (2011). Risperidone nonadherence and return of positive symptoms in
the early course of schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry,
168(3), 286--292. Sullivan, P. F., & Kendler, K. S. (1998). The genetic
epidemiology of smoking. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 1, S51--S57.
Sutton, E. H. (1980). An introduction to human genetics. Philadelphia,
PA: Saunders College. Szasz, T. (1960). The myth of mental illness.
American Psychologist, 15, 113--118. Thomas, K. M., Yalch, M. M.,
Krueger, R. F., Wright, A.G.C., Markon, K. E., & Hopwood, C. J. (2012).
The convergent structure of DSM-5 personality trait facets and
five-factor model trait domains. Assessment. Advance online publication.
doi: 10.1177/ 1073191112457589 Trull, T. J., & Durrett, C. A. (2005).
Categorical and dimensional models of personality disorder. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 355--380. Ullrich, S., Borkenau, P., &
Marneros, A. (2001). Personality disorders in offenders: Categorical
versus dimensional approaches. Journal of Personality Disorders, 15,
442--449. Vaillant, G. E. (1984). The disadvantages of DSM-III outweigh
its advantages. American Journal of Psychiatry, 14, 542--545. van Praag,
H. M. (2000). Nosologomania: A disorder of psychiatry. World of
Biological Psychiatry, 1, 151--158. Wakefield, J. C. (1992). The concept
of mental disorder: On the boundary between biological facts and social
values. American Psychologist, 47, 373--388. Wakefield, J. C. (1998).
The DSM's theory-neutral nosology is scientifically progressive:
Response to

38

Diagnosis

Follette and Houts. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66,
846--852. Wakefield, J. C. (1999). Evolutionary versus prototype
analyses of the concept of disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
108, 374--399. Wakefield, J. C. (2001). The myth of DSM's invention of
new categories of disorder: Houts's diagnostic discontinuity thesis
disconfirmed. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 575--624. Waldman, I.
D. (2005). Statistical approaches to complex phenotypes: Evaluating
neuropsychological endophenotypes of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 1347--1356. Waldman, I. D.,
Lilienfeld, S. O., & Lahey, B. B. (1995). Toward construct validity in
the childhood disruptive behavior disorders: Classification and
diagnosis in DSM-IV and beyond. In T. H. Ollendick & R. J. Prinz (Eds.),
Advances in clinical child psychology (Vol. 17, pp. 323--363). New York,
NY: Plenum Press. Widiger, T. A. (1997). The construct of mental
disorder. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 4, 262--266.
Widiger, T. A. (2007). Alternatives to DSM-IV: Axis II. In W. O'Donohue,
K. A. Fowler, & S. O. Lilienfeld (Eds.), Personality disorders: Toward
the DSM-V (pp. 21--40). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Widiger, T. A., &
Clark, L. A. (2000). Toward DSM-V and the classification of
psychopathology. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 946--963.

Widiger, T. A., Frances, A. J., Pincus, H. A., Ross, R., First, M. B., &
Davis, W. W. (Eds.). (1998). DSM-IV sourcebook (Vol. 4). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press. Widiger, T. A., Frances, A. J., Spitzer, R.
L., & Williams, J.B.W. (1991). The DSM-III-R personality disorders: An
overview. American Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 786--795. Widiger, T. A.,
& Rogers, J. H. (1989). Prevalence and comorbidity of personality
disorders. Psychiatric Annals, 19, 132--136. Widiger, T. A., & Trull, T.
(1985). The empty debate over the existence of mental illness: Comments
on Gorenstein. American Psychologist, 40, 468--470. World Health
Organization. (1992). Mental and behavioural disorders. In International
statistical classification of diseases and related health problems
(chap. V). Geneva, Switzerland: Author. Zimmerman, M. (1994). Diagnosing
personality disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 225--245.
Zimmerman, M., & Mattia, J. I. (2000). Principal and additional DSM-IV
disorders for which outpatients seek treatment. Psychiatric Services,
51, 1299--1304. Zuckerman, M. (1994). Behavioral expressions and
biosocial bases of sensation seeking. New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press.

Chapter 2 Social Anxiety Disorder Deborah Roth Ledley, Brigette A.
Erwin, Amanda S. Morrison, and Richard G. Heimberg

I

n this chapter, we review the most current knowledge on the nature and
treatment of social anxiety disorder (SAD). We begin by briefly
describing the symptoms of SAD and its prevalence. We then outline
several factors that might contribute to both the development and the
maintenance of this common and highly impairing disorder. Finally,
assessment and treatment strategies are reviewed.

Description of the Disorder: Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria
Individuals with social anxiety disorder (SAD) show "marked fear or
anxiety about one or more social situations in which the individual is
exposed to possible scrutiny by others" (DSM-5; American Psychiatric
Association \[APA\], 2013, p. 202, Criterion A). The DSM-5 further
specifies that the individual with social anxiety "fears that he or she
will act in a way or show anxiety symptoms that will be negatively
evaluated (i.e., will be humiliating or embarrassing; will lead to
rejection or offend others)" (Criterion B, p. 202). This newly written
criterion emphasizes the importance of fear of negative evaluation in
social anxiety, which was not explicitly included in previous versions
of the DSM. The DSM-5 diagnostic criteria also state that social
situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety (Criterion C) and that
these situations are avoided or endured with great distress (Criterion
D). Interestingly, about 50% of adults with SAD experience panic attacks
in anticipation of or when exposed to social or performance situations,
and the presence of panic attacks may be listed as a diagnostic
specifier (APA, 2013). Epidemiological data suggest that individuals
with SAD who experience situational panic attacks exhibit greater fear
and avoidance of social situations and more impairment than individuals
who do not have this experience (Potter et al., 2014). Although children
do not typically describe experiencing panic attacks in social
situations, their anxiety tends to manifest as crying, tantrums,
freezing, clinging, shrinking, or failing to speak in social situations.
The DSM-5 also states that the fear or anxiety is out of proportion to
the actual threat posed by the social situation and to the sociocultural
context (Criterion E). In earlier versions of the DSM, there was a
requirement that individuals 18 years of age and over

39

40

Social Anxiety Disorder

recognize their anxiety as excessive or unreasonable. This requirement
has been eliminated in the DSM-5, with that judgment now made by the
clinician, taking into account the fact that individuals with social
anxiety often exhibit poor insight. For example, a high school student
with social anxiety might avoid the school cafeteria because she is
convinced that everyone is looking at her as she selects her lunch and
finds a seat. Without treatment, she might be unable to recognize that
most of her fellow students are simply focusing on eating their own
lunches and speaking to their friends. To receive a diagnosis of SAD,
the fear or anxiety must have lasted for 6 months or more (Criterion F),
to rule out transient social anxiety that might occur at times of life
transition (e.g., moving to a new city, starting college) or as a normal
part of child development. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance must cause
significant impairment in functioning (Criterion G). As with other
diagnostic criteria, SAD cannot be diagnosed if the symptoms are better
explained by use of a substance (Criterion H), the symptoms of another
mental disorder (Criterion I), or a medical condition (Criterion J).
However, if the anxiety symptoms are related to a medical condition, a
diagnosis of SAD may be given if they are clearly excessive, as judged
by comparison to other persons with the medical condition. The
generalized subtype of social anxiety disorder, which was defined by a
fear of most social situations, has been removed from the DSM-5, largely
because most individuals with SAD fear numerous social situations. The
DSM-5 now lists a different specifier in the diagnostic criteria for
SAD---performance only---assigned to individuals whose anxiety is
limited to public speaking or performing in public (e.g., playing a
musical instrument). This specifier will be much less frequently used,
and its utility remains to be evaluated. It is important to note that
"social anxiety disorder" has become the preferred name for the disorder
in the DSM-5, rather than "social phobia," the preferred name in earlier
editions of the DSM. This choice was made because experts in the field
were concerned that the term social phobia did not adequately capture
the impairing nature of this disorder (see Heimberg, Hofmann, et al.,
2014). SAD is associated with significant impairment in social,
educational, and occupational functioning (Acarturk, de Graaf, van
Straten, ten Have, & Cuijpers, 2008), and brings with it a substantial
economic and societal burden (Acarturk et al., 2009; Patel, Knapp,
Henderson, & Baldwin, 2002). Individuals with SAD are also less likely
to be married than individuals without SAD, have fewer friends, and are
less likely to be involved in clubs and activities (see Alden, Regambal,
& Plasencia, 2014, for a review). Alden and Taylor (2004) introduced the
concept of a "self-perpetuating interpersonal cycle" (p. 860) that
describes the interpersonal difficulties experienced by individuals with
SAD. They posit that socially anxious people go into social interactions
expecting negative evaluation, and therefore behave in ways that "'pull'
on other people ... to evoke responses that maintain ... social
assumptions" (p. 858). There are numerous ways in which socially anxious
individuals can exert this pull on others. First, individuals with SAD
rely on safety behaviors, which are typically defined as actions
perceived by an individual as necessary to prevent the occurrence of a
feared outcome (Salkovskis, 1991; Wells et al., 1995; see Piccirillo,
Dryman, & Heimberg, in press, for a review). For example, if an
individual with SAD fears that his voice will shake when he speaks, he
might speak very softly or not speak at all. Although these safety
behaviors are intended to prevent feared outcomes (in this example,
being judged badly for the tone of his voice), they often backfire,
increasing the likelihood that he will sound odd and that, more broadly,
people will not want to

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors

41

talk to him again. Second, individuals with SAD may distance themselves
emotionally from others, engaging in less self-disclosure than
nonanxious people (e.g., see Alden & Bieling, 1998). When they do engage
in self-disclosure, socially anxious individuals tend to have difficulty
describing emotional experiences (Turk, Heimberg, Luterek, Mennin, &
Fresco, 2005). Furthermore, patients with SAD often describe fearing
that if people "really got to know them," they would ultimately reject
them. This kind of core belief is likely related to attachment patterns
that have their origins in early childhood. Specifically, individuals
with SAD tend to exhibit insecure, fearful attachment patterns (Eng,
Heimberg, Hart, Schneier, & Liebowitz, 2001; Wenzel, 2002). Not
surprisingly, they tend to be more dependent in their relationships than
individuals without SAD (Davila & Beck, 2002), and this dependency takes
a toll on their significant others (see Zaider, Heimberg, & Iida, 2010).
As noted above, individuals with SAD also exhibit significant impairment
in the workplace. They also have lower levels of educational attainment
than individuals without the disorder (see Himle et al., 2014) and,
following from this, it is not surprising that SAD is also associated
with reduced income and higher rates of unemployment (Himle et al.,
2014). When people with SAD are employed, their productivity and job
performance is rated more poorly than that of people without the
disorder. Stein and Kean (2000) reported that 20% of individuals with
SAD have turned down a job offer or promotion that was offered to them
because of their social fears. Clinically, we often see clients who are
underemployed given their training, education, or intelligence (e.g., a
lawyer working as a paralegal), or clients who have stepped off their
career track completely due to fear of job interviews, making
presentations at meetings, or feeling uncomfortable with the day-to-day
socializing that occurs in the workplace.

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors Findings from the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication indicate that SAD is one of the most
prevalent psychiatric disorders in the United States, with a lifetime
prevalence of 12.1% and a 1-year prevalence of 6.8% (Kessler, Berglund,
et al., 2005; Kessler, Chiu, Demler, Merikangas, & Walters, 2005). A
recent study by Bandelow and Michaelis (2015) reports similarly high
prevalence rates (13.0% lifetime; 8.0% 12-month). However, lower
prevalence rates were reported in the National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions (Grant et al., 2005; 5.0% lifetime; 2.8%
12-month) and in the European Study of the Epidemiology of Mental
Disorders (ESEMeD) (Alonso, Lépine, & ESEMeD 2000 Scientific Committee,
2007; 2.8% lifetime; 1.6% 12-month). Even with these divergent findings,
it is important to note that across all of these studies, anxiety
disorders are consistently shown to be the most prevalent psychiatric
disorders, with as much as one third of the population affected during
their lifetimes (see Bandelow & Michaelis, 2015). Hofmann, Asnaani, and
Hinton (2010) examined cultural differences in prevalence rates of SAD.
Although rates similar to those in the United States have been found in
South American countries, prevalence rates are far lower in Asian
countries, at less than 1% for 1-year prevalence. Interestingly, Asian
race/ethnicity is associated with low prevalence in American samples as
well. In American samples, being Hispanic or black is also

42

Social Anxiety Disorder

associated with lower risk compared to being non-Hispanic white. Hofmann
et al. write that "it remains uncertain to what extent these differences
... reflect genuine differences in psychopathology, or whether they are
due to insufficient consideration of cultural aspects of the DSM
criteria, the assessment instruments, or the influence of features
associated with race and culture" (p. 1118). With respect to differences
in psychopathology, consider the example of taijin kyofusho (TKS). This
variant of SAD is particularly prevalent in Japanese and Korean
cultures, although it does occur in the United States as well (Choy,
Schneier, Heimberg, Oh, & Liebowitz, 2008). In contrast to the common
presentation of SAD, in which individuals typically fear embarrassing
themselves, those with TKS worry about embarrassing another person. For
example, an individual with TKS might be so concerned about embarrassing
others with his body odor that he avoids most social situations. If we
screen for SAD in our typical ways, we might miss this unique but highly
impairing variant of the disorder, perhaps explaining why rates of SAD
are so low in Asian populations. Now that fear of offending others is
explicitly included in the diagnostic criteria for SAD (APA, 2013), it
will be interesting to see if the rates of co-occurrence of SAD and TKS
will be increased. The mean age of onset for SAD ranges from 13 to 20
years old (Hazen & Stein, 1995), but many patients recall having
struggled all of their lives with shyness and fear of negative
evaluation. In epidemiological studies, the disorder has been found to
be more common in women than in men (Bandelow & Michaelis, 2015; Magee,
Eaton, Wittchen, McGonagle, & Kessler, 1996), with gender differences
emerging in adolescence (Ranta, Kaltiala-Heino, Rantanen, Tuomisto, &
Marttunen, 2007). Men tend to take longer than women to seek treatment
(Wang et al., 2007), but men tend to slightly outnumber women in
clinical samples (Chapman, Mannuzza, & Fyer, 1995; Stein, 1997). This
discrepancy is frequently explained by reference to cultural norms for
social behavior. The cost of not pursuing treatment may be higher for
men, who are typically expected to be outgoing and assertive compared
with women, for whom it is more acceptable to be shy and reticent
(Weinstock, 1999; see also McLean & Anderson, 2009). SAD is associated
with a high degree of Axis I comorbidity. Acarturk et al. (2008), using
data from a community-based survey, reported that 66.2% of respondents
with SAD also met criteria for an additional psychological disorder.
Given the relatively early onset of SAD, it is not surprising that the
onset of SAD typically predates the onset of comorbid conditions. This
chronology suggests that SAD may be a risk factor for the development of
other psychiatric disorders (Magee et al., 1996; Schneier, Johnson,
Hornig, Liebowitz, & Weissman, 1992). SAD most frequently co-occurs with
other anxiety disorders, particularly generalized anxiety disorder (see
Szafranski, Talkovsky, Farris, & Norton, 2014, for a review). Major
depressive disorder is also very common among individuals with SAD
(Szafranski et al., 2014). Data from both epidemiological and clinical
samples suggest that over one third of individuals currently diagnosed
with SAD report having experienced a major depressive episode at some
time in their lives. Individuals who have both SAD and depression have
an earlier age of onset of their depression, a greater number of
depressive episodes, episodes of longer duration, and more suicidal
ideation compared to individuals with depression alone (see Dalrymple &
Zimmerman, 2011). The co-occurrence of SAD and depression is also
associated with greater impairment than either disorder alone (Dalrymple
&

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors

43

Zimmerman, 2011; Erwin, Heimberg, Juster, & Mindlin, 2002).
Specifically, these individuals are less likely to marry, attend
college, or maintain stable employment. Studies have also examined
whether comorbid depression negatively affects the outcome of treatment
for SAD. Some studies suggest that patients with comorbid depression
make as much improvement during treatment as patients without depression
(Erwin et al., 2002; LeMoult, Rowa, Antony, Chudzick, & McCabe, 2014;
Marom, Gilboa-Schechtman, Aderka, Weizman, & Hermesh, 2009), with two
studies showing that they did end treatment with more severe social
anxiety symptoms, but simply because they began treatment with more
severe symptoms (Erwin et al., 2002; LeMoult et al., 2014). Other
studies, however, suggest that higher levels of depressive symptoms are
associated with poorer outcome and higher rates of attrition (Chambless,
Tran, & Glass, 1997; Ledley et al., 2005; Tillfors, Furmark, Carlbring,
& Andersson, 2015). This pattern of depression interfering with SAD
treatment outcome has recently been observed in two large studies (with
around 1,000 patients each), one in adults (Kelly, Jakubovski, & Bloch,
2015) and one in youth (Hudson et al., 2015). Only one study has
examined long-term maintenance of gains in patients with SAD and
comorbid depression (Marom et al., 2009). Although patients with
comorbid depression did just as well as patients without depression
during acute treatment for SAD, depression was associated with poorer
maintenance of gains 1 year later. It is interesting to examine what
happens to depressive symptoms when social anxiety is the focus of
treatment. Addressing this issue is important for designing treatments
for comorbid groups because it is unclear whether depression remits with
successful treatment of SAD or whether depression-specific interventions
need to be added to treatments for this comorbid group. Erwin et
al. (2002) demonstrated that scores on a measure of depression were
substantially reduced after cognitive-behavioral group therapy for SAD.
However, this question was examined in greater depth in a study by
Moscovitch, Hofmann, Suvak, and In-Albon (2005). Their data showed that
improvement in depression (which was not a target of treatment) was
fully mediated by improvement in social anxiety. However, improvement in
social anxiety was not mediated by improvement in depression. In other
words, patients' moods improved because their social anxiety improved.
It is important to point out that the sample of patients in this study
who had both clinically significant SAD and depression was quite small.
Furthermore, studies have not yet examined the efficacy of treatments
designed specifically for patients with SAD and comorbid depression.
Such treatments might be necessary and beneficial for a subset of
comorbid patients who have particularly severe symptoms. SAD is also
frequently comorbid with substance use disorders, with most research
attention paid to alcohol use disorders. Approximately 48% of
individuals with a lifetime diagnosis of SAD also meet criteria for a
lifetime diagnosis of alcohol use disorder (Grant et al., 2005). The
12-month prevalence of alcohol use disorder among individuals with SAD
is 13.1% (Grant et al., 2005), compared to only 8.5% in the general
population (Grant et al., 2004). As with depression, individuals with
both SAD and an alcohol use disorder are more impaired than individuals
with a sole diagnosis of SAD, at least in part because of high rates of
other comorbidities that occur in this group. Schneier et al. (2010)
reported that individuals with comorbid SAD and alcohol dependence had a
mean of 4.6 additional disorders, almost twice the number seen in
individuals with either SAD or alcohol dependence.

44

Social Anxiety Disorder

Onset of SAD typically predates onset of alcohol dependence (Black et
al., 2015), suggesting that SAD is a risk factor for alcohol problems.
One study using a nonclinical sample suggests that fear of scrutiny
(i.e., fear of being observed by others) is the unique aspect of social
anxiety that places people at risk for the later development of alcohol
use disorders (Buckner & Schmidt, 2009). Some studies have also looked
at the function of alcohol use in socially anxious individuals. One
study found that alcohol use prior to a speech reduced anxiety and
blushing during the speech (Stevens, Cludius, Bantin, Hermann, &
Gerlach, 2014), and another found that drinking was associated with less
post-event processing 4 days after a conversation with a member of the
opposite sex, but only for socially anxious women (Battista, Pencer, &
Stewart, 2014). Although there are few studies that actually administer
alcohol prior to or during a socially stressful task, those available
point to the reinforcing effects of alcohol use for socially anxious
individuals. Individuals with comorbid SAD and alcohol dependence report
very low rates of treatment seeking (Schneier et al., 2010), and
research on how to best treat this group has been sparse. Most studies
of treatment for SAD exclude patients with substance use problems or
make no mention of current substance use at all. There have been some
recent efforts to develop and test treatments for this complex and
impaired group. Kushner and colleagues (2013) studied individuals with
SAD who were in a residential alcohol treatment program. Treatment with
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) designed to lower social anxiety and
to explore and weaken the links between social anxiety and motivation to
drink was associated with reduced drinking 4 months posttreatment (as
compared to a progressive muscle relaxation control), but CBT showed
only a slight advantage over the control treatment for anxiety
reduction. Courbasson and Nishikawa (2010) conducted a pilot study
looking at the effect of cognitive-behavioral group therapy modified to
address both social anxiety and substance use. They reported a
significant decrease in social anxiety, but no change in alcohol
expectancies. We have previously proposed combining motivational
enhancement therapy for alcohol use disorder and CBT for SAD and have
outlined the treatment's efficacy in a case report (Buckner, Ledley,
Heimberg, & Schmidt, 2008). A trial is currently ongoing, called the
Combined Alcohol Social Phobia (CASP) Trial Protocol (Baillie et al.,
2013, see also Stapinski et al., 2015), comparing a combined CBT and
motivational interviewing protocol to treatment as usual for alcohol use
disorders. The findings from this large, randomized trial will be an
important contribution to this very inconclusive body of research.
Researchers have also begun to examine cannabis use in patients with SAD
(Buckner, Heimberg, Matthews, & Silgado, 2012; Buckner, Heimberg, &
Schmidt, 2011; Buckner, Heimberg, Schneier, et al., 2012; Buckner,
Schmidt, et al., 2008). Epidemiological studies show that SAD is more
strongly related to cannabis dependence than to cannabis abuse (Buckner,
Heimberg, Schneier, et al., 2012), that SAD almost always comes before
cannabis use, and that individuals with this comorbidity experience
greater impairment than individuals with either disorder alone. Tepe,
Dalrymple, and Zimmerman (2012) reported that individuals with comorbid
SAD and cannabis use disorders are also more likely to have lifetime
diagnoses of posttraumatic stress disorder, specific phobias, and other
substance use disorders than individuals with either disorder alone,
giving further support to the impairment likely seen in this group.
Further research is needed to understand this comorbid combination, as
well as how to treat it.

BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND ENVIRONMENTAL

45

SAD is also highly comorbid with avoidant personality disorder (APD),
with a median of 60% of individuals with generalized SAD (as defined by
earlier versions of the DSM) meeting criteria for APD (Heimberg, 1996).
This is not surprising given the considerable overlap in the criteria
for these two disorders. DSM-5 defines APD as "a pervasive pattern of
social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to
negative evaluation, beginning by early adulthood, and present in a
variety of contexts" (APA, 2013, p. 672). Genetic and family studies
suggest that SAD and APD are strongly related (Isomura et al., 2015;
Torvik et al., 2016). When researchers have tried to determine what
might differentiate these two disorders, nothing terribly clear emerges.
It has been proposed that APD might be associated with greater
personality dysfunction (Eikenaes, Hummelen, Abrahamsen, Andrea, &
Wilberg, 2013) or a greater degree of emotional guardedness (Marques et
al., 2012) than SAD. The most parsimonious description of the
relationship between SAD and APD, however, may be that they are not
different disorders and that APD represents the most severely impaired
persons with SAD (Chambless, Fydrich, & Rodebaugh, 2008; Heimberg, Holt,
et al., 1993; see Reich, 2014, for a review). Following from this,
individuals with both generalized SAD and APD tend to be more depressed
and to have greater functional impairment and reduced quality of life
compared to individuals with SAD alone (Cox, Pagura, Stein, & Sareen,
2009; Huppert, Strunk, Ledley, Davidson, & Foa, 2008; Marques et al.,
2012), In one study, these differences were no longer evident when
severity of social anxiety was controlled (Chambless et al., 2008). With
regard to treatment outcome, some studies have found that clients with
generalized SAD with and without comorbid APD make similar gains (Brown,
Heimberg, & Juster, 1995; Hofmann, Newman, Becker, Taylor, & Roth, 1995;
Hope, Herbert, & White, 1995), although others have found comorbid APD
to be associated with poorer treatment response (Chambless et al., 1997;
Feske, Perry, Chambless, Renneberg, & Goldstein, 1996).

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental and
Sociocultural Factors SAD is caused by multiple biological and
psychosocial factors and is associated with both biological and
psychological dysfunction. In this section, these etiological factors
are reviewed.

Biological Factors Genetics appear to be important in the development of
SAD. Family studies have shown higher rates of SAD in the relatives of
individuals with the disorder than in the relatives of people without
the disorder (see Tillfors, 2004, for a review), and this suggests that
SAD is moderately heritable (Stein, Gelernter, & Smoller, 2004).
Generalized SAD demonstrates stronger familial aggregation than
nongeneralized SAD (Mannuzza et al., 1995; Stein et al., 1998). Twin
studies also support a modest role of genetics in the heritability of
SAD and social anxiety--related symptoms, including behavioral
inhibition and fear of negative evaluation (see Stein & Gelernter,
2014). Both twin studies and genetic linkage

46

Social Anxiety Disorder

studies suggest that SAD and panic disorder might share common
susceptibility genes (see Stein & Gelernter, 2014). This is an
interesting finding given that these two disorders are frequently
comorbid and share many clinical features (as we have already noted,
about half of adults with SAD experience panic attacks in response to
social or performance situations). Given the complexity of psychiatric
disorders, it is unlikely that a single gene or group of genes that
leads to the transmission of a specific anxiety disorder will be
identified. Rather, researchers believe that "some underlying behavioral
trait (e.g., behavioral inhibition or neuroticism) is thought to be
genetically transmitted, contributing to spectrums of psychopathology"
(Stein & Stein, 2008, p. 1118). The research is this area is still
inconclusive. However, specific genetic variations have been found that
are related to neuroticism, introversion/extraversion, behaviorally
inhibited temperament, shyness in children, and increased activation of
the amygdala and insula on exposure to emotional faces (see Stein &
Gelernter, 2014; Stein & Stein, 2008, for reviews), all relevant to the
pathology seen in SAD. With respect to neurobiology, several brain
regions have been implicated in SAD. The amygdala, which forms and
stores emotional memories, is part of the brain's fear pathway.
Individuals with SAD show greater activation of the amygdala in response
to threatening faces, with greater magnitude of activation associated
with severity of SAD (Phan, Fitzgerald, & Nathan, 2006). A study by
Furmark and colleagues (2002) showed that successful treatment of SAD by
either CBT or the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)
citalopram was associated with decreased blood flow to the amygdala
during a public speaking task. The insula is the part of the brain
associated with interoceptive awareness. Studies have shown increased
activity in the insula when individuals with SAD are presented with
socially relevant stimuli like negative facial expressions or social
transgressions (see Syal & Stein, 2014, for a review). Findings from
studies of the fusiform cortex have been complex. This brain region is
associated with facial recognition. As reviewed by Syal and Stein
(2014), some studies in individuals with SAD have shown increased
activation in this area, but others have shown decreased activation when
presented with a range of facial stimuli. Interestingly, hypoactivation
of this area has also been seen in individuals with Asperger's syndrome
(Deeley et al., 2007), a disorder marked by poor social connectedness.
Individuals with SAD can, at times, home in on social stimuli in order
to gain support for their negative beliefs (e.g., focusing on the one
person in the audience who is dozing off during a presentation; see the
study by Veljaca & Rapee, 1998). At many other times, individuals with
SAD shift their attention away from faces, as we see in the case of
averted eye contact (which is also seen in autism spectrum disorder;
APA, 2013). These mixed research findings might be capturing the
complexities of this disorder. Finally, recent research has examined the
role of the prefrontal cortex, the seat of planning, problem solving,
and most relevant to SAD---social behavior and emotion regulation.
Studies have shown that the same socially relevant stimuli that lead to
activation of the amygdala also lead to activation of the prefrontal
cortex (see Syal & Stein, 2014, for a review). This suggests that once
fear is activated by the amygdala, individuals with SAD process this
information in a different way than individuals without the disorder do.
Goldin, Manber-Ball, Werner, Heimberg, and Gross (2009) examined
cognitive reappraisals of negative self-beliefs among individuals with
SAD and healthy controls.

BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND ENVIRONMENTAL

47

Although individuals with SAD were able to reappraise their negative
self-beliefs, it was a much more effortful task for them than for
control individuals, and this difficulty was manifest in relatively
delayed recruitment of brain areas related to cognitive control (e.g.,
the dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex), among others.
Treatment of SAD with CBT resulted in earlier recruitment of the
prefrontal cortex compared to a wait-list control (Goldin et al., 2013).
For many years, researchers have examined the neurotransmitters that
might be implicated in SAD. Serotonin has been implicated, but its role
is unclear. In challenge studies, when individuals with SAD are given
agents that release or mimic serotonin, they experience an increase in
anxiety (e.g., Mathew, Coplan, & Gorman, 2001; Potts, Book, & Davidson,
1996). Nevertheless, the SSRIs, which make available greater levels of
serotonin in the synaptic cleft, have been shown in numerous studies to
reduce anxiety (Stein & Stahl, 2000). One plausible explanation for the
inconsistency of this evidence is that increased levels of serotonin may
have different short-term versus long-term effects. This conclusion is
supported by clinical evidence that when patients begin taking SSRIs,
they frequently experience an initial increase in anxiety, followed by
improvement in their anxiety symptoms (Stein & Stahl, 2000). Dopamine
may also play a role in SAD, as suggested by a number of lines of
evidence. First, the monoamine oxidase inhibitors (which work on both
the dopaminergic and serotonin systems) are efficacious in the treatment
of SAD (Blanco et al., 2003), whereas the tricyclic antidepressants
(which work on the serotonin and norepinephrine systems) are not
(Simpson et al., 1998). Second, low dopamine transporter density has
been found in individuals with SAD (Tilhonen et al., 1997). Third,
higher than expected rates of SAD are seen in individuals with
Parkinson's disease. The drugs used to treat Parkinson's disease
facilitate dopamine transmission (Stein, Heuser, Juncos, & Uhde, 1990).
Finally, low dopamine receptor binding potential in the striatum region
of the brain has also been found in individuals with SAD (Schneier et
al., 2000). Interestingly, this same deficit has been found in animals
with subordinate social status, which have been used as models for human
SAD (see Schneier et al., 2000). More recently, researchers have turned
their attention to the role of oxytocin. Oxytocin is a neuropeptide that
is associated with social approach behavior and bonding. Research
suggests that impairments in the oxytocin system might play a role in
SAD, as well as other disorders characterized by deficits in the
formation of social bonds (including autism spectrum disorder and
postpartum depression; see Heinrichs, Chen, & Domes, 2012, for a
review). It is also possible that oxytocin could serve as a novel
treatment or adjunct to more commonly used treatments for SAD (e.g.,
Guastella, Howard, Dadds, Mitchell, & Carson, 2009; Labuschagne et al.,
2010).

Psychological Factors: Cognitive-Behavioral Models of the Maintenance of
SAD Several cognitive-behavioral models have been posited to explain the
self-sustaining nature of SAD. According to these models, beliefs that
social situations are inherently dangerous and that people are
inherently critical, along with behavioral avoidance and physiological
symptoms, are the crucial structures that maintain social anxiety.
Several models have been put forth (e.g., Alden & Taylor, 2010; Beck &
Emery, 1985; Clark

48

Social Anxiety Disorder

& Wells, 1995; Hofmann, 2007; Kimbrel, 2008; Leary & Jongman-Sereno,
2014; Moscovitch, 2009; Rapee & Heimberg, 1997; Stopa, 2009). Many of
these models are summarized and compared by Wong, Gordon, and Heimberg
(2014). The model proposed by Rapee and Heimberg (1997), updated to
incorporate subsequent research (Heimberg, Brozovich, & Rapee, 2014),
will be the current focus. The development and maintenance of social
anxiety is accounted for by both fear of evaluation and negative imagery
of the self and others. The core feature of social anxiety disorder was
traditionally thought to be fear of negative evaluation by others.
However, Weeks and colleagues (2008; see Weeks & Howell, 2014, for a
review) have recently demonstrated that the core feature of social
anxiety disorder is more accurately described as fear of any evaluation,
either negative or positive. Fear of evaluation develops out of beliefs
that social and performance situations are dangerous and that other
people are critical. Rapee and Heimberg (1997) proposed that, upon
entering a social or performance situation, persons with SAD allocate
their attention first to the audience, bringing to such situations
certain cognitive biases resulting in the prediction that they will fall
short of the perceived standards of the audience. For example, persons
with social anxiety are more likely than those low in social anxiety to
report that most people are inherently critical of others, such that
they will be judged negatively (Leary, Kowalski, & Campbell, 1988). In
addition, persons with SAD formulate a mental representation of the self
as seen by others, engaging in negative self-imagery such that their
self-image is from this presumed critical observer's perspective
(Hackman, Surawy, & Clark, 1998). These findings are consistent with the
theory that persons with social anxiety disorder view social
interactions as inherently competitive (Trower & Gilbert, 1989).
Information extracted from the individuals' initial impressions of the
audience's reaction are combined with information from past similar
situations and internal (e.g., heart palpitations) and external cues to
make an assessment of how the audience is likely to view them. That is,
persons with SAD constantly monitor their behavior and the behavior of
others to determine whether there is any potential for evaluation.
Similarly, when persons with SAD perform well, they are likely to avoid
similar subsequent situations since they believe that they will have to
meet similar or even increasingly positive expectations. Consistent with
evolutionary theories of the etiology of social anxiety disorder
(Gilbert, 2014; Gilboa-Schechtman, Shachar, & Helpman, 2014), persons
with social anxiety disorder are also hypothesized to both avoid drawing
attention to themselves and to work to maintain low social status, so
that they can avoid either losing or having to engage in conflict in
order to defend higher social status, consistent with the notion of fear
of positive evaluation. Ironically, the allocation of attentional
resources to multiple factors (i.e., monitoring the environment for
evidence of evaluation, monitoring performance for evidence of
inadequacy, attending to thoughts about being evaluated), in addition to
attending to the social or performance task at hand, may increase the
probability of a poor performance. For persons with SAD, evidence
confirming their poor performance will be weighted more heavily than
evidence to the contrary. For example, sweating, losing one's train of
thought, or a brief response given by a conversation partner will be
interpreted as confirmatory evidence of negative evaluation. Such
perceived evaluation is likely projected to future catastrophic outcomes
such as social rejection, being professionally discredited, or extreme
loneliness.

BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND ENVIRONMENTAL

49

Thoughts such as these provide the content for post-event processing
(PEP; Brozovich & Heimberg, 2008; Clark & Wells, 1995), the biased,
distorted, and ruminative cognitive process that contributes
consistently to the maintenance of SAD and that links one occurrence of
a feared social situation to the next. Another prominent
cognitive-behavioral model of social anxiety disorder put forth by Clark
and Wells (1995) differs from the Rapee and Heimberg model in several
important ways (as reviewed by Schultz & Heimberg, 2008). First, Clark
and Wells posit that the attention of the person with social anxiety
disorder is largely focused on internal symptoms of anxiety, which are
then used to support the belief that others are indeed evaluating them
negatively. Rapee and Heimberg (1997) posit a similar internal focus of
attention but further assert that the attention of the person with
social anxiety disorder is split between this internal focus and an
external search for indicators of evaluation. A second difference
between these two theoretical models is that Clark and Wells suggest
that subtle avoidance behaviors, such as conversing but remaining
passive in the conversation, play a central role in the maintenance of
social anxiety disorder. Rapee and Heimberg maintain that all unhelpful
anxiety management strategies, ranging from subtle to complete
avoidance, all contribute to the maintenance of the disorder.

Psychological Factors: Impairments in Information Processing Three kinds
of bias in information processing have been studied in individuals with
SAD: biases of attention, biases in judgment and interpretation, and
biases of memory and imagery.

Attentional Bias Attentional bias refers to the idea that people attend
preferentially to information in the environment that they find
particularly relevant. For example, when engaged in public speaking, a
socially anxious person tends to notice the one bored-looking person in
the audience rather than the 99 others who might appear more interested.
Two types of attentional bias have been considered in the context of
anxiety, namely, orienting biases toward threat (or hypervigilance for
detecting threat) and difficulties disengaging attention from threat (or
difficulty shifting attention away from threat once attention has been
captured). Either way, it is hypothesized that maintaining attention on
social threat--relevant information to the exclusion of more neutral or
positive social information makes the person more prone to social
anxiety. Research examining attentional bias has made use of a number of
experimental methodologies, the foremost of which have included the
emotional Stroop and dot-probe paradigms. In the emotional Stroop task,
participants are shown socially threatening and neutral words printed in
various colors and asked to respond by naming the color as quickly as
possible, rather than reading the word. Slowed response suggests that
the content of the word has captured participants' attention, making it
more difficult to quickly report the color. In the dot-probe paradigm,
participants are shown two stimuli (e.g., words or faces), one neutral
and one emotionally valenced. These stimuli are presented briefly,
followed by a dot or other probe stimulus appearing in place of one of
the stimuli. If participants respond more quickly to the probe displayed
in the same location as the emotionally valenced stimulus, compared to
their response when the probe

50

Social Anxiety Disorder

is displayed in the location of the neutral stimulus, they may be
attending preferentially to that stimulus instead of looking away from
it or focusing on the neutral stimulus. Although emotional Stroop
studies have consistently shown slowed color naming of social
threat--related information among people with SAD (e.g., Mattia,
Heimberg, & Hope, 1993), researchers have noted several shortcomings of
the task. For example, slowed color naming of social threat words could
indicate biased attention or cognitive avoidance (de Ruiter & Brosschot,
1994). Likewise, findings from studies using the dot-probe task have
been criticized in recent years. Early studies using the dot-probe task
supported attentional bias toward threat, as individuals with SAD were
faster than nonclinical control participants to identify the probe when
it appeared in the same location as the threat stimulus compared to when
it appeared in the same location as the neutral stimulus (e.g.,
Asmundson & Stein, 1994; for a meta-analysis, see Bar-Haim, Lamy,
Pergamin, Bakermans-Kranenburg, & van IJzendoorn, 2007). More recently,
however, researchers have noted a number of reports of biased attention
away from threat (i.e., faster responses to probes following the neutral
relative to social threat stimulus; see Bögels & Mansell, 2004) or null
results (e.g., Heeren, Mogoaşe, McNally, Schmitz, & Philippot, 2015) in
those with SAD. Indeed, a recent review of the literature concluded that
findings of an attentional bias toward threat in those with SAD are
relatively uncommon (Van Bockstaele et al., 2014). Finally, a number of
studies have criticized the use of the dot-probe task, given its poor
psychometric properties (e.g., Schmukle, 2005). Before we discuss recent
advances in this research area, it is interesting to consider whether
attentional bias has a causal effect on anxiety. In other words, if we
can train people to attend to neutral rather than threat information,
will this help to alleviate their anxiety? Early studies of such
cognitive bias modification of attention (CBM-A) procedures were
supportive of this theory (i.e., Amir, Weber, Beard, Bomyea, & Taylor,
2008; Amir et al., 2009; Heeren, Peschard, & Philippot, 2012; Schmidt,
Richey, Buckner, & Timpano, 2009). More recently, studies have failed to
replicate these findings, and although a recent meta-analysis indicated
a small but significant effect of CBM-A compared to control training
procedures on posttreatment social anxiety, this effect had disappeared
at the 4-month follow-up (Heeren, Mogoaşe, Philippot, & McNally, 2015).
In response to these complex findings, investigators have turned to
fine-tuning conceptualizations and assessments of attentional bias. One
way they have done this is by situating the finding of attentional bias
toward threat within a broader literature that has documented, with
psychometrically sound tasks, an association between heightened anxiety
and difficulties with the effortful or deliberate control of attention
(e.g., Derryberry & Reed, 2002; for a review, see Eysenck, Derakshan,
Santos, & Calvo, 2007). Anxious individuals are thought to have
difficulty inhibiting or shifting attention away from any salient,
task-irrelevant stimulus, including stimuli that are neutral in valence.
Social threat represents just one, particularly salient, type of
stimulus. Indeed, several studies in nonclinical samples of socially
anxious individuals indicate difficulties with the executive control of
attention (Moriya & Sugiura, 2012; Moriya & Tanno, 2008; Morrison &
Heimberg, 2013), which supports the notion that discrepant findings in
the attentional bias literature may be due largely to unreliability of
measures. In a different vein, researchers have begun to consider that
the degree and type of threat-related attentional bias may vary
considerably between and within people with SAD. Price, Tone, and
Anderson (2011) found that individuals with SAD who exhibited

BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND ENVIRONMENTAL

51

a general pretreatment attentional bias away from threat fared worse in
CBT than those who exhibited a general pretreatment bias toward threat
(the purported "bad" variant of attentional bias). This suggests that
attentional bias is not uniform across individuals with SAD. It also
supports the finding that traditional CBM-A, which trains attention away
from threat, may be effective only for those with SAD who exhibit a bias
toward threat (Kuckertz et al., 2014). Attentional bias may also vary
within the same person over time. Although not yet tested in SAD,
attentional bias in individuals with spider phobia has been found to be
dynamic rather than static during the course of a dot-probe task, with
the most harmful type of bias being one with drastic fluctuations in
attentional bias toward and away from threat (Zvielli, Bernstein, &
Koster, 2015). This finding fits nicely within the framework that
suggests that poor control over attention, rather than strict biases
toward threat, may characterize anxious individuals. If we conclude that
individuals with SAD tend to either over- or underattend to social
threat--relevant information in their environments, and that they have
difficulty controlling the focus of their attention, it is important to
consider how these patterns relate to difficulties with social
relationships. It seems reasonable to conclude from the available
literature that many socially anxious individuals go into social
interactions looking for cues that support the expectation that they
will be evaluated. Such hypervigilance for threat may lead the socially
anxious person to notice relatively harmless cues. For example, an
interaction partner might furrow his brow during a brief moment of
disagreement. Whereas this cue might go unnoticed by a non-socially
anxious person, a socially anxious person might be apt to notice it and
to perceive that he or she is acting in a socially unacceptable manner.
Furthermore, avoiding threat information or having difficulty
controlling attention can negatively affect social interactions. If
someone looks away from a conversation partner, he or she may miss out
on important social cues that would make the conversation flow well.
These might include positive cues like the other person's smiling or
nodding that would indicate to the socially anxious individual that he
or she is doing well in the interaction. By looking away or having
difficulty concentrating, socially anxious individuals might come across
to others as bored, disinterested, or socially unskilled, potentially
sabotaging a newly forming relationship. In established relationships,
poor eye contact may make the nonanxious member of the dyad wonder if
the anxious person is not being open or honest. Taken together, this
seemingly simple protective stance can put a strain on the quality of
both new and established interpersonal relationships.

Judgment and Interpretation Bias As we have repeatedly noted, socially
anxious individuals approach social situations expecting negative
evaluation from others. Research on judgment and interpretation bias
provides further support for this notion. First, socially anxious
individuals tend to be their own worst critics. Numerous studies have
shown that socially anxious individuals (e.g., Rapee & Hayman, 1996), as
well as those with SAD (e.g., Alden & Wallace, 1995; Rapee & Lim, 1992;
Stopa & Clark, 1993), judge themselves more negatively than they judge
others and also judge themselves more negatively than they are judged by
others. Furthermore, individuals with SAD are more likely than
nonclinical controls to assume that other people interpret physical
symptoms that they exhibit (like blushing, shaking, or sweating) as
signs of an intense anxiety problem or some other psychiatric disorder,
rather than some more benign explanation, such as being hot, cold, or
tired (Roth, Antony,

52

Social Anxiety Disorder

& Swinson, 2001). Given that socially anxious individuals judge
themselves so harshly, it is not at all surprising that they enter
social situations assuming that others will do the same (or worse).
Numerous studies have shown that individuals with SAD overestimate the
probability of negative outcomes in social situations and greatly
overestimate the cost of these outcomes (Foa, Franklin, Perry, &
Herbert, 1996; Gilboa-Schechtman, Franklin, & Foa, 2000). Individuals
with SAD tend to interpret both ambiguous social events (e.g., those not
obviously positively or negatively valenced; Amir, Foa, & Coles, 1998)
and mildly negative social events (Stopa & Clark, 2000) as extremely
negative and catastrophic. At the same time, they tend to negatively
interpret positive social information (Alden, Taylor, Mellings, &
Laposa, 2008) and fail to accept others' positive reactions at face
value (Vassilopoulos & Banerjee, 2010). When interpretation bias is
inferred from relatively automatic processes, such as event-related
brain potentials, socially anxious individuals also appear to lack the
positive or nonthreat interpretation bias that is typical of nonanxious
individuals (Moser, Hajcak, Huppert, Foa, & Simons, 2008). As with
attentional bias toward threat, research on interpretation biases has
been concerned with whether such biases cause anxiety. To address this
question, researchers have turned to cognitive bias modification of
interpretations (CBM-I). Repeated training to make benign
interpretations of ambiguous scenarios has resulted in reduced threat
interpretations and reduced social anxiety in individuals with high
social anxiety (Beard & Amir, 2008) and in individuals with SAD (Amir &
Taylor, 2012). Most recently, an internet-based application of CBM-I has
shown the potential to reduce threat interpretations and anxiety
symptoms in individuals with SAD (Brettschneider, Neumann, Berger,
Renneberg, & Boettcher, 2015), although controlled studies are needed,
given that a control CBM-I condition (i.e., training to generate 50%
positive and 50% negative interpretations) was as efficacious as the
active condition in reducing anxiety (but not interpretation bias) in an
internet-based study in a mixed anxiety sample (Salemink, Kindt,
Rienties, & van den Hout, 2014). Again, it is interesting to consider
how bias relates to difficulties with social relationships. The
literature on judgment and interpretation bias suggests that socially
anxious individuals routinely put themselves into no-win situations.
Almost any socially relevant information, whether it is negative,
ambiguous, or positive, is perceived negatively and interpreted as
costly, undoubtedly affecting the quality of social interactions. Taken
together, these studies highlight why it is so compelling for socially
anxious individuals to simply avoid social situations. To this point,
laboratory studies of judgment and interpretation bias have generally
involved asking participants what kind of judgments they would make if
certain experiences happened to them (e.g., seeing a table of people
laughing as you walk by). Basically, socially anxious individuals assume
that they would make negative and costly judgments in these hypothetical
situations. Researchers have not examined how individuals with SAD think
about their own contributions to the development and maintenance of
relationships. We do know that individuals with SAD have a difficult
time with self-disclosure, and as noted earlier, our patients often
express fears that people would reject them if they really got to know
them. An interesting question is whether individuals with the disorder
overestimate the probability that people will judge them negatively if
they share relatively benign attributes about themselves (like being
shy), and overestimate the cost of such self-disclosures (like being
rejected). Certainly,

BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND ENVIRONMENTAL

53

this kind of bias might underlie difficulties with self-disclosure,
thereby sabotaging the formation of new relationships and the
maintenance of existing ones.

Memory and Imagery Biases Research on memory bias focuses on whether
socially anxious individuals preferentially remember socially
threatening information relative to neutral information or information
that is threatening but lacking in personal salience (see Coles &
Heimberg, 2002, and Morrison, Gordon, & Heimberg, 2013, for reviews). In
general, studies on memory bias have been inconsistent. In studies of
explicit memory, or conscious, effortful retrieval of previously learned
information, most studies have found no evidence of preferential recall
or recognition of social threat in individuals with SAD (e.g., Rapee,
McCallum, Melville, Ravenscroft, & Rodney, 1994). An explicit bias is
more likely observed when the encoding stimuli have personal relevance.
For example, Lundh and Öst (1996) asked participants to rate faces as
critical or accepting; individuals with SAD subsequently recognized more
critical than accepting faces, whereas the opposite was true for
controls. Similarly, most studies of implicit memory, or retrieval of
information that is learned as an unintended effect of experience and is
tested indirectly, have revealed no evidence of a bias for social threat
information (e.g., Lundh & Öst, 1997). The only two studies that have
produced evidence of a bias have used versions of the white noise
paradigm (e.g., Amir, Foa, & Coles, 2000), suggesting that more research
is needed before conclusions can be drawn. It has also been suggested
that individuals with SAD may preferentially remember autobiographical
social events, but studies in this area have also been inconsistent. Few
studies that have used relatively objective outcome measures (e.g.,
number of memories recalled) have found evidence of a bias. One
exception was a study by Wenzel and Cochran (2006), who found that
richer retrieval cues, namely negative cognitions related to social
anxiety, resulted in retrieval of more anxiety-related memories and
faster retrieval of these memories for individuals with SAD compared to
nonanxious individuals. In contrast to studies with objective measures,
studies that have assessed subjective aspects of the memories, such as
associated emotions or memory content, have largely supported an
autobiographical memory bias. In one study (Erwin, Heimberg, Marx, &
Franklin, 2006), individuals with SAD responded to memories of stressful
social events with symptoms of hyperarousal and avoidance, whereas
control participants did not. In another study, individuals high in
social anxiety recalled more negative and social anxiety-related
memories than individuals low in social anxiety when cued by emotion
words and when asked to recall "self-defining memories" (Krans, de Bree,
& Bryant, 2014). Clearly this area of research deserves further
attention, but empirical support thus far suggests that rich, personally
relevant cues and assessment of the subjective content of memories are
necessary preconditions for observing an autobiographical memory bias
for threat in social anxiety. A related area is involuntary memory, or
memories of personal events that come to mind with no preceding attempt
at retrieval (Berntsen, 1996). Much of this literature has focused on
the study of mental imagery and visual memories. As a whole, these
studies suggest that individuals with SAD experience repetitive,
intrusive, negative, and biased visual memories of themselves in social
situations. Hackmann et al. (1998) asked patients to recall a recent
social situation in which they felt anxious and to describe the image
that they had of themselves during it. Compared to nonclinical controls,
individuals with

54

Social Anxiety Disorder

SAD were more likely to report having a clear, negative self-image that
felt like a very accurate depiction of how they were coming across at
the time of the event. Hackmann, Clark, and McManus (2000) asked
patients if they associated this negative self-image with a particular
event. Indeed, most could recall a specific past event in which they
felt embarrassed and humiliated, with the image clearly connected to the
most negative aspects of this recalled event. This finding fits nicely
with the study by Erwin et al. (2006) on autobiographical memories in
SAD. In that study, a majority of patients with SAD recalled having
experienced a socially stressful life event, like feeling humiliated
after a poor public performance or being rejected by a potential
romantic interest. These memories were accompanied by such significant
symptoms of avoidance and hyperarousal that patients would have met
criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) had these events
qualified as PTSD Criterion A events. It is likely that the patients in
this study had negative self-images related to these socially stressful
life events, just as the patients in the studies conducted by Clark's
group did. A number of studies have also examined imagery perspective.
There are two perspectives from which to recall visual memories of
social events---either the observer perspective, in which people see
themselves through the eyes of others (as if they are viewing themselves
on videotape), or the field perspective, in which people recall
situations as viewed through their own eyes. Socially anxious
individuals are more likely to take an observer perspective when
remembering themselves in social situations. In contrast, individuals
without the disorder tend to take the field perspective. In other words,
when socially anxious individuals look back on social situations, they
tend to remember them from the perspective of how they think they were
viewed by others (e.g., Coles, Turk, & Heimberg, 2002; Coles, Turk,
Heimberg, & Fresco, 2001; Hackmann et al., 1998; Wells, Clark, & Ahmad,
1998), rather than based on what actually occurred in the social
situation. The problem with this information is that it is terribly
biased, always in the negative direction. The bias comes about because
socially anxious individuals believe that they know what other people
are thinking about them. Unfortunately, as is often discussed in
therapy, human beings are not mind readers, and so we can never know how
others truly perceive us (unless we are told directly, which rarely
occurs!). Holding the belief that we have access to what others think of
us causes socially anxious individuals to come away from situations
remembering themselves in a very negative light, undoubtedly affecting
their willingness to enter similar situations in the future. As with
attentional bias and interpretation bias, there is support for the idea
that negative self-imagery contributes causally to the maintenance of
social anxiety. In several studies, researchers have trained
participants to hold either a negative or a benign self-image in mind
while engaging in a social task. Negative self-imagery elicited higher
self-reported anxiety in individuals with SAD (Hirsch, Clark, Mathews, &
Williams, 2003); individuals with high social anxiety (Hirsch, Meynen, &
Clark, 2004); and even nonanxious individuals (Hirsch, Mathews, Clark,
Williams, & Morrison, 2006; Makkar & Grisham, 2011). Indeed, a recent
systematic review concluded that the effects of negative self-imagery on
anxiety were similarly deleterious across the social anxiety spectrum
(Ng, Abbott, & Hunt, 2014). Therefore, it appears that it is the greater
prevalence of negative self-imagery among socially anxious individuals
that contributes to the maintenance of anxiety. Moreover, socially
anxious individuals appear to spontaneously regulate negative
self-imagery

BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND ENVIRONMENTAL

55

in maladaptive ways, such as through suppression, whereas low anxiety
individuals tend to make greater use of adaptive strategies, such as
altering the content of their images (Moscovitch, Chiupka, & Gavric,
2013). Hirsch, Clark, and Mathews (2006) proposed that different kinds
of cognitive biases interact with one another and are best understood in
this way rather than in isolation. Thus far, research has shown support
for the effects of negative imagery on interpretation biases,
interpretation biases on memory biases, and interpretation biases on
attentional biases. For example, socially anxious participants were
faster to retrieve negative autobiographical memories when they held a
negative self-image in mind (Stopa & Jenkins, 2007). Participants in a
negative interpretation bias induction condition also produced more
negative self-related images than did participants in a positive bias
induction condition (Hirsch, Mathews, & Clark, 2007). This trend in
information processing research is likely to continue to grow, and the
connections among attentional bias, interpretation and judgment bias,
and memory and imagery biases will be better understood.

Environmental and Sociocultural Factors Ollendick and Benoit (2012)
point out that SAD originates from a "delicate interplay of parent and
child influences" (p. 82). They suggest that five factors, in
particular, are important to consider: temperamental characteristics,
parental anxiety, attachment processes, information processing biases
(which we have just discussed), and parenting practices. The temperament
that has been most studied in relation to anxiety is the highly reactive
or "behaviorally inhibited" temperament (see Kagan, 1994). Behavioral
inhibition is the temperamental tendency to display restraint,
fearfulness, or withdrawal when faced with unfamiliar people,
situations, and objects (Kagan, Reznick, & Snidman, 1988). A robust body
of research performed over several decades suggests that behaviorally
inhibited temperament is a specific risk factor for SAD (see
Hirshfeld-Becker, Micco, Wang, & Hennin, 2014). It is important to note,
however, that all behaviorally inhibited children do not go on to
develop SAD---only about one fourth to one third do (see Ollendick &
Benoit, 2012). This suggests the interplay of other factors in the
development of SAD. Clearly, parental anxiety plays an important role.
Children have been found to be at increased risk of developing anxiety
disorders, and SAD in particular, when their parents are anxious or when
their parents have clinically significant panic disorder with
agoraphobia or SAD (see Ollendick & Benoit, 2012). These findings fit
well with studies that show that socially anxious children tend to grow
up in homes with low levels of family sociability. Growing up with
extremely shy parents can have a number of consequences. First, while
growing up, children do not see their parents participating in strong,
positive interpersonal relationships of their own (e.g., Bögels, van
Oosten, Muris, & Smulders, 2001; Bruch, Heimberg, Berger, & Collins,
1989). Similarly, they see their parents reacting anxiously in a variety
of social situations. One study observed mothers and their 10-week-old
babies during an interaction with a stranger (Murray, Cooper, Creswell,
Schofield, & Sack, 2007). During this interaction, mothers with SAD
exhibited more anxiety and were also less encouraging of their baby's
interactions with the stranger than were mothers with generalized
anxiety disorder or nonanxious mothers. This study suggests that
offspring of socially anxious mothers might begin to learn about (and
even imitate) social anxiety from a very young age. A little later on in
life, shy parents are less likely to facilitate

56

Social Anxiety Disorder

peer interactions for their children (e.g., Caster, Inderbitzen, & Hope,
1999). During the early years, parents are not only involved in planning
playdates with other parents but are also socializing during these
playdates. In the study by Bögels et al. (2001), the finding that
greater levels of social anxiety in children were associated with
greater levels of social anxiety in parents was actually carried by the
levels of social anxiety experienced by mothers. This is not surprising,
given that it is mothers who tend to be more involved in the day-to-day
social lives of their children. By the time children of socially anxious
parents reach adolescence and can be more socially independent, it is
quite likely that the usual anxieties of adolescence combined with lack
of experience could make social interactions difficult to tolerate.
Theorists have also asked about the role of early attachment to parents.
They posit that people develop schemas for understanding their social
world via these earliest interpersonal relationships. The quality of
these relationships is thought to affect personality development and the
quality of relationships later in life (e.g., Bowlby, 1982; see also
Greenberg, 1999). Attachment theorists have long distinguished between
secure and insecure attachment relationships (see Dozier, Stovall, &
Albus, 1999). It is thought that securely attached children have parents
who are attentive and responsive, whereas insecurely attached children
have parents who are rejecting and undependable. Shyness and social
anxiety during childhood are related to insecure attachment patterns
during infancy (see Bohlin, Hagekull, & Rydell, 2000; LaFreniere &
Sroufe, 1985). When asked to recall their early childhood, shy adults
tend to report having had parents who were rejecting and lacking in
warmth (Schlette et al., 1998). Researchers have also examined adult
attachment patterns, since the way that we relate to one another as
adults likely has its roots in the early parent-child relationship.
Relationships have been found between SAD in adulthood and insecure
attachment patterns (e.g., Eng, Heimberg, et al., 2001; Mickelson,
Kessler, & Shaver, 1997). As children grow older, their relationships to
their peers become increasingly important and further set the groundwork
for the quality of their later relationships. Socially anxious children
are more likely than nonanxious children to experience negative peer
relations, most notably peer neglect (La Greca, Dandes, Wick, Shaw, &
Stone, 1988; Strauss, Lahey, Frick, Frame, & Hynd, 1988), which
exacerbates and maintains social anxiety (see also Rubin & Mills, 1988;
Vernberg, Abwender, Ewell, & Beery, 1992). The association between
social anxiety and peer victimization, including teasing, is
demonstrated in two prospective studies (Siegel, La Greca, & Harrison,
2009; Storch, Masia-Warner, Crisp, & Klein, 2005) and many retrospective
studies (McCabe, Antony, Summerfeldt, Liss, & Swinson, 2003; McCabe,
Miller, Laugesen, Antony, & Young, 2010; Roth, Coles, & Heimberg, 2002).
The relationship between social anxiety and peer victimization is
bidirectional, such that peer victimization was both a predictor and
consequence of social anxiety (Siegel et al., 2009; Crawford & Manassis,
2011; Erath, Flanagan, & Bierman, 2007; Storch et al., 2005). McCabe and
colleagues (2003) found that recalled childhood teasing was much more
strongly related to adult SAD than to adult obsessive-compulsive
disorder or panic disorder. A higher frequency of recalled childhood
teasing was associated with greater severity of adult social anxiety
symptoms (McCabe et al., 2010). Recalled teasing in the social domain
(e.g., being teased about looking shy or appearing nervous) was more
strongly related to psychological distress during adulthood than

Assessment of Social Anxiety Disorder

57

recalled teasing in other domains, such as appearance or academics
(Storch et al., 2005; see also McCabe et al., 2010). Recalled childhood
teasing was also related to greater early adulthood impairment in
interpersonal functioning, specifically less comfort with intimacy and
closeness, less ability to trust and depend on others, as well as a
greater degree of worry about being unloved or abandoned in
relationships (Ledley et al., 2006). Rose and Abramson (1992) proposed
that repeated childhood emotional maltreatment may lead to a negative
inferential style, since children are likely to attribute the
maltreatment to stable and global negative characteristics of the self.
Similarly, the emotional maltreatment found in childhood peer
victimization may lead to the development of a negative inferential
style, interpersonal deficits, and hopelessness regarding one's ability
to change negative events (Ledley et al., 2006). Parenting style also
plays an important role in the development of SAD. However, the research
in this area is somewhat murky. On the one hand, SAD has been associated
with controlling, overprotective, and critical parenting (see Bruch,
Heimberg, et al., 1989; Caster et al., 1999). On the other hand, parents
who are warm and accommodating have been found to exacerbate avoidant
behavior in their inhibited children (Kagan, Arcus, & Snidman, 1993). It
is quite possible that both of these scenarios exist and that these
extremes of parenting (too much accommodation and warmth or too much
criticism and lack of help) are poor fits for children at risk for SAD.
This delicate interplay of parent and child factors is clearly observed
in clinical practice. Typically, we see children and adolescents who
could be described as behaviorally inhibited since infancy. Parents
recall them being nervous around new people, but also reactive to new
toys, foods, and routines. The families we see in clinical practice
often have at least one parent who describes himself or herself as
socially anxious, and many of the families describe themselves as quite
insular, often doing things only within the nuclear or extended family.
It is interesting to see parents who show both ends of the parenting
style spectrum, sometimes within a single day! Although parents of
socially anxious children tend to want to protect them from feeling
anxious and uncomfortable, they might also get angry after a time and
criticize their children for looking anxious (which might of course
arouse the parents' own concern about negative evaluation from others).
If parents' instinct is to avoid anxiety, they will in turn facilitate
avoidance of social situations for their children. Therefore, their
children will never learn that they can cope with anxiety, nor that
their anxiety will habituate with repeated exposure to a feared
situation. Furthermore, they never see that social interactions are
usually quite pleasant and rewarding, increasing the likelihood of
continued avoidance into adolescence and adulthood.

Assessment of Social Anxiety Disorder SAD may be evaluated by means of
various clinical interviews, rating scales, and self-report measures. In
addition, session-by-session measures can be used to assess
treatment-related change. In this section, neurobiological assessment
will also be briefly reviewed. In research settings, this mode of
assessment can be used to examine changes in brain activity that occur
with treatment for SAD.

58

Social Anxiety Disorder

Clinical Interviews In research settings, semistructured diagnostic
interviews are used to establish diagnoses and, in some cases, to rate
the severity of diagnoses (McNeil & Quentin, 2014). Semistructured
interviews present the assessor with a set of questions to guide
decisions about the presence or absence of DSM diagnoses, but also allow
the assessor sufficient flexibility to gain a clear understanding of the
patient's primary concerns. Semistructured interviews may greatly reduce
the rates of false negatives in the diagnosis of SAD (Zimmerman &
Mattia, 1999). In anxiety disorder research settings, the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders--Patient Edition
(SCID-I/P; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 2002) and the most recent
DSM-5 research version (SCID-5-RV; First, Williams, Karg, Spitzer,
2015), along with the Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV
(ADIS-IV; Brown, DiNardo, & Barlow, 1994) and the most recent Anxiety
and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5 (ADIS-5; Brown &
Barlow, 2014) are the most commonly used instruments. Because DSM-5 was
recently published, the available psychometric data are from the DSM-IV
versions of these instruments. However, since the DSM-5 revisions to SAD
were relatively straightforward, the psychometric data should be
expected to maintain relevance. An advantage of the SCID is that it can
be completed in a relatively brief and efficient manner. It includes
screening questions for each diagnosis that allow clinicians to skip
sections that do not seem relevant to a given patient and to skip
particular sections once they have ascertained that criteria for the
given disorder are not met. A disadvantage of the SCID is that it does
not cue clinicians to gather additional data on a patient's difficulties
beyond DSM criteria, and such data may reduce false negatives (Dalrymple
& Zimmerman, 2008). Thus, the information gathered during the SCID is
not sufficiently detailed for use in treatment planning (Hart, Jack,
Turk, & Heimberg, 1999). In contrast, the ADIS includes numerous
questions that go beyond DSM criteria, items that query triggers of
anxiety (e.g., feared social and performance situations) and reactions
to these triggers (e.g., avoidance and experience of situationally cued
panic attacks). Also queried are specific behaviors, thoughts, the scope
of avoidance, and past history of social anxiety symptoms. These
additional questions mean that the ADIS can sometimes be lengthy to
administer, but also that it provides valuable information for treatment
planning. The ADIS also allows the clinician to assign a clinical
severity rating (CSR) for each diagnosis. The CSR has clear utility in
research and clinical settings. This rating of symptom severity
facilitates treatment planning, provides an estimate of treatment
length, and allows for assessment of improvement over the course of
treatment. The psychometric properties of the ADIS have been examined in
a clinical sample of individuals with anxiety disorders. In 362 patients
with mixed diagnoses, Brown, Di Nardo, Lehman, and Campbell (2001)
reported a kappa of .77 for a primary diagnosis of SAD using the
lifetime version of the ADIS-IV.

Clinical Rating Scales The most commonly used clinician-administered
measure of social anxiety is the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS;
Liebowitz, 1987), and it will be our focus here (another
clinician-administered measure, the Brief Social Phobia Scale, is not
reviewed

Assessment of Social Anxiety Disorder

59

here, but information about it is available from Davidson et al., 1991,
1997). The LSAS has 24 items, 11 pertaining to social interaction
situations (e.g., meeting strangers) and 13 pertaining to performance
situations (e.g., making a presentation to a small group). Each item is
rated according to the degree to which the patient has feared and
avoided specific situations over the past week. The LSAS is unique
because it assesses specific situations, whereas other measures of
social anxiety assess symptomatology (Beard et al., 2011; Heeren,
Maurage, et al., 2012). The LSAS includes numerous subscales, but its
total score is most commonly used in research. The LSAS has strong
convergent validity and adequate discriminant validity, and is sensitive
to treatment change (Adler et al., 2009; Book, Thomas, Randall, &
Randall, 2008; Fresco et al., 2001; Heimberg et al., 1999). It is also a
highly reliable measure, with reported Cronbach's alphas of .95 and .96
for the LSAS total score (Fresco et al., 2001; Heimberg et al., 1999). A
self-report version (LSAS-SR) correlates highly with the original
interviewer-rated version and demonstrates strong psychometric
properties (Fresco et al., 2001; Rytwinski et al., 2009). A version of
the LSAS has been developed for use with children and adolescents and
also has strong psychometric properties (LSAS-CA; Masia-Warner et al.,
2003). The LSAS is also an excellent clinical tool. Because it gathers
information on the various social and performance situations that
patients fear and avoid, it can be used for treatment planning (e.g.,
creating a hierarchy of feared situations) and to assess improvement
over the course of treatment (e.g., Heimberg et al., 1998; Liebowitz et
al., 1999). A score of 30 discriminates patients with social anxiety
disorder from normal controls with good specificity and sensitivity
(Mennin et al., 2002; Rytwinski et al., 2009.

Self-Report Measures Numerous self-report measures are available to
assess social anxiety symptoms. Common self-report measures for SAD in
adults include the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS; Mattick &
Clarke, 1998); the Social Phobia Scale (SPS; Mattick & Clarke, 1998);
the Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation scale (BFNE; Leary, 1983); the
Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN; Connor et al., 2000); and the Social
Phobia and Anxiety Inventory (SPAI; Turner, Beidel, Dancu, & Stanley,
1989). Each of these measures assesses slightly different aspects of
social anxiety disorder. All can be used to establish severity of social
anxiety at pretreatment, to assess treatment-related change in symptoms,
and for treatment planning. For a detailed and thoughtful review of
considerations in the evaluation of self-report measures for social
anxiety in adults, see Fernandez, Piccirillo, and Rodebaugh (2014). For
a review of measures for use with children and adolescents, see Herbert,
Brandsma, and Fischer (2014). The SIAS measures anxiety that is
experienced in dyads and groups (sample items: "I feel I will say
something embarrassing when talking," and "I have difficulty making eye
contact with others"). The SPS measures anxiety in situations in which
the person may be observed critically by others (sample items: "I get
nervous that people are staring at me as I walk down the street," and "I
worry I might do something to attract the attention of other people").
Both the SIAS and the SPS have been shown to be reliable instruments for
the assessment of social anxiety disorder and to possess a high degree
of convergent validity with other indices of social anxiety and
avoidance (Brown et al., 1997; Habke, Hewitt, Norton, & Asmundson, 1997;
Heimberg, Mueller, Holt, Hope, &

60

Social Anxiety Disorder

Liebowitz, 1992; Mattick & Clarke, 1998; Peters, 2000). Rodebaugh,
Woods, and Heimberg (2007) found that the three reverse-scored items of
the SIAS related more strongly to the personality trait of extraversion
than to social anxiety and that eliminating them to produce a 17-item
version of the SIAS (SIAS-Straightforward or SIAS-S) results in a more
valid measure of social interaction anxiety, with excellent psychometric
properties in undergraduate and clinical samples. This concern is not
relevant to the SPS, which includes no reverse-scored items. The 12-item
BFNE assesses a core concern experienced by individuals with social
anxiety---fear of negative evaluation (sample item: "I am frequently
afraid of other people noticing my shortcomings"). Rodebaugh and
colleagues (2004) and Weeks and colleagues (2005) demonstrated that the
four reversed-scored items on the BFNE were less related to measures of
social anxiety than the straightforwardly worded items were and that
those were adversely influenced by the respondents' level of education.
As with the SIAS, both sets of investigators concluded that the BFNE is
most valid when only the eight straightforwardly worded items are used
(BFNE-S). The BFNE-S has been shown to have strong psychometric
properties in undergraduate samples (Rodebaugh et al., 2004) and
clinical samples (Weeks et al., 2005). The 17-item Social Phobia
Inventory (SPIN; Antony, Coons, McCabe, Ashbaugh, & Swinson, 2006;
Connor et al., 2000) assesses three theoretical components of social
anxiety: subjective fear, avoidance behavior, and physiological
symptoms. The SPIN has demonstrated good reliability, significant
correlations with related measures, and the ability to discriminate
between clients with social anxiety disorder and those with other
anxiety disorders. A three-item version of the SPIN, the Mini-SPIN, has
also shown substantial utility as a screening device for social anxiety
disorder in both general health care settings (Connor, Kobak, Churchill,
Katzelnick, & Davidson, 2001) and anxiety specialty clinic settings
(Weeks, Spokas, & Heimberg, 2007; de Lima Osório, Crippa, & Loureiro,
2010). The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory (SPAI; Turner et al.,
1989) queries somatic, cognitive, and behavioral responses to social and
performance situations. It also queries situations commonly feared by
individuals with panic disorder and agoraphobia. It consists of 45
items, but because some require multiple responses, respondents actually
answer a total of 109 items. These items yield three subscales: a social
phobia subscale, an agoraphobia subscale, and a derived difference (or
total) score. The SPAI has been shown to be a valid scale, has
demonstrated adequate reliability and good test-retest reliability
(Herbert, Bellack, & Hope, 1991; Turner et al., 1989), and is sensitive
to treatment-related change (Beidel, Turner, & Cooley, 1993; Taylor,
Woody, McLean, & Koch, 1997). Most recently, Roberson-Nay, Strong, Nay,
Beidel, and Turner (2007) developed an abbreviated 23-item version of
the SPAI with excellent psychometric properties in a sample of college
students (Schry, Roberson-Nay, & White, 2012).

Session-by-Session Assessment As noted earlier, the measures that are
commonly used with socially anxious patients are all useful in assessing
treatment-related change. A specific measure has been developed to
assess session-by-session change over the course of treatment for SAD.
The Social Anxiety Session Change Index (SASCI; Hayes, Miller, Hope,
Heimberg, & Juster, 2008) is

Treatment

61

a four-item scale that is completed prior to each treatment session to
assess the progress the patient believes he or she has made since
beginning treatment. Hayes and colleagues (2008) found the scale to be a
valid measure with good internal consistency. Furthermore, the SASCI is
sensitive to symptom improvement and is associated with changes in the
BFNE and in clinician-rated improvement. Its strong psychometric
properties, along with its brevity and ease of scoring, make the SASCI
an excellent choice for assessing session-by-session change over the
course of treatment for SAD. Depending on the clinical profile of
individual patients, additional measures can be administered on a weekly
basis to gather important information and to aid in treatment planning.
As an example, patients with co-occurring depression can complete the
Beck Depression Inventory--II (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996). Those with
co-occurring alcohol use can complete the Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (Saunders, Aasland, Babor, de la Fuente, & Grant,
1993). Both of these measures are brief enough to be completed prior to
each treatment session. Idiographically designed self-monitoring forms
in which patients record aspects of their anxiety and behavior in feared
social situations are also extremely useful in the treatment of SAD.

Neurobiological Assessment As was mentioned earlier, imaging studies
have been used to examine neurobiological changes in brain activity as a
result of treatment (e.g., Furmark et al., 2002; Goldin et al., 2013).
Although neurobiological assessments are not routinely used with
patients with SAD, they may have utility in the future, as suggested by
two preliminary studies. Doehrmann et al. (2013) demonstrated that
whole-brain responses to angry versus neutral faces at baseline
significantly predicted response to CBT for SAD. Goldin et al. (2014)
demonstrated that changes from baseline to posttreatment in neural
responses when asked to reappraise criticism from others predicted
unique variance in CBT-related reductions in social anxiety.

Treatment This section discusses both psychological and biological
interventions in the treatment of SAD. In the section on psychological
interventions, focus will be placed on the use of cognitive-behavioral
therapy in the treatment of SAD. In the section on biological
interventions, focus will be placed on the use of SSRIs and SNRIs; novel
treatments will also be reviewed.

Psychological Interventions As described previously, the experience of
social anxiety occurs along three domains. Cognitive symptoms of anxiety
describe the negative internal dialogue experienced by socially anxious
individuals in anticipation of social situations, during these
situations, and even while processing these situations once they have
occurred (i.e., post-event processing). For example, an individual with
SAD might have thoughts like, "I am a loser,"

62

Social Anxiety Disorder

"They can see my hands shake and will know I am anxious," "She'll never
want to date me," or "I won't get the job." Thoughts like these contain
errors of logic, causing socially anxious individuals to judge their
performance as poor regardless of its actual quality (Hope, Heimberg, &
Turk, 2010). Behavioral symptoms of anxiety refer to avoidance
mechanisms that persons with SAD employ in anxiety-provoking situations.
Avoidance may take a variety of forms, such as choosing not to enter a
situation at all, or engaging in safety behaviors that make entering a
situation tolerable but prevent the person from being fully present in
that situation. As an example of the latter, a socially anxious
individual might go to parties, but she might spend the whole time
speaking only to people she already knows, saying as little as possible,
and drinking alcohol to ease her anxiety symptoms. As already noted,
these safety behaviors often do not result in the desired outcomes and
may increase the likelihood of coming across badly. Finally, physical
symptoms of anxiety such as blushing, stammering, shaking, or sweating
(Amies, Gelder, & Shaw, 1983; Solyom, Ledwidge, & Solyom, 1986) are
commonly experienced by persons with SAD (Heimberg et al., 1990).
Persons with SAD focus on their physical symptoms, overestimate the
visibility of these symptoms to others (Bruch, Gorsky, Collins, &
Berger, 1989), gauge the approval of others by the level of anxiety they
experience, and view their symptoms as evidence of failure. Safety
behaviors are often employed to mask physical symptoms (e.g., gripping a
glass very tightly with both hands at a cocktail party so no one will
notice the hands are shaking), but as noted, these strategies often do
not result in the desired outcome (Piccirillo et al., in press). As the
cognitive, behavioral, and physiological symptoms of anxiety elevate,
they are interpreted as further evidence of how one's appearance and
behavior are perceived by others. Cycling back, a more negative
estimation of how the audience sees the person is made, and the
cognitive, behavioral, and physiological symptoms of anxiety worsen.
This "vicious cycle" of social anxiety increases the probability that
the person with SAD will judge the social situation as a failure. A
collection of similar experiences has further negative impact, as it may
strengthen maladaptive beliefs and lower expectations for success in
future situations. The cognitive-behavioral models of SAD have directly
informed the treatment of SAD, and the psychological intervention that
has gained the most empirical support for the treatment of SAD is CBT.
One widely used CBT protocol for SAD (Hope et al., 2010) includes three
primary components (exposure, cognitive restructuring, and homework
assignments), which are designed to treat the symptoms of social anxiety
that maintain the disorder. In-session exposures are
cognitive-behavioral exercises designed to help patients face social and
performance situations in which they experience distress or that they
are likely to avoid. Cognitive restructuring helps patients to become
more aware of their dysfunctional thoughts and to examine and reframe
these thoughts. Cognitive restructuring also helps patients to challenge
biases, assumptions, and beliefs, which allows them to view the world in
a more accurate way so that they do not expect failure in every social
situation. As interpretations become more adaptive, patients are more
likely to attend to their social performance and to the feedback from
others participating in the situation. Greater attentiveness in social
and performance situations will be associated with increasingly adaptive
thoughts and beliefs and reductions in post-event processing. Exposure
and cognitive restructuring homework is assigned so that patients apply
what they have learned in

Treatment

63

therapy to in vivo situations. Homework compliance is associated with
improved outcome in CBT for SAD (Leung & Heimberg, 1996). One of the
most widely investigated treatment programs for SAD is
cognitive-behavioral group therapy (CBGT). CBGT, as originally developed
by Heimberg's group (see Heimberg & Becker, 2002), is typically
administered to groups of five or six patients in 12 weekly,
2.5-hour-long sessions. During the first two sessions, patients are
educated about social anxiety and are taught cognitive restructuring
skills. During session three, in-session exposures are initiated. These
exposures are tailored to target each patient's unique concerns and are
preceded and followed by therapist-directed cognitive restructuring
exercises. At the end of each session, patients are assigned homework
that typically consists of in vivo exposure, with patient-directed pre-
and postexposure cognitive restructuring. As treatment proceeds,
patients confront increasingly anxiety-provoking situations and are
helped to explore the core beliefs that underlie their difficulties with
social anxiety. Multiple studies by Heimberg's group (Heimberg et al.,
1990, 1998; Hope, Heimberg, & Bruch, 1995; Liebowitz et al., 1999) and
others (Chambless et al., 1997; Edelman & Chambless, 1995; Gelernter et
al., 1991; Woody, Chambless, & Glass, 1997) support the efficacy of
CBGT. CBGT has also been shown to have good long-term efficacy
(Heimberg, Salzman, Holt, & Blendell, 1993) and is associated with
significant improvements in quality of life (Eng, Coles, Heimberg, &
Safren, 2001, 2005; Safren, Heimberg, Brown, & Holle, 1997). Other group
treatments based on CBGT (e.g., Foa, Franklin, & Kozak, 2001; Franklin,
Jaycox, & Foa, 1999), have also been shown to be efficacious (Davidson
et al., 2004). A recently completed trial of CBGT in comparison to
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) and a wait-list control showed
positive outcomes across a variety of outcomes and maintenance of gains
at 1-year follow-up for both treatments (Goldin et al., 2016). A
meta-analysis of controlled trials of multiple variants of CBGT suggests
that it is as efficacious as individual CBT or pharmacotherapy for SAD
(Barkowski et al., 2016). Although group treatment certainly holds
appeal for the treatment of SAD, it can be logistically difficult to
implement, particularly in clinical settings in which it can take a long
time to gather a sufficient number of appropriate patients to form a
group. CBGT has been adapted to a manualized, individual CBT format
(Hope et al., 2010), which has been shown to be more efficacious than a
wait-list control condition (Goldin et al., 2012; Ledley et al., 2009).
In addition, Ledley and colleagues and Goldin and colleagues found high
protocol adherence, little attrition, and significant improvement on
both self-report and clinician-administered measures of social anxiety
among patients treated with individual CBT. Clark and colleagues have
developed an individual cognitive therapy (CT) based on Clark and
Wells's (1995) cognitive model of SAD. Consistent with Clark and Wells's
theoretical assumption that attention is largely focused on internal
symptoms of anxiety and that safety behaviors play a central role in the
maintenance of SAD, CT teaches patients to reduce safety behaviors and
to shift attention externally, with the goals of helping patients to
gather more accurate information about how they are evaluated by others
and reframe their distorted self-image. CT employs specific strategies
to facilitate external focus of attention, such as video feedback, which
provides patients a source of external information and allows comparison
of predicted and actual performance (Clark et al., 2003). When compared
with exposure and progressive muscle relaxation (i.e., applied

64

Social Anxiety Disorder

relaxation), CT was more efficacious at posttreatment (Clark et al.,
2006) and at 5-year follow-up (Mörtberg, Clark, & Bejerot, 2011). CT was
also more efficacious than interpersonal psychotherapy in the treatment
of SAD (Stangier, Schramm, Heidenreich, Berger, & Clark, 2011). When
compared with manualized psychodynamic therapy, CT was more efficacious
at posttreatment (Leichsenring et al., 2013) but results were relatively
equivalent at 2-year follow-up (Leichsenring et al., 2014). Several
meta-analyses suggest significant effects of individual CBT (e.g.,
Mayo-Wilson et al., 2014). Although most meta-analyses suggest no
difference in efficacy between group and individual treatment for SAD
(e.g., Barkowski et al., 2016; Powers, Sigmarsson, & Emmelkamp, 2008),
the meta-analysis by Aderka (2009) of a small sample of studies
conducted between 2000 and 2006 suggested that individual treatments
resulted in larger effect sizes and lower attrition rates than group
treatments. In the network meta-analysis conducted by Mayo-Wilson et
al. (2014), only individual CBT was superior to both wait-list and
placebo controls. CBGT was superior only to wait-list controls, but
individual and group CBT did not differ from each other. Based on these
findings, the United Kingdom's National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (2013) recommends individual CBT over CBGT (or
pharmacological treatment) as the first-line treatment of SAD in adults.
Several recent studies have provided encouraging evidence in support of
the generalizability and transportability of group CBT (Gaston, Abbott,
Rapee, & Neary, 2006; McEvoy, 2007; McEvoy, Nathan, Rapee, & Campbell,
2012), including evidence in support of a recently developed
imagery-enhanced variant (McEvoy, Erceg-Hurn, Saulsman, & Thibodeau,
2015), as well as evidence in support of individual CBT (Lincoln et al.,
2003) for SAD in private practice and community settings. Effect sizes
in community settings were comparable to those reported in laboratory
studies and meta-analyses. Comparable effect sizes in community settings
are particularly encouraging given the fact that clinical trials are
often conducted in university or medical school research settings,
manualized treatment protocols are used and monitored for adherence, and
strict exclusion criteria may be employed in clinical trials (Lincoln et
al., 2003). Furthermore, these encouraging findings were demonstrated
despite the fact that patients from the community had more severe
symptoms, more comorbid disorders, and lower educational attainment than
the patients from the research clinic (McEvoy et al., 2012).

Biological Interventions Medications are frequently used to treat SAD.
The first-line pharmacological treatments for SAD are the SSRIs and the
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) (Blanco, Bragdon,
Schneier, & Liebowitz, 2013). The Food and Drug Administration has
approved four medications for the treatment of SAD: paroxetine,
sertraline, extended release fluvoxamine (all SSRIs), and extended
release venlafaxine (an SNRI). These medications tend to yield moderate
effect sizes with mild side effects and low risk of overdose and are the
most efficacious for the treatment of disorders frequently comorbid with
SAD, including major depressive disorder and other anxiety disorders.
Several controlled studies and meta-analyses support their efficacy (see
Blanco et al., 2013; Hedges, Brown, Shwalb, Godfrey, & Larcher, 2007)
and suggest no significant differences in efficacy between SSRIs and
SNRIs (Hansen et al., 2008). The SSRI fluoxetine appears to be less

Treatment

65

efficacious in the treatment of SAD than the other SSRIs and SNRIs
(Clark et al., 2003; Kobak, Greist, Jefferson, & Katzelnick, 2002).
Although less well studied, venlafaxine has surpassed a pill placebo in
reducing social anxiety symptoms (e.g., Liebowitz, Gelenberg, & Munjack,
2005; Liebowitz, Mangano, Bradwejn, & Asnis, 2005) and has efficacy
comparable to paroxetine (Liebowitz, Gelenberg, et al., 2005).
Benzodiazepines have also been studied as treatments for SAD. Though
studies with clonazepam have yielded very positive results (e.g.,
Davidson, Potts, et al., 1993), studies of alprazolam have been less
promising (e.g., Gelernter et al., 1991). Bromazepam has been reported
to be efficacious in the treatment of SAD (Versiani, Nardi, Figueira,
Mendlowicz, & Marques, 1997). Benzodiazepines are frequently prescribed
and are useful on an as-needed basis for less frequent high-anxiety
situations. In addition, benzodiazepines can be a useful adjunct during
the initial 4 to 6 weeks of adjustment to an SSRI or SNRI. Because of
their abuse potential and sometimes problematic withdrawal effects
(e.g., rebound anxiety on withdrawal from alprazolam), benzodiazepines
must be administered with adequate supervision and avoided in patients
with a history of substance abuse. In addition, benzodiazepines can
cause sedation and impair cognition, which can interfere with
performance and they are associated with falls in the elderly. Monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), such as phenelzine, were the first
medications studied for the treatment of SAD and were found to be very
efficacious (e.g., Blanco et al., 2010; Gelernter et al., 1991; Heimberg
et al., 1998). However, patients who take them must adhere to strict
dietary restrictions, avoiding any foods, beverages, and medications
containing tyramine. Failure to adhere to this dietary regimen can lead
to a sudden surge in blood pressure, with potentially serious effects.
Given this risk, MAOIs are typically used only after other medications
(e.g., SSRIs, benzodiazepines, venlafaxine, etc.) have proven
ineffective for a given patient. Three classes of medication have shown
promise in the treatment of SAD, but require more research. Two
controlled trials found D-cycloserine (DCS), a partial NMDA receptor
agonist, an efficacious adjunct to brief exposure therapy for public
speaking fears among patients with SAD (Guastella et al., 2008; Hofmann
et al., 2006), with a particularly positive effect on anxiety reduction
and performance appraisal immediately after exposure exercises
(Guastella et al., 2008). This interesting finding suggests that DCS may
enhance the efficacy of the exposure component of CBT. However, when
employed as an adjunct to a full 12-week course of CBT, DCS was not
associated with better response or remission rates (Hofmann et al.,
2013). Second, in small clinical trials, the atypical antipsychotics
olanzapine (Barnett, Kramer, Casat, Connor, & Davidson, 2002);
quetiapine (Schutters, van Megan, & Westenberg, 2005; Vaishnavi, Alamy,
Zhang, Connor, & Davidson, 2007); and risperidone (Simon et al., 2006)
were efficacious for the treatment of SAD. Given the potential side
effects of these medications, including weight gain and metabolic
syndrome, larger trials are needed to confirm their efficacy. In
clinical practice, the atypical antipsychotics are typically prescribed
as adjuncts to SSRIs. Clinical trials are necessary to confirm the
utility of this practice. Finally, a placebo-controlled trial of the
anticonvulsant gabapentin (Pande et al., 1999) and two randomized,
double-blind trials of its successor, pregabalin (Feltner, Liu-Dumaw,
Schweizer, & Bielski, 2011; Pande et al., 2004) found these drugs to be
more efficacious than a placebo. Meta-analyses suggest effects of
pharmacological treatments that range from equivalent to CBT (Gould,
Buckminster, Pollack, Otto, & Yap, 1997) to superior to CBT

66

Social Anxiety Disorder

(Fedoroff & Taylor, 2001) for SAD. The effects of pharmacotherapy may be
achieved more rapidly (Heimberg et al., 1998); however, CBT may offer
greater protection against relapse (Liebowitz et al., 1999). Studies
that have combined CBT with medication have produced mixed results (see
Blanco et al., 2010; Blomhoff et al., 2001; Davidson et al., 2004).

Summary and Future Directions Great progress has been made in
understanding the nature of the impairments observed in SAD, advancing
hypotheses regarding factors that might have contributed to these
impairments, and developing and testing treatments. There is, however,
still much to be done. One essential goal is for researchers to come to
a clearer understanding of the nature of the social relationships of
individuals with SAD. Beginning with children, it is important to
elucidate not only why socially anxious individuals have fewer
relationships than their less anxious counterparts, but also what occurs
within relationships that leads to dissatisfaction and other
difficulties. As we gain a clearer understanding of the nature of these
impairments, new components of treatment can be developed (e.g., Alden &
Taylor, 2011). It will also be important to maintain a focus on how
biases inherent in SAD (e.g., interpretation biases, exaggeration of
probability and cost, biased self-image) negatively affect relationships
and how best to correct these biases (e.g., conducting exposures without
the use of safety behaviors or using video feedback for those who have
the most negatively biased self-perceptions), thereby reducing social
anxiety symptoms. This is a strategy that has been fruitful in past
research (Rodebaugh & Rapee, 2005; Wells et al., 1995). Current
psychosocial and pharmacological treatments yield excellent results, but
further efforts should be made to optimize outcomes (see Ledley &
Heimberg, 2005). These might include development of new pharmacological
agents, new ways of using existing agents (e.g., combining medications
to enhance outcomes), promulgation of new guidelines for action when a
first-line agent does not work (e.g., increasing the dose or switching
to a new agent; see Pollack et al., 2014), and matching agents with
particular symptom profiles. It is also important to explore how best to
combine pharmacological and psychosocial treatments. Previous research
has found no consistent advantage of combining medication and CBT, but
the two treatments were always administered concurrently. Combined
treatments might work better if they were sequenced---for example,
adding CBT to medication once the drug has had a chance to take
effect---or if the second-administered treatment were reserved only for
those who had not shown adequate improvements on the first-administered
treatment. With psychosocial treatments, another important agenda is to
learn more about treatment of patients with comorbid conditions,
particularly depression and alcohol use disorders. These disorders often
co-occur with SAD, but comorbid patients are typically excluded from
treatment studies. Thus, we know little about how they fare in standard
treatment for SAD. We know even less about modifications to treatment
that might improve outcomes for these particularly impaired groups.
Finally, future research should focus on making empirically supported
treatments more available to individuals with SAD. Despite extensive
research on the utility of CBT and SSRIs for SAD, psychodynamic therapy
and benzodiazepines are still among the most

Summary and Future Directions

67

commonly used treatments for this impairing disorder (see Keller, 2003).
We must educate the public about SAD and treatments for it, taking into
account that a common barrier to treatment is that individuals with SAD
fear what others think about them (Olfson et al., 2000). Knowing that
some individuals with SAD will never seek professional help (Kessler,
Stein, & Berglund, 1998), we must develop interventions that appeal to
this population, and a strong tool in this effort may be the Internet.
Recent studies have shown that internet-based CBT with minimal therapist
contact is effective in reducing social anxiety compared to wait-list
groups, may be as effective as face-to-face treatment, demonstrates
maintenance of gains at follow-up, and is as or more cost effective than
face-to-face treatment (see review by Andersson, Rozental, Rück, &
Carlbring, 2015). Of course, it is also essential that we disseminate
empirically supported treatments for SAD to clinicians in the community.
Such efforts should include explorations into the best ways to train
clinicians to use such protocols effectively.

References positive social events. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22,
577--590. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2007.05.007 Alden, L. E., & Wallace, S.
T. (1995). Social phobia and social appraisal in successful and
unsuccessful social interactions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33,
497--505. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(94)00088-2 Alonso, J., Lépine, J. P., &
ESEMeD 2000 Scientific Committee. (2007). Overview of key data from the
European Study of the Epidemiology of Mental Disorders (ESEMeD). Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 68 (Suppl. 2), 3--9. American Psychiatric
Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Amies, P. L., Gelder, M.
G., & Shaw, P. M. (1983). Social phobia: A comparative clinical study.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 142, 174--179. Amir, N., Beard, C.,
Taylor, C. T., Klumpp, H., Elias, J., Burns, M., & Chen, X. (2009).
Attention training in individuals with generalized social phobia: A
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 77, 961--973. doi: 10.1037/a0016685 Amir, N., Foa, E. B., &
Coles, M. E. (1998). Negative interpretation bias in social phobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 959--970. Amir, N., Foa, E. B., &
Coles, M. E. (2000). Implicit memory bias for threat-relevant
information in generalized social phobia. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 109, 713--720. doi: 10.1037/0021 -843X.109.4.713 Amir, N., &
Taylor, C. T. (2012). Interpretation training in individuals with
generalized social anxiety disorder: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 497--511. doi:
10.1037/a0026928 Amir, N., Weber, G., Beard, C., Bomyea, J., & Taylor,
C. T. (2008). The effect of a single-session attention modification
program on response to a publicspeaking challenge in socially anxious
individuals. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 860--868. doi:
10.1037/a0013445 Andersson, G., Rozental, A., Rück, C., & Carlbring, P.
(2015). Guided internet-delivered CBT: Can it really be as good as
seeing a therapist? The Behavior Therapist, 38, 123--126.

Acarturk, C., de Graaf, R., van Straten, A., ten Have, M., & Cuijpers,
P. (2008). Social phobia and number of social fears, and their
association with comorbidity, health-related quality of life and help
seeking. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 43, 273--279.
doi: 10.1007/s00127-008-0309-1 Acarturk, C., Smit, F., de Graaf, R., van
Straten, A., ten Have, M., & Cuijpers, P. (2009). Economic costs of
social phobia: A population-based study. Journal of Affective Disorders,
115, 421--429. doi: 10.1016/ j.jad.2008.10.008 Aderka, I. M. (2009).
Factors affecting treatment efficacy in social phobia: The use of video
feedback and individual vs. group formats. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
23, 12--17. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis .2008.05.003 Adler, L. A., Liebowitz,
M., Kronenberger, W., Qiao, M., Rubin, R., Hollandbeck, M., ... Durell,
T. (2009). Atomoxetine treatment in adults with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and comorbid social anxiety
disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 212--221. doi: 10.1002/da.20549
Alden, L. E., & Bieling, P. (1998). Interpersonal consequences of the
pursuit of safety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 53--64. doi:
10.1016/ S0005-7967(97)00072-7 Alden, L. E., Regambal, M. J., &
Plasencia, L. (2014). Relational processes in social anxiety disorder.
In J. W. Weeks (Ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of social anxiety
disorder (pp. 159--181). Chichester, England: Wiley. Alden, L. E., &
Taylor, C. T. (2004). Interpersonal processes in social phobia. Clinical
Psychology Review, 24, 857--882. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2004.07.006 Alden,
L. E., & Taylor, C. T. (2010). Interpersonal processes in social anxiety
disorder. In J. G. Beck (Ed.), Interpersonal processes in the anxiety
disorders (pp. 125--152). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Alden, L. E., & Taylor, C. T. (2011). Relational treatment
strategies increase social approach behaviors in patients with
generalized social anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25,
309--318. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2010.10.003 Alden, L. E., Taylor, C.
T., Mellings, T. M., & Laposa, J. M. (2008). Social anxiety and the
interpretation of

68

References Antony, M. M., Coons, M. J., McCabe, R. E., Ashbaugh, A., &
Swinson, R. P. (2006). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia
Inventory: Further evaluation. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44,
1177--1185. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2005 .08.013 Asmundson, G.J.G., & Stein,
M. B. (1994). Selective processing of social threat in patients with
generalized social phobia: Evaluation using a dot-probe paradigm.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 8, 107--117. doi:
10.1016/0887-6185(94)90009-4 Baillie, A. J., Sannibale, C., Stapinski,
L. A., Teesson, M., Rapee, R. M. & Haber, P. S. (2013). An
investigator-blinded, randomized study to compare the efficacy of
combined CBT for alcohol use disorders and social anxiety disorder
versus CBT focused on alcohol alone in adults with comorbid disorders:
The Combined Alcohol Social Phobia (CASP) trial protocol. BMC
Psychiatry, 13, 199. doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-13-199 Bandelow, B., &
Michaelis, S. (2015). Epidemiology of anxiety disorders in the 21st
century. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 17, 327--335. Bar-Haim, Y.,
Lamy, D., Pergamin, L., BakermansKranenburg, M. J., & van IJzendoorn, M.
H. (2007). Threat-related attentional bias in anxious and nonanxious
individuals: A meta-analytic study. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 1--24.
doi: 10.1037/0033 -2909.133.1.1 Barkowski, S., Schwartze, D., Strauss,
B., Burlingame, G. M., Barth, J., & Rosendahl, J. (2016). Efficacy of
group psychotherapy for social anxiety disorder: A meta-analysis of
randomized-controlled trials. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 39, 44--64.
doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.02.005 Barnett, S. D., Kramer, M. L., Casat,
C. D., Connor, K. M., & Davidson, J. R. (2002). Efficacy of olanzapine
in social anxiety disorder: A pilot study. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 16, 365--368. doi: 10.1177/026988110201600412
Battista, S., Pencer, A., & Stewart, S. H. (2014). Drinking and
thinking: Alcohol effects on post-event processing in social anxious
individuals. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 38, 33--42. doi: 10.1007/
s10608-013-9574-8 Beard, C., & Amir, N. (2008). A multi-session
interpretation modification program: Changes in interpretation and
social anxiety symptoms. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46, 1135--1141.
doi: 10.1016/ j.brat.2008.05.012

69

Beard, C., Rodriguez, B. F., Moitra, E., Sibrava, N., Weisberg, R. B., &
Keller, M. B. (2011). Psychometric properties of the Liebowitz Social
Anxiety Scale (LSAS) in a longitudinal study of African Americans with
anxiety disorders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 722--726. doi:
10.1016/j.janxdis.2011.03.009 Beck, A. T., & Emery, G. (with Greenberg,
R. L.). (1985). Anxiety disorders and phobias: A cognitive perspective.
New York, NY: Basic Books. Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K.
(1996). Beck Depression Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation. Beidel, D. C., Turner, S. M., & Cooley, M. R.
(1993). Assessing reliable and clinically significant change in social
phobia: Validity of the Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 31, 149--158. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(93)90033-Q
Berntsen, D. (1996). Involuntary autobiographical memories. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 10, 435--454. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1099-0720(199610)10 :5\<435::AID-ACP408\>3.0.CO;2-L Black,
J. J., Clark, D. B., Martin, C. S., Kim, K. H., Blaze, T. J., Creswell,
K. G., & Chung, T. (2015). Course of alcohol symptoms and social anxiety
disorder from adolescence to young adulthood. Alcoholism, Clinical and
Experimental Research, 39, 1008--1015. doi: 10.1111/acer.12711 Blanco,
C., Bragdon, L. B., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2013). The
evidence-based pharmacotherapy of social anxiety disorder. International
Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 16, 235--249. doi:
10.1017/S1461145712000119 Blanco, C., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R.,
Fresco, D. M., Chen, H., Turk, C., ... Liebowitz, M. R. (2010). A
placebo-controlled trial of phenelzine, cognitive behavioral group
therapy, and their combination for social anxiety disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 67, 286--295. doi: 10.1001/arch
genpsychiatry.2010.11 Blanco, C., Schneier, F. R., Schmidt, A.,
Blanco-Jerez, C.-R., Marshall, R. D., Sanchez-Lacày, A., & Liebowitz, M.
R. (2003). Pharmacological treatment of social anxiety disorder: A
meta-analysis. Depression and Anxiety, 18, 29--40. doi: 10.1002/da.10096
Blomhoff, S., Haug, T. T., Hellstrom, K., Holme, I., Humble, M., Madsbu,
H. P., & Wold, J. E. (2001). Randomised controlled general practice
trial of sertraline, exposure therapy and combined treatment in
generalized social phobia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 23--30.
doi: 10.1192/bjp.179.1.23

70

Social Anxiety Disorder

Bögels, S. M., & Mansell, W. (2004). Attention processes in the
maintenance and treatment of social phobia: Hypervigilance, avoidance
and self-focused attention. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 827--856.
doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2004.06.005 Bögels, S. M., van Oosten, A., Muris, P.,
& Smulders, D. (2001). Familial correlates of social anxiety in children
and adolescents. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 273--287. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7967(00) 00005-X Bohlin, G., Hagekull, B., & Rydell, A.-M.
(2000). Attachment and social functioning: A longitudinal study from
infancy to middle childhood. Social Development, 9, 24--39. doi:
10.1111/1467 -9507.00109 Book, S. W., Thomas, S. E., Randall, P. K., &
Randall, C. L. (2008). Paroxetine reduces social anxiety in individuals
with a co-occurring alcohol use disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
22, 310--318. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2007.03.001 Bowlby, J. (1982).
Attachment and loss (Vol. 1). London, England: Hogarth Press.
Brettschneider, M., Neumann, P., Berger, T., Renneberg, B., & Boettcher,
J. (2015). Internet-based interpretation bias modification for social
anxiety: A pilot study. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 49, 21--29. doi: 10.1016/j.jbtep.2015 .04.008 Brown, E. J.,
Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (1995). Social phobia subtype and
avoidant personality disorder: Effect on severity of social phobia,
impairment, and outcome of cognitive-behavioral treatment. Behavior
Therapy, 26, 467--486. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7894(05)80095-4 Brown, E. J.,
Turovsky, J., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H. R., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D.
H. (1997). Validation of the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and the
Social Phobia Scale across the anxiety disorders. Psychological
Assessment, 9, 21--27. doi: 10.1037/ 1040-3590.9.1.21 Brown, T. A., &
Barlow, D. H. (2014). Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview Schedule
for DSM-5(ADIS-5)--Lifetime Version. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press Brown, T. A., DiNardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press. Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, C. L., &
Campbell, L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood
disorders: Implications for the

classification of emotional disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
110, 49--58. doi: 10.1037/ 0021-843X.110.1.49 Brozovich, F., & Heimberg,
R. G. (2008). An analysis of post-event processing in social anxiety
disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 891--903. doi:
10.1016/j.cpr.2008.01.002 Bruch, M. A., Gorsky, J. M., Collins, T. M., &
Berger, P. A. (1989). Shyness and sociability reexamined: A
multicomponent analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
57, 904--915. doi: 10.1037/ 0022-3514.57.5.904 Bruch, M. A., Heimberg,
R. G., Berger, P., & Collins, T. M. (1989). Social phobia and
perceptions of early parental and personal characteristics. Anxiety
Research, 2, 57--65. doi: 10.1080/089177789 08249326 Buckner, J. D.,
Heimberg, R. G., Matthews, R. A., & Silgado, J. (2012).
Marijuana-related problems and social anxiety: The role of marijuana
behaviors in social situations. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 26,
151--156. doi: 10.1037/a0025822 Buckner, J. D., Heimberg, R. G., &
Schmidt, N. B. (2011). Social anxiety and marijuana-related problems:
The role of social avoidance. Addictive Behaviors, 36, 129--132. doi:
10.1016/j.addbeh.2010 .08.015 Buckner, J. D., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier,
F., Liu, S., Wang, S., & Blanco, C. (2012). The relationship between
cannabis use disorders and social anxiety disorder in the National
Epidemiologic Study of Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC). Drug and
Alcohol Dependence, 124, 128--134. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2011.12.023
Buckner, J. D., Ledley, D. R., Heimberg, R. G., & Schmidt, N. B. (2008).
Treating comorbid social anxiety and alcohol use disorders: Combining
motivation enhancement therapy with cognitive-behavioral therapy.
Clinical Case Studies, 7, 208--223. doi: 10.1177/ 1534650107306877
Buckner, J. D., & Schmidt, N. B. (2009). Understanding social anxiety as
a risk for alcohol use disorders: Fear of scrutiny, not social
interaction fears, prospectively predicts alcohol use disorders. Journal
of Psychiatric Research, 43, 477--483. doi:
10.1016/j.jpsychires.2008.04.012 Buckner, J. D., Schmidt, N. B., Lang,
A. R., Small, J., Schlauch, R. C., & Lewinsohn, P. M. (2008).
Specificity of social anxiety disorder as a risk factor for alcohol and
cannabis dependence. Journal

References of Psychiatric Research, 42, 230--239. doi: 10.1016/
j.jpsychires.2007.01.002 Caster, J. B., Inderbitzen, H. M., & Hope, D.
(1999). Relationship between youth and parent perceptions of family
environment and social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 13,
237--251. doi: 10.1016/S0887-6185(99)00002-X Chambless, D. L., Fydrich,
T., & Rodebaugh, T. L. (2008). Generalized social phobia and avoidant
personality disorder: Meaningful distinction or useless duplication?
Depression and Anxiety, 25, 8--19. doi: 10.1002/da.20266 Chambless, D.
L., Tran, G. Q., & Glass, C. R. (1997). Predictors of response to
cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social phobia. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 11, 221--240. doi: 10.1016/ S0887-6185(97)00008-x Chapman, T.
F., Mannuzza, S., & Fyer, A. J. (1995). Epidemiology and family studies
in social phobia. In R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F.
R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment
(pp. 21--40). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Choy, Y., Schneier, F. R.,
Heimberg, R. G., Oh, K.-S., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2008). Features of the
offensive subtype of Taijin-Kyofu-Sho in U.S. and Korean patients with
DSM-IV social anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 230--240.
doi: 10.1002/da.20295 Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus,
F., Fennell, M., Grey, N., ... Wild, J. (2006). Cognitive therapy versus
exposure and applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74,
568--578. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.74.3.568 Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A.,
McManus, F., Hackmann, A., Fennell, M., Campbell, H., ... Louis, B.
(2003). Cognitive therapy versus fluoxetine in generalized social
phobia: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 71, 1058--1067. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.71.6.1058
Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In
R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.),
Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment (pp. 69--93). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Coles, M. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2002). Memory
biases in the anxiety disorders: Current status. Clinical Psychology
Review, 22, 587--627. doi: 10.1016/ S0272-7358(01)00113-1

71

Coles, M. E., Turk, C. L., & Heimberg, R. G. (2002). The role of memory
perspective in social phobia: Immediate and delayed memories for
role-played situations. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 30,
415--425. doi: 10.1017/S1352465802004034 Coles, M. E., Turk, C. L.,
Heimberg, R. G., & Fresco, D. M. (2001). Effects of varying levels of
anxiety within social situations: Relationship to memory perspective and
attributions in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39,
651--665. doi: 10.1016/ S0005-7967(00)00035-8 Connor, K. M., Davidson,
J.R.T., Churchill, E., Sherwood, A., Foa, E. B., & Weisler, R. H.
(2000). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN): A
new self-rating scale. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 379--386.
doi: 10.1192/ bjp.176.4.379 Connor, K. M., Kobak, K. A., Churchill, E.,
Katzelnick, D., & Davidson, J.R.T. (2001). MiniSPIN: A brief screening
assessment for generalized social anxiety disorder. Depression and
Anxiety, 14, 137--140. doi: 10.1002/da.1055 Courbasson, C. M., &
Nishikawa, Y. (2010). Cognitive behavioral group therapy for patients
with co-existing social anxiety disorder and substance use disorders: A
pilot study. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 34, 82--91. doi:
10.1007/s10608-008 -9216-8 Cox, B. J., Pagura, J., Stein, M. B., &
Sareen, J. (2009). The relationship between generalized social phobia
and avoidant personality disorder in a national mental health survey.
Depression and Anxiety, 26, 354--362. doi: 10.1002/da.20475 Crawford,
M., & Manassis, K. (2011). Anxiety, social skills, friendship quality,
and peer victimization: An integrated model. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 25, 924--931. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2011.05.005 Dalrymple,
K. L., & Zimmerman, M. (2008). Screening for social fears and social
anxiety disorder in psychiatric outpatients. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
49, 399--406. Dalrymple, K. L., & Zimmerman, M. (2011). Age of onset of
social anxiety disorder in depressed outpatients. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 25(1), 131--137. Davidson, J. R., Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D.,
Keefe, F. J., Franklin, M. E., Compton, J. S., ... Gadde, K. M. (2004).
Fluoxetine, comprehensive cognitive behavioral therapy, and placebo in
generalized social phobia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61,
1005--1013. doi: 10.1001/archpsych.61.10.1005

72

Social Anxiety Disorder

Davidson, J.R.T., Miner, C. M., De Veaugh-Geiss, J., Tupler, L. A.,
Colket, J. T., & Potts, N. L. S. (1997). The Brief Social Phobia Scale:
A psychometric evaluation. Psychological Medicine, 27, 161--166. doi:
10.1017/S0033291796004217 Davidson, J.R.T., Potts, N.L.S., Richichi, E.
A., Ford, S. M., Krishnan, R. R., Smith, R. D., & Wilson, W. (1991). The
Brief Social Phobia Scale. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 52, 48--51.
Davidson, J.R.T., Potts, N., Richichi, E., Krishnan, R., Ford, S. M.,
Smith, R., & Wilson, W. H. (1993). Treatment of social phobia with
clonazepam and placebo. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 13,
423--428. doi: 10.1097/00004714-199312000 -00008 Davila, J., & Beck, J.
G. (2002). Is social anxiety associated with impairment in close
relationships? A preliminary investigation. Behavior Therapy, 33,
427--446. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7894(02)80037-5 de Lima Osório, F., Crippa,
J. A., & Loureiro, S. R. (2010). Further study of the psychometric
qualities of a brief screening tool for social phobia (MINI-SPIN)
applied to clinical and nonclinical samples. Perspectives in Psychiatric
Care, 46, 266--278. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-6163.2010.00261.X de Ruiter, C.,
& Brosschot, J. F. (1994). The emotional Stroop interference effect in
anxiety: Attentional bias or cognitive avoidance? Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 32, 315--319. doi: 10.1016/ 0005-7967(94)90128-7 Deeley, Q.,
Daly, E. M., Surguladze, S., Page, L., Toal, F., Robertson, D., ...
Murphy, D. G. (2007). An event related functional magnetic resonance
imaging study of facial emotion processing in Asperger syndrome.
Biological Psychiatry, 62, 207--217. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.09.037
Derryberry, D., & Reed, M. A. (2002). Anxiety-related attentional biases
and their regulation by attentional control. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 111, 225--236. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.111.2.225 Doehrmann,
O., Ghosh, S. S., Polli, F. E., Reynolds, G. O., Horn, F., Keshavan, A.,
... Gabrieli, J. D. (2013). Predicting treatment response in social
anxiety disorder from functional magnetic resonance imaging. JAMA
Psychiatry, 70, 87--97. doi: 10.1001/ 2013.jamapsychiatry.5 Dozier, M.,
Stovall, K. C., & Albus, K. E. (1999). Attachment and psychopathology in
adulthood. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of

attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 497--519).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Edelman, R. E., & Chambless, D. L. (1995).
Adherence during session and homework in cognitivebehavioral group
treatment of social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33,
537--577. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(94)00068-U Eikenaes, I., Hummelen, B.,
Abrahamsen, G., Andrea, H., & Wilberg, T. (2013). Personality
functioning in patients with avoidant personality disorder and social
phobia. Journal of Personality Disorders, 27, 746--763. doi:
10.1521/pedi_2013_27_109. Eng, W., Coles, M. E., Heimberg, R. G., &
Safren, S. A. (2001). Quality of life following cognitive behavioral
treatment for social anxiety disorder: Preliminary findings. Depression
and Anxiety, 13, 192--193. doi: 10.1002/da.1037 Eng, W., Coles, M. E.,
Heimberg, R. G., & Safren, S. A. (2005). Domains of life satisfaction in
social anxiety disorder: Relation to symptoms and response to
cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 19,
143--156. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis .2004.01.007 Eng, W., Heimberg, R. G.,
Hart, T. A., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2001). Attachment in
individuals with social anxiety disorder: The relationship among adult
attachment styles, social anxiety and depression. Emotion, 1, 365--380.
doi: 10.1037/1528 -3542.1.4.365 Erath, S. A., Flanagan, K. S., &
Bierman, K. B. (2007). Social anxiety and peer relations in early
adolescence: Behavioral and cognitive factors. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 35, 405--416. doi: 10.1007/s10802-007-9099-2 Erwin, B. A.,
Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H. R., & Mindlin, M. (2002). Comorbid anxiety
and mood disorders among persons with social anxiety disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 40, 19--35. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7967(00)00114-5
Erwin, B. A., Heimberg, R. G., Marx, B. P., & Franklin, M. E. (2006).
Traumatic and socially stressful life events among persons with social
anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 20, 896--914. doi:
10.1016/j.janxdis.2005.05.006 Eysenck, M. W., Derakshan, N., Santos, R.,
& Calvo, M. G. (2007). Anxiety and cognitive performance: Attentional
control theory. Emotion, 7, 336--353. doi: 10.1037/1528-3542.7.2.336

References Fedoroff, I. C., & Taylor, S. (2001). Psychological and
pharmacological treatments of social phobia: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 21, 311--323. doi: 10.1097/00004714
-200106000-00011 Feltner, D. E., Liu-Dumaw, M., Schweizer, E., &
Bielski, R. (2011). Efficacy of pregabalin in generalized social anxiety
disorder: Results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled, fixed-dose
study. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 26, 213--220. doi:
10.1097/YIC.0b013e32834519bd Fernandez, K. C., Piccirillo, M. L., &
Rodebaugh, T. L. (2014). Self-report assessment: The status of the field
and room for improvement. In J. W. Weeks (Ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell
handbook of social anxiety disorder (pp. 292--319). Chichester, England:
Wiley-Blackwell. Feske, U., Perry, K. J., Chambless, D. L., Renneberg,
B., & Goldstein, A. J. (1996). Avoidant personality disorder as a
predictor for treatment outcome among generalized social phobics.
Journal of Personality Disorders, 10(2), 174--184. First, M. B.,
Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. (2002). Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders--Patient Edition (SCID-I/P).
New York, NY: Biometrics Research Department. First, M. B., Williams,
J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-5--Research Version (SCID-5-RV). Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Association Publishing. Foa, E. B., Franklin, M.
E., & Kozak, M. J. (2001). Social phobia: An information processing
perspective. In S. G. Hofmann & P. M. DiBartolo (Eds.), From social
anxiety to social phobia: Multiple perspectives (pp. 268--280). Needham,
MA: Allyn & Bacon. Foa, E. B., Franklin, M. E., Perry, K. J., & Herbert,
J. D. (1996). Cognitive biases in generalized social phobia. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 105, 433--439. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.105.3.433
Franklin, M. E., Jaycox, L. H., & Foa, E. B. (1999). Social phobia:
Social skills training. In M. Hersen & A. Bellack (Eds.), Handbook of
comparative interventions for adult disorders (2nd ed., pp. 317--339).
New York, NY: Wiley. Fresco, D. M., Coles, M. E., Heimberg, R. G.,
Liebowitz, M. R., Hami, S., Stein, M. B., & Goetz, D. (2001). The
Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale: A comparison of the psychometric
properties of self-report and clinician-administered formats.
Psychological

73

Medicine, 31, 1025--1035. doi: 10.1017/S00332917 01004056 Furmark, T.,
Tillfors, M., Marteinsdottir, I., Fischer, H., Pissiota, A., Långström,
B., & Fredrikson, M. (2002). Common changes in cerebral blood flow in
patients with social phobia treated with citalopram or
cognitive-behavioral therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59,
425--433. doi: 10.1001/archpsych .59.5.425 Gaston, J. E., Abbott, M. J.,
Rapee, R. M., & Neary, S. A. (2006). Do empirically supported treatments
generalize to private practice? A benchmark study of a
cognitive-behavioural group treatment programme for social phobia.
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 45, 33--48. doi:
10.1348/014466505 X35146 Gelernter, C. S., Uhde, T. W., Cimbolic, P.,
Arnkoff, D. B., Vittone, B. J., & Tancer, M. E. (1991).
Cognitive-behavioral approaches and pharmacological treatments of social
phobia: A controlled study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48,
938--945. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1991.01810340070009 Gilbert, P. (2014).
Evolutionary models: Practical and conceptual utility for the treatment
and study of social anxiety disorder. In J. W. Weeks (Ed.), The
Wiley-Blackwell handbook of social anxiety disorder (pp. 24--52).
Chichester, England: Wiley-Blackwell. Gilboa-Schechtman, E., Franklin,
M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Anticipated reactions to social events:
Differences among individuals with generalized social phobia, obsessive
compulsive disorder, and nonanxious controls. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 24, 731--746. doi: 10.1023/A:1005595513315 Gilboa-Schechtman,
E., Shachar, I., & Helpman, L. (2014). Evolutionary perspective on
social anxiety. In S. G. Hofmann, & P. M. DiBartolo (Eds.). Social
anxiety: Clinical, developmental, and social perspectives (3rd ed.,
pp. 599--622). Waltham, MA: Academic Press. Goldin, P. R., Manber-Ball,
T., Werner, K., Heimberg, R., & Gross, J. J. (2009). Neural mechanisms
of cognitive reappraisal of negative self-beliefs in social anxiety
disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 66, 1091--1099. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.07.014 Goldin, P. R., Morrison, A., Jazaieri,
H., Brozovich, F., Heimberg, R. G., & Gross, J. J. (2016). Group CBT
versus MBSR for social anxiety disorder: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 84, 427--437.

74

Social Anxiety Disorder

Goldin, P. R., Ziv, M., Jazaieri, H., Hahn, K., Heimberg, R., & Gross,
J. J. (2013). Impact of cognitive-behavioral therapy for social anxiety
disorder on the neural dynamics of cognitive reappraisal of negative
self-beliefs: Randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 70,
1048--1056. doi: 10.1001/ jamapsychiatry.2013.234 Goldin, P. R., Ziv,
M., Jazaieri, H., Weeks, J., Heimberg, R. G., & Gross, J. J. (2014).
Impact of cognitivebehavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder on the
neural bases of emotional reactivity to and regulation of social
evaluation. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 62, 97--106. doi:
10.1016/.2014 .08.005 Goldin, P. R., Ziv, M., Jazaieri, H., Werner, K.,
Kraemer, H., Heimberg, R. G., & Gross, J. J. (2012). Cognitive
reappraisal self-efficacy mediates the effects of individual
cognitive-behavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder in a randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80,
1034--1040. Gould, R. A., Buckminster, S., Pollack, M. H., Otto, M. W.,
& Yap, L. (1997). Cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological treatment for
social phobia: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 4, 291--306. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2850.1997 .tb00123.x Grant,
B. F., Hasin, D. S., Blanco, C., Stinson, F. S., Chou, S. P., Goldstein,
R. B., ... Huang, B. (2005). The epidemiology of social anxiety disorder
in the United States: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 66,
1351--1361. doi: 10.4088/JCP.v66n1102 Grant, B. F., Stinson, F. S.,
Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Ruan, J., & Pickering, R. P. (2004).
Co-occurrence of 12--month alcohol and drug use disorders and
personality disorders in the United States: Results from the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 61, 362--368. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.61.4.361
Greenberg, M. T. (1999). Attachment and psychopathology in childhood. In
J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory,
research, and clinical applications (pp. 469--496). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Guastella, A. J., Howard, A. L., Dadds, M. R., Mitchell,
P., & Carson, D. S. (2009). A randomized controlled trial of intranasal
oxytocin as an adjunct to exposure therapy for social anxiety

disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 34, 917--923. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.01.005 Guastella, A. J., Richardson, R.,
Lovibond, P. F., Rapee, R. M., Gaston, J. E., Mitchell, P., & Dadds, M.
R. (2008). A randomized controlled trial of D-cycloserine enhancement of
exposure therapy for social anxiety disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 63,
544-549. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.11.011 Habke, A. M., Hewitt, P.
L., Norton, R., & Asmundson, G. (1997). The Social Phobia and Social
Interaction Anxiety Scales: An exploration of the dimensions of social
anxiety and sex differences in the structure and relations and
pathology. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 19,
21--39. doi: 10.1007/BF02263227 Hackmann, A., Clark, D. M., & McManus,
F. (2000). Recurrent images and early memories in social phobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 601--610. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7967(99)00161-8 Hackmann, A., Surawy, C., & Clark, D. M.
(1998). Seeing yourself through others' eyes: A study of spontaneously
occurring images in social phobia. Behavioral and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 26, 3--12. doi: 10.1017/S1352465898000022 Hansen, R. A.,
Gaynes, B. N., Gartlehner, G., Moore, C. G., Tiwari, R., & Lohr, K. N.
(2008). Efficacy and tolerability of second-generation antidepressants
in social anxiety disorder. International Clinical Psychopharmacology,
23, 170--179. doi: 10.1176/appi .ps.59.10.1121 Hart, T. A., Jack, M. S.,
Turk, C. L., & Heimberg, R. G. (1999). Issues for the measurement of
social phobia. In H.G.M. Westenberg & J. A. den Boer (Eds.), Social
phobia: Recent trends and progress (pp. 133--155). Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Syn-Thesis. Hayes, S. A., Miller, N. A., Hope, D. A.,
Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (2008). Assessing client progress
session-by-session: The Social Anxiety Session Change Index. Cognitive
and Behavioral Practice, 15, 203--211. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpra.2007 .02.010
Hazen, A. L., & Stein, M. B. (1995). Clinical phenomenology and
comorbidity. In M. B. Stein (Ed.), Social phobia: Clinical and research
perspectives (pp. 3--41). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Hedges, D. W., Brown, B. L., Shwalb, D. A., Godfrey, K., & Larcher, A.
M. (2007). The efficacy of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in
adult social anxiety disorder: A meta-analysis of double-blind,

References placebo-controlled trials. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 21,
102--111. doi: 10.1177/0269881106 065102 Heeren, A., Maurage, P.,
Rossignol, M., Vanhaelen, M., Peschard, V., Eeckhout, C., & Philippot,
P. (2012). Self-report version of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale:
Psychometric properties of the French version. Canadian Journal of
Behavioural Science, 44, 99--107. doi: 10.1037/a0026249 Heeren, A.,
Mogoaşe, C., McNally, R. J., Schmitz, A., & Philippot, P. (2015). Does
attention bias modification improve attentional control? A double-blind
randomized experiment with individuals with social anxiety disorder.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 29, 35--42. doi:
10.1016/j.janxdis.2014.10.007 Heeren, A., Mogoaşe, C., Philippot, P., &
McNally, R. J. (2015). Attention bias modification for social anxiety: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 40,
76--90. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr .2015.06.001 Heeren, A., Peschard, V., &
Philippot, P. (2012). The causal role of attentional bias for threat
cues in social anxiety: A test on a cyber-ostracism task. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 36, 512--521. doi: 10.1007/ s10608-011-9394-7
Heimberg, R. G. (1996). Social phobia, avoidant personality disorder,
and the multiaxial conceptualization of interpersonal anxiety. In P.
Salkovskis (Ed.), Trends in cognitive and behavioural therapies
(pp. 43--62). Chichester, England: Wiley. Heimberg, R. G., & Becker, R.
E. (2002). Cognitivebehavioral group therapy for social phobia: Basic
mechanisms and clinical strategies. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Heimberg, R. G., Brozovich, F. A., & Rapee, R. M. (2014). A
cognitive-behavioral model of social anxiety disorder. In S. G. Hofmann,
& P. M. DiBartolo (Eds.), Social anxiety: Clinical, developmental, and
social perspectives (3rd ed., pp. 705--728). Waltham, MA: Academic
Press. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12 -394427-6.00024-8 Heimberg, R. G., Dodge,
C. S., Hope, D. A., Kennedy, C. R., Zollo, L., & Becker, R. E. (1990).
Cognitive behavioral group treatment of social phobia: Comparison to a
credible placebo control. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 1--23.
doi: 10.1007/ BF01173521 Heimberg, R. G., Hofmann, S. G., Liebowitz, M.
R., Schneier, F. R., Smits, J.A.J., Stein, M. B., ... Craske, M. G.
(2014). Social anxiety disorder in

75

DSM-5. Depression and Anxiety, 31, 472--479. doi: 10.1002/da.22231
Heimberg, R. G., Holt, C. S., Schneier, F. R., Spitzer, R. L., &
Liebowitz, M. R. (1993). The issue of subtypes in the diagnosis of
social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 7, 249--269. doi:
10.1016/0887 -6185(93)90006-7 Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H.
R., Safren, S. A., Brown, E. J., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R.
(1999). Psychometric properties of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale.
Psychological Medicine, 29, 199--212. doi: 10.1017/S0033291798007879
Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hope, D. A., Schneier, F. R., Holt,
C. S., Welkowitz, L. A., ... Klein, D. F. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral
group treatment versus phenelzine in social phobia: 12-week outcome.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 1133--1141. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.55.12.1133 Heimberg, R. G., Mueller, G. P., Holt, C.
S., Hope, D. A., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1992). Assessment of anxiety in
social interaction and being observed by others: The Social Interaction
Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Behavior Therapy, 23, 53--73.
doi: 10.1016/S0005-7894(05)80308-9 Heimberg, R. G., Salzman, D., Holt,
C. S., & Blendell, K. (1993). Cognitive behavioral group treatment of
social phobia: Effectiveness at 5-year follow-up. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 17, 325--339. doi: 10.1007/BF01177658 Heinrichs, M., Chen, F.
S. & Domes, G. (2012). Oxytocin. In S. G. Hofmann (Ed.),
Psychobiological approaches for anxiety disorders: Treatment combination
strategies (pp. 123--143). Chichester, England: Wiley-Blackwell.
Herbert, J. D., Bellack, A. S., & Hope, D. A. (1991). Concurrent
validity of the Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory. Journal of
Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 13, 357--369. doi: 10.1007/
BF00960447 Herbert, J. D., Brandsma, L. L., & Fischer, L. (2014).
Assessment of social anxiety and social phobia. In S. G. Hofmann, & P.
M. DiBartolo (Eds.). Social anxiety: Clinical, developmental, and social
perspectives (3rd ed., pp. 46--94). Waltham, MA: Academic Press. Himle,
J. A., Weaver, A., Bybee, D., O'Donnell, L., Vlnka, S., Laviolette, W.,
... Levine, D. S. (2014). A comparison of unemployed job-seekers with
and without social anxiety. Psychiatric Services, 65, 924--930. doi:
10.1176/appi.ps.201300201

76

Social Anxiety Disorder

Hirsch, C., Clark, D. M., & Mathews, A. (2006). Imagery and
interpretations in social phobia: Support for the combined cognitive
biases hypothesis. Behavior Therapy, 37, 223--236. doi: 10.1016/j.beth
.2006.02.001 Hirsch, C. R., Clark, D. M., Mathews, A., & Williams, R.
(2003). Self-images play a causal role in social phobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 41, 909--921. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7967(02)00103-1
Hirsch, C. R., Mathews, A., & Clark, D. M. (2007). Inducing an
interpretation bias changes self-imagery: A preliminary investigation.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 2173--2181. doi: 10.1016/j.brat
.2006.11.001 Hirsch, C. R., Mathews, A., Clark, D. M., Williams, R., &
Morrison, J. A. (2006). The causal role of negative imagery in social
anxiety: A test in confident public speakers. Journal of Behavior
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 37, 159--170. doi: 10.1016/
j.jbtep.2005.03.003 Hirsch, C. R., Meynen, T., & Clark, D. M. (2004).
Negative self-imagery in social anxiety contaminates social
interactions. Memory, 12, 496--506. doi: 10.1080/09658210444000106
Hirshfeld-Becker, D. R., Micco, J. A, Wang, C. H. & Hennin, A. (2014).
Behavioral inhibition: A discrete precursor to social anxiety disorder?
In J. W. Weeks (Ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of social anxiety
disorder (pp. 133--158). Chichester, England: Wiley-Blackwell. Hofmann,
S. G. (2007). Cognitive factors that maintain social anxiety disorder: A
comprehensive model and its treatment implications. Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy, 36, 193--209. doi: 10.1080/16506070701421313 Hofmann, S.,
Asnaani, A., & Hinton, D. (2010). Cultural aspects in social anxiety and
social anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 1117--1127. doi:
10.1002/da.20759 Hofmann, S. G., Meuret, A. E., Smits, J.A.J., Simon, N.
M., Pollack, M. H., Eisenmenger, K., ... Otto, M. W. (2006).
Augmentation of exposure therapy with D-cycloserine for social anxiety
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 298--304. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.63.3.298 Hofmann, S. G., Newman, M. G., Becker, E.,
Taylor, C. B., & Roth, W. T. (1995). Social phobia with and without
avoidant personality disorder: Preliminary behavior therapy outcome
findings. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 427--438. doi: 10.1016/
0887-6185(95)00022-G

Hofmann, S. G., Smits, J.A.J., Rosenfield, D., Simon, N., Otto, M. W.,
Meuret, A. E., ... Pollack, M. H. (2013). D-cycloserine as an
augmentation strategy with cognitive-behavioral therapy for social
anxiety disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 751--758. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.2013 .12070974 Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Bruch,
M. A. (1995). Dismantling cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social
phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 637--650. doi:
10.1016/0005-7967(95)00013-N Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L.
(2010). Managing social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral approach (client
workbook) (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Hope, D. A.,
Herbert, J. D., & White, C. (1995). Diagnostic subtype, avoidant
personality disorder, and efficacy of cognitive behavioral group therapy
for social phobia. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 19, 399--417. doi:
10.1007/BF02230408 Hudson, J. L., Rapee, R. M., Lyneham, H. J.,
McLellan, L. F., Wuthrich, V. M., & Schniering, C. A. (2015). Comparing
outcomes for children with different anxiety disorders following
cognitive behavioural therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 72,
30--37. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2015.06.007 Huppert, J. D., Strunk, D. R.,
Ledley, D. R., Davidson, J.R.T., & Foa, E. B. (2008). Generalized social
anxiety disorder and avoidant personality disorder: Structural analysis
and treatment outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 441--448. doi:
10.1002/da.20349 Isomura, K., Boman, M., Ruck, C., Serlachius, E.,
Larsson, H., Lichtenstein, P., & Mataix-Cols. (2015). Population-based,
multi-generational family clustering study of social anxiety disorder
and avoidant personality disorder. Psychological Medicine, 45,
1581--1589. doi: 10.1017/S0033291714002116 Kagan, J. (1994). The nature
of the child. New York, NY: Basic Books. Kagan, J., Arcus, D., &
Snidman, N. (1993). The idea of temperament: Where do we go from here?
In R. Plomin & G. E. McClearn (Eds.), Nature, nurture & psychology
(pp. 197--210). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. doi:
10.1037/ 10131-009 Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., & Snidman, N. (1988).
Biological bases of childhood shyness. Science, 240, 167--171. doi:
10.1126/science.3353713 Keller, M. B. (2003). The lifelong course of
social anxiety disorder: A clinical perspective. Acta

References Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 108(Suppl. 417), 85--94. doi:
10.1034/j.1600-0447.108.s417.6.x Kelly, J. M., Jakubovski, E., & Bloch,
M. H. (2015). Prognostic subgroups for remission and response in the
Coordinated Anxiety Learning and Management (CALM) trial. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 76, 267--278. doi: 10.4088/JCP.13m08922. Kessler,
R. C., Berglund, P. D., Demler, O., Olga, J. R., Merikangas, K. R., &
Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset
distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593--602. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.593 Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O.,
Merikangas, K., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and
comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617--627. doi:
10.1001/ archpsyc.62.6.617 Kessler, R. C., Stein, M. B., & Berglund, P.
(1998). Social phobia subtypes in the National Comorbidity Survey.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 613--619. doi:
10.1176/ajp.155.5.613 Kimbrel, N. A. (2008). A model of the development
and maintenance of generalized social phobia. Clinical Psychology
Review, 28, 592--612. doi: 10.1016/ j.cpr.2007.08.003 Kobak, K. A.,
Greist, J. H., Jefferson, J. W., & Katzelnick, D. J. (2002). Fluoxetine
in social phobia: A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study.
Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 22, 257--262. doi:
10.1097/00004714-200206000-00005 Krans, J., de Bree, J., & Bryant, R. A.
(2014). Autobiographical memory bias in social anxiety. Memory, 22,
890--897. doi: 10.1080/096.58211.2013.844261 Kuckertz, J. M.,
Gildebrant, E., Liliequist, B., Karlström, P., Väppling, C., Bodlund,
O., ... Carlbring, P. (2014). Moderation and mediation of the effect of
attention training in social anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 53, 30--40. doi: 10.1016/ j.brat.2013.12.003 Kushner, M. G.,
Maurer, E. W., Thuras, P., Donahue, C., Frye, B., Menary, K. R., ... Van
Demark, J. (2013). Hybrid cognitive behavioral therapy versus relaxation
training for co-occurring anxiety and alcohol disorder: A randomized
clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81,
429--442. doi: 10.1037/a0031301 Labuschagne, I., Phan, K. L., Wood, A.,
Angstadt, M., Chua, P., Heinrichs, M., ... Nathan, P. J. (2010).

77

Oxytocin attenuates amygdala reactivity to fear in generalized social
anxiety disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35, 2403--2413. doi: 10.1038/
npp.2010.123 LaFreniere, P. J., & Sroufe, L. A. (1985). Profiles of peer
competence in the preschool: Interrelations between measures, influence
of social ecology, and relation to attachment history. Developmental
Psychology, 21, 56--69. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.21.1.56 La Greca, A. M.,
Dandes, S. K., Wick, P., Shaw, K., & Stone, W. L. (1988). Development of
the Social Anxiety Scale for Children: Reliability and concurrent
validity. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 17, 84--91. doi:
10.1207/s15374424jccp 1701_11 Leary, M. R. (1983). A brief version of
the Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 9, 371--375. doi: 10.1177/ 0146167283093007 Leary, M. R., &
Jongman-Sereno, K. P. (2014). Social anxiety as an early warning system:
A refinement and extension of the self-presentation theory of social
anxiety. In S. G. Hofmann & P.M. DiBartolo (Eds.), Social anxiety:
Clinical, developmental, and social perspectives (3rd ed.,
pp. 579--597). Waltham, MA: Academic Press. Leary, M. R., Kowalski, R.
M., & Campbell, C. D. (1988). Self-presentational concerns and social
anxiety: The role of generalized impression expectancies. Journal of
Research in Personality, 22, 308--321. doi: 10.1016/0092-6566(88)90032-3
Ledley, D. R., & Heimberg, R. G. (2005). Social anxiety disorder. In M.
M. Antony, D. R. Ledley, & R. G. Heimberg (Eds.), Improving outcomes and
preventing relapse in cognitive behavioral therapy (pp. 38--76). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Ledley, D. R., Heimberg, R. G., Hope, D. A.,
Hayes, S. A., Zaider, T. I., Van Dyke, M., ... Fresco, D. M. (2009).
Efficacy of a manualized and workbookdriven individual treatment for
social anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 40, 414--424. doi: 10.1016/
j.beth.2008/.12.001 Ledley, D. R., Huppert, J. D., Foa, E. B., Davidson,
J.R.T., Keefe, F. J., & Potts, N.L.S. (2005). The impact of depressive
symptoms on the treatment of generalized social anxiety disorder.
Depression and Anxiety, 22, 161--167. doi: 10.1002/da.20121 Ledley, D.
R., Storch, E. A., Coles, M. E., Heimberg, R. G., Moser, J., & Bravata,
E. A. (2006). The relationship between childhood teasing and later

78

Social Anxiety Disorder

interpersonal functioning. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 28, 33--40. doi: 10.1007/s10862-006-4539-9 Leichsenring, F.,
Salzer, S., Beutel, M. E., Herpertz, S., Hiller, W., Hoyer, J., ...
Leibing, E. (2013). Psychodynamic therapy and cognitive-behavioral
therapy in social anxiety disorder: A multicenter randomized controlled
trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 759--767. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.12081125. Erratum in: American Journal of
Psychiatry, 2013, 170, 1373. Leichsenring, F., Salzer, S., Beutel, M.
E., Herpertz, S., Hiller, W., Hoyer, J., ... Leibing, E. (2014).
Long-term outcome of psychodynamic therapy and cognitive-behavioral
therapy in social anxiety disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171,
1074--1082. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2014.13111514. LeMoult, J., Rowa, K.,
Antony, M. M., Chudzik, S., & McCabe, R. E. (2014). Impact of comorbid
depression on cognitive behavioral group treatment for social anxiety
disorder. Behaviour Change, 31, 53--64. doi: 10.1017/bec.2013.32 Leung,
A. W., & Heimberg, R. G. (1996). Homework compliance, perceptions of
control, and outcome of cognitive-behavioral treatment of social phobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 423--432. doi:
10.1016/0005-7967(96)00014-9 Liebowitz, M. (1987). Social phobia. Modern
Problems of Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141--173. Liebowitz, M. R.,
Gelenberg, A. J., & Munjack, D. (2005). Venlafaxine extended release
vs. placebo and paroxetine in social anxiety disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 62, 190--198. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.2.190
Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Hope, D. A., Davies,
S., Holt, C. S., ... Klein, D. F. (1999). Cognitive-behavioral group
therapy versus phenelzine in social phobia: Long term outcome.
Depression and Anxiety, 10, 89--98. doi: 10.1002/
(SICI)1520-6394(1999)10:3\<89::AID-DA1\>3.0 .CO;2-5 Liebowitz, M. R.,
Mangano, R. M., Bradwejn, J., & Asnis, G. (2005). A randomized
controlled trial of venlafaxine extended release in generalized social
anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 66, 238--247. doi:
10.4088/JCP.v66n0213 Lincoln, T. M., Rief, W., Hahlweg, K., Frank, M.,
von Witzleben, I., Schroeder, B., & Fiegenbaum, W. (2003). Effectiveness
of an empirically supported treatment for social phobia in the field.
Behaviour

Research and Therapy, 41, 1251--1269. doi: 10.1016/ S000 Lundh, L. G., &
Öst, L.-G. (1996). Recognition bias for critical faces in social
phobics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 787--794. doi: 10.1016/
0005-7967(96)00035-6 Lundh, L. G., & Öst, L.-G. (1997). Explicit and
implicit memory bias in social phobia: The role of subdiagnostic type.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 305--317. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7967(96)00122-2 Magee, W. J., Eaton, W. W., Wittchen,
H.-U., McGonagle, K. A., & Kessler, R. C. (1996). Agoraphobia, simple
phobia, and social phobia in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 53, 159--168. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc
.1996.01830020077009 Makkar, S. R., & Grisham, J. R. (2011). Social
anxiety and the effects of negative self-imagery on emotion, cognition,
and post-event processing. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49, 654--664.
doi: 10.1016/ j.brat.2011.07.004 Mannuzza, S., Schneier, F. R., Chapman,
T. F., Liebowitz, M. R., Klein, D. F., & Fyer, A. J. (1995). Generalized
social phobia: Reliability and validity. Archives of General Psychiatry,
52(3), 230--237. Marom, S., Gilboa-Schechtman, E., Aderka, I. M.,
Weizman, A., & Hermesh, H. (2009). Impact of depression on treatment
effectiveness and gains maintenance in social phobia: A naturalistic
study of cognitive behavior group therapy. Depression and Anxiety, 26,
289--300. doi: 10.1002/da.20390 Marques, L., Porter, E., Keshaviah, A.,
Pollack, M. H., Van Ameringen, M., Stein, M. B., & Simon, N. M. (2012).
Avoidant personality disorder in individuals with generalized social
anxiety disorder: What does it add? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26,
665--672. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2012.05.004 Masia-Warner, C., Storch,
E. A., Pincus, D. B., Klein, R. G., Heimberg, R. G., & Liebowitz, M. R.
(2003). The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale for Children and Adolescents:
An initial psychometric investigation. Journal of the American Academy
of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 42, 1076--1084. doi:
10.1097/01.CHI.0000070249.24125.89 Mathew, S. J., Coplan, J. D., &
Gorman, J. M. (2001). Neurobiological mechanisms of social anxiety
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1558--1567. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.158.10.1558 Mattia, J. I., Heimberg, R. G., & Hope, D.
A. (1993). The revised Stroop color-naming task in social

References phobics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 305--313. doi:
10.1016/0005-7967(93)90029-T Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998).
Development and validation of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear
and social interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36,
455--470. doi: 10.1016/S0005 -7967(97)10031-6 Mayo-Wilson, E., Dias, S.,
Mavranezouli, I., Kew, K., Clark, D. M., Ades, A. E., & Pilling, S.
(2014). Psychological and pharmacological interventions for social
anxiety disorder in adults: A systematic review and network
meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 368--376. doi:
10.1016/S2215-0366(14)70329-3 McCabe, R. E., Antony, M. M., Summerfeldt,
L. J., Liss, A., & Swinson, R. P. (2003). Preliminary examination of the
relationship between anxiety disorders in adults and self-reported
history of teasing or bullying experiences. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
32, 187--193. doi: 10.1080/16506070310005051 McCabe, R. E., Miller, J.
L., Laugesen, N., Antony, M. M., & Young, L. (2010). The relationship
between anxiety disorders in adults and recalled childhood teasing.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24, 238--243. doi:
10.1016/j.janxdis.2009.11.002 McEvoy, P. M. (2007). Effectiveness of
cognitive behavioural group therapy for social phobia in a community
clinic: A benchmarking study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45,
3030--3040. doi: 10.1016/ j.brat.2007.08.002 McEvoy, P., Erceg-Hurn, D.,
Saulsman, L., & Thibodeau, M. (2015). Imagery enhancements increase the
effectiveness of cognitive behavioural group therapy for social anxiety
disorder: A benchmarking study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 65,
42--51. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2014.12.011 McEvoy, P. M., Nathan, P.,
Rapee, R. M., & Campbell, B.N.C. (2012). Cognitive behavioural group
therapy for social phobia: Evidence of transportability to community
clinics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 258--265. doi:
10.1016/j.brat.2012 .01.009 McLean, C. P., & Anderson, E. R. (2009).
Brave men and timid women? A review of the gender differences in fear
and anxiety. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 496--505. doi:
10.1016/j.cpr.2009.05.003 McNeil, D. W., & Quentin, L. L. (2014).
Clinical interviews: Empirical overview and procedural recommendations.
In J. W. Weeks (Ed.), The WileyBlackwell handbook of social anxiety
disorder (pp. 271--291). Chichester, England: Wiley-Blackwell.

79

Mennin, D. S., Fresco, D. M., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Davies,
S. O., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2002). Screening for social anxiety disorder
in the clinical setting: Using the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 661--673. doi:
10.1016/S0887-6185(02)00134-2 Mickelson, K. D., Kessler, R. C., &
Shaver, P. R. (1997). Adult attachment in a nationally representative
sample. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 1092--1106.
doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.73.5.1092 Moriya, J., & Sugiura, Y. (2012).
Impaired attentional disengagement from stimuli matching the contents of
working memory in social anxiety. PloS One, e47221. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0047221 Moriya, J., & Tanno, Y. (2008).
Relationships between negative emotionality and attentional control in
effortful control. Personality and Individual Differences, 44,
1348--1355. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2007 .12.003 Morrison, A. S., Gordon,
D., & Heimberg, R. G. (2013). Anxiety disorders. In M. D. Robinson, E.
R. Watkins, & E. Harmon-Jones (Eds.), Guilford handbook of cognition and
emotion (pp. 421--442). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Morrison, A. S., &
Heimberg, R. G. (2013). Attentional control mediates the effect of
social anxiety on positive affect. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 27,
56--67. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2012.10.002 Mörtberg, E., Clark, D. M., &
Bejerot, S. (2011). Intensive group cognitive therapy and individual
cognitive therapy for social phobia: Sustained improvement at 5-year
follow-up. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 994--1000. doi:
10.1016/j.janxdis.2011.06.007 Moscovitch, D. A. (2009). What is the core
fear in social phobia? A new model to facilitate individualized case
conceptualization and treatment. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 16,
123--134. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpra.2008.04.002 Moscovitch, D. A., Chiupka,
C. A., & Gavric, D. L. (2013). Within the mind's eye: Negative mental
imagery activates different emotion regulation strategies in high versus
low socially anxious individuals. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 44, 426--432. doi: 10.1016/jbtep.2013 .05.002
Moscovitch, D. A., Hofmann, S. G., Suvak, M. K., & In-Albon, T. (2005).
Mediation of changes in anxiety and depression during treatment of
social phobia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73,
945--952. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.73.5.945

80

Social Anxiety Disorder

Moser, J. S., Hajcak, G., Huppert, J. D., Foa, E. B., & Simons, R. F.
(2008). Interpretation bias in social anxiety as detected by
event-related brain potentials. Emotion, 8, 693--700. doi:
10.1037/a0013173 Murray, L., Cooper, P., Creswell, C., Schofield, E., &
Sack, C. (2007). The effects of maternal social phobia on mother-infant
interactions and infant social responsiveness. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 48, 45--52. doi: 10.1111/j.1469
-7610.2006.01657.x National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.
(2013). Social anxiety disorder: Recognition, assessment and treatment.
Retrieved from https:// www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg159 Ng, A. S.,
Abbott, M. J., & Hunt, C. (2014). The effect of self-imagery on symptoms
and processes in social anxiety: A systematic review. Clinical
Psychology Review, 34, 620--633. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2014 .09.003 Olfson,
M., Guardino, M., Struening, E., Schneier, F. R., Hellman, F., & Klein,
D. F. (2000). Barriers to treatment of social anxiety. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 157, 521--527. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp .157.4.521
Ollendick, T. H., & Benoit, K. (2012). A parent-child interactional
model of social anxiety disorder in youth. Clinical Child and Family
Psychology Review, 15, 81--91. doi: 10.1007/s10567-011-0108-1 Pande, A.
C., Davidson, J. R., Jefferson, J. W., Janney, C. A., Katzelnick, D. J.,
Weisler, R. H., ... Sutherland, S. M. (1999). Treatment of social phobia
with gabapentin: A placebo-controlled study. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 19, 341--348. doi: 10.1097/00004714-199908000-00010
Pande, A. C., Feltner, D. E., Jefferson, J. W., Davidson, J. R.,
Pollack, M., Stein, M. B., ... Werth, J. L. (2004). Efficacy of the
novel anxiolytic pregabalin in social anxiety disorder: A
placebo-controlled, multicenter study. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 24, 141--149. doi: 10.1097/01.jcp.0000117423
.05703.e7 Patel, A., Knapp, M., Henderson, J., & Baldwin, D. (2002). The
economic consequences of social phobia. Journal of Affective Disorders,
68(2--3), 221--233. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0327(00)00323-2 Peters, L.
(2000). Discriminant validity of the Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory
(SPAI), the Social Phobia Scale (SPS) and the Social Interaction Anxiety
Scale (SIAS). Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 943--950. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7967(99)00131-X

Phan, K., Fitzgerald, D., & Nathan, P. (2006). Association between
amygdala hyperactivity to harsh faces and severity of social anxiety in
generalized social phobia. Biological Psychiatry, 59, 424--429. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.08.012 Piccirillo, M. L., Dryman, M. T., &
Heimberg, R. G. (in press). Safety behaviors in adults with social
anxiety: review and future directions. Behavior Therapy. doi:
10.1016/j.beth.2015.11.005 Pollack, M. H., Van Ameringen, M., Simon, N.
M., Worthington, J. W., Hoge, E. A., Keshaviah, A., & Stein, M. B.
(2014). A double-blind randomized controlled trial of augmentation and
switch strategies for refractory social anxiety disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 44--53. doi: 10.1176/appi .ajp.2013.12101353
Potter, C. M., Wong, J., Heimberg, R. G., Blanco, C., Liu, S.-M., Wang,
S., & Schneier, F. R. (2014). Situational panic attacks in social
anxiety disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 167, 1--7. doi:
10.1016/ j.jad.2014.05.044 Potts, N.L.S., Book, S., & Davidson, J.R.T.
(1996). The neurobiology of social phobia. International Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 11(Suppl. 3), 43--48. doi:
10.1097/00004850-199606003-00008 Powers, M. B., Sigmarsson, S. R., &
Emmelkamp, P.M.G. (2008). A meta-analytic review of psychological
treatments for social anxiety disorder. International Journal of
Cognitive Therapy, 1, 94--113. doi: 10.1521/ijct.2008.1.2.94 Price, M.,
Tone, E. B., & Anderson, P. L. (2011). Vigilant and avoidant attention
biases as predictors of response to cognitive behavioral therapy for
social phobia. Depression and Anxiety, 28, 349--353. doi:
10.1002/da.20791 Ranta, K., Kaltiala-Heino, R., Rantanen, P., Tuomisto,
M. T., & Marttunen, M. (2007). Screening social phobia in adolescents
from general population: The validity of the Social Phobia Inventory
(SPIN) against a clinical interview. European Psychiatry, 22, 244--251.
doi: 10.1016/j.eurpsy.2006.12.002 Rapee, R. M., & Hayman, K. (1996). The
effects of video feedback on the self-evaluation of performance in
socially anxious subjects. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 315--322.
doi: 10.1016/ 0005-7967(96)00003-4 Rapee, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G.
(1997). A cognitivebehavioral model of anxiety in social phobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 741--756. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7967(97)00022-3

References Rapee, R. M., & Lim, L. (1992). Discrepancy between self- and
observer ratings of performance in social phobics. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 101, 728--731. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.101.4.728 Rapee, R.
M., McCallum, S. L., Melville, L. F., Ravenscroft, H., & Rodney, J. M.
(1994). Memory bias in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
32, 89--99. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(94)90087-6 Reich, J. (2014). Avoidant
personality disorder and its relationship to social phobia. In S.
Hofmann & P. M. DiBartolo (Eds.), Social anxiety: Clinical,
developmental, and social perspectives (3rd ed., pp. 27--44). Waltham,
MA: Academic Press. Roberson-Nay, R., Strong, D. R., Nay, W. T., Beidel,
D. C., & Turner, S. M. (2007). Development of an abbreviated Social
Phobia and Anxiety Inventory using item response theory: The SPAI-23.
Psychological Assessment, 19, 133--145. doi: 10.1037/1040 -3590.19.1.133
Rodebaugh, T. L., & Rapee, R. M. (2005). Those who think they look worst
respond best: Self-observer discrepancy predicts response to video
feedback following a speech task. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29,
705--715. doi: 10.1007/s10608-005-9634-9 Rodebaugh, T. L., Woods, C. M.,
& Heimberg, R. G. (2007). The reverse of social anxiety is not always
the opposite: The reverse-scored items of the Social Interaction Anxiety
Scale do not belong. Behavior Therapy, 38, 192--206. doi: 10.1016/j.beth
.2006.08.001 Rodebaugh, T. L., Woods, C. M., Thissen, D. M., Heimberg,
R. G., Chambless, D. L., & Rapee, R. M. (2004). More information from
fewer questions: The factor structure and item properties of the
original and Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation scale. Psychological
Assessment, 16, 169--181. doi: 10.1037/ 1040-3590.16.2.169 Rose, D. T.,
& Abramson, L. Y. (1992). Developmental predictors of depressive
cognitive style: Research and theory. In D. Chicetti & S. Toth (Eds.),
Rochester symposium of developmental psychopathology (Vol. 4,
pp. 323--349). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. Roth, D.
A., Antony, M. M., & Swinson, R. P. (2001). Interpretations for anxiety
symptoms in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 129--138.
doi: 10.1016/S0005-7967(99)00159-X Roth, D. A., Coles, M., & Heimberg,
R. G. (2002). The relationship between memories for childhood teasing
and anxiety and depression in adulthood.

81

Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 151--166. doi:
10.1016/S0887-6185(01)00096-2 Rubin, K. H., & Mills, R.S.L. (1988). The
many faces of social isolation in childhood. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 56, 916--924. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.56.6.916
Rytwinski, N. K., Fresco, D. M., Heimberg, R. G., Coles, M. E.,
Liebowitz, M. R., Cissell, S., ... Hofmann, S. G. (2009). Screening for
social anxiety disorder with the self-report version of the Liebowitz
Social Anxiety Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 34--38. doi:
10.1002/da.20503 Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., Brown, E. J., & Holle,
C. (1997). Quality of life in social phobia. Depression and Anxiety, 4,
126--133. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1520
-6394(1996)4:3\<126::AID-DA5\>3.0.CO;2-E Salemink, E., Kindt, M.,
Rienties, H., & van den Hout, M. (2014). Internet-based cognitive bias
modification of interpretations in patients with anxiety disorders: A
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 45, 186--195. doi: 10.1016/j.btep.2013.10.005
Salkovskis, P. M. (1991). The importance of behaviour in the maintenance
of anxiety and panic: A cognitive account. Behavioural Psychotherapy,
19, 6--19. doi: 10.1017/S0141347300011472 Saunders, J. B., Aasland, O.
G., Babor, T. F., de la Fuente, J. R., & Grant, M. (1993). Development
of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): WHO
collaborative project on early detection of persons with harmful alcohol
consumption--II. Addiction, 88, 791--804. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443
.1993.tb02093.x Schlette, P., Brändström, S., Eisemann, M., Sigvardsson,
S., Nylander, P.-O., Adolfsson, R., & Perris, C. (1998). Perceived
parental rearing behaviours and temperament and character in healthy
adults. Personality and Individual Differences, 24, 661--668. doi:
10.1016/S0191-8869(97)00229-8 Schmidt, N. B., Richey, J. A., Buckner, J.
D., & Timpano, K. R. (2009). Attention training for generalized social
anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118, 5--14. doi:
10.1037/a0013643 Schmukle, S. C. (2005). Unreliability of the dot probe
task. European Journal of Personality, 19, 595--605. doi:
10.1002/per.554 Schneier, F. R., Foose, T. E., Hasin, D. S., Heimberg,
R. G., Liu, S.-M., Grant, B. F., & Blanco, C. (2010). Social anxiety
disorder and alcohol use disorder comorbidity in the National
Epidemiologic

82

Social Anxiety Disorder

Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychological Medicine, 40,
977--988. doi: 10.1017/ S0033291709991231 Schneier, F. R., Johnson, J.,
Hornig, C. D., Liebowitz, M. R., & Weissman, M. M. (1992). Social
phobia: Comorbidity and morbidity in an epidemiologic sample. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 49, 282--288. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.1992.01820040034004 Schneier, F. R., Liebowitz, M. R.,
Abi-Dargham, A., Zea-Ponce, Y., Lin, S.-H., & Luruelle, M. (2000). Low
dopamine D2 receptor binding potential in social phobia. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 457--459. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.157.3.457
Schry, A. R., Roberson-Nay, R., & White, S. W. (2012). Measuring social
anxiety in college students: A comprehensive evaluation of the
psychometric properties of the SPAI-23. Psychological Assessment, 24,
846--854. Schultz, L. T., & Heimberg, R. G. (2008). Attentional focus in
social anxiety disorder: Potential for interactive processes. Clinical
Psychology Review, 28, 1206--1221. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2008.04.003
Schutters, S. I., van Megan, H. J., & Westenberg, H. G. (2005). Efficacy
of quetiapine in generalized social anxiety disorder: Results from an
open-label study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 66, 540--542. doi:
10.4088/JCP.v66n0420b Siegel, R., La Greca, A. M., & Harrison, H. M.
(2009). Peer victimization and social anxiety in adolescents:
Prospective and reciprocal relationships. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 38, 1096--1109. doi: 10.1007/ s10964-009-9392-1 Simon, N.
M., Hoge, E. A., Fischmann, D., Worthington, J. J., Christian, K. M.,
Kinrys, G., & Pollack, M. H. (2006). An open-label trial of risperidone
augmentation for refractory anxiety disorders. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 67, 381--385. doi: 10.4088/JCP.v67n0307 Simpson, H. B.,
Schneier, F. R., Campeas, R., Marshall, R. D., Fallon, B. A., Davies,
S., ... Liebowitz, M. R. (1998). Imipramine in the treatment of social
phobia. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 18, 132--135. doi:
10.1097/00004714-199804000-00005 Solyom, L., Ledwidge, B., & Solyom, C.
(1986). Delineating social phobia. British Journal of Psychiatry,
149(4), 464--470. Stangier, U., Schramm, E., Heidenreich, T., Berger,
M., & Clark, D. (2011). Cognitive therapy vs interpersonal psychotherapy
in social anxiety disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Archives

of General Psychiatry, 68, 692--700. doi: 10.1001/
archgenpsychiatry.2011.67 Stapinski, L. A., Rapee, R. M., Sannibale, C.,
Teeson, M., Haber, P. S., & Baillie, A. J. (2015). The clinical and
theoretical basis for integrated cognitive behavioral treatment of
comorbid social anxiety and alcohol use disorders. Cognitive and
Behavioral Practice, 22, 504--521. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpra.2014 .05.004
Stein, D. J., & Stahl, S. (2000). Serotonin and anxiety: Current models.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 15(Suppl. 2), S1--S6. Stein,
M. B. (1997). Phenomenology and epidemiology of social phobia.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 12(Suppl. 6), S23--S26. doi:
10.1097/ 00004850-199710006-00005 Stein, M. B., Chartier, M. J., Hazen,
A. L., Kozak, M. V., Tancer, M. E., Lander, S., ... Walker, J. R.
(1998). A direct-interview family study of generalized social phobia.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 90--97. doi: 10.1176/ajp.155.1.90
Stein, M. B., & Gelernter, J. (2014). Genetic factors in social anxiety
disorder. In J. W. Weeks (Ed.), The Wiley Blackwell handbook of social
anxiety disorder (pp. 53--66). Chichester, England: Wiley. Stein, M. B.,
Gelernter, J., & Smoller, J. W. (2004). Genetic aspects of social
anxiety and related traits. In B. Bandelow & D. J. Stein (Eds.), Social
anxiety disorder: More than shyness (pp. 197--214). New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker. Stein, M. B., Heuser, I. J., Juncos, J. L., & Uhde, T. W.
(1990). Anxiety disorders in patients with Parkinson's disease. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 217--220. doi: 10.1176/ajp.147.2.217 Stein,
M. B., & Kean, Y. (2000). Disability and quality of life in social
phobia: Epidemiologic findings. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157,
1606--1613. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.157.10.1606 Stein, M. B., & Stein, D.
J. (2008). Social anxiety disorder. Lancet, 371, 1115--1125. doi:
10.1016/S0140 -6736(08)60488-2 Stevens, S., Cludius, B., Banti, T.,
Hermann, C., & Gerlach A. (2014). Influence of alcohol on social
anxiety: An investigation of attentional, physiological and behavioral
effects. Biological Psychology, 96, 126--133. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsycho.2013.12.004 Stopa, L. (2009). Why is the self
important in understanding and treating social phobia? Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy, 38, 48--54. doi: 10.1080/ 16506070902980737

References Stopa, L., & Clark, D. M. (1993). Cognitive processes in
social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 255--267. doi:
10.1016/0005-7967(93) 90024-O Stopa, L., & Clark, D. M. (2000). Social
phobia and interpretation of social events. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 38, 273--283. doi: 10.1016/S0005 -7967(99)00043-1 Stopa, L., &
Jenkins, A. (2007). Images of the self in social anxiety: Effects on the
retrieval of autobiographical memories. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 38, 459--473. doi: 10.1016/j.jbtep.2007.08.006
Storch, E. A., Masia-Warner, C., Crisp, H., & Klein, R. G. (2005). Peer
victimization and social anxiety in adolescence: A prospective study.
Aggressive Behavior, 31, 437--452. doi: 10.1002/ab.20093 Strauss, C. C.,
Lahey, B. B., Frick, P., Frame, C. L., & Hynd, G. W. (1988). Peer social
status of children with social anxiety disorders. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 56, 137--141. doi: 10.1037/ 0022-006X.56.1.137
Syal, S. & Stein, D. J. (2014). The social neuroscience of social
anxiety disorder. In J. W. Weeks (Ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of
social anxiety disorder (pp. 67--89). Chichester, England:
Wiley-Blackwell. Szafranski, D. D., Talkovsky, A. M., Farris, S. G., &
Norton, P .J. (2014). Comorbidity: Social anxiety disorder and
psychiatric comorbidity are not shy to co-occur. In J. W. Weeks (Ed.),
The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of social anxiety disorder (pp. 201--222).
Chichester, England: Wiley-Blackwell. Taylor, S., Woody, S., McLean, P.
D., & Koch, W. J. (1997). Sensitivity of outcome measures for treatments
of generalized social phobia. Assessment, 4, 181--191. doi:
10.1177/107319119700400207 Tepe, E., Dalrymple, K., & Zimmerman, M.
(2012). The impact of comorbid cannabis use disorders on the clinical
presentation of social anxiety disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 46, 50--56. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2011.09.021 Tilhonen,
J., Kuikka, J., Bergstrom, K., Lepola, U., Koponen, H., & Leinonen, E.
(1997). Dopamine reuptake site densities in patients with social phobia.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 239--242. doi:
10.1176/ajp.154.2.239 Tillfors, M. (2004). Why do some individuals
develop social phobia? A review with emphasis on the neurobiological
influences. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 58, 267--276. doi:
10.1080/08039480410005774

83

Tillfors, M., Furmark, T., Carlbring, P., & Andersson, G. (2015). Risk
profiles for poor treatment response to internet-delivered CBT in people
with social anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 33,
103--109. Torvik, F. A., Welander-Vatn, A., Ystrom, E., Knudsen, G. P.,
Czajkowski, N., Kendler, K. S., & Reichborn-Kjennerud, T. (2016).
Longitudinal associations between social anxiety disorder and avoidant
personality disorder: A twin study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 125,
114--124. doi: 10.1037/ abn0000124 Trower, P., & Gilbert, P. (1989). New
theoretical conceptions of social anxiety and social phobia. Clinical
Psychology Review, 9, 19--35. doi: 10.1016/ 0272-7358(89)90044-5 Turk,
C. L., Heimberg, R. G., Luterek, J. A., Mennin, D. S., & Fresco, D. M.
(2005). Emotion dysregulation in generalized anxiety disorder: A
comparison with social anxiety disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
29, 89--106. doi: 10.1007/ s10608-005-1651-1 Turner, S. M., Beidel, D.
C., Dancu, C. V., & Stanley, M. A. (1989). An empirically derived
inventory to measure social fears and anxiety: The Social Phobia and
Anxiety Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 1, 35--40. doi:
10.1037/1040-3590.1.1.35 Vaishnavi, S., Alamy, S., Zhang, W., Connor, K.
M., & Davidson, J.R.T. (2007). Quetiapine as monotherapy for social
anxiety disorder: A placebo-controlled study. Progress in
Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 31, 1464--1469. doi:
10.1016/ j.pnpbp.2007.06.027 Van Bockstaele, B., Verschuere, B.,
Tibboel, H., De Houwer, J., Crombez, G., & Koster, E. (2014). A review
of current evidence for the causal impact of attentional bias on fear
and anxiety. Psychological Bulletin, 140, 682--721. doi:
10.1037/a0034834 Vassilopoulos, S. P., & Banerjee, R. (2010). Social
interaction anxiety and the discounting of positive interpersonal
events. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 38, 597--609. doi:
10.1017/S13524658 10000433 Veljaca, K. A., & Rapee, R. M. (1998).
Detection of negative and positive audience behaviours by socially
anxious subjects. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 311--321. doi:
10.1016/s0005-7967(98) 00016-3 Vernberg, E. M., Abwender, D. A., Ewell,
K. K., & Beery, S. H. (1992). Social anxiety and peer relationships in
early adolescence: A prospective analysis.

84

Social Anxiety Disorder

Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 21, 189--196. doi:
10.1207/s15374424jccp2102_11 Versiani, M., Nardi, A. E., Figueira, I.,
Mendlowicz, M., & Marques, C. (1997). Double-blind placebo controlled
trials with bromazepam. Jornal Brasileiro de Psiquiatria, 46, 167--171.
Wang, P. S., Angermeyer, M., Guilherme, B., Bruffaerts, R., Chiu, W. T.,
De Girolamo, G., ... Bedirhan Ustun, T. (2007). Delay and failure in
treatment seeking after first onset of mental disorders in the World
Health Organization's World Mental Health Survey Initiative. World
Psychiatry, 6, 177--185. Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M.,
Hart, T. A., Turk, C. L., Schnieier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2005).
Empirical validation and psychometric evaluation of the Brief Fear of
Negative Evaluation Scale in patients with social anxiety disorder.
Psychological Assessment, 17, 179--190. doi: 10.1037/ 1040-3590.17.2.179
Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., Rodebaugh, T. L., & Norton, P. J. (2008).
Exploring the relationship between fear of positive evaluation and
social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 386--400. doi:
10.1016/j.janxdis.2007.04.009 Weeks, J. W., & Howell, A. N. (2014). Fear
of positive evaluation: The neglected fear domain in social anxiety. In
J. W. Weeks (Ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of social anxiety
disorder (pp. 433--453). Chichester, England: Wiley. Weeks, J. W.,
Spokas, M. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Psychometric evaluation of the
Mini--Social Phobia Inventory (Mini-SPIN) in a treatment-seeking sample.
Depression and Anxiety, 24, 382--391. doi: 10.1002/da.20250 Weinstock,
L. S. (1999). Gender differences in the presentation and management of
social anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(Suppl. 9),
9--13. Wells, A., Clark, D. M., & Ahmad, S. (1998). How do I look with
my mind's eye? Perspective taking in social

phobic imagery. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 631--634. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7967(98)00037-0 Wells, A., Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P.,
Ludgate, J., Hackmann, A., & Gelder, M. (1995). Social phobia: The role
of in-situation safety behaviors in maintaining anxiety and negative
beliefs. Behavior Therapy, 26, 153--161. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7894(05)
80088-7 Wenzel, A. (2002). Characteristics of close relationships in
individuals with social phobia: A preliminary comparison with nonanxious
individuals. In J. H. Harvey & A. Wenzel (Eds.), Maintaining and
enhancing close relationships: A clinician's guide (pp. 199--213).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Wenzel, A., & Cochran, C. (2006). Autobiographical
memories prompted by automatic thoughts in panic disorder and social
phobia. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 35, 129--137. doi:
10.1080/165060706005 83130 Wong, J., Gordon, E. A., & Heimberg, R. G.
(2014). Cognitive-behavioral models of social anxiety disorder. In J. W.
Weeks (Ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of social anxiety disorder
(pp. 3--23). Chichester, England: Wiley. Woody, S. R., Chambless, D. L.,
& Glass, C. R. (1997). Self-focused attention in the treatment of social
phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 117--129. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7967(96)00084-8 Zaider, T. I., Heimberg, R. G., & Iida, M.
(2010). Anxiety disorders and intimate relationships: A study of daily
processes in couples. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119, 163--173.
doi: 10:1037/a0018473 Zimmerman, M., & Mattia, J. I. (1999). Psychiatric
diagnosis in clinical practice: Is comorbidity being missed?
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 40, 182--191. doi:
10.1016/S0010-440X(99)90001-9 Zvielli, A., Bernstein, A., & Koster,
E.H.W. (2015). Temporal dynamics of attentional bias. Clinical
Psychological Science, 3, 772--778. doi: 10.1177/ 2167702614551572

Chapter 3 Panic Disorder Joanna J. Arch, Alex Kirk, and Michelle G.
Craske

T

he purpose of this chapter is to offer an up-to-date review on the
nature, etiology, assessment, and treatment of panic disorder. The
chapter aims to integrate a substantial body of previous research on
panic disorder with the most recent advances in the field.

Panic Disorder A panic attack is an abrupt surge of intense fear or
discomfort that is diagnosed by the presence of 4 or more of 13 physical
and cognitive symptoms: palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated
heart rate; sweating; trembling or shaking; sensations of shortness of
breath or smothering; feeling of choking; chest pain or discomfort;
nausea or abdominal distress; feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or
faint; chills or heat sensations; paresthesias (numbness or tingling
sensations); derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization
(being detached from oneself); fear of losing control or going crazy;
and fear of dying (American Psychiatric Association \[APA\], 2013). The
sudden, abrupt surge of intense fear or discomfort peaks within minutes,
as opposed to gradually building anxious arousal. This abrupt surge can
occur from an anxious or calm baseline state. A full-blown panic attack
is defined as four or more symptoms, whereas limited symptom attacks are
defined as fewer than four symptoms. Panic disorder is characterized by
repeated unexpected panic attacks, i.e. attacks that occur without an
obvious trigger, "out of the blue," plus at least 1 month of persistent
worry or concern about the recurrence of panic or its consequences, or a
significant, maladaptive behavioral change related to the attacks. These
behavioral changes may include avoidance of activities in which panic
attacks are expected to occur, particularly physiologically arousing
activities such as exercise, saunas, scary movies, sex, unfamiliar
places, and so forth, or use of safety behaviors, such as frequent
attendance at medical facilities for fear of a medical problem. Panic
attacks often, but not always, occur within the context of
agoraphobia---marked fear or anxiety about situations from which escape
might be difficult or in which help might be unavailable in the event of
panic-like or other incapacitating symptoms (e.g., loss of bowel control
or a sense of falling). A diagnosis of agoraphobia requires fear of at
least two of the following situations: public transportation

85

86

Panic Disorder

(e.g., traveling in automobiles, buses, trains, ships, or planes), open
spaces (e.g., parking lots, marketplaces, or bridges), enclosed places
(e.g., shops, theaters, or cinemas), standing in line or being in a
crowd, and being outside of the home alone. Panic attacks commonly occur
within the context of any of the anxiety disorders, as well as substance
use disorders and other psychiatric conditions. Panic attacks are also a
marker of psychopathology, predictive of the onset of a variety of
disorders as well as their course and severity (Batelaan et al., 2012;
Kircanski, Craske, Epstein, & Wittchen, 2009). Consequently, panic
attack can be added as a specifier for any DSM-5 diagnosis. What
distinguishes panic attacks associated with other DSM-5 disorders
(outside of panic disorder) is that they are expected or confined to the
context of that disorder, e.g., panic attacks occur only when recovering
from the effects of alcohol in an alcohol use disorder, or when
encountering trauma cues in posttraumatic stress disorder, or when
speaking publicly in social anxiety disorder. Furthermore, in those
disorders, the panic attacks themselves are rarely the focus of concern.
In contrast, within panic disorder, the panic attacks occur unexpectedly
(repeatedly), although expected attacks can occur as well, and the focus
of concern is on the physical and mental consequences of the panic
attacks themselves. In addition, panic attacks may also occur in the
absence of psychiatric disorder; thus, nearly one third of the 22% of
adults in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication who reported
having had at least one panic attack in their lifetime did not meet the
criteria for any other DSM-IV diagnosis (Kessler et al., 2006). Panic
attacks are characterized by a unique action tendency: specifically,
urges to escape and, less often, urges to fight. In other words, panic
attacks represent activation of the fight-flight system. Accordingly,
panic attacks usually involve elevated autonomic nervous system arousal,
needed to support such fight-flight reactivity. Furthermore, perceptions
of imminent threat, such as death, loss of control, or social ridicule,
frequently accompany the fight-flight response. However, the urgency to
escape, autonomic arousal, and perception of threat are not present in
every self-reported occurrence of panic. For example, data gathered from
ambulatory (portable) devices have found sympathetic nervous system
activation during reported panic attacks (Wilkinson et al., 1998),
although nonactivation has also been documented (for about 40% of
self-reported panic attacks; see Margraf, Taylor, Ehlers, Roth, & Agras,
1987; Taylor et al., 1986). Severe panic attacks are more autonomically
based (Margraf et al., 1987). Self-reported panic in the absence of
actual autonomic activation is assumed to reflect anticipatory anxiety
versus true panic (Barlow, Brown, & Craske, 1994). Another discordant
example occurs when perceptions of loss of control, dying, or going
crazy are refuted, despite the report of intense fear and arousal. This
has been termed noncognitive panic (Kircanski et al., 2009; Rachman,
Lopatka, & Levitt, 1988). It has been reported that up to 30% of people
who experience panic attacks do so without reported fear of dying,
losing control, or going crazy (Chen, Tsuchiya, Kawakami, & Furukawa,
2009). A subset of individuals who have panic disorder also experience
nocturnal panic attacks. Nocturnal panic refers to waking from sleep in
a state of panic with symptoms that are very similar to panic attacks
that occur during wakeful states (Craske & Barlow, 1989). Nocturnal
panic does not refer to waking from sleep and panicking after a lapse of
waking time, or nighttime arousals induced by nightmares or
environmental stimuli (such as unexpected noises). Also, nocturnal panic
is distinct from sleep terrors and sleep apnea (see Craske & Tsao, 2005,
for a review). Although epidemiological studies have not been

Panic Disorder

87

conducted, surveys of select clinical groups suggest that nocturnal
panic is relatively common among individuals with panic disorder, with
44% to 71% reporting nocturnal panic at least once, and 30% to 45%
reporting repeated nocturnal panics (Craske & Barlow, 1989; Mellman &
Uhde, 1989; Singareddy & Uhde, 2009). Panic disorder was first regarded
as a diagnostic entity with the publication 33 years ago of the DSM-III
(APA, 1980). Prior to that time, panic attacks were viewed as symptoms
of a general neurosis, although accounts of clinically similar syndromes
had appeared much earlier. These were labeled soldier's heart (Wooley,
1982), neurocirculatory asthenia (Wheeler, White, Reed, & Cohen, 1950),
and effort syndrome (Nixon, 1993). In the DSM-III, agoraphobia was
considered a separate disorder, which might or might not be associated
with panic attacks. Observations of clinical samples by Klein (1981) and
others (Craske & Barlow, 1988; Turner, Williams, Beidel, & Mezzich,
1986) suggested that agoraphobia generally developed following panic
attacks, and this led to a redefinition of agoraphobia as a secondary
response to panic attacks in DSM-III-R (APA, 1987; Barlow, 2002) through
DSM-IV-TR (APA, 1994). In DSM-5, panic disorder and agoraphobia are once
again considered two distinct, although highly comorbid, disorders. This
change was made in recognition of the substantial number of individuals,
albeit possibly more in the community than in clinical settings, who
exhibit the full features of agoraphobia but do not report ever having
had a full-blown panic attack or panic-like symptoms (Wittchen, Gloster,
Beesdo-Baum, Fava, & Craske, 2010). The 13 symptoms of a panic attack
remained unchanged from DSM-IV to DSM-5, although recognition has been
given to some culture-specific symptoms that may be associated with
panic attacks: for example, uncontrollable crying or sore neck. However,
these culture-specific symptoms do not count toward having the required
4 of the 13 standard panic attack symptoms. As noted earlier, greater
recognition has been given in DSM-5 to the notion that panic attacks may
occur in the context of any anxiety disorder: a panic attack specifier
may be applied to any diagnosis.

Case Example Sandy is a 30-year-old Caucasian mother of a 5-year-old and
a 3-year-old, who lives with her husband of 6 years. For the past 2
years, she has been chronically anxious and panic-stricken. Her panic
attacks are described as intolerable and increasing in frequency. Her
first panic attack occurred 3 years ago, just after the birth of her
second child. She recalls suddenly experiencing strong sensations of
lightheadedness and weakness when she was at home alone with her newborn
and 2-year-old child. Convinced that she was about to pass out, she
immediately lay down. The feelings passed within a few minutes, but
Sandy remained very concerned that she would pass out. This concern was
particularly worrisome since Sandy feared what would happen to her
children if she lost consciousness. She felt anxious for a day or so but
then forgot about the feelings until a few weeks later when again, at
home alone with her children, she was overcome with even stronger
sensations of lightheadedness, weakness, and a cold sweat. She became
very afraid, especially for her children, and called her husband, who
left work to be with her. A visit to her primary care doctor the next
day did not reveal any medical explanations for the symptoms.
Nonetheless, Sandy began to pay close attention to her physical state
and became

88

Panic Disorder

very anxious about her husband's upcoming business trip. While her
husband was away, she panicked daily, each time phoning her mother, who
would come over to look after the children while Sandy lay down until
the feelings subsided. From that time onward, Sandy was very anxious
about being alone with her children. Currently Sandy has panic attacks
in many situations. She describes them as intense feelings of
lightheadedness, weakness, a sense of unreality and detachment, a racing
heart, nausea, and fears of losing consciousness. The lightheadedness
and unreality scare her the most, for fear of passing out and leaving
her children unattended. Consequently, Sandy is now sensitive to
anything that produces lightheadedness and feelings of unreality, such
as standing quickly from a seated position, heat, the semiconsciousness
that occurs just before falling asleep, bright lights, alcohol, and
drugs. Even though she has a prescription for Klonopin (a high-potency
benzodiazepine), she rarely uses medication because of her fear of
feeling "weird" and unable to take care of her children. She wants to be
as alert as possible at all times, but she keeps the Klonopin with her
in the event that she has no other escape route. She has become very
sensitive to her body in general---anything that feels a little
different than usual scares her. Even coffee, which she used to enjoy,
is distressing to her now because it has agitating effects and makes her
heart race. She was never a big exerciser, but to think of exerting
herself is now also scary. She reports that she is constantly waiting
for the next panic attack to occur. She avoids being alone with her
children, and also avoids situations where she thinks she is more likely
to pass out, such as driving, being in restaurants, and being long
distances from home. She avoids crowds and large groups as well, partly
because of the feeling of too much stimulation and partly because she is
afraid she might panic in front of others. In general, she prefers to be
with her husband or her mother. Sandy's reliance on her husband and
mother has strained those relationships. Her husband is frustrated with
Sandy's behavior and the restrictions it has placed on his own life: he
no longer goes on business trips, he spends every free moment with Sandy
and the children, and sometimes he has to leave work to come home
because Sandy's mother is not available to be with her. Similarly, while
her mother offers to help as much as possible, she also feels that
Sandy's reliance upon her is too much. Sandy describes how weak and
scared she is now---quite different from how she used to be. The only
other incident that has any similarity to her current panic attacks
occurred in her late teens when she smoked marijuana. Sandy recalls
being very scared of the feeling of losing control and the sense that
she would never return to reality. She has not taken drugs since then.
Otherwise she has no history of serious medical conditions or any
previous psychological treatment. Sandy was shy as a young child and
throughout her teens. However, her social anxiety improved throughout
her 20s to the point that, up until the onset of her panic attacks, she
was mostly very comfortable around people. Since the onset of her panic
attacks, she has become concerned that others will notice that she
appears different or strange. However, her social anxiety is limited to
panic attacks and does not reflect a broader social phobia. At least
once a week Sandy wakes abruptly in the middle of the night with a panic
attack, feeling short of breath and scared. Consequently, her sleep is
restless. Sandy worries about what will happen to her children if she
loses consciousness, and what will happen to them in the long term if
she continues to panic. She has some difficulty concentrating, but in
general she functions well when she feels safe---that is, when her
mother

Prevalence and Epidemiology of Panic Disorder

89

or husband is nearby. She sometimes becomes depressed about her panic
and the limitations on her independence. She occasionally has times of
feeling hopeless about the future, doubting if she will ever be able to
get back to feeling the way she did before these attacks began.

Prevalence and Epidemiology of Panic Disorder According to the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R), prevalence estimates for panic
disorder are 2.4% (12-month), 4.7% (lifetime), and 6.8% (lifetime morbid
risk) (Kessler, Berglund, et al., 2005; Kessler, Chiu, Demler,
Merikangas, & Walters, 2005; Kessler, Petukhova, Sampson, Zaslavsky, &
Wittchen, 2012). These rates are higher than estimates from the Ukraine
(Bromet et al., 2005), Japan (Kawakami et al., 2005), Germany (Goodwin,
Fergusson, & Horwood, 2005), and Greece (Skapinakis et al., 2013, though
prevalence in that study was assessed over only a 1-week period), but
commensurate with the Netherlands (Batelaan et al., 2012). While data
from the United States suggest increased prevalence over the past two
decades (Kessler, Berglund, et al., 2005), these data from other
countries raise the possibility that the range in prevalence rates
reflects differences in diagnostic methodology as well as variations in
diagnostic criteria. Individuals with agoraphobia who are seeking
treatment almost always report a history of panic that preceded
development of their avoidance behavior (Wittchen, Reed, & Kessler,
1998); however, epidemiological data indicate relatively high rates for
agoraphobia without a history of panic disorder: 0.8% to 1.7% in the
prior 12 months (Kessler, Berglund, et al., 2005; Kessler et al., 2012)
and 1.4% lifetime prevalence (Kessler, Chiu, et al., 2005). The more
recent data still indicate that agoraphobia without a history of panic
disorder occurs at roughly one third the rate of panic disorder. The
discrepancy between the clinical and epidemiological data may occur
because individuals who panic are more likely to seek help (Boyd, 1986).
Rarely does the diagnosis of panic disorder, with or without
agoraphobia, occur in isolation. Data from the NCS-R show that 93.7% of
individuals with panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia, have at
least one other mental or chronic physical disorder (Gadermann, Alonso,
Vilagut, Zaslavsky, & Kessler, 2012). These same data further suggest
that those with panic disorder meet the criteria for an average of 4.5
additional (mental or physical) disorders. Commonly co-occurring Axis I
conditions include specific phobias, social phobia, dysthymia,
generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, and substance
abuse (e.g., Brown, Campbell, Lehman, Grisham, & Mancill, 2001, found
such co-occurring conditions in 60% of those studied; Brown, Antony, &
Barlow, 1995, in 51% of those studied, and Kessler et al., 2006, found
them in 83% of their panic disorder sample). Also, from 25% to 60% of
persons with panic disorder meet criteria for a current comorbid
personality disorder, mostly avoidant or dependent personality disorders
(e.g., Chambless & Renneberg, 1988). The modal age of onset for panic
disorder is early adulthood, between the ages of 21 and 23, although
there is significant variability in onset period (Kessler et al., 2006,
2012). In fact, a substantial proportion of adolescents report panic
attacks; 13- to 17-year-olds show a 2.3% and 2.7% 12-month prevalence of
panic disorder and agoraphobia, respectively (Kessler et al., 2012).
Subsequent research from the Netherlands Study of

90

Panic Disorder

Depression and Anxiety (NESDA) has proposed a bimodal distribution for
onset, at ages 17 and 39, with a single mean of age 25 (Tibi et al.,
2013). Treatment is usually sought at a much later age, around 34 years
(e.g., Noyes et al., 1986). The overall ratio of adult females to males
with panic disorder is approximately 2:1 (Kessler et al., 2006, 2012)
although the ratio shifts dramatically in the direction of female
predominance as the level of agoraphobia worsens (e.g., Thyer, Himle,
Curtis, Cameron, & Nesse, 1985). Panic disorder in children and
adolescents tends to be chronic and comorbid with other anxiety, mood,
and disruptive disorders (Biederman, Faraone, Marrs, & Moore, 1997),
with onset reported as early as 6 years old (Moreau, Weissman, & Warner,
1989). While the physiological symptoms of panic attacks tend to be
similar for children and adolescents and for adults, adolescents are
more likely than children to report a fear of going crazy (Doerfler,
Connor, Volungis, & Toscano, 2007). This may corroborate earlier work by
Nelles and Barlow (1988), who proposed that the interpretation of
physiological symptoms may distinguish child from adolescent panic,
whereby children are more likely to apply external explanations for
panic and adolescents are more likely to apply internal explanations
(such as "I'm going crazy"). Most individuals with panic disorder, with
or without agoraphobia, (approximately 72%; Craske, Miller, Rotunda, &
Barlow, 1990) report identifiable stressors around the time of their
first panic attack. These include interpersonal stressors and stressors
related to physical well-being, such as negative drug experiences,
disease, or death in the family (e.g., Pollard, Pollard, & Corn, 1989;
Roy-Byrne, Geraci, & Uhde, 1986). However, another study suggests that
stressors experienced by those with panic disorder may not differ in
number but are rated as more distressing than stressors reported by
adults without a history of panic disorder or any other psychological
disorder (Rapee, Litwin, & Barlow, 1990). Approximately one half report
having experienced panicky feelings at some time before their first full
panic attack, suggesting that onset may be either insidious or acute
(Craske et al., 1990). Finally, panic disorder, particularly in
combination with agoraphobia, tends to be highly chronic (Bruce et al.,
2005), displaying only modest decreases in severity over a 14-year
follow-up (Ramsawh, Raffa, Edelen, Rende, & Keller, 2009) in a sample of
treatment-seeking, middle-aged adults (who received at least some
treatment, though not necessarily evidence-based treatment). Further,
panic disorder entails severe financial and interpersonal costs.
Individuals with panic disorder overutilize medical resources compared
to the general public (Marciniak et al., 2005) or other primary care
patients (Roy-Byrne et al., 1999). Even with or following
pharmacological treatment, only a minority of patients remit without
subsequent relapse (≈30%), although a similar proportion (25% to 35%)
experience notable improvement, albeit with a waxing and waning course
(Katschnig & Amering, 1998; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 1995). Nonetheless, the
prognosis for panic disorder (in the absence of agoraphobia) is more
positive than that for generalized anxiety disorder or social anxiety
disorder (Bruce et al., 2005).

Psychological Models and Empirical Data on Panic Disorder This
discussion of psychological models and empirical data is organized
around the behavioral, cognitive, and emotional features of panic
disorder.

Psychological Models and Empirical Data on Panic Disorder

91

Behavioral Features of Panic Disorder The behavioral features of panic
disorder involve maladaptive behaviors related to the panic attacks.
These can include avoidance of situations in which panic attacks are
expected to occur, avoidance of activities that induce panic-like
sensations, safety behaviors, and experiential avoidance.

Avoidance of Particular Situations Avoidance of situations in which
panic attacks are expected to occur may warrant a diagnosis of
agoraphobia. However, agoraphobia pertains to fear and situational
avoidance for reasons beyond the occurrence of panic attacks: namely,
fear and avoidance of panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating
symptoms. Thus, the person with agoraphobia may fear and avoid
situations for reasons related or unrelated to panic attacks.
Individuals with panic disorder vary widely in their degree of
agoraphobia (Craske & Barlow, 1988); some manifest few or no agoraphobic
symptoms, whereas others spend years as virtual prisoners in their own
homes. Still others limit themselves to a safety zone of a few blocks or
miles around their homes and do not venture beyond its radius,
unaccompanied or at all (Barlow, 2002). In general, evidence suggests
that agoraphobia tends to increase the severity of panic disorder
(Kessler et al., 2006) and the severity of comorbid conditions
(Pané-Farré et al., 2013). What accounts for these wide discrepancies in
the development of agoraphobia among individuals with panic disorder?
Although agoraphobia tends to increase as history of panic lengthens
(Kikuchi et al., 2005; Pané-Farré et al., 2013), a significant
proportion of individuals panic for many years without developing
agoraphobia (Wittchen et al., 2010). Individuals with both agoraphobia
and panic disorder do not differ from individuals with only panic
disorder in terms of fears of dying, going crazy, or losing control
(Cox, Endler, & Swinson, 1995), although they show significantly more
impairments overall (see Wittchen et al., 2010) and greater distress
regarding the social consequences of panicking (Amering et al., 1997; de
Jong & Bouman, 1995; Nay, Brown, & Roberson-Nay, 2013). Occupational
status also predicts agoraphobia, accounting for 18% of the variance:
"the more one is forced to leave the house by means of employment, the
less one is likely to suffer from agoraphobia" (de Jong & Bouman, 1995,
p. 197). But perhaps the strongest predictor of agoraphobia is gender.
Agoraphobia without panic is even more female dominated than panic
disorder (see Wittchen et al., 2010), and female preponderance increases
with agoraphobia severity (e.g., Thyer et al., 1985). Socialized sex
role expectations and behaviors may contribute to these effects, as
socialization may reinforce activity, independence, and confrontation of
feared stimuli and situations to a greater extent in boys than in girls
(see Craske, 2003). Given the direct relevance of avoidance behaviors
for the development of agoraphobia, the clinical implications are clear.
Interoceptive Avoidance Strong sensitivity to and avoidance of the
internal bodily symptoms associated with anxiety and panic is known as
interoceptive avoidance (Bouton, Mineka, & Barlow, 2001; Rapee, Craske,
& Barlow, 1995; White & Barlow, 2002). Behavioral manifestations include
actions intended to minimize exposure to situations, substances, or
activities that

92

Panic Disorder

reproduce bodily sensations associated with symptoms of anxiety and/or
panic attacks. Common examples include avoiding exercise, sex, caffeine,
alcohol, saunas, wearing a necktie, watching arousing or scary movies,
or situations that may produce anger. Assessing the specific
interoceptive cues and situations that panic disorder patients avoid is
central to treatment.

Safety Behaviors Safety behaviors are "behaviors which are intended to
avoid disaster" (Salkovskis, Clark, Hackmann, Wells, & Gelder, 1999,
p. 573; emphasis in original). A more recent definition defines safety
behaviors as "dysfunctional emotion regulation strategies ... \[that\]
can be differentiated from adaptive coping both by the situation in
which they occur," a situation of "overrated or no real threat," and by
their function, "preventing feared outcomes that are unlikely to happen"
(Helbig-Lang & Petermann, 2010, pp. 220--221). Within panic disorder,
they are behaviors that help individuals feel more protected and secure
in the event of a panic attack (White & Barlow, 2002). Examples include
checking to make sure that a bathroom or hospital is close by, taking
one's pulse rate whenever cardiac concerns arise, and carrying a cell
phone, religious symbols, smelling salts, a special "safe" object, food,
or drink. Perhaps the most common safety behavior is carrying
antianxiety medication; some people even find carrying empty pill
bottles sufficient to prevent attacks. Another widespread behavior is
bringing along or checking on the location of a safe person, often a
spouse, whose presence provides a sense of reassurance that facilitates
venturing out to places that otherwise would be avoided. The "safe"
person is generally considered to be such because he or she knows about
the patient's panic attacks and can assist if the panic attack becomes
overwhelming (White & Barlow, 2002). When individuals with panic
disorder enact safety behaviors, they seek objects, persons, and
situations that signal safety against having a panic attack; thus, the
safe objects, persons, and situations themselves are referred to as
"safety signals"---cues that signal safety. An extensive animal
literature (see Hermans, Craske, Mineka, & Lovibond, 2006) demonstrates
that the presence of safety signals functions as a conditioned inhibitor
that interferes with extinction. Though somewhat limited
methodologically, a few treatment studies indicate that exposure therapy
targeting reductions of safety behaviors and signals is more successful
than exposure therapy alone (Salkovskis et al., 1999; Telch, Sloan, &
Smits, 2000, as cited in Powers, Smits, & Telch, 2004). Also, the mere
availability of safety signals rather than the actual use of them
disrupted fear extinction in exposure treatment for claustrophobia
(Powers, Smits, & Telch, 2004). Hence, safety behaviors may reduce
anxiety in the short term but likely serve to maintain panic disorder in
the long term by preventing the disconfirmation of the patient's
catastrophic predictions about panic (Salkovskis et al., 1999) and/or
the extinction of the conditioned response (see Hermans et al., 2006).
Based on these findings, a recent cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
trial for anxiety disorders (with 44% of the subjects having a primary
diagnosis of panic disorder, that is, the disorder causing the most
distress) targeted the elimination of safety behaviors, and demonstrated
promising results (Schmidt et al., 2012). Recently, however, several
investigations have challenged this view by showing that the "judicious
use" of safety behaviors does not impede exposure outcomes among
undergraduates (Levy & Radomsky, 2014; Rachman, Shafran, Radomsky, &
Zysk, 2011; van den Hout, Engelhard, Toffolo, & van Uijen, 2011), and in
one case, unexpectedly improved

Psychological Models and Empirical Data on Panic Disorder

93

outcomes (Sy, Dixon, Lickel, Nelson, & Deacon, 2011). This hypothesis
has not yet been confirmed in a panic disorder sample but is intriguing
in that it contradicts previous studies of safety behavior utilization,
which show detrimental effects on anxiety or panic outcomes following
exposure (see Helbig-Lang & Petermann, 2010; Helbig-Lang et al., 2014).

Experiential Avoidance Experiential avoidance occurs when a person is
"unwilling to remain in contact with particular private experiences
\[e.g., bodily sensations, emotions, thoughts, memories, behavioral
predispositions\] and takes steps to alter the form or frequency of
these events and the contexts" in which they occur (Hayes, Wilson,
Giffore, Follette, & Strosahl, 1996, p. 1154). The types of avoidance
discussed thus far, particularly interoceptive avoidance, also may be
characterized as experiential avoidance. In addition, any form of
distraction from anxiety- and panic-related symptoms falls into this
category. Distraction behaviors can include watching TV, playing video
games, and eating, among others. From an experiential avoidance
perspective, distraction often represents an unwillingness to experience
anxiety- and fear-related thoughts and emotions. Whether distraction
interferes with exposure therapy for anxiety is a subject of debate
(see, e.g., Devilly, 2001a and 2001b versus Lipke, 2001; Podină, Koster,
Philippot, Dethier, & David, 2013; see also Rodriguez & Craske, 1993).
However, several controlled, empirical studies (e.g., Rodriguez &
Craske, 1995; Telch et al., 2004) have found that distraction occurring
in the context of exposure therapy generally results in less effective
fear reduction. Further, a meta-analysis of exposure for specific phobia
found that distraction was inferior to uninstructed exposure but
superior to focused exposure (deliberately attending to the feared
stimulus or to the internal anxiety and fear produced by the exposure;
Podină et al., 2013). However, the exclusive focus on specific phobia
and the lack of differentiating internal focus from external focus in
comparison to distracted or uninstructed exposure, means that further
study in the context of panic disorder is needed. Experiential avoidance
also includes avoidance and suppression of anxiety- and panic-related
cognitions, such as, "I'm having a heart attack." Evidence generally
suggests that such thought suppression has a negative impact. That is,
thought suppression and to some extent emotion suppression have been
shown to be relatively counterproductive, facilitating the return of the
very thought or emotional arousal one hoped to avoid (e.g., Lambert, Hu,
Magee, Beadel, & Teachman, 2014; Richards & Gross, 2000; Wenzlaff &
Wegner, 2000). Researchers of experiential avoidance argue that
psychopathology in general, including panic disorder, is caused and
maintained by experiential avoidance. In other words, psychopathology
stems from an unwillingness to experience whatever thoughts, feelings,
memories, and so forth appear in the present (e.g., Eifert & Forsyth,
2005; Hayes et al., 1996; Hayes, Levin, Plumb-Vilardaga, Villatte, &
Pistorello, 2013). Acceptance (of anxiety- and panic-related thoughts,
feelings, and sensations) is promoted over direct modification and
change (Eifert & Forsyth, 2005; Hayes et al., 2013; Hayes, Luoma, Bond,
Masuda, & Lillis, 2006; Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999). In support of
this view, correlational evidence demonstrates that panickers report
higher experiential avoidance and lack of emotional clarity and
acceptance than nonpanickers do (Tull & Roemer, 2007). Further,
instructions to notice and accept symptoms of induced panic---the

94

Panic Disorder

opposite of experiential avoidance---resulted in lower fear and
avoidance among panic disorder patients (Levitt, Brown, Orsillo, &
Barlow, 2004) and high anxiety sensitivity individuals (Eifert &
Heffner, 2003) than did instructions to suppress (Levitt et al., 2004)
or control symptoms (Eifert & Heffner, 2003). Nonetheless, experiential
avoidance has been criticized for a lack of definitional clarity and
unclear incremental validity (Chawla & Ostafin, 2007). Recent work,
however, has led to improved definition and measurement of experiential
avoidance (Bond et al., 2011; Gámez et al., 2014; Gámez, Chmielewski,
Kotov, Ruggero, & Watson, 2011; Wolgast, Lundh, & Viborg, 2013) and
evidence of incremental validity in accounting for panic-related worries
and disability in panic disorder (Kämpfe et al., 2012) and in moderating
the relationship between anxiety sensitivity and perceived stress
(Bardeen, Fergus, & Orcutt, 2013). In accounting for the etiology and
maintenance of panic disorder, reducing experiential avoidance
represents a promising approach for which additional research is needed.

Cognitive Features of Panic Disorder Persons with panic disorder have
strong beliefs and fears of physical or mental harm arising from bodily
sensations that are associated with panic attacks (e.g., Chambless,
Caputo, Bright, & Gallagher, 1984; Sandin, Sánchez-Arribas, Chorot, &
Valiente, 2015). They are more likely to interpret bodily sensations in
a catastrophic fashion (Clark et al., 1988), and to attend more to words
that represent physical threat, such as disease and fatality (e.g.,
Asmundson, Sandler, Wilson, & Walker, 1992; De Cort et al., 2013);
catastrophe words, such as death and insane (e.g., Maidenberg, Chen,
Craske, Bohn, & Bystritsky, 1996); and (what patients believed was real)
heartbeat information (Kroeze & van den Hout, 2000). Further, adults
with panic disorder show greater anxiety responses to panic words
relative to adults with mixed anxiety disorders and healthy controls (De
Cort et al., 2013). A more recent effort (De Cort, Hermans, Spruyt,
Griez, & Schruers, 2008), however, failed to establish that
panic-specific words resulted in greater attentional bias among people
with panic disorder compared to other anxiety disorders. More work is
needed to establish content and disorder specificity of attentional
biases toward panic-related threat. Individuals with panic disorder are
more likely to fear procedures that elicit bodily sensations similar to
the ones experienced during panic attacks, including benign
cardiovascular, respiratory, and audiovestibular exercises and
inductions (Jacob, Furman, Clark, & Durrant, 1992; Kaplan et al., 2012;
Zarate, Rapee, Craske, & Barlow, 1988), and carbon dioxide inhalations
compared to patients with other anxiety disorders (e.g., Rapee, Brown,
Antony, & Barlow, 1992; see Vickers, Jafarpour, Mofidi, Rafat, &
Woznica, 2012) or healthy controls (e.g., Gorman et al., 1994; Zvolensky
& Eifert, 2001). Indeed, even in interoceptive conditioning studies
using healthy participants, a suffocation-focused interpretation of a
carbon dioxide inhalation task can significantly induce fear symptoms
relative to neutral and non-panic-focused control conditions (De Cort,
Grieze, Büchler, & Schruers, 2012). Patients with panic disorder fear
signals that ostensibly reflect heightened arousal and false
physiological feedback (Craske & Freed, 1995; Craske, Lang, et al.,
2002; Ehlers, Margraf, Roth, Taylor, & Birbaumer, 1988). Findings are
not fully consistent, however, as patients with panic disorder did not
differ from patients with social phobia in response to an epinephrine
challenge (Veltman, van Zijderveld, Tilders, & van Dyck, 1996).

Psychological Models and Empirical Data on Panic Disorder

95

In addition, direct manipulation of appraisals can affect level of
distress over physical symptoms. For example, persons with panic
disorder and nonclinical panickers report significantly less fear and
panic during laboratory-based panic provocation procedures, such as
hyperventilation and carbon dioxide inhalation, when they perceive that
the procedure is safe and/or controllable (e.g., Rapee, Mattick, &
Murrell, 1986; Sanderson, Rapee, & Barlow, 1989), when accompanied by a
safe person (Carter, Hollon, Carson, & Shelton, 1995), or after
cognitive-behavioral treatment that reduces fears of bodily sensations
(Craske, Lang, Aikins, & Mystkowski, 2005; Schmidt, Trakowski, & Staab,
1997). However, manipulations of predictability and controllability did
not significantly affect frequency of panic responses among panic
disorder patients in an epinephrine challenge study (Veltman, van
Zijderveld, van Dyck, & Bakker, 1998). Individuals with panic disorder
sometimes demonstrate memory abnormalities, although results have been
varied and contradictory at times. A comprehensive early meta-analysis
(Mitte, 2008) clarified that anxiety disorders and high
anxiety---including panic disorder---do not affect implicit memory or
recognition abilities. However, anxiety was associated with a memory
bias toward recalling threat-related information, with no differences
between individuals with high anxiety and those with anxiety disorders.
A modest memory recall bias toward threat is consistent with the
attentional biases toward threat observed in panic disorder and other
anxiety disorders. A more recent study also documented nonverbal memory
and visuoconstructive ability impairments in panic disorder relative to
healthy controls, independent of benzodiazepine use (Deckersbach,
Moshier, Tuschen-Caffier, & Otto, 2011). Finally, a recent meta-analysis
showed that, among 10 studies investigating memory deficits in
individuals with panic disorder specifically, seven found such deficits
when compared to healthy controls (Alves, Pereira, Machado, Nardi, &
Oliveira e Silva, 2013). These included difficulties in visual memory
tasks (Lucas, Telch, & Bigler, 1991), spatial memory (Boldrini et al.,
2005), free recall and cued recall (Airaksinen, Larsson, & Forsell,
2005), short-term memory for numbers and words (Gordeev, 2008), and
working memory (Castillo, Coy, Shejet, Duran, & Cabrera, 2010). However,
most of these studies were small, indicating that further investigation
is needed. Other studies have looked at dual-task versus single-task
memory in panic disorder patients, and compared deficits in panic
disorder to other anxiety disorders. Among inpatients with severe panic
disorder (without co-occurring current or past disorders), Lautenbacher
and colleagues (Lautenbacher, Spernal, & Kreig, 2002) found attentional
deficits within a dual-task paradigm for divided attention, but not
within a single-task paradigm for selective attention. These deficits
also were evident among individuals with severe depression (without
co-occurring disorders) but not among healthy controls, suggesting that
these two severe patient groups show similar deficits in tasks with a
high attentional load. The meta-analysis by Alves et al. (2013)
discussed above investigated eight studies on attentional issues in
individuals with panic disorder, with three of the eight reporting
deficits when compared to healthy controls. Whereas two showed panic
disorder--specific problems in selective attention (Castillo et al.,
2010; Gordeev, 2008), the third (Lautenbacher et al., 2002) contradicted
these results by finding no differences in selective attention tasks.
Studies utilizing event-related brain potential electroencephalogram
(EEG) methodologies provide a more precise understanding of the time
course of panic-related attentional

96

Panic Disorder

and memory abnormalities. In contrast to healthy controls, panic
patients failed to modulate prefrontal event-related brain potentials
when responding to words with different affective connotations in a
memory recognition task (Windmann, Sakhavat, & Kutas, 2002). The effect
was found in the latency range of responding (300--500 milliseconds),
which generally assumes greater influence of autonomic rather than
controlled memory processes, but not at later processing stages (700+
milliseconds). Hence, the authors suggest that patients may "adopt
conscious strategies to minimize the impact of these early processing
abnormalities on overt behaviors" (p. 357). On a cautionary note, half
of the patients had mild depression, making it unclear whether the
results were due to panic- or depression-related functioning (or to
both). In a related set of findings, Pauli and colleagues (Pauli,
Amrhein, Muhlberger, Dengler, & Wiedemann, 2005) found that panic
patients---but not healthy controls---showed early enhanced brain
potentials (at 100--200 and 200--400 milliseconds) in response to
panic-related words. The authors concluded that panic disorder may be
characterized by an early, largely automatic processing bias toward
panic-related stimuli. A review of EEG findings in individuals with
panic disorder suggests that most changes are evident in the frontal and
temporal cortexes (de Carvalho et al., 2013). Specifically, adults with
panic disorder show increased right frontal hemisphere activation, which
could reflect a more acute emotional response in response to fear
stimuli. Such a response may indeed be associated with negative
emotionality and subsequent behavioral avoidance systems. Whereas
event-related brain potential studies help identify the timing of
cognitive processing abnormalities, functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) brain imaging studies reveal their location and
functional relationships. Previous fMRI studies of visual exposure to
physical threat and neutral words find that individuals with panic
disorder showed greater left posterior cingulate and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex activity during threat words relative to healthy
controls (see de Carvalho et al., 2010; Maddock, Buonocore, Kile, &
Garrett, 2003). Maddock and colleagues (2003) associated these regions
with emotion and verbal memory processing, consistent with the notion of
greater processing of threat-related words in panic disorder (though
memory for threat words was not tested directly). In an fMRI study of
neuroanatomical correlates of the Stroop task across panic disorder,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and hypochondriasis patient groups (van
den Heuvel et al., 2005), panic disorder patients showed activation
patterns similar to hypochondriacal patients. Both displayed increased
ventral and dorsal brain region activation, suggesting increased
unconscious emotional processing as well as increased cognitive
elaboration.

Emotional Features of Panic Disorder The temperament variable most
associated with anxiety disorders, including panic disorder, is
neuroticism (Eysenck, 1967; Gray, 1982; Longley, Watson, Noyes, & Yoder,
2006), or proneness to experience negative emotions in response to
stressors. A closely linked construct is negative affectivity, or the
tendency to experience an array of negative emotions across a variety of
situations, even in the absence of objective stressors (Watson & Clark,
1984). Structural analyses confirm that negative affect is a
higher-order factor that distinguishes individuals with anxiety and/or
depressive disorders from controls with no mental disorder. The anxiety
disorders load differentially on negative affectivity,

Interaction with Environmental Factors

97

with more pervasive anxiety disorders such as generalized anxiety
disorder loading more heavily, panic disorder loading at an intermediate
level, and social anxiety disorder loading the least (Brown, Chorpita, &
Barlow, 1998).1 Lower-order factors further discriminate among the
anxiety disorders, with fear of fear being the factor that discriminates
panic disorder from other anxiety disorders (Brown et al., 1998; Zinbarg
& Barlow, 1996). Longitudinal prospective evidence for the role of
neuroticism in predicting the onset of panic disorder is relatively
limited. However, neuroticism was found to predict the onset of panic
attacks (Hayward, Killen, Kraemer, & Taylor, 2000; Schmidt, Lerew, &
Jackson, 1997, 1999), and emotional reactivity at age 3 was a
significant variable in the classification of panic disorder in 18- to
21-year-old males (Craske, Poulton, Tsao, & Plotkin, 2001). Ongoing
studies, such as the Northwestern/UCLA Youth Emotion Project (Zinbarg et
al., 2010), are currently evaluating the relationships among
neuroticism, various other risk factors, and panic disorder.

Interaction with Environmental Factors Environmental factors interact
with biologically and genetically-related temperamental factors to
increase (or decrease) risk for anxiety disorders, including panic
disorder. Early deficient caregiving and/or parenting likely relate more
to risk for psychopathology in general, whereas abuse and especially
childhood experiences with illness may relate to panic disorder more
specifically. Depending on their nature, life stressors can play a more
general or specific role in the etiology and maintenance of panic
disorder. We review each environmental factor in turn.

Early Caregiving and Infant Attachment Emerging research supports the
hypothesis that early experiences related to infant care may play an
important role in buffering or facilitating later proneness toward
anxiety. Specifically, early experiences with prediction and control may
be associated with the development of adaptive emotional regulatory
capacities in the face of negative stressors. In this context,
prediction refers to a contingency (cause-effect) awareness of events in
the environment, as well as outcome prediction by virtue of one's own
responding, and control refers to control over emotions and outcomes via
one's own attention and behaviors (see Craske, 2003). Evidence (e.g.,
Papousek & Papousek, 2002; Rochat & Striano, 1999) supports the
assertion that parental monitoring and reactivity to infant signals
enable infants to learn contingency-response relationships and hence a
sense of predictability. Initially, a sense of predictability may
develop from the relationship between an infant's cues and the
caretaker's response. Later, this may transfer to contingency knowledge
of the relationship between an infant's own behaviors and responses (see
Craske, 2003). According to attachment pioneer Bowlby (1969, 1980),
caregiver responses that are characterized by unpredictability and
unresponsiveness may lead to anxious attachment in which the child is
chronically insecure and apprehensive. In support, a recent 1 Specific
phobias were not assessed, but by being most circumscribed, they would
be hypothesized to load the least on negative

affectivity.

98

Panic Disorder

meta-analysis of both longitudinal and cross-sectional studies showed a
moderate relationship (r = .3) between early insecure attachment
(particularly ambivalent attachment) and the development of anxiety
disorders and symptoms in childhood and adolescence (Colonnesi et al.,
2011). This work, however, remains limited by the fact that
experimentally manipulating predictability and control for extended
periods of time in infant humans is not ethically possible. Hence, the
most compelling evidence of the causal effects of prolonged lack of
predictability and control in infants comes from research with rhesus
monkeys. Mineka, Gunnar, and Champoux (1986) demonstrated that infant
rhesus monkeys who were granted control over toys and food habituated
more quickly to novel stimuli, demonstrated more exploratory behavior in
a novel playroom, and demonstrated enhanced coping responses during
separation from peers compared to infants without control (but with
equal exposure) over toys and food. Mineka and Cook (1986) concluded
that experiences with mastery and control buffer the effects of
stressful experiences.

Parenting In addition to infant attachment, general parental styles
across situations may contribute to children's trait anxiety, whereas
situationally specific parental behaviors may contribute to the
development of particular anxiety disorders (Craske, 1999). Although
many previous studies examining these hypotheses are fraught with
methodological difficulties, more recent studies on parent-child
interactions have been more informative. One line of studies examines
children's perceptions of their parents' behavior. Generally, children
of anxious parents view their families as more conflictual, less
independent, less cohesive, and more controlling than children with
healthy, nonanxious parents do (see Whaley, Pinto, & Sigman, 1999). In
addition, children with anxiety disorders view their families as less
independence promoting than nonanxious children do. Another study
demonstrated that perceptions of low maternal caring and
overprotectiveness were highest among children with anxiety disorders,
slightly lower among high trait anxious children, and lowest among low
trait anxious children (Bennet & Stirling, 1998). Still another found
that children's self-perceived competence mediated the relation between
child-reported maternal overcontrol and child-reported anxiety (Affrunti
& Ginsburg, 2012). However, a study of 7- to 13-year-old children
referred to mental health clinics and their parents (Gere, Villabø,
Torgersen, & Kendall, 2012) found that the presence of child behavior
symptoms accounted for the relationship between parental protectiveness
and child anxiety symptoms, suggesting that parental overprotectiveness
may stem from other child symptoms. These studies, however, are limited
by reliance on self-report measures and cross-sectional designs (see
Craske, 2003; Wood, McLeod, Sigman, Hwang, & Chu, 2003). A longitudinal
study found a bidirectional pattern whereby mothers' anxious parenting
and adolescents' anxiety influenced one another. Adolescents' perception
of maternal anxious parenting (overprotection and high anxiety
expression) predicted their own self-reported anxiety 12 months later,
whereas mother-reported adolescent anxiety predicted adolescents'
perception of maternal anxious parenting 12 months later (Rapee, 2009).
Again, however, this study relied on self-reported anxiety, and recent
work has shown that mother-child agreement on (reported) child anxiety
symptoms is influenced by the presence of maternal worry and depression
(Affrunti & Woodruff-Borden, 2015).

Interaction with Environmental Factors

99

A more reliable body of research relies on behavioral coding of observed
parent-child interactions. Fortunately, the findings generally converge
with the self-report data. Whaley and Sigman (Moore, Whaley, & Sigman,
2004; Whaley et al., 1999) found that in comparison with nonanxious
control mothers, anxious mothers were observed to criticize and
catastrophize more, and to display less warmth and autonomy granting
toward their children. Maternal behaviors predicted children's anxiety
levels, and children's anxiety levels predicted maternal autonomy
granting (Whaley et al., 1999). Finally, mothers of anxiety-disordered
children, regardless of their own anxiety status, displayed less warmth
and autonomy granting (Moore et al., 2004). These combined findings
support an interactive model in which parenting behaviors predict
offspring anxiety, and offspring anxiety molds parenting behaviors. A
descriptive review by Wood et al. (2003) concluded that observed
parental control during parent-child interactions (defined as
overprotectiveness, excessive regulation of activities, routines, and
decision making) consistently predicted child shyness and childhood
anxiety disorders, a finding confirmed by a more recent meta-analysis
(McLeod, Wood, & Weisz, 2007). The meta-analysis concluded that
parenting accounted for only modest (4%) variance in child anxiety on
average, but certain parenting domains had greater influence.
Specifically, autonomy granting was especially important---accounting
for 18% of the variance in child anxiety---whereas parental warmth was
not strongly associated with child anxiety. More recently, Schneider et
al. (2009) used observational coding to compare mothers with panic
disorder to nonanxious mothers and found that mothers with panic
disorder were more verbally controlling and more conflictual with their
children, regardless of the children's anxiety status. This finding
remained after controlling for parental depression, which may indicate a
specific manner in which mothers with panic disorder interact with their
children. However, in this study other independent disorders of the
mother were not considered (e.g., depression without comorbid panic
disorder or other anxiety disorders). Overall, however, the extent to
which negative, intrusive, or overinvolved parenting styles are
anxiety-specific remains debatable. Hudson and Rapee (2001) observed
that mothers of anxious children were more negative, overinvolved, and
intrusive than mothers of nonanxious control children, (e.g., Hibbs,
Hamburger, Kruesi, & Lenane, 1993); but see Stubbe, Zahner, Goldstein,
and Leckman (1993) for the opposite finding. That study failed to find a
difference in maternal behaviors toward children with anxiety disorders
versus children with oppositional disorders. Similarly, as noted,
another study showed that parental overprotectiveness is more influenced
by child behavior problems than by child anxiety symptoms (Gere et al.,
2012). In a longitudinal investigation using observational coding,
Schwartz et al. (2012) demonstrated that greater parental aggression
predicted higher adolescent anxiety and depression symptoms over the
course of 2.5 years. Thus, maladaptive parental behaviors such as
overinvolvement and aggression may characterize parents of children with
significant psychopathology or distress rather than children with
anxiety disorders or panic disorder in particular. A rare experimental
study of parental modeling among older youth demonstrated that when
young adolescents (mean age of 12 years) observed their parent escape a
voluntary 3-minute hyperventilation (which produces panic-like
symptoms), they were more likely to escape themselves, relative to
adolescents who observed their parent complete the hyperventilation
(Bunaciu et al., 2014). This study is particularly interesting given its
focus on a pubertal stage of youth, which, as the authors note, is a
developmental

100

Panic Disorder

stage that predicts the development of panic-related problems. Thus, the
role of vicarious learning in fear panic-related symptoms via parental
modeling of avoidance and escape from panic-relevant sensations and/or
contexts represents a promising pathway for further research. The vast
majority of studies have focused on the influence of maternal behaviors
and symptoms on childhood anxiety, reflecting samples made up only or
largely of mothers; in contrast, the influence of paternal behaviors and
symptoms has received less attention. Yet in one study, the offspring
(mean age of 14 years) of a clinical sample of fathers and mothers
treated for panic disorder and/or depression 10 years earlier
demonstrated that paternal panic disorder predicted higher rates of
panic disorder, agoraphobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and multiple
anxiety disorders at similar or higher rates than maternal panic
disorder (Hirshfeld-Becker et al., 2012), suggesting the importance of
including fathers in parenting studies on panic disorder. Thus, given
the seeming importance of both maternal and paternal behaviors in
influencing offspring's risk for panic disorder, research is now needed
to demonstrate the direct causal links and specificity of parental
behaviors that confer such risk.

Childhood Experiences with Illness and Abuse Childhood experience with
medical illness, personally or via observing others, may increase the
risk for the subsequent development of anxiety disorders in general and
panic disorder in particular. Experience with personal respiratory
disturbance and parental illness in childhood predicted panic disorder
onset at ages 18 or 21 in a large, longitudinal sample (Craske et al.,
2001). This finding is consistent with multiple reports of more
respiratory disease and disturbance in the history of panic disorder
patients compared to other anxiety-disordered patients (Goodwin & Pine,
2002; Verburg, Griez, Meijer, & Pols, 1995). Further, one study found
that first-degree relatives of panic disorder patients had a
significantly higher prevalence of chronic obstructive respiratory
disease and asthma than did first-degree relatives of patients with
other anxiety disorders (van Beek, Schruers, & Griez, 2005). A review of
the literature (Grassi et al., 2013) found that adults with panic
disorder, relative to healthy controls, evidenced baseline respiratory
abnormalities that reflected a state of chronic hyperventilation
(independent of state anxiety levels) as well as greater respiration
variability and irregularity. Additional research now needs to examine
whether such respiratory abnormalities are present, and whether they
increase the short- or long-term risk for panic disorder, among the
offspring of parents with panic disorder. Childhood experiences of
sexual and physical abuse may also prime panic disorder. Retrospective
reports of childhood abuse were associated with panic disorder onset at
ages 16 to 21 in a longitudinal analysis of New Zealanders from birth to
age 21 (Goodwin et al., 2005), a finding consistent with multiple
cross-sectional studies in both clinical and community samples (e.g.,
Kessler, Davis, & Kendler, 1997; Stein et al., 1996). The link with
childhood abuse was stronger for panic disorder than for other anxiety
disorders such as social phobia (Safren, Gershuny, Marzol, Otto, &
Pollack, 2002; Stein et al., 1996) and obsessive-compulsive disorder
(Stein et al., 1996). Further, a gene by environment interaction study
indicated that childhood maltreatment mediated the relationship between
the serotonin transporter gene promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and

Interaction with Environmental Factors

101

anxiety sensitivity, which is implicated in the etiology of panic
disorder (Stein, Schork, & Gelernter, 2008). However, more recent data
from the National Comorbidity Survey (Kessler et al., 1997) and National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R; Cougle, Timpano, Sachs-Ericsson,
Keough, & Riccardi, 2010) demonstrated a relationship between childhood
sexual abuse and panic disorder as well as multiple other psychiatric
disorders (social anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and
posttraumatic stress disorder in the latter study). Similarly, in the
NCS-R study, neglect-related parenting was associated with slightly
elevated risk for all mood and anxiety disorders (including panic
disorder), again suggesting a lack of specificity to panic disorder
(Nickerson, Bryant, Aderka, Hinton, & Hofmann, 2013). Thus, the extent
to which childhood abuse or neglect uniquely predicts panic disorder
remains debatable. In addition, some studies found an association
between panic disorder and exposure to violence between other family
members, usually interparental violence (e.g., Bandelow et al., 2002),
whereas the most recent study did not (Goodwin et al., 2005).
Retrospective reporting of childhood abuse or neglect in all of these
studies, however, limits their findings.

Stress The relationship between external aversive events, also known as
stressful events, and panic disorder has several facets. First,
temperamental vulnerabilities, such as neuroticism, may contribute to
more frequent and more potent stressful life events (Craske, 2003).
Second, stressful life events may precipitate initial panic attacks and
contribute to their repeated occurrence over time: As described earlier,
a large percentage of individuals with panic disorder report the
presence of identifiable stressors around the time of the first panic
attack (Craske et al., 1990; Pollard et al., 1989; Roy-Byrne et al.,
1986; although see Rapee, Litwin, & Barlow, 1990 for somewhat different
findings). As alluded to earlier, significant childhood adversity and
stressful life events are both associated with increased risk for
anxiety disorders as well as other psychopathology (Brown, Harris, &
Eales, 1993; Kessler et al., 1997). In addition, variations in anxiety
symptom levels over time are influenced by life stress and other
environmental factors (Mackinnon, Henderson, & Andrews, 1990). Life
stressors over multiple months and years predicted later anxious and
depressive symptoms in adult (Cohen, McGowan, Fooskas, & Rose, 1984)
though not adolescent samples (Cohen, Burt, & Bjork, 1987; Rueter,
Scaramella, Wallace, & Conger, 1999). Recently, however, self-reported
history of traumatic event exposure among adolescents was found to
predict panic symptoms outside the laboratory and greater anxious and
fearful responses to an in-session hyperventilation task (Hawks,
Blumenthal, Feldner, Leen-Feldner, & Jones, 2011). For panic disorder
specifically, potentially traumatic events are more influential in
leading to the disorder when they occur during childhood rather than
adulthood (Zlotnick et al., 2008). A stress-diathesis perspective would
hypothesize that stressful life events interact with preexisting
vulnerabilities to produce panic attacks and panic disorder. For
example, autonomic instability (e.g., the tendency to experience cardiac
symptoms and shortness of breath) may develop into full-blown panic when
instances occur in threatening contexts or following life stressors,
when the sensations are more likely to be perceived as threatening
(Craske, 1999). According to Bouton et al. (2001), high anxiety can
elevate the likelihood of panic attacks. Stressful life events may
elevate levels of anxiety, particularly

102

Panic Disorder

in vulnerable individuals, which in turn increases the risk for panic.
From a related perspective, a study of Russian individuals examined the
interaction of anxiety sensitivity, or the tendency to interpret anxiety
symptoms as dangerous and threatening, and recent exposure to stressful
life events (Zvolensky, Kotov, Antipova, & Schmidt, 2005). Beyond levels
of negative affect, high levels of stressful life events interacted with
a subscale of anxiety sensitivity (the physical concerns subscale) to
predict panic attacks in the past week and agoraphobic avoidance. These
findings are consistent with a stress-diathesis model; however, the
notion of stress-diathesis does not offer specificity in the etiology of
panic disorder relative to other anxiety disorders. Looking beyond the
infant attachment period, the death of a parent or loss of a loved one
may threaten attachment and, thus, might be expected to hold specificity
as a risk factor for panic disorder. Again, however, the specificity to
panic disorder remains dubious; earlier parental loss, for example, is
associated with greater risk for all anxiety and mood disorders rather
than panic disorder specifically (Nickerson et al., 2013). A study
comparing Korean adults with panic disorder and healthy controls (Choe
et al., 2013) found that the number of separation-related life events
(e.g., death of a loved one, divorce) interacted with the presence of
serotonergic gene polymorphisms (5-HTTLPR S/S homozygotes) to predict
current panic disorder status and harm avoidance. If replicated, this
finding suggests that loss-related life stressors activate genetic
vulnerabilities in a manner that can increase risk for panic disorder.
However, the lack of a psychiatric control group obscures whether this
interaction also predicts other forms of psychopathology or panic
disorder specifically.

Biological Features of Panic Disorder Investigations into the genetic
and neurobiological underpinnings of panic disorder have greatly
expanded over the past decade. In this section, we offer an updated
account of the complex biological factors that contribute to elevated
risk for and maintenance of panic disorder.

Genetics According to family studies, the heritability of panic disorder
accounts for approximately 30% to 40% of the variance in panic disorder
(Hettema, Neale, & Kendler, 2001; López-Solà et al., 2014). Even though
heritability studies of anxiety disorders often rely on poorly validated
lifetime diagnostic instruments (e.g., the Diagnostic Interview
Schedule), two broad but distinct genetic factors have been identified.
The first factor is defined by high loadings for generalized anxiety
disorder and major depression, but only moderate loadings for panic
disorder (Mineka, Watson, & Clark, 1998) and agoraphobia (Kendler,
Neale, Kessler, Heath, & Eaves, 1993). The trait of neuroticism loads
heavily on this first factor and roughly half of the variance in
neuroticism is accounted for by genetic factors (Lake, Eaves, Maes,
Heath, & Martin, 2000). Twin studies provide evidence that symptoms of
panic or fear (i.e., breathlessness, heart pounding) may be additionally
explained by a second genetic factor (e.g., a second source of genetic
variance), which is distinct from general symptoms of anxiety and
depression (Kendler et al., 1993) and, at

Biological Features of Panic Disorder

103

least in females, from neuroticism (Martin, Jardine, Andrews, & Heath,
1988). Support for these two broad diatheses, one focused on general
anxiety and depression symptoms and the other focused on fear and panic
symptoms, exists in analyses of the Vietnam Era Twin Registry (Scherrer
et al., 2000). In addition, recent advances in molecular genetics have
begun to illuminate a complex interplay of more specific chromosomal
regions, genes, and alleles that may be related to panic disorder.
Previously, panic disorder phenotype transmission has been linked to
numerous chromosomal regions; however, few of these are actually shared
across samples (Sakolsky, McCracken, & Nurmi, 2012). Further, although
many of these associations have been found for panic disorder
specifically, they may be relevant for the transmission of high trait
anxiety or anxiety disorders more broadly. Somewhat better progress has
been made on linking panic disorder to specific genetic polymorphisms.
Broadly, the gene polymorphism 5-HTTLPR---a promoter region on the
serotonin transporter gene---has been a target of investigation across
the mood and anxiety disorders, with mixed findings. For example, a
meta-analysis of 10 studies investigating 5-HTTLPR polymorphism in
individuals with and without panic disorder found no significant
association between 5-HTTLPR and panic disorder (Blaya, Salum, Lima,
Leistner-Segal, & Manfro, 2007), whereas a more recent study (Lonsdorf
et al., 2009) found strong associations between bi- and triallelic
5-HTTLPR polymorphisms and panic disorder symptoms assessed
dimensionally (rather than categorically as is typically done). Further,
several meta-analyses found strong associations between 5-HTTLPR and
neuroticism measured by the NEO Personality Inventory (Munafò, Freimer,
et al., 2008; Schinka, Busch, & Robichaux-Keene, 2004; Sen, Burmeister,
& Ghosh, 2004), which is implicated in risk for panic disorder and
anxiety disorders more generally. One study (Agorastos et al., 2014)
suggests that adults with the short/short 5-HTTLPR genotype show blunted
autonomic reactivity when confronted by panic-like arousal (induced by
cholecystokinin tetrapeptide), compared to adults with the long/long
5-HTTLPR genotype. Although this study did not focus on individuals with
panic disorder, results point toward a potential genetic vulnerability
associated with hyporeactivity and hyperreactivity to interoceptive,
panic-like sensations. Similarly, a meta-analysis has shown an
association between the 5-HTTLPR genotype and increased acute HPA-axis
and cortisol reactivity among adults with the short/short relative to
the short/long or long/long 5-HTTLPR genotype (Miller, Wankerl, Stalder,
Kirschbaum, & Alexander, 2013). Thus, the short/short 5-HTTLPR genotype
appears to confer risk for stress sensitivity and vulnerability to
psychological disorders in general, rather than to panic disorder in
particular. A study based on the stress-diathesis model (Gunthert et
al., 2007) showed that elevated anxiety in response to daily stressors
(e.g., self-reported via daily diary over 2 months, 1 year apart) varied
as a function of 5-HTTLPR genotype. A meta-analysis of neuroimaging
studies found associations between 5-HTTLPR and brain activity in the
amygdala, a region involved in anxiety (Munafò, Brown, & Hariri, 2008).
The authors concluded that the 5-HTTLPR gene locus could account for up
to 10% of phenotypic variance in amygdala activation. However, a later
study examining physiological and affective responses to a carbon
dioxide challenge (an acute panicogenic stressor) in a high and low
neuroticism sample failed to find group differences in reactivity based
on the 5-HTTLPR genotype (Verschoor & Markus, 2012). Further, an
investigation of people with panic disorder,

104

Panic Disorder

social anxiety disorder, or both, failed to find an association with
5-HTTLPR but did find a panic disorder--specific association with
SLC6A4, the serotonin transporter gene on which the 5-HTTLPR
polymorphism region is located (Strug et al., 2010). Additional research
has found that the 5-HTTLPR genotype does not by itself strongly predict
panic disorder, but does predict it when coupled with certain life
stressors such as early separation events (Choe et al., 2013). In
summary, the association between 5-HTTLPR genotypes and panic disorder
is complex and requires additional investigation to elucidate the
currently mixed findings. Nonetheless, multiple studies suggest that
5-HTTLPR genotypes may be relevant for understanding dimensional
expressions of panic disorder, as well as daily anxiety reactivity and
neural regions linked to anxiety. A range of various other genetic loci
have been investigated in panic disorder. Association and linkage
studies, for example, implicate the adenosine receptor gene in panic
disorder and anxiety sensitivity (Deckert et al., 1998; Gajewska et al.,
2013; Hamilton et al., 2004). Recently, a variant of the adenosine
receptor gene, particularly the T-allele, was found to indicate risk for
panic disorder, especially with agoraphobia (Hohoff et al., 2010).
However, the T-allele was also associated with anxiety-related
harm-avoidance personality traits in healthy individuals, suggesting
that it may be more relevant for understanding panic disorder risk
dimensionally rather than categorically. Additionally, a susceptibility
locus for panic disorder has been mapped to chromosome 7p14--q15 (e.g.,
Logue, Vieland, Goedken, & Crowe, 2003). An allele of the neuropeptide S
receptor gene, located on chromosome 7, was linked in a sample of
Japanese men to panic disorder but was not linked to schizophrenia or
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (Okamura et al., 2007). A more
recent study found a female-specific effect, linking the neuropeptide S
receptor gene to panic disorder (compared to healthy controls) and to
anxiety sensitivity and heightened physiological arousal during a
stressful behavioral avoidance task (Domschke et al., 2011). This study
also found the neuropeptide S allele to predict decreased anterior
cingulate cortex activity, which had been previously linked to panic
disorder (e.g., Pillay, Gruber, Rogowska, Simpson, & Todd, 2006).
Another investigation found a gender-specific effect relating the
angiotensin converting enzyme gene (located on chromosome 17) to panic
disorder only in males (Bandelow et al., 2010). Many of these findings
await further replication and elucidation. In addition, more recent
research has found that an interaction between the neuropeptide S
receptor TT genotype and the adenosinergic system potentially mediates
affect-modulated startle response in humans (Domschke et al., 2012).
Additionally, the Val158Met polymorphism of the
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene---involved in dopamine
regulation in the prefrontal cortex as well as other subcortical
regions---has been associated with alterations in fear arousal and
emotion regulation (e.g., Olsson et al., 2005) and has been implicated
in panic disorder susceptibility in several independent samples (Maron,
Hettema, & Shlik, 2010). More precisely, a meta-analysis found that the
COMT Val158Met polymorphism corresponded with panic disorder in
Caucasian samples with a trend toward correspondence in Asian samples,
though effects in both groups were specific to females (Domschke,
Deckert, O'Donovan, & Glatt, 2007). Thus, the polymorphism demonstrated
both ethnicity and sex-specific effects. However, a more recent
meta-analysis (Gatt, Burton, Williams, & Schofield, 2015) found that
this polymorphism was implicated in multiple psychiatric disorders and
thus is not specific to panic disorder. Additional COMT gene variants
await

Biological Features of Panic Disorder

105

exploration. Other, lesser known candidate genes are also being
investigated for their link to panic disorder (e.g., Erhardt et al.,
2012; see also Gatt et al., 2015). Recently, the role of microRNAs,
which repress gene expression, has gained attention in understanding
phenotypic expression. For example, several studies (Muiños-Gimeno et
al., 2011; Hommers et al., 2015) have found preliminary evidence for
microRNAs that affected expression of candidate genes implicated in
panic disorder. Thus, further research on microRNA regulation of genetic
pathways in panic disorder is indicated.

Basic Neurocircuitry Neural Networks Involving the Amygdala Current
neural models focus on the role of the amygdala and related structures
as central to the dysfunctional anxiety evaluation and response system
in panic disorder (Gorman, Kent, Sullivan, & Coplan, 2000; Kim, Dager, &
Lyoo, 2012). The amygdala serves as a mediator of input from the
environment (via the thalamus and sensory cortex) and stored experience
(via the frontal cortex and hippocampus), which then triggers anxiety
and panic response by activating brain regions involved in panic
symptoms, including the hypothalamus (HPA axis and autonomic system),
locus coeruleus (heart rate and blood pressure), and parabrachial
nucleus (changes in respiration; see Roy-Byrne, Craske, & Stein, 2006).
Research on patients with panic disorder has found alterations in the
amygdala and associated structures consistent with this model, including
reduced volume in the amygdala (see Del Casale et al., 2013; Kim et al.,
2012); decreased cerebral glucose metabolism in amygdala, hippocampus,
thalamus, brain stem (Sakai et al., 2005), right middle temporal gyrus,
right caudate body, and left posterior cingulate gyrus (Kang et al.,
2012); and lowered levels of creatine and phosphocreatine metabolites in
the right medial temporal lobe (Atmaca, Yildirim, Gurok, Akyol, &
Koseoglu, 2012; Massana et al., 2002), in resting states. In addition,
while some evidence points to decreased volume in the left temporal lobe
(e.g., Uchida et al., 2003), other research shows no difference in this
brain region for individuals with panic disorder relative to healthy
controls (e.g., Del Casale et al., 2013). Evidence also points to the
role of the anterior cingular cortex, insula, and midbrain
periaqueductal gray in the pathophysiology of experimentally induced
panic attacks and panic disorder (Graeff & Del-Ben, 2008). Many of these
findings occur in various combinations within other anxiety disorders,
such as social anxiety and posttraumatic stress disorder (Kent & Rauch,
2003), indicating that they are not necessarily specific to panic
disorder. One neural pathway possibly associated with the onset of panic
disorder exists between the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and
the amygdala (Johnson, Federici, & Shekhar, 2014). Evidence suggests
that the vmPFC may be underactive in panic disorder, resulting in
diminished inhibitory inputs to the amygdala and subcortical
panic-generation regions within the perifornical hypothalamus and dorsal
periaqueductal gray (Johnson et al., 2014). Indeed, a review and a
meta-analysis by de Carvalho and colleagues (2010, 2013) suggest that
most studies investigating the neural underpinnings of panic disorder
show inhibitory deficits of the prefrontal cortex when modulating
amygdala activity. GABA/Benzodiazepine System Another neurological
system potentially implicated in the pathophysiology of panic disorder
is the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neuronal system. Some studies
demonstrate

106

Panic Disorder

that patients with panic disorder exhibit low baseline GABA levels in
the occipital cortex (Goddard et al., 2001) and, following acute
benzodiazepine administration, show blunted benzodiazepine sensitivity
(Roy-Byrne, Cowley, Greenblatt, Shader, & Hommer, 1990) and GABA
neuronal responses (Goddard et al., 2004). In contrast, a more recent
study found no deficits in GABA within the occipital cortex for
individuals with panic disorder (Long et al., 2013) but, rather,
decreased GABA in the anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex.
However, sample sizes were small, suggesting the need for further
investigation and replication. Potentially elucidating these findings,
several studies (Bremner et al., 2000; Malizia et al., 1998), but not
all studies (Brandt et al., 1998), have found lowered benzodiazepine
receptor density in amygdala and perihippocampal areas and in
frontocortical areas more generally (by a mean of --13%; Nikolaus,
Antke, Beu, & Muller, 2011) in patients with panic disorder relative to
healthy controls. However, GABA abnormalities have also been found in
patients with other psychological disorders such as depression (Mohler,
2012) and alcohol dependency (Xuei et al., 2010), suggesting once again
that these findings may not necessarily be specific to panic disorder.

HPA Axis and Autonomic Nervous System Functioning Dysregulation of the
autonomic nervous system and HPA axis has been hypothesized to be
central to panic disorder. Thus, significant research has been conducted
in this area, although findings are sometimes contradictory. Abelson and
colleagues (Abelson, Khan, Liberzon, & Young, 2007) reexamined four HPA
studies from their laboratory and concluded that experimental contexts
that are novel, uncontrollable, or threatening produce elevated HPA
responses in panic disorder patients relative to healthy controls and
account for disparate findings from previous studies. In other words,
they found consistent evidence that individuals with panic disorder show
elevated HPA reactivity to specific environmental cues, rather than
elevated HPA responding in general (i.e., at baseline). The same effect
has been observed with measures of the time course of startle eyeblink
responding (which is mediated by the amygdala; Anders, Martin, Erb,
Grodd, & Birbaumer, 2004): baseline startle was enhanced in participants
with panic disorder relative to controls, but the groups showed
otherwise equivalent patterns of responding to approaching shock
(Grillon, Ameli, Goddard, Woods, & Davis, 1994). Since baseline
represents a state of anticipation about upcoming experimental
procedures, the results are interpreted as elevated emotional reactivity
to stressful conditions in general versus exaggerated responding to
explicit threat cues (Grillon, 2002). Thus, once again, relative to
healthy controls, adults with panic disorder have difficulty
distinguishing threat cues from safety cues, and thus fear becomes
generalized more to the threat context than to the specific threat cue
(e.g., Lissek et al., 2009, 2010). Similarly, investigations of
autonomic state, such as galvanic skin response, heart rate,
respiration, and skin temperature, generally indicate that persons with
panic disorder show an elevated response to experimental contexts (a
context or situation in which threat may be present) versus explicit
threat stimuli (the threat itself) (e.g., Roth et al., 1992). However,
recent research indicates that the general versus explicit threat
distinction may not be completely consistent, and that HPA axis
dysregulation in panic disorder patients can alternatively manifest as
dampened response to threat. In a series of German experiments employing
the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST), panic disorder patients lacked a
salivary and plasma cortisol response to the TSST (an acute social
performance

Biological Features of Panic Disorder

107

stressor) compared to healthy controls, even though they had the same
heart rate elevation (Petrowski, Herold, Joraschky, Wittchen, &
Kirschbaum, 2010; Petrowski, Wintermann, Kirschbaum, & Bornstein, 2013)
and no differences in basal cortisol or cortisol awakening responses
(Petrowski et al., 2010). Other studies show mixed results for blunted
response in panic disorder relative to healthy controls (Jezova, Vigas,
Hlavacova, & Kukumberg, 2010; van Duinen, Schruers, Maes, & Griez,
2007); however, these additional studies are limited by very small
samples (ns = 9 to 16 per group, depending on the study). In sum,
findings suggest hypocortisol responsiveness to acute (physiological and
external) threat among panic disorder patients. Further, a more recent
study indicates that different markers of HPA axis activation---cortisol
and ACTH---may be decoupled in panic disorder (Petrowski, Wintermann,
Kirschbaum, & Bornstein, 2012). Thus, abnormalities in panic disorder
may be evident further downstream in the HPA system, or in the
communication and responsiveness of the various elements within the
system. HPA axis dysfunction also has been examined for structural
abnormality. An MRI study found that patients with panic disorder
evidenced significantly lower pituitary gland volume than healthy
controls, and that panic disorder patients with agoraphobia had
significantly smaller pituitary glands than those without agoraphobia
(Kartalci et al., 2011). Further, pituitary volume was linked to
severity and duration of panic disorder. Though this structural
difference is consistent with a malfunctioning neuroendocrine system,
hormone levels were not directly assessed. Heart rate variability and
specifically cardiac vagal tone, the high-frequency component of heart
rate variability, have emerged as popular means of assessing
parasympathetic responding. High cardiac vagal tone2 is hypothesized to
facilitate the organism's capacity for quick, precise cardiac and
behavioral adaptations to changes in internal states and environmental
circumstances, whereas low vagal tone limits such flexible responding
(Porges, 1992). Panic disorder has been linked to abnormal heart rate
variability and vagal tone, but it is unclear whether these findings are
specific to panic disorder or characteristic of anxiety or emotional
disorder patients more generally. On one hand, compared to nonpanic
controls, multiple heart rate variability abnormalities (involving both
high- and low-frequency spectral power) have been found in panic
disorder samples during both nonpanic and panicogenic conditions
(Friedman & Thayer, 1998; Friedman, Thayer, & Borkovec, 1993). Finally,
heart rate variability increases in response to CBT but not in response
to SSRI medication treatment for panic disorder (Garakani et al., 2009).
That stated, heart rate variability abnormalities have also been found
among adults with other anxiety disorders outside of panic disorder
(e.g., Cohen et al., 1998, 2000; Hoehn-Saric, McLeod, & Hipsley, 1995;
Pittig, Arch, Lam, & Craske, 2013; Thayer, Friedman, Borkovec, Johnsen,
& Molina, 2000). Thus, it remains unclear whether a distinct pattern of
heart rate variability abnormalities characterizes panic disorder or
whether similar abnormalities generalize across the anxiety disorders.
More important, multiple well-controlled studies have failed to find
heart rate variability differences in panic disorder patients versus
healthy controls (Asmundson & Stein, 1994; 2 Heart rate in humans is
regulated by the sinoatrial node (SA), the natural pacemaker of the
heart, located in the muscle fibers of

the right atrial chamber. The SA is enervated by the sympathetic and
parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system, both of which
modulate the regular rhythm set by the SA. The vagus, the 10th cranial
nerve, serves as the principal source of parasympathetic communication
between the SA and the central nervous system (Porges, 2003).

108

Panic Disorder

Slaap et al., 2004), or they have shown that heart rate variability
differences disappeared after accounting for psychotropic medication use
(Licht, de Geus, van Dyck, & Penninx, 2009; although see Pittig et al.,
2013, for the opposite finding). Differences in time of testing,
environmental and psychological conditions surrounding testing (e.g.,
Abelson et al., 2007), methods of recording and analysis, and subject
demographic factors such as age, fitness, and illness duration and
severity (e.g., Ito et al., 1999) likely account for these
inconsistencies, with the bulk of the evidence pointing to the presence
of heart rate variability abnormalities across the anxiety disorders.
Researchers also have focused on assessing sympathetic nervous system
functioning in panic disorder. Evaluations of sympathetic nervous system
functioning over extended periods of time in the natural environment
have yielded mixed results. Some report no baseline differences between
a panic disorder sample and nonanxious controls in terms of respiratory
and cardiovascular functioning (Clark et al., 1990; Shear et al., 1992),
whereas others find differences (Anastasiades, Clark, Salkovskis, &
Middleton, 1990; Bystritsky, Craske, Maidenberg, Vapnik, & Shapiro,
1995), including in the dysfunctional baroreflex regulation of
sympathetic nerve activity (Shioiri et al., 2005). Differences in the
contextual threat value of the studies (anticipating and experiencing
stressful stimuli versus resting) perhaps account for these seemingly
contradictory findings (see Abelson et al., 2007). Further, Alvarenga
and colleagues (Alvarenga, Richards, Lambert, & Esler, 2006) measured
cardiac sympathetic nervous tone during resting baseline via rates of
cardiac noradrenaline spillover and found no differences between
individuals with and without panic disorder. Rather, they found
reductions in measures of the noradrenaline transporter among panic
disorder patients, suggesting impaired neuronal uptake of noradrenaline
in panic disorder. Interestingly, Middleton and Ashby (1995) found that
panic disorder treatment in the form of CBT or imipramine increased
plasma noradrenaline, suggesting that noradrenaline-associated
dysregulations may be modifiable via treatment. The vast majority of
studies (e.g., Brambilla, Perna, Garberi, Nobile, & Bellodi, 1995;
Charney, Woods, Krystal, Nagy, & Heninger, 2007) have shown that
patients with panic disorder display blunted growth hormone responses to
clonidine, an alpha2adrenoreceptor partial agonist. However, Abelson and
colleagues (Abelson, Curtis, & Uhde, 2005) measured growth hormone
secretion over a 24-hour period and found no differences between panic
patients and nonpatients, suggesting that growth hormone circadian
patterns and basal activity are normal in panic disorder. Hence, growth
hormone abnormalities in panic disorder may be evidenced only in
specific activation paradigms, most consistently with clonidine. These
combined findings have been interpreted as consistent with
subsensitivity in postsynaptic alpha2-adrenoreceptor in response to
excessive central noradrenergic outflow. In sum, the contradictory and
inconsistent findings in the physiological literature on panic disorder
may stem from differences in contextual, methodological, and sample
demographic factors. Nonetheless, numerous studies suggest abnormalities
in HPA and autonomic nervous system functioning; their influence on
cardiac and respiratory functioning may account, at least partially, for
the cardiac and respiration-focused symptoms that characterize panic
disorder. Future studies should systematically investigate the effect of
treatment (behavioral and pharmacological) on the physiology of panic
disorder.

Etiological Models of Panic Disorder

109

Etiological Models of Panic Disorder Barlow (2002; Barlow, Chorpita, &
Turovsky, 1996) characterizes panic attacks as false alarms, in which a
fight-or-flight response is triggered in the absence of threatening
stimuli. While some research finds no association between somatic
symptoms or sensations and panic disorder (Moreno-Peral et al., 2014),
alarms in the form of panic attacks occur relatively commonly in the
general population (e.g., Norton, Cox, & Malan, 1992; Wittchen & Essau,
1991). This finding begs this question: What accounts for the difference
between the majority of individuals who display little to no distress
over panic attacks versus the minority who develop panic disorder? As
described earlier, neuroticism is viewed as a higher-order factor
characteristic of all anxiety disorders, with fear of fear being more
singular to panic disorder. The construct of fear of fear overlaps with
the construct of anxiety sensitivity, or the belief that anxiety and its
associated symptoms may cause deleterious physical, social, and
psychological consequences that extend beyond any immediate physical
discomfort during an episode of anxiety or panic (Reiss, Peterson,
Gursky, & McNally, 1986). Anxiety sensitivity is elevated across most
anxiety disorders (Wheaton, Deacon, McGrath, Berman, & Abramowitz,
2012), but it is particularly elevated in panic disorder (e.g., Taylor,
Koch, & McNally, 1992; Zinbarg & Barlow, 1996), especially on the
physical concerns subscale (Zinbarg & Barlow, 1996; Zinbarg, Barlow, &
Brown, 1997; Wheaton et al., 2012; Olthuis, Watt, & Stewart, 2014). That
is, beliefs that physical symptoms of anxiety are harmful seem to be
particularly relevant to panic disorder and appear to be mediated by
catastrophic misinterpretations about physiological sensations (Sandin
et al., 2015). Anxiety sensitivity may be acquired insidiously from a
lifetime of direct aversive experiences (such as a personal history of
significant illness or injury), vicarious observations (such as exposure
to significant illnesses or death among family members, or to family
members who display fear of body sensations through hypochondriasis), or
informational transmissions (such as parental overprotectiveness
regarding physical well-being; Craske & Rowe, 1997). In support, Watt,
Stewart, and colleagues (Stewart et al., 2001; Watt, Stewart, & Cox,
1998) reported that levels of anxiety sensitivity in young adulthood
were positively correlated with (retrospectively reported) learning
experiences related to anxiety symptoms in the form of parental
reinforcement (instrumental learning) and parental modeling (vicarious
learning) that such symptoms were to be feared. In addition, similar
results have been found in the adolescent literature, with findings that
when parents model or encourage fearful or distressing responses to
symptoms that can be triggered by or contribute to anxiety, such as
dizziness, racing heart, shortness of breath, and nausea, it predicts
the development of panic symptomatology for youth high in anxiety
sensitivity (Knapp, Frala, Blumenthal, Badour, & Leen-Feldner, 2013).
Unfortunately, data from all of these studies are retrospective and thus
vulnerable to biased recall. Anxiety sensitivity is posited to be a risk
factor for panic disorder because it primes reactivity to bodily
sensations. Consistent with this view is the finding that anxiety
sensitivity predicts subjective distress and reported symptoms in
response to procedures that induce strong physical sensations, such as
carbon dioxide inhalation (Blechert, Wilhelm, Meuret, Wilhelm, & Roth,
2013; Forsyth, Palav, & Duff, 1999), balloon inflation (Messenger &
Shean, 1998), and hyperventilation (Sturges, Goetsch,

110

Panic Disorder

Ridley, & Whittal, 1998), in nonclinical samples, even after controlling
for the effects of trait anxiety (Rapee & Medoro, 1994). Further,
Blechert and colleagues (2013) found that relative to those with low
anxiety sensitivity, young adults with high anxiety sensitivity showed
respiratory abnormalities during carbon dioxide (CO2 ) inhalation,
particularly during a second CO2 task, suggesting that respiratory
abnormalities are common and may be conditionable. In addition, several
longitudinal studies indicate that high scores on the Anxiety
Sensitivity Index predict the onset of panic attacks over 1- to 4-year
intervals in adolescents (Hayward et al., 2000), college students
(Maller & Reiss, 1992), and community samples with specific phobias or
no anxiety disorders (Ehlers, 1995), as well as during an acute military
stressor (basic training) (Schmidt et al., 1997, 1999). The predictive
relationship remains after controlling for prior depression (Hayward et
al., 2000) and history of panic attacks and trait anxiety (Schmidt et
al., 1997, 1999). Nonetheless, Bouton et al. (2001) argue that the
relationship between anxiety sensitivity and panic attacks in these
studies is relatively small, is not exclusive to panic, and is weaker
than the relationship between panic and general neuroticism.
Furthermore, these studies have not evaluated prediction of full panic
disorder as opposed to panic attacks. Two other models offer accounts
for the persistence of fear of bodily sensations. The first model, put
forth primarily by Clark (1986, 1988, 1996), is cognitive in nature.
Clark and others (e.g., Salkovskis, 1988) argue that catastrophic
misappraisals of bodily sensations, including misinterpretation of
panic- and anxiety-related bodily sensations as signs of imminent death,
craziness, loss of control, and so forth, are central to the development
and maintenance of panic disorder. As reviewed earlier, there is
extensive evidence that persons with panic disorder judge certain bodily
sensations to be detrimental. However, Bouton et al. (2001) take issue
with Clark's cognitive misappraisal model for multiple reasons,
including that the model cannot account for panic attacks that lack
conscious cognitive appraisal (e.g., nocturnal panic) without becoming
untestable. They also note that although catastrophic cognitions often
occur in panic patients, they do not necessarily play a causal role in
panic disorder. Finally, Bouton et al. critique the cognitive model for
not specifying how and when such cognitions are acquired and for whom
and under what circumstances they become catastrophic. The second model
was initially put forth by Eysenck more than four decades ago (Eysenck,
1960; Eysenck & Rachman, 1965), then expanded by Goldstein and Chambless
(1978), and more recently brought up to date by Bouton et al. (2001).
This model emphasizes interoceptive fear conditioning, or the process by
which low-level somatic sensations of arousal or anxiety (e.g., elevated
heart rate or perspiration) become conditioned stimuli due to their
association with intense fear, pain, or distress (Razran, 1961). In the
context of panic disorder, the result is that early somatic components
of the anxiety response come to elicit significant bursts of anxiety or
panic. An extensive body of experimental literature attests to the
robustness of interoceptive conditioning (e.g., Dworkin & Dworkin, 1999;
Acheson, Forsyth, & Moses, 2012), particularly with regard to early
interoceptive drug onset cues becoming conditioned stimuli for larger
drug effects (e.g., Sokolowska, Siegel, & Kim, 2002). In addition,
interoceptive conditioned responses are not dependent on conscious
awareness of triggering cues (Razran, 1961) and are observed even under
anesthesia in animals (e.g., Shibuki, Hamamura, & Yagi, 1984; Uno, 1970)
and humans (e.g., Block, Ghoneim, Fowles, Kumar, & Pathak, 1987). Within
this model, slight changes in relevant

Assessment of Panic Disorder

111

bodily functions that are not consciously recognized may elicit
conditioned fear and panic due to previous pairings with the terror of
panic (Bouton et al., 2001). Nevertheless, some researchers argue that
the acquisition of interoceptive conditioned responding requires
conscious awareness (e.g., Lovibond & Shanks, 2002). Expanding on
Eysenck's view, Bouton et al. (2001) argue that the similarity between
conditioned and unconditioned stimuli creates very strong, easily
conditioned responses, as occurs when initial bodily symptoms of panic
(conditioned stimulus) signal the rest of the panic attack
(unconditioned stimulus). Drawing on the extensive animal and human
learning literature, they explain that interoceptive cues do not always
produce conditioned panic, owing to factors such as the presence of
safety signals and context effects (e.g., performance in one context
does not always generalize to performance in another context). In
addition, they cite evidence from Öhman and Mineka (2001) and others
(e.g., LeDoux, 1996) to argue against the notion that conditioning
necessarily involves propositional knowledge and cognitive awareness.
Rather, Bouton et al. (2001) argue that catastrophic misappraisals may
accompany panic attacks because they are part of the range of responses
linked to panic or because they have been encouraged or reinforced. Such
thoughts may become conditioned stimuli that trigger anxiety or they may
simply be part of the conditioned response to anxiety- and panic-related
cues. Related work demonstrates that panic disorder patients show
impaired safety learning (Schroijen et al., 2015), including reporting
higher expectancies of danger in the presence of safety cues but equal
expectancies in the presence of danger cues (Lissek et al., 2009).
Further, panic disorder patients show greater generalization of fear
responding, as reflected by enhanced startle blink EMG responses,
greater electrodermal activity, and more pronounced respiration in
response to multiple generalization tasks with varying intensities
(Lissek et al., 2010). A recent laboratory conditioning study by
Schroijen et al. (2015) demonstrated that the interoceptive fear
learning and generalization is modulated by stimulus intensity (which is
typically high in panic disorder), and that impaired discriminatory
learning is closely linked to fear generalization. In summary, evidence
shows that panic disorder is characterized by impaired discriminative
learning between safety and danger cues, which creates a context in
which fear conditioning more readily occurs and generalizes.

Assessment of Panic Disorder Fortunately, a wide range of tools and
approaches are available for the assessment of panic disorder. In this
section, we highlight commonly used and up-and-coming instruments across
the domains of semistructured clinical interviews; dimensional clinical
rating scales; self-report and behavioral measures; behavioral approach
tests; ongoing, repeated assessment; and neurobiological assessment.

Interviews An in-depth interview is the first step in establishing
diagnostic and behavioral-cognitive profiles. The value of structured
interviews lies in their contribution to differential

112

Panic Disorder

diagnosis and interrater reliability. Several semistructured and fully
structured interviews exist. The Schedule for Schizophrenia and
Affective Disorders--Lifetime Version (anxiety modified) produces
reliable diagnoses for most of the anxiety disorders (generalized
anxiety disorder and simple phobia being the exceptions; Mannuzza et
al., 1989), as does the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV, which
covers all of the mental disorders (First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams,
1994). However, the semistructured interview that most specifically
focuses on assessment and differential diagnosis among the anxiety
disorders is the Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule (ADIS; DiNardo,
Brown, & Barlow, 1994), which has been updated for DSM-5 (Brown &
Barlow, 2014). In addition to its primary focus on anxiety disorders,
the ADIS-5 evaluates mood disorders and somatoform disorders, as well as
screens for psychotic and drug conditions. Differential diagnosis among
the anxiety disorders is sometimes difficult because, as described
earlier, panic is a ubiquitous phenomenon (Craske et al., 2010),
occurring across a wide variety of emotional disorders. It is not
uncommon for persons with specific phobias, generalized anxiety
disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and posttraumatic stress
disorder to report panic attacks. Hence, the ADIS-5 facilitates a
reliable method of gathering information to make differential diagnoses
among the anxiety disorders and also provides the information to
distinguish between clinical and subclinical presentations of a
disorder. Interrater agreement using the ADIS for DSM-IV (which is very
similar to the ADIS-5 due to minimal changes among the descriptions of
anxiety disorders) ranges from satisfactory to excellent for the various
anxiety disorders (Brown, Di Nardo, Lehman, & Campbell, 2001).

Clinical Rating Scales The Panic Disorder Severity Scale (PDSS; Houck,
Spiegel, Shear, & Rucci, 2002; Shear et al., 1997, 2001) is a
well-validated, seven-item measure designed to efficiently assess the
severity of panic disorder symptoms. In addition to providing a
dimensional severity rating, a cutoff score of 8 on the PDSS identifies
patients with panic disorder with high sensitivity (83%) and acceptable
specificity (64%) (Shear et al., 2001). The PDSS is available in both
interview-administered (Shear et al., 1997, 2001) and self-report (Houck
et al., 2002) versions. Although the PDSS has been employed with
increasing frequency (see, e.g., Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & Woods, 2000),
clinical severity ratings (CSRs) of distress and disablement (0 = not at
all, 8 = extreme) have been more commonly used as dimensional ratings
for panic disorder and other anxiety disorders. A CSR is based on the
information gathered from the diagnostic interview; a rating of 4 or
higher indicates that the individual meets diagnostic criteria for a
given disorder and evidences clinically significant distress and/or
disablement stemming from that disorder. With proper clinician training
procedures, adequate reliabilities have been demonstrated for CSRs based
on the ADIS-IV interview (Brown, Di Nardo, et al., 2001). Building on
the success of these earlier scales, the DSM-5 Anxiety Disorders
Subgroup preliminarily validated a promising new 10-item dimensional
rating scale for panic disorder and a separate scale for agoraphobia
(LeBeau et al., in press). The new scales are consistent with the
revisions to the DSM, and are consistent in form and content across the
anxiety disorders.

Assessment of Panic Disorder

113

Self-Report and Behavioral Measures Several standardized self-report
inventories provide useful information for treatment planning, as well
as being sensitive markers of therapeutic change. The Anxiety
Sensitivity Index (Reiss et al., 1986) and the multidimensional Anxiety
Sensitivity Index--3 (Taylor et al., 2007) have received wide acceptance
as trait measures of threatening beliefs about bodily sensations. Both
display good psychometric properties, and the former tends to
discriminate panic disorder from other types of anxiety disorders (e.g.,
Taylor et al., 1992; Telch, Shermis, & Lucas, 1989). More specific
information about which particular bodily sensations are feared the
most, and what specific misappraisals occur most often, can be obtained
from the Body Sensations Questionnaire and Agoraphobic Cognitions
Questionnaire (Chambless et al., 1984). Extensive psychometric and
clinical research indicates that these questionnaires show strong
psychometric properties (Arrindell, 1993; Chambless et al., 1984),
discriminate between individuals with panic and agoraphobia and people
with other anxiety disorders (Chambless & Gracely, 1989), and are
sensitive to change following treatment (Chambless et al., 1984). Fears
of interoceptive stimuli (e.g., caffeine, exercise) can be measured by
the Albany Panic and Phobia Questionnaire, which has shown good internal
validity and adequate test-retest reliability (Rapee et al., 1995). The
Mobility Inventory for Agoraphobia (Chambless, Caputo, Jasin, Gracely, &
Williams, 1985) lists agoraphobic situations that are rated based on
degree of avoidance when alone and when accompanied. This instrument is
useful for establishing in vivo exposure hierarchies. Newman and
colleagues (Newman, Holmes, Zuellig, Kachin, & Behar, 2006) developed
the Panic Disorder Self-Report (PDSR), a self-report diagnostic measure
based on DSM-IV panic disorder criteria. The PDSR demonstrates excellent
sensitivity and specificity in diagnosing panic disorder, strong
agreement with a structured diagnostic interview, good retest
reliability, and convergent and discriminant validity (Newman et al.,
2006). Finally, the Panic Disorder Screener (PADIS) was developed as a
way to identify panic disorder in community settings and to assess
symptom severity (Batterham, Mackinnon, & Christensen, 2015). The PADIS
shows adequate validity and reliability as a measurement tool in both
research and clinical settings.

Behavioral Tests The behavioral test is a useful measure of degree of
avoidance of specific situations. Behavioral approach tests can be
standardized or individually tailored. The standardized behavioral test
for agoraphobia usually involves walking or driving a particular route,
such as a 1-mile loop around the clinic setting. Anxiety levels are
rated at regular intervals, and actual distance walked or driven is
measured. The disadvantage is that the specific task may not be relevant
to all clients. More useful clinically are individually tailored
behavioral tasks that usually entail attempts at three to five
individualized situations that are somewhat to extremely difficult for
the client. These might include driving two exits on a freeway, waiting
in a bank line, or shopping in a local supermarket for 15 minutes. The
therapist assesses the client's maximum levels of anxiety and degree of
approach (i.e., refused task, attempted but escaped from task, or
completed task) for each situation. Though informative for clinical
practice, such individualized tasks confound between-subject comparisons
for research purposes. Standardized behavioral

114

Panic Disorder

tests for individuals with panic disorder target interoceptive
sensations and typically include exercises such as spinning, running in
place, and hyperventilating. As with the behavioral tests for
agoraphobia, anxiety levels are recorded continuously along with the
duration for which the client continued each exercise. Standardized and
individually tailored behavioral tests are susceptible to demand biases
for fear and avoidance prior to treatment and for improvement after
treatment (Borkovec, Weerts, & Bernstein, 1977). However, behavioral
tests are an important supplement to self-report of agoraphobic
avoidance because clients tend to underestimate what they can actually
achieve (Craske, Rapee, & Barlow, 1988). In addition, behavioral tests
often reveal information of which the individual is not fully aware, but
that is important for treatment planning. For example, the
safety-seeking behavior of remaining close to supports such as railings
or walls may not be apparent until observing the client walk through a
shopping mall.

Ongoing Assessment Self-monitoring is a very important part of
assessment and treatment for panic disorder and agoraphobia.
Retrospective recall of past episodes of panic and anxiety, especially
when made under anxious conditions, may inflate estimates of panic
frequency and intensity (Margraf et al., 1987; Rapee, Craske, & Barlow,
1990). Moreover, such inflation may contribute to apprehension about
future panic. Thus, to the degree that ongoing self-monitoring yields
more accurate, less inflated estimates, it is a therapeutic tool (see
Craske & Tsao, 1999, for a comprehensive review of self-monitoring for
panic and anxiety). Also, ongoing self-monitoring is believed to
contribute to increased objective self-awareness, which is essential to
cognitive-behavioral therapy approaches. To assess the course and rate
of change in treatment, as well as to investigate the mechanisms or
mediators by which a given treatment exerts its effects (see Kraemer,
Wilson, Fairburn, & Agras, 2002), it is important to conduct
psychometrically sound assessment of anxiety symptoms during treatment.
Ongoing, session-by-session measures, also known as process measures,
can be administered to patients at regular intervals during treatment to
assess changes in panic symptomology. The Anxiety Sensitivity Index
(Reiss et al., 1986; Taylor et al., 2007) is one example of an
appropriate symptom process measure for treatment of panic disorder.
Finally, particularly at treatment follow-up, assessments may benefit
from including broader quality of life (QOL) measures that capture the
wider impact of panic disorder treatment. For example, the Quality of
Life Inventory (Frisch, Cornell, Villanueva, & Retzlaff, 1992) assesses
17 domains, including the quality of a client's family relationships and
friendships and his or her sense of meaning and life direction, whereas
the frequently used, well-validated 36-Item Short Form Health Survey
(SF-36; Ware, 1993) assesses physical functioning, mental health, social
functioning, vitality, and general health. These QOL measures, however,
are quite general; panic- and anxiety-specific measures of QOL have not
yet been developed.

Neurobiological Assessment A medical evaluation is generally recommended
because several medical conditions should be ruled out before assigning
the diagnosis of panic disorder and agoraphobia.

Treatment of Panic Disorder

115

These include thyroid conditions, caffeine or amphetamine intoxication,
drug withdrawal, or pheochromocytoma (a rare adrenal gland tumor).
Furthermore, certain medical conditions can exacerbate panic disorder
and agoraphobia, although panic and agoraphobia are likely to continue
even when such conditions are under medical control. Mitral valve
prolapse, asthma, allergies, and hypoglycemia fall into this category.
These medical conditions exacerbate panic disorder and agoraphobia to
the extent that they elicit the types of physical sensations that are
feared. For example, mitral valve prolapse sometimes produces the
sensation of a heart flutter, asthma produces shortness of breath, and
hypoglycemia produces dizziness and weakness. Ongoing physiological
measures are not very practical tools for clinicians, but can provide
important information. In particular, the discrepancy described earlier
between reports of symptoms and actual physiological arousal can serve
as a therapeutic demonstration of the role of attention and appraisal in
symptom production. Similarly, actual recordings provide data to
disconfirm misappraisals such as, "My heart feels like its going so fast
that it will explode," or "I'm sure my blood pressure is so high that I
could have a stroke at any minute." Finally, baseline levels of
physiological functioning, which are sometimes dysregulated in anxious
individuals, may be sensitive measures of treatment outcome (e.g.,
Craske et al., 2005).

Treatment of Panic Disorder This section addresses the prevention of
panic disorder as well as psychological and biological modes of
treatment.

Psychological The most widely studied and validated psychotherapeutic
treatment for panic disorder is cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) in
its various forms. The two major forms of CBT have been Barlow and
Craske's panic control treatment (PCT; Barlow, Craske, Cerny, & Klosko,
1989), and Clark's cognitive therapy for panic disorder (Clark, 1986).
Both treatments emphasize using components of psychoeducation about
panic to correct misconceptions regarding panic symptoms, cognitive
restructuring to identify and correct distortions in thinking, and
interoceptive exposure to feared bodily sensations (e.g., palpitations,
dyspnea, dizziness) and in vivo exposure to feared situations (e.g.,
unfamiliar areas, driving) to obtain corrective information that
disconfirms fearful misappraisals and eventually lessens fear
responding. Breathing retraining as a means of helping patients to cope
with panic and anxiety is sometimes included. Although PCT and Clark's
cognitive therapy for panic disorder have not been directly compared,
the major difference lies in the reliance of PCT on both cognitive and
conditioning models, with behavioral exposure functioning as a primary
agent of therapeutic change. In Clark's approach, cognitive models are
more central and behavioral exposure serves as a vehicle for cognitive
change. Results for both of these forms of CBT typically yield
panic-free rates in the range of 70% to 80% of those treated and high
end-state rates (i.e., within normative ranges of functioning) in the
range of 50% to 70% (e.g., Barlow et al., 1989; Clark et al., 1994). Two
meta-analyses reported very large effect sizes of 1.55 and 0.90 for CBT
for panic

116

Panic Disorder

disorder (Mitte, 2005; Sanchez-Meca, Rosa-Alcazar, Marin-Martinez, &
Gomez-Conesa, 2010). Similarly robust findings emerge from a
meta-analysis of CBT in real-world clinic settings (e.g., effectiveness
studies), including for panic disorder (Stewart & Chambless, 2009), and
from a meta-analysis of the effects of CBT on improving quality of life
(preto posttreatment for panic disorder; g = .46; Hofmann, Wu, &
Boettcher, 2014). Another meta-analysis demonstrated that CBT for panic
disorder was superior to placebo (e.g., pill placebo or
nondirected-supportive therapy) (Hofmann & Smits, 2008). Benefits
generally are maintained over follow-up intervals for as long as 2 years
(Craske, Brown, & Barlow, 1991). This contrasts with the higher relapse
rates typically found with medication approaches to the treatment of
panic disorder, particularly the use of high-potency benzodiazepines
(e.g., Gould, Otto, & Pollack, 1995). That stated, a recent
comprehensive review that integrated multiple stringent criteria to
assess CBT response rates (Loerinc et al., 2015) concluded that the
response rate for panic disorder was 53% at posttreatment and 59% at
follow-up---lower than typically reported rates. Further, an earlier
analysis of individual profiles over time also suggested a less
optimistic picture, in that one third of clients who were panic-free 24
months after CBT had experienced a panic attack in the preceding year,
and 27% had sought additional treatment for panic over that same
interval of time (Brown & Barlow, 1995). Nevertheless, this approach to
analysis did not take into account the general trend toward continuing
improvement over time. Thus, CBT is a well-studied and relatively
efficacious treatment for panic disorder, but there is room for
improvement (see Loerinc et al., 2015). One approach to improving
long-term response rates involves monthly "booster," or "maintenance,"
CBT sessions. A recent investigation (White et al., 2013), for example,
demonstrated that following acute CBT for panic disorder (11 sessions),
panic disorder patients randomized to 9 monthly maintenance CBT sessions
showed substantially lower relapse rates over a 21-month follow-up than
did patients who were simply assessed and not offered maintenance
sessions (5% versus 18%). Thus, monthly maintenance sessions offer a
promising and straightforward approach to improving outcomes following
CBT for panic disorder. The effectiveness of CBT extends to patients who
experience nocturnal panic attacks (Craske et al., 2005). Also, CBT has
proven very helpful in lowering relapse rates upon discontinuation of
high-potency benzodiazepines (e.g., Otto, McHugh, et al., 2010).
Moreover, treatment is effective even when there is comorbidity. Indeed,
initial studies indicated that comorbidity did not reduce the
effectiveness of CBT for panic disorder (e.g., Brown et al., 1995;
McLean, Woody, Taylor, & Koch, 1998). More recent studies suggest that
comorbid depression only slightly reduced the effectiveness of CBT for
panic disorder (Emmrich et al., 2012), whereas comorbid personality
disorders moderately reduced effectiveness (Telch, Kamphuis, & Schmidt,
2011). In addition, CBT results in improvements in comorbid conditions
(e.g., Brown et al., 1995; Tsao, Mystkowski, Zucker, & Craske, 2005). In
other words, co-occurring symptoms of depression and other anxiety
disorders tend to improve after CBT for panic disorder. However, a study
assessing patients 2 years after treatment showed that the benefits for
comorbid conditions can lessen over time (Brown et al., 1995).
Nonetheless, the general finding of improvement in comorbidity suggests
the value of remaining focused on panic disorder treatment even when
comorbidity is present, since the comorbidity will be benefited as well
(for at least up to 1 year). In fact, preliminary evidence suggests that
simultaneously

Treatment of Panic Disorder

117

addressing panic disorder along with comorbidity (using CBT, tailored to
each disorder) may be less effective than remaining focused on panic
disorder (Craske et al., 2007), although this finding is in need of
replication. Generally, CBT for agoraphobia involves more situational
exposure than CBT for panic disorder alone. Randomized controlled
studies of CBT for agoraphobia generally yield slightly less effective
results than CBT for panic disorder with no or minimal agoraphobia
(e.g., Williams & Falbo, 1996). Moreover, greater agoraphobic avoidance
represents one of the only consistent predictors of worse outcomes in
the context of CBT for panic disorder and agoraphobia (Porter &
Chambless, 2015). Nonetheless, the trends suggest continuing improvement
over time after CBT has ended (see Loerinc et al., 2015). Furthermore,
Fava, Zielezny, Savron, and Grandi (1995) found that only 18.5% of their
panic-free clients relapsed over a period of 5 to 7 years after
exposure-based treatment for agoraphobia. Some research suggests that
the trend for improvement after acute treatment is facilitated by
involvement of significant others in every aspect of treatment (e.g.,
Cerny, Barlow, Craske, & Himadi, 1987). An intensive 8-day treatment
using a sensation-focused PCT approach was developed for individuals
with moderate to severe agoraphobia, and initial results are promising
(Morissette, Spiegel, & Heinrichs, 2005). Attempts have been made to
dismantle the different components of CBT for panic and agoraphobia. The
results are somewhat complex and to some extent depend on the samples
used (e.g., mild versus severe levels of agoraphobia), the exact
comparisons made, and the outcomes assessed. However, a meta-analysis of
42 panic disorder treatment studies (Sanchez-Meca et al., 2010)
concluded that the combination of exposure, relaxation, and breathing
retraining resulted in the highest effect size (d = 1.84), followed by
exposure alone (d = 1.53). Further, in vivo exposure led to larger gains
than imaginal or mixed exposure (e.g., use of more than one exposure
approach). However, the cognitive therapy component may be effective
even when conducted in full isolation from exposure and behavioral
procedures (e.g., Salkovskis, Clark, & Hackmann, 1991). Despite this,
many studies find that cognitive therapy does not improve outcome when
added to in vivo exposure treatment for agoraphobia (e.g., van den Hout,
Arntz, & Hoekstra, 1994; see Craske, 1999; Longmore & Worrell, 2007). In
support, meta-analyses have found no differences between CBT and
behavioral therapies in the treatment of panic disorder (Chambless &
Peterman, 2004) or have found an advantage for exposure alone or for CBT
combinations that include exposure over cognitive therapy alone
(Sanchez-Meca et al., 2010). The finding that exposure alone represents
a highly effective treatment for panic disorder, combined with the
evidence that cognitive components generally do not increase the
efficacy of exposure therapy (Sanchez-Meca et al., 2010), have led some
to conclude that cognitive components (e.g., cognitive restructuring)
are unnecessary (Longmore & Worrell, 2007), although the debate
continues (Hofmann, 2008). Further, growing evidence suggests that
exposure represents the most powerful component of CBT for panic
disorder. A large study in primary care demonstrated that strong
utilization of the nonexposure components of CBT resulted in worse
outcomes (Craske et al., 2006). Another large trial of CBT for panic
disorder with agoraphobia showed that exposure evidenced a dose-response
effect in reducing agoraphobic avoidance (Gloster et al., 2011),
suggesting that exposure led directly to agoraphobia improvement.
Further, the same CBT for panic disorder trial (Gloster et al., 2011)
demonstrated superior outcomes when in vivo exposure was conducted
during sessions (outside the therapy room) than when therapists planned
the in

118

Panic Disorder

vivo exposure exercises in session but then assigned them for homework.
This finding supports the central importance of exposure in CBT by
linking in-session completion of exposure exercises (which presumably
were completed at a higher rate than in the condition in which exposure
was merely assigned for homework) to better outcomes. Relatedly, an
earlier study found that breathing retraining and interoceptive exposure
did not improve outcome beyond in vivo exposure alone for agoraphobia
(de Beurs, van Balkom, Lange, Koele, & van Dyke, 1995). In summary,
although more dismantling research is needed, extant evidence suggests
that the exposure component of CBT plays a strongly efficacious role.
Group formats appear to be nearly as effective as individual treatment
formats for CBT for panic and agoraphobia (Néron, Lacroix, & Chaput,
1995; Sharp, Power, & Swanson, 2004). Although group formats are highly
effective, individual formats may be superior at posttreatment (Sharp et
al., 2004) or at reducing co-occurring depression and general anxiety
symptoms in the long term (Néron et al., 1995). Current findings warrant
more direct comparisons between group and individual formats before firm
conclusions can be drawn. Most of the panic disorder treatment studies
described in the previous sections averaged around 11 to 12 treatment
sessions. Four to 6 sessions of PCT also are effective (Craske,
Maidenberg, & Bystritsky, 1995; Roy-Byrne et al., 2005), although the
results are not as strong as those typically seen with 11 or 12
treatment sessions. However, studies have demonstrated equally effective
results when delivering CBT for panic disorder across the standard 12
sessions versus approximately 6 sessions (Clark et al., 1999), good
results following 5-session CBT (Otto et al., 2012), and good
effectiveness with intensive CBT over 2 days (e.g., Deacon & Abramowitz,
2006). Self-directed treatments, with minimal direct therapist contact,
are very beneficial to highly motivated and educated clients (e.g.,
Ghosh & Marks, 1987; Gould & Clum, 1995; Gould, Clum, & Shapiro, 1993).
Computer-assisted and internet versions of CBT are effective for panic
disorder (e.g., Richards, Klein, & Carlbring, 2003). Internet-based CBT
for panic disorder has shown effectiveness similar to face-to-face CBT
across multiple studies (e.g., Bergström et al., 2010; Kiropoulos et
al., 2008), albeit possibly lower quality of life improvements (Hofmann
et al., 2014). For professional-assisted online CBT, delivery by
psychologists led to better results than delivery by primary care
physicians (Shandley et al., 2008). Moreover, findings from computerized
programs for emotional disorders in general indicate that such
treatments are more acceptable and enjoyable when they are combined with
therapist involvement (e.g., Carlbring, Ekselius, & Andersson, 2003).
The theorized role of experiential avoidance as a risk and maintenance
factor for panic disorder has led to the development of acceptance-based
behavioral treatments for anxiety disorders. One of the most prominent
of the new therapies is acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT; Hayes,
Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999, 2012). Eifert and Forsyth (2005) developed an
ACT-based treatment manual for anxiety disorders, including panic
disorder. Arch, Eifert, et al. (2012) compared ACT with traditional CBT
for heterogeneous anxiety disorders (42% of patients had principal panic
disorder), demonstrating equivalent outcomes for both treatments at
posttreatment. Importantly, both treatments utilized behavioral exposure
(which has not been used in all ACT studies and here was framed in a
manner consistent with ACT). At 12-month follow-up, ACT demonstrated

Treatment of Panic Disorder

119

lower diagnostic severity and lower experiential avoidance among
completers, and CBT demonstrated higher quality of life. Thus,
preliminary evidence suggests that ACT is an efficacious treatment for
anxiety disorders. Regarding panic disorder--specific ACT studies,
Meuret, Twohig, Rosenfield, Hayes, and Craske (2012) demonstrated the
feasibility of combining 4 sessions of ACT with 6 subsequent sessions of
exposure therapy for panic disorder, with preliminary pre-/posttreatment
efficacy on the order of large effect sizes. More recently, Gloster and
colleagues (2015) conducted a small randomized clinical trial focused on
adults with panic disorder and/or agoraphobia with prior unsuccessful
evidence-based treatment, e.g., treatment-resistant patients with an
average of 42 previous sessions of (traditional) CBT (88%) and/or
medication (33%) for panic disorder. Patients were randomized to 8
twice-weekly sessions of ACT or a wait-list with delayed treatment. At
posttreatment, those receiving ACT reported medium to large effect size
gains on primary outcomes over the wait-list group, and continued to
improve over the 6-month follow-up. Thus, although additional panic
disorder--specific studies are needed, ACT appears to offer a promising
approach for the treatment of panic disorder---perhaps particularly for
treatment-resistant patients. Mindfulness meditation, in which
mindfulness states are intentionally cultivated, represents the central
skill taught in the 8-week mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR)
group intervention designed by Kabat-Zinn (1990).3 Building on the
success of an earlier nonrandomized study of MBSR for panic disorder and
generalized anxiety disorder (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1992; Miller, Fletcher,
& Kabat-Zinn, 1995), two randomized trials of MBSR for mixed anxiety
disorders have been completed. In the first study (Vøllestad, Sivertsen,
& Nielsen, 2011), MBSR completers (50% with principal panic disorder)
improved significantly on all outcomes compared to wait-list controls,
with moderate to large effect size improvements on measures of anxiety
and depression maintained through 6-month follow-up. In the second study
(Arch et al., 2013), veterans with anxiety disorders (31% with principal
panic disorder) showed large equivalent improvements in principal
disorder severity following adapted MBSR or CBT. However, CBT resulted
in superior improvements on anxious arousal, whereas adapted MBSR
resulted in superior improvements in worry and comorbid emotional
disorders (though baseline differences complicated the latter findings).
These initial studies demonstrate the preliminary efficacy of MBSR for
anxiety disorders; clearly more randomized trial work is needed to test
MBSR's efficacy for panic disorder specifically and in comparison to
CBT. A related intervention, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (Segal,
Williams, & Teasdale, 2002), was shown to serve as a successful adjunct
to medication in a pre-post study for Korean adults with panic disorder
(Kim et al., 2010). Though the study was very small (n = 23) and
nonrandomized, these participants had not sufficiently responded to
medication after 6+ months (and thus might be classified as treatment
resistant), and they were followed for a full year after MBCT,
suggesting the value of further investigating MBCT for panic disorder.
Two additional treatment developments merit attention. First, there is
longstanding and growing interest in the potential benefit of physical
exercise for the treatment of anxiety 3 Although scientifically defining
the construct of mindfulness has been challenging, it is thought to
involve the cultivation of

concentration, attention, and nonjudgmental acceptance toward whatever
one is experiencing in the present moment (Bishop et al., 2004).

120

Panic Disorder

disorders (e.g., Powers, Asmundson, & Smits, 2015; Stonerock et al.,
2015). Examining its potential for the treatment of panic disorder
specifically, Hovland and colleagues (2013), in a small trial, compared
CBT to physical exercise (three times a week) for adults with panic
disorder, and found that CBT outperformed physical exercise. More recent
work preliminarily shows that physical exercise assigned in the context
of CBT treatment for panic disorder boosts CBT's efficacy (Gaudlitz,
Plag, Dimeo, & Ströhle, 2015). Thus, exercise appears better as an
adjunct to CBT. Capnometry-assisted respiratory training (CART), a
treatment developed by Meuret and colleagues (Meuret, Wilhelm, Ritz, &
Roth, 2008; Meuret, Rosenfield, Hofmann, Seidel, & Bhaskara, 2010),
appears to offer a more promising stand-alone treatment for panic
disorder. CART helps patients with panic disorder learn how to breathe
in a manner that reduces the chronic hyperventilation or hypocapnia
(abnormally low levels of carbon dioxide, or CO2 ) that characterizes
this disorder. In CART, patients practice breathing exercises, paced by
audio tones, at home twice per day, while connected to a respiratory
feedback device that monitors their respiration rate and end-tidal CO2 .
At the end of the paced breathing period, they continue breathing
without the pacing tones while aiming to maintain the same end-tidal CO2
and respiration rate as before. In an initial trial (Meuret et al.,
2010), CART improved panic disorder symptoms to an extent similar to
cognitive therapy results, and functioned via the unique mechanism of
normalizing respiration. This promising approach warrants further
investigation.

Biological (Medications) Based on 19 placebo-controlled, randomized
clinical trials (Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2002), selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) are the medication treatment of choice for panic
disorder. Meta-analyses and reviews have reported medium to large effect
sizes compared to placebo (e.g., Bakker, van Balkom, & Spinhoven, 2002;
Mitte, 2005). The majority of trials have been short-term, although
several have examined and confirmed longer-term efficacy up to 1 year.
Benzodiazepines are effective agents for panic disorder as well. They
work rapidly, within days to 1 week, and are even better tolerated than
the very tolerable SSRI class of agents. They are limited by their risk
of physiological dependence and withdrawal and by the risk of abuse
(Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2002), and thus, prescribing trends have shifted
away from them in recent years (e.g., Berney, Halperin, Tango,
Daeniker-Dayer, & Schulz, 2007). However, a recent meta-analysis
(Offidani, Guidi, Tomba, & Fava, 2013) found that benzodiazepines were
more effective than antidepressant medication (e.g., tricyclics, SSRIs)
in reducing the number of panic attacks, and resulted in fewer side
effects and less (premature) discontinuation. Numerous studies show
clearly that discontinuation of medication results in relapse in a
significant proportion of patients, with placebo-controlled
discontinuation studies showing rates between 25% and 50% within 6
months, depending on study design (Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2002). In
addition, SSRIs, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs),
and benzodiazepines are associated with a time-limited withdrawal
syndrome (considerably worse for the benzodiazepines), which itself may
serve as an interoceptive stimulus that promotes or contributes to panic
disorder relapse.

Treatment of Panic Disorder

121

In terms of comparison between pharmacological and psychological
approaches, a meta-analysis of 21 randomized trials involving over 1,700
patients with panic disorder with or without agoraphobia clearly showed
that combined treatment with antidepressants and psychotherapy
(behavioral, CBT, and other) was superior to antidepressants alone and
to psychotherapy alone in the acute phase (Furukawa, Watanabe, &
Churchill, 2006). After treatment discontinuation, however, combined
treatment was superior to medication only but did not differ from
psychotherapy alone, and specifically CBT alone. Similarly, a more
recent meta-analysis showed that CBT plus pharmacotherapy (e.g.,
combined treatment) was superior to CBT plus placebo at posttreatment
but not at 6-month follow-up (Hofmann, Sawyer, Korten, & Smits, 2009),
confirming the short-term advantage but lack of long-term advantage for
combined treatment. Following medication discontinuation, other studies
show that the combination of medication and CBT fares worse than CBT
alone (and worse than CBT plus placebo, see Barlow et al., 2000),
suggesting the possibility that state- or context-dependent learning in
the presence of medication may have attenuated the new learning that
occurs during CBT (Otto, Pollack, & Sabatino, 1996; Otto, Smits, &
Reese, 2005). Thus, once medication is discontinued, having received
combined treatment may reduce the long-term effectiveness of CBT.
Further, naturalistic use of SSRIs in the context of CBT for panic
disorder has been associated with worse outcomes (e.g., Arch & Craske,
2007). Finally, a recent meta-analysis demonstrated a significant
advantage for CBT alone over medication alone in the treatment of panic
disorder, of moderate effect size (Roshanaei-Moghaddam et al., 2011).
Findings from the combination of fast-acting anxiolytics, especially the
high-potency benzodiazepines, with behavioral treatments for panic
disorder with agoraphobia are contradictory (e.g., Marks et al., 1993;
Wardle et al., 1994). Nevertheless, several studies reliably show
detrimental effects from chronic, naturalistic use of benzodiazepines on
short-term and long-term outcome from CBT for panic or agoraphobia
(e.g., Fava et al., 2001; Otto et al., 1996; van Balkom, de Beurs,
Koele, Lange, & van Dyck, 1996; and Westra, Stewart, & Conrad, 2002, for
as-needed benzodiazepine use). Specifically, there is evidence for more
attrition, poorer memory for CBT-related psychoeducational materials,
poorer outcome, and greater relapse when cognitive-behavioral therapy is
conducted in the context of chronic, naturalistic use of
benzodiazepines. In summary, because medication may reduce the long-term
effectiveness of CBT and often requires continual use to prevent
relapse, CBT alone represents the most cost-effective (in group format;
Gould et al., 1995) and durable first-line treatment for panic disorder.

Prevention Prevention for high-risk samples might halt the development
of panic disorder as well as prevent the development of other
psychological disorders, since people who report panic attacks are at
risk for other psychological problems, including other anxiety
disorders, depression, and substance abuse (e.g., Warren & Zgourides,
1988). Moreover, comorbid diagnoses such as depressive disorders (e.g.,
Roy-Byrne et al., 2000) and substance abuse (e.g., Marshall, 1997) are
believed to sometimes develop as a direct function of having panic
disorder.

122

Panic Disorder

In addition, prevention using a brief cognitive-behavioral intervention
is likely to be highly cost efficient. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is
among the least expensive treatments for panic disorder (Gould et al.,
1995). Prevention may cut indirect costs as well, given that people with
panic disorder are heavy users of the medical system (e.g., Roy-Byrne et
al., 1999). However, research on prevention is limited. At least two
studies (Marchand et al., 2012; Swinson, Soulios, Cox, & Kuch, 1992)
have briefly intervened with patients seeking care at emergency rooms
for panic attacks or noncardiac chest pain, with the goal of preventing
future panic attacks and panic disorder. One study (Swinson et al.,
1992) demonstrated that a single session of psychoeducation plus
self-exposure instructions resulted in significantly fewer panic attacks
(through 6-month follow-up) than psychoeducation plus reassurance
instructions. However, diagnostic evaluations and independent
assessments were not conducted. A more rigorous study (Lessard et al.,
2012) found that pharmacotherapy, a single session of CBT, or seven
sessions of CBT were all more effective than usual care at reducing
panic disorder severity (but not agoraphobia or daily interference) at
posttreatment, and did not differ from one another. Gardenswartz and
Craske (2001) conducted a selective/indicated prevention study that
targeted panic disorder. College students reporting at least one panic
attack in the past year and at least moderate anxiety sensitivity (as
assessed by the Anxiety Sensitivity Index) were randomized to either a
5-hour, group cognitive-behavioral workshop modified from empirically
supported cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder (Barlow &
Cerny, 1988), or a wait-list control group. Six months later, 13.6% of
the individuals in the control group developed panic disorder, as
opposed to only 1.8% of individuals in the workshop group. Among
non-treatment-seeking university students with elevated anxiety
sensitivity, Keough and Schmidt (2012) compared a single 50-minute
session of psychoeducation and interoceptive exposure to a general
health training matched for time and therapist contact. Relative to
health training, the single psychoeducation and exposure session reduced
anxiety sensitivity; improvements were maintained through 6-month
follow-up, suggesting the efficacy of very brief CBT-based interventions
for reducing anxiety sensitivity. Similarly, Meulenbeek and colleagues
(2009, 2010) designed a 16-hour CBT group intervention aimed at
preventing severe panic disorder in individuals with subclinical and
mild panic disorder. Relative to wait-list control, the intervention led
to moderate to large effect size improvements in panic disorder symptoms
and diagnostic status, maintained through 6-month follow-up (Meulenbeek
et al., 2010). In summary, extant studies demonstrate the promise of
early intervention and prevention efforts for panic disorder.

Summary and Future Directions As the many studies discussed in this
chapter attest, panic disorder enjoys the position as the most
researched anxiety disorder. The outgrowth of this intensive research
includes an emerging understanding of the interplay between
environmental and individual factors in shaping risk for panic disorder,
converging evidence on the neurocircuitry of fear and panic, an
integration of the latest advances in learning theory into models of
etiology and maintenance, and the development of effective
cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological treatments. Nevertheless,
despite a proliferation of studies and technological advances in

Summary and Future Directions

123

methodology, there remain areas in which the research is contradictory,
including several areas of panic-related molecular genetics as well as
panic-related psychophysiology. Looking toward the future, multiple new
and continuing areas of investigation will likely attract increasing
attention from researchers and clinicians alike. One rapidly expanding
research area involves the interaction of genetic and environmental
factors in increasing the risk for panic disorder. Future studies may
range from investigating the separate and interactive effects of high
genetic risk with known environmental risk factors, to linking our
emerging understanding of parent and child interactions in the etiology
and maintenance of anxiety disorders to specific genetic risk factors
(i.e., familial/environmental by individual by genetics interactions).
Additional potentially emerging areas include associations between in
utero, birth-related, and early childhood trauma and genetics in
increasing risk for panic disorder, and for other forms of
psychopathology. Regarding the underlying theoretical account of
exposure treatment for panic disorder and other anxiety disorders,
empirical evidence has increasingly shown that the traditional emotional
processing theory is not well supported (Craske et al., 2008, 2014;
Craske, Liao, Brown, & Vervliet, 2012). The success of exposure-based
therapy appears to stem rather from the strength of learned nonthreat
associations and the likelihood of their recall within the real-world
contexts in which feared stimuli are reencountered. We have outlined the
implications of this theoretical shift for the treatment of panic
disorder (Arch & Craske, 2011), including violating patient expectancies
regarding predicted negative outcomes, conducting exposures in multiple
real-world contexts during treatment, weaning safety signals,
integrating multiple excitors, scheduling treatment booster sessions at
increasing time intervals from treatment, and perhaps developing safety
recall cues that can be drawn upon in daily life. Recent empirical
research further explores the implications of this theoretical shift for
panic disorder (e.g., Meuret, Seidel, Rosenfield, Hofmann, & Rosenfield,
2012), and we expect additional work in this area in the future. In the
realm of treatment, the augmentation of exposure therapy for anxiety
disorders with D-cycloserine (DCS) represents one potential pathway. DCS
enhances extinction learning by serving as a partial agonist of an
extinction-related receptor in the basolateral amygdala (see Norberg,
Krystal, & Tolin, 2008). One small, randomized study (Otto, Tolin, et
al., 2010) demonstrated that DCS improved outcomes of brief CBT for
panic disorder at posttreatment and 1-month follow-up. Although another
study showed advantages of DSC over placebo among patients with more
severe panic disorder, the groups were not equal in severity at baseline
(Siegmund et al., 2011). DCS-enhanced CBT, therefore, may represent a
promising path to improving CBT outcomes with medication, but research
with larger samples and longer follow-ups are now needed, particularly
since a Cochrane review of 21 studies found no evidence of benefit for
DCS augmentation of CBT for anxiety disorders in general (Ori et al.,
2015). Treatment mediation and moderation studies comparing acceptance
and mindfulness treatments to traditional CBT for anxiety disorders
(e.g., Arch, Wolitzky-Taylor, Eifert, & Craske, 2012; Wolitzky-Taylor,
Arch, Rosenfield, & Craske, 2012) represent another important recent
development; such studies illuminate how each treatment works and for
whom. Many moderator studies to date, however, have been plagued by low
power and weak statistical tests of moderation (Schneider, Arch, &
Wolitzky-Taylor, 2015), demonstrating that more robust investigations
are now needed. Mindfulness strategies

124

Panic Disorder

(Treanor, 2011) and ACT (Meuret, Twohig, et al., 2012) have been
proposed as potentially powerful ways to enhance exposure therapy for
anxiety disorders, including panic disorder; these hypotheses await
further testing in randomized trials. Finally, interest in experiential
avoidance and mindfulness should continue to spawn new self-report and
behavioral measures to assess and validate these constructs. Several
such self-measures have already emerged (e.g., Bond et al., 2011; K. W.
Brown & Ryan, 2003; Gámez et al., 2011; Hayes et al., 2004). With the
emergence of new treatments and the existence of proven, effective ones
(e.g., CBT), it is important to consider that treatments are only as
effective as the patients and clinicians who know about and use them.
Despite the existence for over a decade of effective
cognitive-behavioral treatments, the vast majority of individuals with
panic disorder never receive CBT (even if they seek psychiatric
treatment, see Wolitzky-Taylor, Zimmermann, Arch, De Guzman, &
Lagomasino, 2015) or any other form of treatment (Johnson & Coles,
2013). In fact, many individuals with panic disorder are never treated
by mental health professionals, but nearly 85% initially seek medical
help for their symptoms (Katerndahl & Realini, 1997). Hence, researchers
have begun adapting treatment models to the medical locations in which
most (help-seeking) panic disorder patients are seen: primary care and
emergency room settings (Craske, Roy-Byrne, et al., 2002). The most
recent of these treatment models trains non--mental health
professionals, such as primary care nurses, to conduct therapy (e.g.,
Roy-Byrne et al., 2010). A multisite panic disorder treatment study
conducted in a primary care setting demonstrated that an enhanced CBT
and medication-based intervention was more effective than usual care
(Roy-Byrne et al., 2005), a finding that was recently replicated across
multiple anxiety disorder groups, including panic disorder (Craske et
al., 2011; Roy-Byrne et al., 2010). Given the significant unmet needs of
medical patients for recognition and treatment of panic disorder and the
success of these early trials, future work in this direction is needed.
Regarding our neurobiological understanding of panic disorder,
neuroimaging has highlighted low levels of activation in the ventral
medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), which may result in lessened
inhibitory influences upon the amygdala (Johnson et al., 2014). This
pattern is not specific to panic disorder but is also observed in
posttraumatic stress disorder (Milad et al., 2009) and
obsessive-compulsive disorder (Milad et al., 2013). Thus, rather than
representing a neural signature of panic disorder, hypoactivation of the
vmPFC is more likely to represent an underlying construct that is shared
across these disorders, such as elevated threat sensitivity. Whether a
unique neural signature exists for panic disorder awaits considerably
larger scale investigation across multiple disorders associated with
elevated threat sensitivity. Furthermore, studies to date have generally
focused on generic threat relevant stimuli or fear conditioning to
neutral stimuli to establish the neural correlates of panic disorder.
The neural correlates of fear of bodily sensations---the hallmark
feature of panic disorder---may elucidate more specific neural pathways.
Aside from issues of specificity, neural activation may be a useful tool
for personalizing treatment approach, should certain neural features
differentially moderate outcomes from one treatment approach (e.g.,
exposure therapy) over another (e.g., mindfulness or pharmacotherapy).
Again, larger scale studies will be needed to investigate neural
predictors of treatment response. Finally, given the enormous financial,
quality of life, familial, and societal costs of panic disorder (e.g.,
Ettigi, Meyerhoff, Chirban, Jacobs, & Wilson, 1997; Greenberg et al.,
1999;

Summary and Future Directions

125

Katerndahl & Realini, 1997), efforts toward early detection and
prevention of panic disorder will continue to demand the attention of
researchers, mental health professionals, and policy makers. Significant
strides have been made in the identification of general risk and
buffering factors in the development of anxiety disorders (see Zucker &
Craske, 2001). Individuals at risk may be defined broadly (e.g.,
females, high neurotics, or people in high-stress situations) or more
narrowly (e.g., children of parents with anxiety disorders or
individuals with disorder-specific genetic profiles or high anxiety
sensitivity, chronic somatic illness, or subthreshold panic attacks)
(Batelaan et al., 2010; Craske & Zucker, 2001). Similarly, prevention
and early detection efforts can be directed broadly through mass media
or school-based programs, or more specifically toward individuals at
risk for anxiety disorders (selective prevention) or individuals with
subclinical anxiety symptoms (indicated prevention). Greater attention
is currently needed to identify the most effective timing for prevention
efforts, the buffers that prevent high-risk or symptomatic individuals
from developing full-blown anxiety disorders, and whether prevention
efforts are better directed at broad vulnerability to anxiety or
vulnerability to specific anxiety disorders (Zucker & Craske, 2001).

References Abelson, J. L., Curtis, G. C., & Uhde, T. W. (2005).
Twenty-four hour growth hormone secretion in patients with panic
disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 30, 72--79. Abelson, J. L., Khan,
S., Liberzon, I., & Young, E. A. (2007). HPA axis activity in patients
with panic disorder: Review and synthesis of four studies. Depression
and Anxiety, 24(1), 66--76. Acheson, D. T., Forsyth, J. P., & Moses, E.
(2012). Interoceptive fear conditioning and panic disorder: The role of
conditioned stimulus-unconditioned stimulus predictability. Behavior
Therapy, 43(1), 174--189. Affrunti, N. W., & Ginsburg, G. S. (2012).
Maternal overcontrol and child anxiety: The mediating role of perceived
competence. Child Psychiatry & Human Development, 43(1), 102--112.
Affrunti, N. W., & Woodruff-Borden, J. (2015). The effect of maternal
psychopathology on parent--child agreement of child anxiety symptoms: A
hierarchical linear modeling approach. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 32,
56--65. Agorastos, A., Kellner, M., Stiedl, O., Muhtz, C., Becktepe, J.
S., Wiedemann, K., & Demiralay, C. (2014). The 5-HTTLPR genotype
modulates heart rate variability and its adjustment by pharmacological
panic challenge in healthy men. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 50,
51--58. Airaksinen, E., Larsson, M., & Forsell, Y. (2005).
Neuropsychological functions in anxiety disorders in population-based
samples: Evidence of episodic memory dysfunction. Journals of
Psychiatric Research, 39(2), 207--214. Alvarenga, M. E., Richards, J.
C., Lambert, G., & Esler, M. D. (2006). Psychophysiological mechanisms
in panic disorder: A correlative analysis of noradrenaline spillover,
neuronal noradrenaline reuptake, power spectral analysis of heart rate
variability, and psychological variables. Psychosomatic Medicine, 68,
8--16. Alves, M. R., Pereira, V. M., Machado, S., Nardi, A. E., &
Oliveira e Silva, A. C. (2013). Cognitive functions in patients with
panic disorder: A literature review. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria,
35(2), 193--200. American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, DC:
Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., rev.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American
Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Amering, M.,
Katschnig, H., Berger, P., Windhaber, J., Baischer, W., & Dantendorfer,
K. (1997). Embarrassment about the first panic attack predicts
agoraphobia in panic disorder patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
35, 517--521. Anastasiades, P., Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., &
Middleton, H. (1990). Psychophysiological responses in panic and stress.
Journal of Psychophysiology, 4(4), 331--338. Anders, S., Martin, L.,
Erb, M., Grodd, W., & Birbaumer, N. (2004). Brain activity underlying
emotional valence and arousal: A response-related fMRI study. Human
Brain Mapping, 23, 200--209. Arch, J. J., Ayers, C. A., Baker, A.,
Almklov, E., Dean, D. J., & Craske, M. G. (2013). Randomized clinical
trial of adapted mindfulness based stress reduction versus group
cognitive behavioral therapy for heterogeneous anxiety disorders.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51(4--5), 185--196. Arch, J. J., &
Craske, M. G. (2007). Implications of naturalistic use of
pharmacotherapy in CBT treatment of panic disorder. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 45(7), 1435--1447. Arch, J. J., & Craske, M. G. (2011).
Addressing relapse in cognitive behavioral therapy for panic disorder:
Methods for optimizing long-term treatment outcomes. Cognitive and
Behavioral Practice, 18, 306--315. Arch, J. J., Eifert, G. H., Davies,
C., Plumb, J. C., Rose, R. D., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Randomized
clinical trial of cognitive behavioral therapy versus acceptance and
commitment therapy for the treatment of mixed anxiety disorders. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(5), 750--765. Arch, J. J.,
Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B., Eifert, G. H., & Craske, M. G. (2012).
Longitudinal treatment mediation of traditional cognitive behavioral
therapy and

126

References acceptance and commitment therapy for anxiety disorders.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50(7--8), 469--478. Arrindell, W. A.
(1993). The fear of fear concept: Stability, retest artifact and
predictive power. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 139--148.
Asmundson, G. J., Sandler, L. S., Wilson, K. G., & Walker, J. R. (1992).
Selective attention toward physical threat in patients with panic
disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 6, 295--303. Asmundson, G. J., &
Stein, M. B. (1994). Vagal attenuation in panic disorder: An assessment
of parasympathetic nervous system function and subjective reactivity to
respiratory manipulations. Psychosomatic Medicine, 56, 187--193. Atmaca,
M., Yildirim, H., Gurok, M. G., Akyol, M., & Koseoglu, F. (2012).
Hippocampal neurochemical pathology in patients with panic disorder.
Psychiatry Investigation, 9(2), 161--165. Bakker, A., van Balkom, A. J.
L. M., & Spinhoven, P. (2002). SSRIs vs. TCAs in the treatment of panic
disorder: A meta-analysis. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 106,
163--167. Bandelow, B., Saleh, K., Pauls, J., Domschke, K., Wedekind,
D., & Falkai, P. (2010). Insertion/deletion polymorphism in the gene for
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) in panic disorder: A gender-specific
effect? World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 11(1), 66--70. Bandelow,
B., Spath, C., Tichaner, G. A., Brooks, A., Hajak, G., & Ruther, E.
(2002). Early traumatic life events, parental attitudes, family history,
and birth risk factors in patients with panic disorder. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 43, 269--278. Bardeen, J. R., Fergus, T. A., & Orcutt, H. K.
(2013). Experiential avoidance as a moderator of the relationship
between anxiety sensitivity and perceived stress. Behavior Therapy,
44(3), 459--469. Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The
nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Craske, M. G. (1994).
Definitions of panic attacks and panic disorder in the DSM-IV:
Implications for research. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103,
553--564. Barlow, D. H., & Cerny, J. A. (1988). Psychological treatment
of panic. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Barlow, D. H., Chorpita, B. P.,
& Turovsky, J. (1996). Fear, panic, anxiety, and disorders of emotion.
In D. A. Hope (Ed.), Perspectives on anxiety, panic,

127

and fear (The 43rd Annual Nebraska Symposium on Motivation),
(pp. 251--328). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. Barlow, D. H.,
Craske, M. G., Cerny, J. A., & Klosko, J. S. (1989). Behavioral
treatment of panic disorder. Behavior Therapy, 20(2), 261--282. Barlow,
D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2000).
Cognitive-behavioral therapy, imipramine, or their combination for panic
disorder. JAMA, 283(19), 2529--2536. Batelaan, N. M., Rhebergen, D., de
Graaf, R., Spijker, J., Beekman, A. T., & Penninx, B. W. (2012). Panic
attacks as a dimension of psychopathology: Evidence for associations
with onset and course of mental disorders and level of functioning.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 73, 1195--1202. Batelaan, N., Smit, F.,
de Graaf, R., van Balkom, A., Vollebergh, W., & Beekman, A. (2010).
Identifying target groups for the prevention of anxiety disorders in the
general population. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 122(1), 56--65.
Batterham, P. J., Mackinnon, A. J., & Christensen, H. (2015). The Panic
Disorder Screener (PADIS): Development of an accurate and brief
population screening tool. Psychiatry Research, 228(1), 72--76. Bennet,
A., & Stirling, J. (1998). Vulnerability factors in the anxiety
disorders. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 71, 311--321.
Bergström, J., Andersson, G., Ljótsson, B., Rück, C., Andreewitch, S.,
Karlsson, A., ... Lindefors, N. (2010). Internet-versus
group-administered cognitive behaviour therapy for panic disorder in a
psychiatric setting: A randomised trial. BMC Psychiatry, 10(1), 54.
Berney, P., Halperin, D., Tango, R., Daeniker-Dayer, I., & Schulz, P.
(2007). A major change of prescribing pattern in absence of adequate
evidence: Benzodiazepines versus newer antidepressants in anxiety
disorders. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 41(3), 39--47. Biederman, J.,
Faraone, S. V., Marrs, A., & Moore, P. (1997). Panic disorder and
agoraphobia in consecutively referred children and adolescents. Journal
of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 214--223.
Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N. D.,
Carmody, J., ... Devins, G. (2004). Mindfulness: A proposed operational
definition. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 230--241.

128

Panic Disorder

Blaya, C., Salum, G. A., Lima, M. S., Leistner-Segal, S., & Manfro, G.
G. (2007). Lack of association between the serotonin transporter
promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and panic disorder: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 3, 41. Blechert, J.,
Wilhelm, F. H., Meuret, A. E., Wilhelm, E. M., & Roth, W. T. (2013).
Experiential, autonomic, and respiratory correlates of CO2 reactivity in
individuals with high and low anxiety sensitivity. Psychiatry Research,
209(3), 566--573. Block, R. I., Ghoneim, M. M., Fowles, D. C., Kumar,
V., & Pathak, D. (1987). Effects of a subanesthetic concentration of
nitrous oxide on establishment, elicitation, and semantic and phonemic
generalization of classically conditioned skin conductance responses.
Pharmacology Biochemistry & Behavior, 28, 7--14. Boldrini, M., Del Pace,
L., Placidi, G. P., Keilp, J., Ellis, S. P., Signori, S., ... Cappa, S.
F. (2005). Selective cognitive deficits in obsessive-compulsive disorder
compared to panic disorder with agoraphobia. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 111(2), 150--158. Bond, F. W., Hayes, S. C., Baer, R. A.,
Carpenter, K. M., Guenole, N., Orcutt, H. K., ... Zettle, R. D. (2011).
Preliminary psychometric properties of the Acceptance and Action
Questionnaire--II: A revised measure of psychological inflexibility and
experiential avoidance. Behavior Therapy, 42(4), 676--688. Borkovec, T.
D., Weerts, T. C., & Bernstein, D. A. (1977). Assessment of anxiety. In
A. R. Ciminero, K. S. Calhoun, & H. E. Adams (Eds.), Handbook of
behavioral assessment (pp. 367--428). New York, NY: Wiley. Bouton, M.
E., Mineka, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). A modern learning theory
perspective on the etiology of panic disorder. Psychological Review,
108, 4--32. Bowlby, J. (1969). Disruption of affectional bonds and its
effects on behavior. Canada's Mental Health Supplement, 59, 12. Bowlby,
J. (1980). By ethology out of psycho-analysis: An experiment in
interbreeding. Animal Behaviour, 28, 649--656. Boyd, J. H. (1986). Use
of mental health services for the treatment of panic disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 1569--1574. Brambilla, F., Perna, G.,
Garberi, A., Nobile, P., & Bellodi, L. (1995). Alpha2-adrenergic
receptor sensitivity in panic disorder: I. GH response to GHRH and
clonidine stimulation in panic disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 20,
1--9.

Brandt, C. A., Meller, J., Keweloh, L., Hoschel, K., Staedt, J., Munz,
D., & Stoppe, G. (1998). Increased benzodiazepine receptor density in
the prefrontal cortex in patients with panic disorder. Journal of Neural
Transmission, 105, 1325--1333. Bremner, J. D., Innis, R. B., White, T.,
Masahiro, F., Silbersweig, D., Goddard, A. W., & Charney, D. S. (2000).
SPECT \[I-123\] iomazenil measurement of the benzodiazepine receptor in
panic disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 47, 96--106. Bromet, E. J.,
Gluzman, S. F., Paniotto, V. I., Webb, C. P. M., Tintle, N. L.,
Zakhozha, V., ... Schwartz, J. E. (2005). Epidemiology of psychiatric
and alcohol disorders in Ukraine: Findings from the Ukraine World Mental
Health Survey. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 40,
681--690. Brown, G. W., Harris, T. O., & Eales, M. J. (1993). Aetiology
of anxiety and depressive disorders in an inner-city population: II.
Comorbidity and adversity. Psychological Medicine, 23, 155--165. Brown,
K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2003). The benefits of being present: Mindfulness
and its role in psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 84, 822--848. Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow,
D. H. (1995). Diagnostic comorbidity in panic disorder: Effect on
treatment outcome and course of comorbid diagnoses following treatment.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 408--418. Brown, T.
A., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Long-term outcome in cognitive behavioral
treatment of panic disorder: Clinical predictors and alternative
strategies for assessment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 63, 754--765. Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2014). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5 (ADIS-5)--Adult Version. Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press. Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman,
C. L., Grisham, J. R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current and lifetime
comorbidity of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical
sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 585--599. Brown, T. A.,
Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). Structural relationships among
dimensions of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders and dimensions of
negative affect, positive affect, and autonomic arousal. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 107, 179--192. Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A.,
Lehman, C. L., & Campbell, L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV

References anxiety and mood disorders: Implications for the
classification of emotional disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
110, 49--58. Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K. A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, J. L.,
Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M., ... Keller, M. B. (2005). Influence of
psychiatric comorbidity on recovery and recurrence in generalized
anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic disorder: A 12-year
prospective study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1179--1187.
Bunaciu, L., Leen-Feldner, E. W., Blumenthal, H., Knapp, A. A., Badour,
C. L., & Feldner, M. T. (2014). An experimental test of the effects of
parental modeling on panic-relevant escape and avoidance among early
adolescents. Behavior Therapy, 45(4), 517--529. Bystritsky, A., Craske,
M., Maidenberg, E., Vapnik, T., & Shapiro, D. (1995). Ambulatory
monitoring of panic patients during regular activity: A preliminary
report. Biological Psychiatry, 38, 684--689. Carlbring, P., Ekselius,
L., & Andersson, G. (2003). Treatment of panic disorder via the
Internet: A randomized trial of CBT vs. applied relaxation. Journal of
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 34, 129--140. Carter, M.
M., Hollon, S. D., Carson, R., & Shelton, R. C. (1995). Effects of a
safe person on induced distress following a biological challenge in
panic disorder with agoraphobia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104,
156--163. Castillo, E. P., Coy, P. E. C., Shejet, F. O., Duran, E. T., &
Cabrera, D. M. (2010). Evaluación de funciones cognitivas: Atención y
memoria en pacientes con trastorno de pánico. Salud Mental, 33(6),
481--488. Cerny, J. A., Barlow, D. H., Craske, M. G., & Himadi, W. G.
(1987). Couples treatment of agoraphobia: A two-year follow-up. Behavior
Therapy, 18, 401--415. Chambless, D. L., Caputo, G. C., Bright, P., &
Gallagher, R. (1984). Assessment of fear of fear in agoraphobics: The
Body Sensations Questionnaire and the Agoraphobic Cognitions
Questionnaire. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52,
1090--1097. Chambless, D. L., Caputo, G. C., Jasin, S. E., Gracely, E.
J., & Williams, C. (1985). The Mobility Inventory for Agoraphobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23, 35--44. Chambless, D. L., & Gracely,
E. J. (1989). Fear of fear and the anxiety disorders. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 13, 19--20.

129

Chambless, D. L., & Peterman, M. (2004). Evidence on
cognitive-behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder and panic
disorder: The second decade. In R. L. Leahy (Ed.), Contemporary
cognitive therapy: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 86--115), New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Chambless, D. L., & Renneberg, B. (1988,
September). Personality disorders of agoraphobics. Paper presented at
the World Congress of Behavior Therapy, Edinburgh, Scotland. Charney, D.
S., Woods, S., Krystal, J. H., Nagy, L., & Heninger, G. (2007).
Noradrenergic neuronal dysregulation in panic disorder: The effects of
intravenous yohimbine and clonidine in panic disorder patients. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 86(4), 273--282. Chawla, N., & Ostafin, B.
(2007). Experiential avoidance as a functional dimensional approach to
psychopathology: An empirical review. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
63(9), 871--890. Chen, J., Tsuchiya, M., Kawakami, N., & Furukawa, T. A.
(2009). Non-fearful vs. fearful panic attacks: A general population
study from the National Comorbidity Survey. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 112(1--3), 273--278. Choe, A. Y., Kim, B., Lee, K. S., Lee,
J. E., Lee, J. Y., Choi, T. K., & Lee, S. H. (2013). Serotonergic genes
(5-HTT and HTR1A) and separation life events: Gene-by-environment
interaction for panic disorder. Neuropsychobiology, 67(4), 192--200.
Clark, D. B., Taylor, C. B., Hayward, C., King, R., Margraf, J., Ehlers,
A., ... Stewart, A. W. (1990). Motor activity and tonic heart rate in
panic disorder. Psychiatry Research, 32, 45--53. Clark, D. M. (1986). A
cognitive approach to panic. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24,
461--470. Clark, D. M. (1988). A cognitive model of panic attacks. In S.
Rachman & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Panic: Psychological perspectives
(pp. 71--89). Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum. Clark, D. M. (1996). Panic
disorder: From theory to therapy. In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers
of cognitive therapy (pp. 318--344). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Gelder, M., Koehler, C., Martin, M.,
Anastasiades, P., ... Jeavons, A. (1988). Tests of a cognitive theory of
panic. In I. Hand & H.-U. Wittchen (Eds.), Panic and phobias II:
Treatments and variables affecting course and outcome (pp. 71--90).
Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.

130

Panic Disorder

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Middleton, H.,
Anastasiades, P., & Gelder, M. (1994). A comparison of cognitive
therapy, applied relaxation, and imipramine in the treatment of panic
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry,
164, 759--769. Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Wells, A.,
Ludgate, J., & Gelder, M. (1999). Brief cognitive therapy for panic
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 67, 583--589. Cohen, H., Benjamin, J., Geva, A. B.,
Matar, M. A., Kaplan, Z., & Kotler, M. (2000). Autonomic dysregulation
in panic disorder and in post-traumatic stress disorders: Application of
power spectrum analysis of heart rate variability at rest and in
response to recollection of trauma or panic attacks. Psychiatry
Research, 96, 1--13. Cohen, H., Matar, A. M., Kaplan, Z., Miodownik, H.,
Cassuto, Y., & Kotler, M. (1998). Analysis of heart rate variability in
post-traumatic stress disorder patients: At rest and in response to a
trauma-related reminder. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 1054--1059. Cohen,
L., McGowan, J., Fooskas, S., & Rose, S. (1984). Positive life events
and social support and the relationship between life stress and
psychological disorder. American Journal of Community Psychology, 12,
567--587. Cohen, L. H., Burt, C. E., & Bjork, J. P. (1987). Life stress
and adjustment: Effects of life events experienced by young adolescents
and their parents. Developmental Psychology, 23, 583--592. Colonnesi,
C., Draijer, E. M., Stams, G. J. J., Van der Bruggen, C. O., Bögels, S.
M., & Noom, M. J. (2011). The relation between insecure attachment and
child anxiety: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Clinical Child &
Adolescent Psychology, 40(4), 630--645. Cougle, J. R., Timpano, K. R.,
Sachs-Ericsson, N., Keough, M. E., & Riccardi, C. J. (2010). Examining
the unique relationships between anxiety disorders and childhood
physical and sexual abuse in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Psychiatry Research, 177(1--2), 150. Cox, B. J., Endler, N.
S., & Swinson, R. P. (1995). An examination of levels of agoraphobic
severity in panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 57--62.
Craske, M. G. (1999). Anxiety disorders: Psychological approaches to
theory and treatment. Boulder, CO: Westview.

Craske, M. G. (2003). Origins of phobias and anxiety disorders: Why more
women than men? Oxford, England: Elsevier. Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D.
H. (1988). A review of the relationship between panic and avoidance.
Clinical Psychology Review, 8, 667--685. Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H.
(1989). Nocturnal panic. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 177,
160--167. Craske, M. G., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1991).
Behavioral treatment of panic disorder: A two-year follow-up. Behavior
Therapy, 22, 289--304. Craske, M. G., Farchione, T. J., Allen, L. B.,
Barrios, V., Stoyanova, M., & Rose, R. (2007). Cognitive behavioral
therapy for panic disorder and comorbidity: More of the same or less of
more? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45(6), 1095--1109. Craske, M. G.,
& Freed, S. (1995). Expectations about arousal and nocturnal panic.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 567--575. Craske, M. G., Kircanski,
K., Epstein, A., Wittchen, H.-U., Pine, D. S., Lewis-Fernández, R., &
Hinton, D. (2010). Panic disorder: A review of DSM-IV panic disorder and
proposals for DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27(2), 93--112. Craske, M.
G., Kircanski, K., Zelikowsky, M., Mystkowski, J., Chowdhury, N., &
Baker, A. (2008). Optimizing inhibitory learning during exposure
therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46(1), 5--27. doi:
10.1016/j.brat.2007.10.003 Craske, M. G., Lang, A. J., Aikins, D., &
Mystkowski, J. L. (2005). Cognitive behavioral therapy for nocturnal
panic. Behavior Therapy, 36, 43--54. Craske, M. G., Lang, A. J., Rowe,
M., DeCola, J. P., Simmons, J., Mann, C., ... Bystritsky, A. (2002).
Presleep attributions about arousal during sleep: Nocturnal panic.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 53--62. Craske, M. G., Liao, B.,
Brown, L., & Vervliet, B. (2012). Role of inhibition in exposure
therapy. Journal of Experimental Psychopathology, 3(3), 322--345.
Craske, M. G., Maidenberg, E., & Bystritsky, A. (1995). Brief
cognitive-behavioral versus non-directive therapy for panic disorder.
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 26, 113--120.
Craske, M. G., Miller, P. P., Rotunda, R., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). A
descriptive report of features of initial unexpected panic attacks in
minimal and extensive avoiders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28(5),
395--400.

References Craske, M. G., Niles, A. N., Burklund, L. J., WolitzkyTaylor,
K. B., Plumb, J. C., Arch, J. J., ... Lieberman, M. D. (2014).
Randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavioral therapy and
acceptance and commitment therapy for social phobia: Outcomes and
moderators. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 82(6),
1034--1048. Craske, M. G., Poulton, R., Tsao, J. C. I., & Plotkin, D.
(2001). Paths to panic disorder/agoraphobia: An exploratory analysis
from age 3 to 21 in an unselected birth cohort. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 556--563. Craske, M. G.,
Rapee, R. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1988). The significance of
panic-expectancy for individual patterns of avoidance. Behavior Therapy,
19, 577--592. Craske, M. G., & Rowe, M. K. (1997). Nocturnal panic.
Clinical Psychology: Science & Practice, 4, 153--174. Craske, M. G.,
Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M. B., DonaldSherbourne, C., Bystritsky, A.,
Katon, W., & Sullivan G. (2002). Treating panic disorder in primary
care: A collaborative care intervention. General Hospital Psychiatry,
24(3), 148--155. Craske, M. G., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M. B., Sullivan,
G., Hazlett-Stevens, H., Bystritsky, A., & Sherbourne, C. (2006). CBT
intensity and outcome for panic disorder in a primary care setting.
Behavior Therapy, 37, 112--119. Craske, M. G., Stein, M. B., Sullivan,
G., Sherbourne, C., Bystritsky, A., Rose, R. D., ... Roy-Byrne, P.
(2011). Disorder-specific impact of coordinated anxiety learning and
management treatment for anxiety disorders in primary care. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 68(4), 378--387. doi: 10.1001/
archgenpsychiatry.2011.25 Craske, M. G., & Tsao, J. C. I. (1999).
Self-monitoring with panic and anxiety disorders. Psychological
Assessment, 11, 466--479. Craske, M. G., & Tsao, J. C. I. (2005).
Assessment and treatment of nocturnal panic attacks. Sleep Medicine
Reviews, 9, 173--184. Craske, M. G., & Zucker, B. G. (2001). Prevention
of anxiety disorders: A model for intervention. Applied and Preventive
Psychology, 10(3), 155--175. de Beurs, E., van Balkom, A. J., Lange, A.,
Koele, P., & van Dyke, R. (1995). Treatment of panic disorder with
agoraphobia: Comparison of fluvoxamine, placebo, and psychological panic
management combined with exposure and of exposure in vivo alone.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 683--691.

131

de Carvalho, M. R., Dias, G. P., Cosci, F., de-Melo-Neto, V. L.,
Bevilaqua, M. C., Gardino, P. F., & Nardi, A. E. (2010). Current
findings of fMRI in panic disorder: Contributions for the fear
neurocircuitry and CBT effects. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics,
10(2), 291--303. de Carvalho, M. R., Velasques, B. B., Cagy, M.,
Marques, J. B., Teixeira, S., Nardi, A. E., ... Ribeiro, P. (2013).
Electroencephalographic findings in panic disorder. Trends in Psychiatry
and Psychology, 35(4), 238--251. De Cort, K., Griez, E., Büchler, M., &
Schruers, K. (2012). The role of "interoceptive" fear conditioning in
the development of panic disorder. Behavior Therapy, 43(1), 203--215. De
Cort, K., Hermans, D., Noortman, D., Arends, W., Griez, E. J., &
Schruers, K. R. (2013). The weight of cognitions in panic: The link
between misinterpretations and panic attacks. PLoS One, 8(8), e70315. De
Cort, K., Hermans, D., Spruyt, A., Griez, E., & Schruers, K. (2008). A
specific attentional bias in panic disorder? Depression and Anxiety,
25(11), 951--955. de Jong, G. M., & Bouman, T. K. (1995). Panic
disorder: A baseline period; Predictability of agoraphobic avoidance
behavior. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 185--199. Deacon, B., &
Abramowitz, J. (2006). A pilot study of two-day cognitive-behavioral
therapy for panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44,
807--817. Deckersbach, T., Moshier, S., Tuschen-Caffier, B., & Otto, M.
W. (2011). Memory dysfunction in panic disorder: An investigation of the
role of chronic benzodiazepine use. Depression and Anxiety, 28(11),
999--1007. Deckert, J., Nothen, M. M., Franke, P., Delmo, C., Fritze,
J., Knapp, M., ... Propping, P. (1998). Systematic mutation screening
and association study of the A1 and A2a adenosine receptor genes in
panic disorder suggest a contribution of the A2a gene to the development
of disease. Molecular Psychiatry, 3, 81--85. Del Casale, A., Serata, D.,
Rapinesi, C., Kotzalidis, G. D., Angeletti, G., Tatarelli, R., ...
Girardi, P. (2013). Structural neuroimaging in patients with panic
disorder: Findings and limitations of recent studies. Psychiatria
Danubina, 25(2), 108--114. Devilly, G. J. (2001a). Effect size and
methodological rigor in EMDR: A reply to Lipke's (2001) comment.
Behavior Therapist, 24, 195--196.

132

Panic Disorder

Devilly, G. J. (2001b). The influence of distraction during exposure and
researcher allegiance during outcome trials. Behavior Therapist, 24,
18--21. DiNardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV: Clinician's manual. New York,
NY: Graywind. Doerfler, L. A., Connor, D. F., Volungis, A. M., &
Toscano, P. F., Jr. (2007). Panic disorder in clinically referred
children and adolescents. Child Psychiatry & Human Development, 38(1),
57--71. Domschke, K., Deckert, J., O'Donovan, M. C., & Glatt, S. J.
(2007). Meta-analysis of COMT val158met in panic disorder: Ethnic
heterogeneity and gender specificity. American Journal of Medical
Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 144(5), 667--673. Domschke,
K., Klauke, B., Winter, B., Gajewska, A., Herrmann, M. J., Warrings, B.,
... Deckert, J. (2012). Modification of caffeine effects on the
affectmodulated startle by neuropeptide S receptor gene variation.
Psychopharmacology, 222(3), 533--541. Domschke, K., Reif, A., Weber, H.,
Richter, J., Hohoff, C., Ohrmann, P., ... Deckert, J. (2011).
Neuropeptide S receptor gene---converging evidence for a role in panic
disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 16(9), 938--948. Dworkin, B. R., &
Dworkin, S. (1999). Heterotopic and homotopic classical conditioning of
the baroreflex. Integrative Physiological & Behavioral Science, 34,
158--176. Ehlers, A. (1995). A 1-year prospective study of panic
attacks: Clinical course and factors associated with maintenance.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 164--172. Ehlers, A., Margraf, J.,
Roth, W. T., Taylor, C. B., & Birbaumer, N. (1988). Anxiety induced by
false heart rate feedback in patients with panic disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 26, 1--11. Eifert, G. H., & Forsyth, J. P. (2005).
Acceptance and commitment therapy for anxiety disorders: A
practitioner's treatment guide to using mindfulness, acceptance, and
values-based behavior change strategies. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Eifert, G. H., & Heffner, M. (2003). The effects of acceptance versus
control contexts on avoidance of panic-related symptoms. Journal of
Behavioral Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 34, 293--312. Emmrich,
A., Beesdo-Baum, K., Gloster, A. T., Knappe, S., Höfler, M., Arolt, V.,
... Wittchen, H.-U. (2012). Depression does not affect the treatment
outcome of CBT for panic and agoraphobia: Results

from a multicenter randomized trial. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics,
81(3), 161--172. Erhardt, A., Schumacher, A. N., Czamara, D., Karbalai,
N., Müller-Myhsok, B., Mors, O., ... Binder, E. B. (2012). Replication
and meta-analysis of TMEM132D gene variants in panic disorder.
Translational Psychiatry, 2, e156. Ettigi, P., Meyerhoff, A. S.,
Chirban, J. T., Jacobs, R. J., & Wilson, R. R. (1997). The quality of
life and employments in panic disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 185, 368--372. Eysenck, H. J. (Ed.). (1960). Behavior therapy
and the neuroses. Oxford, England: Pergamon Press. Eysenck, H. J.
(1967). The biological basis of personality. Springfield, IL: C. C.
Thomas. Eysenck, H. J., & Rachman, S. (1965). The causes and cures of
neurosis. London, England: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Fava, G. A.,
Rafanelli, C., Grandi, S., Conti, S., Ruini, C., Mangelli, L., ...
Belluardo, P. (2001). Long-term outcome of panic disorder with
agoraphobia treated by exposure. Psychological Medicine, 31, 891--898.
Fava, G. A., Zielezny, M., Savron, G., & Grandi, S. (1995). Long-term
effects of behavioural treatment for panic disorder with agoraphobia.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 87--92. First, M. B., Spitzer, R.
L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. (1994). Structured clinical
interview for Axis I DSM-IV disorders. New York, NY: Biometric Research
Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute. Forsyth, J. P., Palav,
A., & Duff, K. (1999). The absence of relation between anxiety
sensitivity and fear conditioning using 20% versus 13% CO2 -enriched air
as unconditioned stimuli. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 143--153.
Friedman, B. H., & Thayer, J. F. (1998). Autonomic balance revisited:
Panic anxiety and heart rate variability. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 44, 133--151. Friedman, B. H., Thayer, J. F., & Borkovec, T.
D. (1993). Heart rate variability in generalized anxiety disorder
\[abstract\]. Psychophysiology, 30(Suppl.), S28. Frisch, M. B., Cornell,
J., Villanueva, M., & Retzlaff, P. J. (1992). Clinical validation of the
Quality of Life Inventory: A measure of life satisfaction for use in
treatment planning and outcome assessment. Psychological Assessment, 4,
92--101.

References Furukawa, T. A., Watanabe, N., & Churchill, R. (2006).
Psychotherapy plus antidepressant for panic disorder with or without
agoraphobia: Systematic review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188,
305--312. Gadermann, A. M., Alonso, J., Vilagut, G., Zaslavsky, A. M., &
Kessler, R. C. (2012). Comorbidity and disease burden in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NSC-R). Depression and Anxiety, 29,
797--806. Gajewska, A., Blumenthal, T. D., Winter, B., Hermann, M. J.,
Conzelmann, A., Mühlberger, A., ... Domschke, K. (2013). Effects of
ADORA2A gene variation and caffeine on prepulse inhibition: A
multi-level risk model of anxiety. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology
& Biological Psychiatry, 40(1), 115--121. Gámez, W., Chmielewski, M.,
Kotov, R., Ruggero, C., Suzuki, N., & Watson, D. (2014). The Brief
Experiential Avoidance Questionnaire: Development and initial
validation. Psychological Assessment, 26(1), 35--45. Gámez, W.,
Chmielewski, M., Kotov, R., Ruggero, C., & Watson, D. (2011).
Development of a measure of experiential avoidance: The Multidimensional
Experiential Avoidance Questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 23(3),
692--713. Garakani, A., Martinez, J. M., Aaronson, C. J., Voustianiouk,
A., Kaufmann, H., & Gorman, J. M. (2009). Effect of medication and
psychotherapy on heart rate variability in panic disorder. Depression
and Anxiety, 26(3), 251--258. Gardenswartz, C. A., & Craske, M. G.
(2001). Prevention of panic disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32(4), 725--737.
Gatt, J. M., Burton, K. L., Williams, L. M., & Schofield, P. R. (2015).
Specific and common genes implicated across major mental disorders: A
review of meta-analysis studies. Journal of Psychiatry Research, 60,
1--13. Gaudlitz, K., Plag, J., Dimeo, F., & Ströhle, A. (2015). Aerobic
exercise training facilitates the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral
therapy in panic disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 32(3), 221--228.
Gere, M. K., Villabø, M. A., Torgersen, S., & Kendall, P. C. (2012).
Overprotective parenting and child anxiety: The role of co-occurring
child behavior problems. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26(6), 642--649.
Ghosh, A., & Marks, I. M. (1987). Self-treatment of agoraphobia by
exposure. Behavior Therapy, 18, 3--16.

133

Gloster, A. T., Sonntag, R., Hoyer, J., Meyer, A. H., Heinze, S.,
Ströhle, A., ... Wittchen, H.-U. (2015). Treating treatment-resistant
patients with panic disorder and agoraphobia using psychotherapy: A
randomized controlled switching trial. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics,
84(2), 100--109. Gloster, A. T., Wittchen, H.-U., Einsle, F., Lang, T.,
Helbig-Lang, S., Fydrich, T., ... Arolt, V. (2011). Psychological
treatment for panic disorder with agoraphobia: A randomized controlled
trial to examine the role of therapist-guided exposure in situ in CBT.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79(3), 406--420. doi:
10.1037/a0023584 Goddard, A. W., Mason, G. F., Almai, A., Rothman, D.
L., Behar, K. L., Petroff, O. A. C., ... Krystal, J. H. (2001).
Reductions in occipital cortex GABA levels in panic disorder detected
with 1h-magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Archives of General Psychiatry,
58, 556--561. Goddard, A. W., Mason, G. F., Appel, M., Rothman, D. L.,
Gueorguieva, R., Behar, K. L., ... Krystal, J. H. (2004). Impaired GABA
neuronal response to acute benzodiazepine administration in panic
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 2186--2193. Goldstein, A.
J., & Chambless, D. L. (1978). A reanalysis of agoraphobia. Behavior
Therapy, 9, 47--59. Goodwin, R. D., Fergusson, D. M., & Horwood, L. J.
(2005). Childhood abuse and familial violence and the risk of panic
attacks and panic disorder in young adulthood. Psychological Medicine,
35, 881--890. Goodwin, R. D., & Pine, D. S. (2002). Respiratory disease
and panic attacks among adults in the United States. Chest, 122(2),
645--650. Gordeev, S. A. (2008). Cognitive functions and the state of
nonspecific brain systems in panic disorder. Neuroscience and Behavioral
Physiology, 38(7), 707--714. Gorman, J. M., Kent, J. M., Sullivan, G.
M., & Coplan, J. D. (2000). Neuroanatomical hypothesis of panic
disorder, revised. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 493--505.
Gorman, J. M., Papp, L. A., Coplan, J. D., Martinez, J. M., Lennon, S.,
Goetz, R. R., ... Klein, D. F. (1994). Anxiogenic effects of CO2 and
hyperventilation in patients with panic disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 151(4), 547--553. Gould, R. A., & Clum, G. A. (1995).
Self-help plus minimal therapist contact in the treatment of panic
disorder: A replication and extension. Behavior Therapy, 26, 533--546.

134

Panic Disorder

Gould, R. A., Clum, G. A., & Shapiro, D. (1993). The use of
bibliotherapy in the treatment of panic: A preliminary investigation.
Behavior Therapy, 24, 241--252. Gould, R. A., Otto, M. W., & Pollack, M.
H. (1995). A meta-analysis of treatment outcome for panic disorder.
Clinical Psychology Review, 15, 819--844. Graeff, F. G., & Del-Ben, C.
M. (2008). Neurobiology of panic disorder: From animal models to brain
neuroimaging. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 32(7), 1326--1335.
Grassi, M., Caldirola, D., Vanni, G., Guerriero, G., Piccinni, M.,
Valchera, A., & Perna, G. (2013). Baseline respiratory parameters in
panic disorder: A meta-analysis. Journal of Affective Disorders, 146(2),
158--173. Gray, J. A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry
into the functions of the septo-hippocampal system. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press. Greenberg, P. E., Sisitsky, T., Kessler, R. C.,
Finkelstein, S. N., Berndt, E. R., Davidson, J. R. T., ... Fyer, A. J.
(1999). The economic burden of anxiety disorders in the 1990s. Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 60, 427--435. Grillon, C. (2002). Startle
reactivity and anxiety disorders: Aversive conditioning, context, and
neurobiology. Biological Psychiatry, 52, 958--975. Grillon, C., Ameli,
R., Goddard, A., Woods, S. W., & Davis, M. (1994). Baseline and
fear-potentiated startle in panic disorder patients. Biological
Psychiatry, 35, 431--439. Gunthert, K. C., Conner, T. S., Armeli, S.,
Tennen, H., Covault, J., & Kranzler, H. R. (2007). Serotonin transporter
gene polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and anxiety reactivity in daily life: A
daily process approach to gene-environment interaction. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 69(8), 762--768. Hamilton, S. P., Slager, S. L., De Leon, A.
B., Heiman, G. A., Klein, D. F., Hodge, S. E., ... Knowles, J. A.
(2004). Evidence for genetic linkage between a polymorphism in the
adenosine 2A receptor and panic disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29,
558--565. Hawks, E., Blumenthal, H., Feldner, M. T., Leen-Feldner, E.
W., & Jones, R. (2011). An examination of the relation between traumatic
event exposure and panic-relevant biological challenge responding among
adolescents. Behavior Therapy, 42(3), 427--438. Hayes, S. C., Levin, M.
E., Plumb-Vilardaga, J., Villatte, J. L., & Pistorello, J. (2013).
Acceptance and

commitment therapy and contextual behavioral science: Examining the
progress of a distinctive model of behavioral and cognitive therapy.
Behavior Therapy, 44(2), 180--198. Hayes, S. C., Luoma, J. B., Bond, F.
W., Masuda, A., & Lillis, J. (2006). Acceptance and commitment therapy:
Model, processes and outcomes. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44,
1--25. Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance
and commitment therapy: An experiential approach to behavior change. New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G.
(2012). Acceptance and commitment therapy: The process and practice of
mindful change (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Hayes, S. C.,
Strosahl, K., Wilson, K. G., Bissett, R. T., Pistorello, J., Toarmino,
D., ... McCurry, S. M. (2004). Measuring experiential avoidance: A
preliminary test of a working model. Psychological Record, 54(4),
553--578. Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., Giffore, E. V., Follette, V. M.,
& Strosahl, K. (1996). Experiential avoidance and behavioral disorders:
A functional dimensional approach to diagnosis and treatment. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 1152--1168. Hayward, C., Killen,
J. D., Kraemer, H. C., & Taylor, C. B. (2000). Predictors of panic
attacks in adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 207--214. Helbig-Lang, S., & Petermann, F.
(2010). Tolerate or eliminate? A systematic review on the effects of
safety behavior across anxiety disorders. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 17(3), 218--233. Helbig-Lang, S., Richter, J., Lang, T.,
Gerlach, A. L., Fehm, L., Alpers, G. W., ... Wittchen, H.-U. (2014). The
role of safety behaviors in exposure-based treatment for panic disorder
and agoraphobia: Associations to symptom severity, treatment course, and
outcome. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 28(8), 836--844. Hermans, D.,
Craske, M. G., Mineka, S., & Lovibond, P. F. (2006). Extinction in
humans. Biological Psychiatry, 60, 361--368. Hettema, J. M., Neale, M.
C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A review and meta-analysis of the genetic
epidemiology of anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry,
158(10), 1568--1578. Hibbs, E. D., Hamburger, S. D., Kruesi, M. J. P., &
Lenane, M. (1993). Factors affecting expressed

References emotion in parents of ill and normal children. American
Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 63, 103--112. Hirshfeld-Becker, D. R.,
Micco, J. A., Henin, A., Petty, C., Faraone, S. V., Mazursky, H., ...
Biederman, J. (2012). Psychopathology in adolescent offspring of parents
with panic disorder, major depression, or both: A 10-year follow-up.
Psychopathology, 169(11). Hoehn-Saric, R., McLeod, D. R., & Hipsley, P.
(1995). Is hyperarousal essential to obsessive-compulsive disorder?
Diminished physiologic flexibility, but not hyperarousal, characterizes
patients with obsessivecompulsive disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 52, 688--693. Hofmann, S. G. (2008). Common misconceptions
about cognitive mediation of treatment change: A commentary to Longmore
and Worrell (2007). Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 67--70. Hofmann, S.
G., Sawyer, A. T., Korten, A. E., & Smits, J. A. J. (2009). Is it
beneficial to add pharmacotherapy to cognitive-behavioral therapy when
treating anxiety disorders? A meta-analytic review. International
Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 2(2), 160--175. Hofmann, S. G., & Smits,
J. A. J. (2008). Cognitivebehavioral therapy for adult anxiety
disorders: A meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69(4), 621--632. Hofmann, S. G., Wu, J.
Q., & Boettcher, H. (2014). Effect of cognitive-behavioral therapy for
anxiety disorders on quality of life: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 82(3), 375. Hohoff, C., Mullings, E.
L., Heatherley, S. V., Freitag, C. M., Neumann, L. C., Domschke, K., ...
Deckert, J. (2010). Adenosine A2A receptor gene: Evidence for
association of risk variants with panic disorder and anxious
personality. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 44(14), 930--937. Hommers,
L., Raab, A., Bohl, A., Weber, H., Scholz, C. J., Erhardt, A., ...
Kalisch, R. (2015). MicroRNA hsa-miR-4717-5p regulates RGS2 and may be a
risk factor for anxiety-related traits. American Journal of Medical
Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 168(4), 296--306. Houck, P.
R., Spiegel, D. A., Shear, M. K., & Rucci, P. (2002). Reliability of the
self-report version of the Panic Disorder Severity Scale. Depression and
Anxiety, 15(4), 183--185. Hovland, A., Nordhus, I. H., Sjøbø, T.,
Gjestad, B. A., Birknes, B., Martinsen, E. W., ... Pallesen, S. (2013).
Comparing physical exercise in groups to group

135

cognitive behaviour therapy for the treatment of panic disorder in a
randomized controlled trial. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy,
41(4), 408--432. Hudson, J., & Rapee, R. (2001). Parent--child
interactions and anxiety disorders: An observational study. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 39, 1411--1427. Ito, T., Inoue, Y., Sugihara, T.,
Yamada, H., Katayama, S., & Kawahara, R. (1999). Autonomic function in
the early stage of panic disorder: Power spectral analysis of heart rate
variability. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 53(6), 667--672.
Jacob, R. G., Furman, J. M., Clark, D. B., & Durrant, J. D. (1992).
Vestibular symptoms, panic, and phobia: Overlap and possible
relationships. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 4, 163--174. Jezova, D.,
Vigas, M., Hlavacova, N., & Kukumberg, P. (2010). Attenuated
neuroendocrine response to hypoglycemic stress in patients with panic
disorder. Neuroendocrinology, 92(2), 112--119. Johnson, E. M., & Coles,
M. E. (2013). Failure and delay in treatment-seeking across anxiety
disorders. Community Mental Health Journal, 49(6), 668--674. Johnson, P.
L., Federici, L. M., & Shekhar, A. (2014). Etiology, triggers and
neurochemical circuits associated with unexpected, expected, and
laboratory-induced panic attacks. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
46(3), 429--454. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using
the wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness. New
York, NY: Delta. Kabat-Zinn, J., Massion, A. O., Kristeller, J.,
Peterson, L. G., Fletcher, K. E., Pbert, L., ... Santorelli, S. F.
(1992). Effectiveness of a meditation-based stress reduction program in
the treatment of anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149,
936--943. Kämpfe, C. K., Gloster, A. T., Wittchen, H.-U., HelbigLang,
S., Lang, T., Gerlach, A. L., ... Deckert, J. (2012). Experiential
avoidance and anxiety sensitivity in patients with panic disorder and
agoraphobia: Do both constructs measure the same? International Journal
of Clinical and Health Psychology, 12(1), 5--22. Kang, E. H., Park, J.
E., Lee, K. H., Cho, Y. S., Kim, J. J., & Yu, B. H. (2012). Regional
brain metabolism and treatment response in panic disorder patients: An
\[18F\]FDG-PET study. Neuropsychobiology, 66(2), 106--111. Kaplan, J.
S., Arnkoff, D. B., Glass, C. R., Tinsley, R., Geraci, M., Hernandez,
E., ... Carlson, P. J. (2012).

136

Panic Disorder

Avoidant coping in panic disorder: A yohimbine biological challenge
study. Anxiety, Stress, & Coping, 25(4), 425--442. Kartalci, S., Dogan,
M., Unal, S., Ozcan, A. C., Ozdemir, S., & Atmaca, M. (2011). Pituitary
volume in patients with panic disorder. Progress in
NeuroPsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 35(1), 203--207.
Katerndahl, D. A., & Realini, J. P. (1997). Quality of life and
panic-related work disability in subjects with infrequent panic and
panic disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 58, 153--158. Katschnig,
H., & Amering, M. (1998). The long-term course of panic disorder and its
predictors. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 18(Suppl. 2),
6S--11S. Kawakami, N., Takeshima, T., Ono, Y., Uda, H., Hata, Y.,
Nakane, Y., ... Kikkawa, T. (2005). Twelve-month prevalence, severity,
and treatment of common mental disorders in communities in Japan:
Preliminary finding from the World Mental Health Japan Survey
2002--2003. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 59, 441--452.
Kendler, K. S., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C., Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L.
J. (1993). Major depression and phobias: The genetic and environmental
sources of comorbidity. Psychological Medicine, 23, 361--371. Kent, J.
M., & Rauch, S. L. (2003). Neurocircuitry of anxiety disorders. Current
Psychiatry Report, 5, 266--273. Keough, M. E., & Schmidt, N. B. (2012).
Refinement of a brief anxiety sensitivity reduction intervention.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(5), 766--772. Kessler,
R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters,
E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of
DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593--602. Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W.
T., Demler, O., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence,
severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62,
617--627. Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Jin, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear,
K., & Walters, E. E. (2006). The epidemiology of panic attacks, panic
disorder, and agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(4), 415--424.

Kessler, R. C., Davis, C. G., & Kendler, K. S. (1997). Childhood
adversity and adult psychiatric disorder in the U.S. National
Comorbidity Survey. Psychological Medicine, 27, 1101--1119. Kessler, R.
C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A., & Wittchen, H.-U.
(2012). Twelvemonth and lifetime prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of
anxiety and mood disorders in the United States. International Journal
of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 21(3), 169--184. Kikuchi, M.,
Komuro, R., Hiroshi, O., Kidani, T., Hanaoka, A., & Koshino, Y. (2005).
Panic disorder with and without agoraphobia: Comorbidity within a
half-year of the onset of panic disorder. Psychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 58, 639--643. Kim, B., Lee, S. H., Kim, Y. W., Choi, T.
K., Yook, K., Suh, S. Y., ... Yook, K. H. (2010). Effectiveness of a
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy program as an adjunct to
pharmacotherapy in patients with panic disorder. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 24(6), 590--595. Kim, J. E., Dager, S. R., & Lyoo, K. (2012).
The role of the amygdala in the pathophysiology of panic disorder:
Evidence from neuroimaging studies. Biology of Mood & Anxiety Disorders,
2, 20. Kircanski, K., Craske, M. G., Epstein, A. M., & Wittchen, H.-U.
(2009). Subtypes of panic attacks: A critical review of the empirical
literature. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 878--887. Kiropoulos, L. A.,
Klein, B., Austin, D. W., Gilson, K., Pier, C., Mitchell, J., &
Ciechomski, L. (2008). Is internet-based CBT for panic disorder and
agoraphobia as effective as face-to-face CBT? Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 22(8), 1273--1284. Klein, D. F. (1981). Anxiety
reconceptualized. In D. F. Klein & J. G. Rabkin (Eds.), Anxiety: New
research and changing concepts (pp. 235--262). New York, NY: Raven.
Knapp, A. A., Frala, J., Blumenthal, H., Badour, C. L., & Leen-Feldner,
E. W. (2013). Anxiety sensitivity and childhood learning experiences:
Impacts on panic symptoms among adolescents. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 37, 1151--1159. Kraemer, H. C., Wilson, T., Fairburn, C. G., &
Agras, W. S. (2002). Mediators and moderators of treatment effects in
randomized clinical trials. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59(10),
877--883. Kroeze, S., & van den Hout, M. A. (2000). Selective attention
for cardiac information in panic patients. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 38, 63--72.

References Lake, R. I. E., Eaves, L. J., Maes, H. H. M., Heath, A. C., &
Martin, N. G. (2000). Further evidence against the environmental
transmission of individual differences in neuroticism from a
collaborative study of 45,850 twins and relatives of two continents.
Behavior Genetics, 30, 223--233. Lambert, A. E., Hu, Y., Magee, J. C.,
Beadel, J. R., & Teachman, B. A. (2014). Thought suppression across
time: Change in frequency and duration of thought recurrence. Journal of
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders, 3(1), 21--28. Lautenbacher,
S., Spernal, J., & Krieg, J.-C. (2002). Divided and selective attention
in panic disorder: A comparative study of patients with panic disorder,
major depression and healthy controls. European Archives of Psychiatry
and Clinical Neuroscience, 252, 210--213. LeBeau, R. T., Glenn, D. E.,
Hanover, L. N., BeesdoBaum, K., Wittchen, H.-U., & Craske, M. G. (In
press). Preliminary assessment of a dimensional approach to measuring
anxiety for DSM-5. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric
Research. LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious
underpinnings of emotional life. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Lessard, M. J., Marchand, A., Pelland, M. È., Belleville, G.,
Vadeboncoeur, A., Chauny, J. M., ... Lavoie, K. L. (2012). Comparing two
brief psychological interventions to usual care in panic disorder
patients presenting to the emergency department with chest pain.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 40(2), 129. Levitt, J. T.,
Brown, T. A., Orsillo, S. M., & Barlow, D. H. (2004). The effects of
acceptance versus suppression of emotion on subjective and
psychophysiological response to carbon dioxide challenge in patients
with panic disorder. Behavior Therapy, 35(4), 747--766. Levy, H. C., &
Radomsky, A. S. (2014). Safety behaviour enhances the acceptability of
exposure. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 43(1), 83--92. Licht, C. M. M.,
de Geus, E. J. C., van Dyck, R., & Penninx, B. W. J. H. (2009).
Association between anxiety disorders and heart rate variability in the
Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA). Psychosomatic
Medicine, 71(5), 508--518. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181a292a6 Lipke, H.
(2001). Response to Devilly's (2001) claims on distraction and exposure.
Behavior Therapist, 24(9), 195.

137

Lissek, S., Rabin, S., Heller, R. E., Lukenbaugh, D., Geraci, M., Pine,
D. S., & Grillon, C. (2010). Overgeneralization of conditioned fear as a
pathogenic marker of panic disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
167(1), 47. Lissek, S., Rabin, S. J., McDowell, D. J., Dvir, S.,
Bradford, D. E., Geraci, M., ... Grillon, C. (2009). Impaired
discriminative fear-conditioning resulting from elevated fear responding
to learned safety cues among individuals with panic disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 47(2), 111--118. Loerinc, A. G., Meuret, A. E.,
Twohig, M. P., Rosenfield, D., Bluett, E. J., & Craske, M. G. (2015).
Response rates for CBT for anxiety disorders: Need for standardized
criteria. Clinical Psychology Review, 42, 72--82. Logue, M. W., Vieland,
V. J., Goedken, R. J., & Crowe, R. R. (2003). Bayesian analysis of a
previously published genome screen for panic disorder reveals new and
compelling evidence for linkage to chromosome 7. American Journal of
Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 121(1), 95--99.
Long, Z., Medlock, C., Dzemidzic, M., Shin, Y. W., Goddard, A. W., &
Dydak, U. (2013). Decreased GABA levels in anterior cingulate
cortex/medial prefrontal cortex in panic disorder. Progress in
Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 44, 131--135. Longley,
S. L., Watson, D., Noyes, R., & Yoder, K. (2006). Panic and phobic
anxiety: Associations among neuroticism, physiological hyperarousal,
anxiety sensitivity, and three phobias. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
20, 718--739. Longmore, R. J., & Worrell, M. (2007). Do we need to
challenge thoughts in cognitive behavioral therapy? Clinical Psychology
Review, 27, 173--187. Lonsdorf, T. B., Rück, C., Bergström, J.,
Andersson, G., Öhman, A., Schalling, M., & Lindefors, N. (2009). The
symptomatic profile of panic disorder is shaped by the 5-HTTLPR
polymorphism. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological
Psychiatry, 33(8), 1479--1483. López-Solà, C., Fontenelle, L. F.,
Alonso, P., Caudras, D., Foley, D. L., Pantelis, C., ... Harrison, B. J.
(2014). Prevalence and heritability of obsessivecompulsive spectrum and
anxiety disorder symptoms: A survey of the Australian Twin Registry.
American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics,
165B(4), 314--325.

138

Panic Disorder

Lovibond, P. F., & Shanks, D. R. (2002). The role of awareness in
Pavlovian conditioning: Empirical evidence and theoretical implications.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 28,
3--26. Lucas, J. A., Telch, M. J., & Bigler, E. D. (1991). Memory
functioning in panic disorder: A neuropsychological perspective. Journal
of Anxiety Disorders, 5(1), 1--20. Mackinnon, A. J., Henderson, A. S., &
Andrews, G. (1990). Genetic and environmental determinants of the
lability of trait neuroticism and the symptoms of anxiety and
depression. Psychological Medicine, 20, 581--591. Maddock, R. J.,
Buonocore, M. H., Kile, S. J., & Garrett, A. S. (2003). Brain regions
showing increased activation by threat-related words in panic disorder.
NeuroReport, 14, 325--328. Maidenberg, E., Chen, E., Craske, M., Bohn,
P., & Bystritsky, A. (1996). Specificity of attentional bias in panic
disorder and social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 10, 529--541.
Malizia, A. L., Cunningham, V. J., Bell, C. J., Liddle, P. F., Jones,
T., & Nutt, D. J. (1998). Decreased brain GABA(A)-benzodiazepine
receptor binding in panic disorder: Preliminary results from a
quantitative PET study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 715--720.
Maller, R. G., & Reiss, S. (1992). Anxiety sensitivity in 1984 and panic
attacks in 1987. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 6, 241--247. Mannuzza,
S., Fyer, A. J., Martin, L. Y., Gallops, M. S., Endicott, J., Gorman, J.
M., ... Klein, D. F. (1989). Reliability of anxiety assessment: I.
Diagnostic agreement. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1093--1101.
Marchand, A., Belleville, G., Fleet, R., Dupuis, G., Bacon, S. L.,
Poitras, J., ... Lavoie, K. L. (2012). Treatment of panic in chest pain
patients from emergency departments: Efficacy of different interventions
focusing on panic management. General Hospital Psychiatry, 34(6),
671--680. Marciniak, M. D., Lage, M. J., Dunayevich, E., Russell, J. M.,
Bowman, L., Landbloom, R. P., & Levine, L. R. (2005). The cost of
treating anxiety: The medical and demographic correlates that impact
total medical costs. Depression and Anxiety, 21(4), 178--184. Margraf,
J., Taylor, C. B., Ehlers, A., Roth, W. T., & Agras, W. S. (1987). Panic
attacks in the natural environment. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 175, 558--565.

Marks, I. M., Swinson, R. P., Basoglu, M., Kuch, K., Noshirvani, H.,
O'Sullivan, G., ... Sengun, S. (1993). "Alprazolam and exposure alone
and combined in panic disorder with agoraphobia: A controlled study in
London and Toronto": Reply. British Journal of Psychiatry, 162,
790--794. Maron, E., Hettema, J., & Shlik, J. (2010). Advances in
molecular genetics of panic disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 15(7),
681--701. Marshall, J. R. (1997). Alcohol and substance abuse in panic
disorder: Discussion. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 58, 46--50.
Martin, N. G., Jardine, R., Andrews, G., & Heath, A. C. (1988). Anxiety
disorders and neuroticism: Are there genetic factors specific to panic?
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 77, 698--706. Massana, G., Gasto, C.,
Junque, C., Mercader, J. M., Gomez, B., Massana, J., ... Salamero, M.
(2002). Reduced levels of creatine in the right medial temporal lobe
region of panic disorder patients detected with (1)H magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. Neuroimage, 16(pt. 1), 836--842. McLean, P. D., Woody, S.,
Taylor, S., & Koch, W. J. (1998). Comorbid panic disorder and major
depression: Implications for cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(2), 240--247. McLeod, B. D.,
Wood, J. J., & Weisz, J. R. (2007). Examining the association between
parenting and childhood anxiety: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology
Review, 27(2), 155--172. Mellman, T. A., & Uhde, T. W. (1989). Sleep
panic attacks: New clinical findings and theoretical implications.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 146(9), 1204--1207. Messenger, C., &
Shean, G. (1998). The effects of anxiety sensitivity and history of
panic on reactions to stressors in a non-clinical sample. Journal of
Behavior Therapy, 29, 279--288. Meulenbeek, P., Willemse, G., Smit, F.,
Smits, N., van Balkom, A., Spinhoven, P., & Cuijpers, P. (2009). Effects
and feasibility of a preventive intervention in sub-threshold and mild
panic disorder: Results of a pilot study. BMC Research Notes, 2(1), 4.
Meulenbeek, P., Willemse, G., Smit, F., van Balkom, A., Spinhoven, P., &
Cuijpers, P. (2010). Early intervention in panic: Pragmatic randomised
controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196(4), 326--331.
Meuret, A. E., Rosenfield, D., Hofmann, S. G., Seidel, A., & Bhaskara,
L. (2010). Respiratory and

References cognitive mediators of treatment change in panic disorder:
Evidence for intervention specificity. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 78(5), 691--704. Meuret, A. E., Seidel, A.,
Rosenfield, B., Hofmann, S. G., & Rosenfield, D. (2012). Does fear
reactivity during exposure predict panic symptom reduction? Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(5), 773. Meuret, A. E., Twohig,
M. P., Rosenfield, D., Hayes, S. C., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Brief
acceptance and commitment therapy and exposure for panic disorder: A
pilot study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 19(4), 606--618. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpra.2012.05.004 Meuret, A. E., Wilhelm, F. H., Ritz, T., &
Roth, W. T. (2008). Feedback of end-tidal pCO2 as a therapeutic approach
for panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 42, 560--568.
Middleton, H. C., & Ashby, M. (1995). Clinical recovery from panic
disorder is associated with evidence of changes in cardiovascular
regulation. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 91, 108--113. Milad, M. R.,
Furtak, S. C., Greenberg, J. L., Keshaviah, A., Im, J. J., Falkenstein,
M. J., ... & Wilhelm, S. (2013). Deficits in conditioned fear extinction
in obsessive-compulsive disorder and neurobiological changes in the fear
circuit. JAMA Psychiatry, 70(6), 608--618. Milad, M. R., Pitman, R. K.,
Ellis, C. B., Gold, A. L., Shin, L. M., Lasko, N. B., ... Rauch, S. L.
(2009). Neurobiological basis of failure to recall extinction memory in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 66(12),
1075--1082. Miller, J. J., Fletcher, K., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (1995).
Three-year follow-up and clinical implications of a mindfulness
meditation-based stress reduction intervention in the treatment of
anxiety disorders. General Hospital Psychiatry, 17, 192--200. Miller,
R., Wankerl, M., Stalder, T., Kirschbaum, C., & Alexander, N. (2013).
The serotonin transporter gene-linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) and
cortisol stress reactivity: A meta-analysis. Molecular Psychiatry,
18(9), 1018--1024. Mineka, S., & Cook, M. (1986). Immunization against
the observational conditioning of snake fear in rhesus monkeys. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 307--318. Mineka, S., Gunnar, M., &
Champoux, M. (1986). Control and early socioemotional development:
Infant rhesus monkeys reared in controllable versus

139

uncontrollable environments. Child Development, 57, 1241--1256. Mineka,
S., Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1998). Comorbidity of anxiety and
unipolar mood disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 377--412.
Mitte, K. (2005). A meta-analysis of the efficacy of psycho- and
pharmacotherapy in panic disorder with and without agoraphobia. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 88, 27--45. Mitte, K. (2008). Memory bias for
threatening information in anxiety and anxiety disorders: A
meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 134(6), 886--911. Mohler,
H. (2012). The GABA system in anxiety and depression and its therapeutic
potential. Neuropharmacology, 62(1), 42--53. Moore, P. S., Whaley, S.
E., & Sigman, M. (2004). Interactions between mothers and children:
Impacts of maternal and child anxiety. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
113, 471--476. Moreau, D. L., Weissman, M., & Warner, V. (1989). Panic
disorder in children at high risk for depression. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 146(8), 1059--1060. Moreno-Peral, P., Conejo-Ceróna, S.,
Motrico, E., Rodríguez-Morejón, A., Fernández, A., GarcíaCampayo, J.,
... Bellón, J. Á. (2014). Risk factors for the onset of panic and
generalised anxiety disorders in the general adult population: A
systematic review of cohort studies. Journal of Affective Disorders,
168, 337--348. Morissette, S. B., Spiegel, D. A., & Heinrichs, N.
(2005). Sensation-focused intensive treatment for panic disorder with
moderate to severe agoraphobia. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 12,
17--29. Muiños-Gimeno, M., Espinosa-Parrilla, Y., Guidi, M., Kagerbauer,
B., Sipilä, T., Maron, E., ... Estivill, X. (2011). Human microRNAs
miR-22, miR-138-2, miR-148a, and miR-488 are associated with panic
disorder and regulate several anxiety candidate genes and related
pathways. Biological Psychiatry, 69(6), 526--533. Munafò, M. R., Brown,
S. M., & Hariri, A. R. (2008). Serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) genotype
and amygdala activation: A meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 63(9),
852--857. Munafò, M. R., Freimer, N. B., Ng, W., Ophoff, R., Veijola,
J., Miettunen, J., ... Flint, J. (2008). 5-HTTLPR genotype and
anxiety-related personality traits: A meta-analysis and new data.
American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics,
150(2), 271--281.

140

Panic Disorder

Nay, W., Brown, R., & Roberson-Nay, R. (2013). Longitudinal course of
panic disorder with and without agoraphobia using the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC).
Psychiatry Research, 208(1), 54--61. Nelles, W. B., & Barlow, D. H.
(1988). Do children panic? Clinical Psychology Review, 8(4), 359--372.
Néron, S., Lacroix, D., & Chaput, Y. (1995). Group vs. individual
cognitive behaviour therapy in panic disorder: An open clinical trial
with a six month follow-up. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 27,
379--392. Newman, M. G., Holmes, M., Zuellig, A. R., Kachin, K. E., &
Behar, E. (2006). The reliability and validity of the Panic Disorder
Self-Report: A new diagnostic screening measure of panic disorder.
Psychological Assessment, 18, 49--61. Nickerson, A., Bryant, R. A.,
Aderka, I. M., Hinton, D. E., & Hofmann, S. G. (2013). The impacts of
parental loss and adverse parenting on mental health: Findings from the
National Comorbidity Survey-Replication. Psychological Trauma: Theory,
Research, Practice, and Policy, 5(2), 119. Nikolaus, S., Antke, C., Beu,
M., & Muller, H.-W. (2011). Cortical GABA, striatal dopamine and
midbrain serotonin as the key players in compulsive and anxiety
disorders---results from in vivo imaging studies. Reviews in the
Neurosciences, 21(2), 119--140. Nixon, P. G. (1993). The grey area of
effort syndrome and hyperventilation: From Thomas Lewis to today.
Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London, 27, 377--383.
Norberg, M. M., Krystal, J. H., & Tolin, D. F. (2008). A meta-analysis
of D-cycloserine and the facilitation of fear extinction and exposure
therapy. Biological Psychiatry, 63(12), 1118--1126. Norton, G. R., Cox,
B. J., & Malan, J. (1992). Nonclinical panickers: A critical review.
Clinical Psychology Review, 12, 121--139. Noyes, R., Crowe, R. R.,
Harris, E. L., Hamra, B. J., McChesney, C. M., & Chaudhry, D. R. (1986).
Relationship between panic disorder and agoraphobia: A family study.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 227--232. Offidani, E., Guidi, J.,
Tomba, E., & Fava, G. A. (2013). Efficacy and tolerability of
benzodiazepines versus antidepressants in anxiety disorders: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics,
82(6), 355--362.

Öhman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and preparedness: Toward
an evolved module of fear and fear learning. Psychological Review, 108,
483--522. Okamura, N., Hashimoto, K., Iyo, M., Shimizu, E., Dempfle, A.,
Friedel, S., & Reinscheid, R. K. (2007). Gender-specific association of
a functional coding polymorphism in the neuropeptide S receptor gene
with panic disorder but not with schizophrenia or
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Progress in
Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 31(7), 1444--1448.
Olsson, C. A., Anney, R. J., Lotfi-Miri, M., Byrnes, G. B., Williamson,
R., & Patton, G. C. (2005). Association between the COMT Val158Met
polymorphism and propensity to anxiety in an Australian population-based
longitudinal study of adolescent health. Psychiatric Genetics, 15(2),
109. Olthuis, J. V., Watt, M. C., & Stewart, S. H. (2014). Anxiety
Sensitivity Index (ASI-3) subscales predict unique variance in anxiety
and depressive symptoms. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 28(2), 115--124.
Ori, R., Amos, T., Bergman, H., Soares-Weiser, K., Ipser, J. C., &
Stein, D. J. (2015). Augmentation of cognitive and behavioural therapies
(CBT) with d-cycloserine for anxiety and related disorders. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2015(5). Otto, M. W., McHugh, R. K.,
Simon, N. M., Farach, F. J., Worthington, J. J., & Pollack, M. H.
(2010). Efficacy of CBT for benzodiazepine discontinuation in patients
with panic disorder: Further evaluation. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
48(8), 720--727. Otto, M. W., Pollack, M. H., & Sabatino, S. A. (1996).
Maintenance of remission following cognitive behavior therapy for panic
disorder: Possible deleterious effects of concurrent medication
treatment. Behavior Therapy, 27(3), 473--482. Otto, M. W., Smits, J. A.
J., & Reese, H. E. (2005). Combined psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy
for mood and anxiety disorders in adults: Review and analysis. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 12, 72--86. Otto, M. W., Tolin, D. F.,
Nations, K. R., Utschig, A. C., Rothbaum, B. O., Hofmann, S. G., &
Smits, J. A. (2012). Five sessions and counting: Considering ultra-brief
treatment for panic disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 29(6), 465--470.
Otto, M. W., Tolin, D. F., Simon, N. M., Pearlson, G. D., Basden, S.,
Meunier, S. A., ... Pollack, M. H. (2010). Efficacy of D-cycloserine for
enhancing response to

References cognitive-behavior therapy for panic disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 67(4), 365--370. Pané-Farré, C. A., Fenske, K., Stender, J.
P., Meyer, C., John, U., Rumpf, H. J., ... Hamm, A. O. (2013).
Sub-threshold panic attacks and agoraphobic avoidance increase
comorbidity of mental disorders: Results from an adult general
population sample. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 27(5), 485--493.
Papousek, H., & Papousek, M. (2002). Intuitive parenting. In M. H.
Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of parenting: Vol. 2. Biology and ecology of
parenting (2nd ed., pp. 183--203). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Pauli, P.,
Amrhein, C., Muhlberger, A., Dengler, W., & Wiedemann, G. (2005).
Electrocortical evidence for an early abnormal processing of
panic-related words in panic disorder patients. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 57, 33--41. Petrowski, K., Herold, U., Joraschky, P.,
Wittchen, H.-U., & Kirschbaum, C. (2010). A striking pattern of cortisol
non-responsiveness to psychosocial stress in patients with panic
disorder with concurrent normal cortisol awakening responses.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 35(3), 414. Petrowski, K., Wintermann, G. B.,
Kirschbaum, C., & Bornstein, S. R. (2012). Dissociation between ACTH and
cortisol response in DEX-CRH test in patients with panic disorder.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 37(8), 1199--1208. Petrowski, K., Wintermann,
G. B., Schaarschmidt, M., Bornstein, S. R., & Kirschbaum, C. (2013).
Blunted salivary and plasma cortisol response in patients with panic
disorder under psychosocial stress. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 88(1), 35--39. Pillay, S. S., Gruber, S. A., Rogowska,
J., Simpson, N., & Todd, D. A. (2006). fMRI of fearful facial affect
recognition in panic disorder: The cingulate gyrus-amygdala connection.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 94, 173--181. Pittig, A., Arch, J. J.,
Lam, C. W. R., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Heart rate and heart rate
variability in panic, social anxiety, obsessive-compulsive, and
generalized anxiety disorders at baseline and in response to relaxation
and hyperventilation. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 87(1),
19--27. Podină, I. R., Koster, E. H., Philippot, P., Dethier, V., &
David, D. O. (2013). Optimal attentional focus during exposure in
specific phobia: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 33(8),
1172--1183. Pollard, C. A., Pollard, H. J., & Corn, K. J. (1989). Panic
onset and major events in the lives of agoraphobics:

141

A test of contiguity. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 98, 318--321.
Porges, S. W. (1992). Autonomic regulation and attention. In B. A.
Campbell, H. Hayne, & R. Richardson (Eds.), Attention and information
processing in infants and adults (pp. 201--223). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Porges, S. W. (2003). The polyvagal theory: Phylogenetic contributions
to social behavior. Physiology & Behavior, 79, 503--513. Porter, E., &
Chambless, D. L. (2015). A systematic review of predictors and
moderators of improvement in cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic
disorder and agoraphobia. Clinical Psychology Review, 42, 179--192.
Powers, M. B., Asmundson, G. J., & Smits, J. A. (2015). Exercise for
mood and anxiety disorders: The state-of-the science. Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy, 44(4), 237--239. Powers, M. B., Smits, J. A. J., &
Telch, M. J. (2004). Disentangling the effects of safety behavior
utilization and safety-behavior availability during exposure based
treatments: A placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 72, 448--454. Rachman, S., Lopatka, C., & Levitt,
K. (1988). Experimental analyses of panic: II. Panic patients. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 26, 33--40. Rachman, S., Shafran, R., Radomsky, A.
S., & Zysk, E. (2011). Reducing contamination by exposure plus safety
behaviour. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
42(3), 397--404. Ramsawh, H. J., Raffa, S. D., Edelen, M., Rende, R., &
Keller, M. B. (2009). Anxiety in middle adulthood: Effects of age and
time on the 14-year course of panic disorder, social phobia and
generalized anxiety disorder. Psychological Medicine, 39(4), 615--624.
Rapee, R. M. (2009). Early adolescents' perceptions of their mother's
anxious parenting as a predictor of anxiety symptoms 12 months later.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 37(8), 1103--1112. Rapee, R. M.,
Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1992). Response to
hyperventilation and inhalation of 5.5% carbon dioxide-enriched air
across the DSM-III-R anxiety disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
101, 538--552. Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1990).
Subject-described features of panic attacks using self-monitoring.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 4, 171--181.

142

Panic Disorder

Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Assessment
instrument for panic disorder that includes fear of sensation-producing
activities: The Albany Panic and Phobia Questionnaire. Anxiety, 1,
114--122. Rapee, R. M., Litwin, E. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). Impact of
life events on subjects with panic disorder and on comparison subjects.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 640--644. Rapee, R. M., Mattick,
R., & Murrell, E. (1986). Cognitive mediation in the affective component
of spontaneous panic attacks. Journal of Behavior Therapy & Experimental
Psychiatry, 17, 245--253. Rapee, R. M., & Medoro, L. (1994). Fear of
physical sensations and trait anxiety as mediators of the response to
hyperventilation in nonclinical subjects. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 103, 693--699. Razran, G. (1961). The observable unconscious
and the inferable conscious in current Soviet psychophysiology:
Interoceptive conditioning, semantic conditioning, and the orienting
reflex. Psychological Review, 69, 81--150. Reiss, S., Peterson, R. A.,
Gursky, D. M., & McNally, R. J. (1986). Anxiety sensitivity, anxiety
frequency and the predictions of fearfulness. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 24, 1--8. Richards, J., Klein, B., & Carlbring, P. (2003).
Internetbased treatment for panic disorder. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
32, 125--135. Richards, J. M., & Gross, J. J. (2000). Emotion regulation
and memory: The cognitive costs of keeping one's cool. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 410--424. Rochat, P., & Striano,
T. (1999). Social-cognitive development in the first year. In P. Rochat
(Ed.), Early social cognition: Understanding others in the first months
of life (pp. 3--34). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Rodriguez, B. I., & Craske, M.
G. (1993). The effects of distraction during exposure to phobic stimuli.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 549--558. Rodriguez, B. I., &
Craske, M. G. (1995). Does distraction interfere with fear reduction
during exposure? A test among animal-fearful subjects. Behavior Therapy,
26, 337--349. Roshanaei-Moghaddam, B., Pauly, M. C., Atkins, D. C.,
Baldwin, S. A., Stein, M. B., & Roy-Byrne, P. (2011). Relative effects
of CBT and pharmacotherapy in depression versus anxiety: Is medication
somewhat better for depression, and CBT somewhat better for anxiety?
Depression and Anxiety, 28, 560--567.

Roth, W. T., Margraf, J., Ehlers, A., Taylor, C. B., Maddock, R. J.,
Davies, S., & Agras, W. S. (1992). Stress test reactivity in panic
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49(4), 301--310. Roy-Byrne, P.
P., & Cowley, D. S. (1995). Course and outcome in panic disorder: A
review of recent follow-up studies. Anxiety, 1, 151--160. Roy-Byrne, P.
P., & Cowley, D. S. (2002). Pharmacologic treatments for panic disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia and social anxiety
disorders. In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments
that work (2nd ed., pp. 337--365). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press. Roy-Byrne, P. P., Cowley, D. S., Greenblatt, D. J., Shader, R.
I., & Hommer, D. (1990). Reduced benzodiazepine sensitivity in panic
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 47, 534--538. Roy-Byrne, P.
P., Craske, M. G., & Stein, M. B. (2006). Panic disorder. Lancet,
368(9540), 1023--1032. Roy-Byrne, P. P., Craske, M. G., Stein, M. B.,
Sullivan, G., Bystritsky, A., Katon, W., ... Sherbourne, C. D. (2005). A
randomized effectiveness trial of cognitivebehavioral therapy and
medication for primary care treatment of panic disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 62, 290--298. Roy-Byrne, P. P., Craske, M. G.,
Sullivan, G., Rose, R. D., Edlund, M. J., Lang, A., ... Stein, M. B.
(2010). Delivery of evidence-based treatment for multiple anxiety
disorders in primary care: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 19(303),
1921--1928. Roy-Byrne, P. P., Geraci, M., & Uhde, T. W. (1986). Life
events and the onset of panic disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
143, 1424--1427. Roy-Byrne, P. P., Stang, P., Wittchen, H.-U., Ustun,
B., Walters, E. E., & Kessler, R. C. (2000). Lifetime panic-depression
comorbidity in the National Comorbidity Survey: Association with
symptoms, impairment, course and help-seeking. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 176, 229--235. Roy-Byrne, P. P., Stein, M. B., Russo, J.,
Mercier, E., Thomas, R., McQuaid, J., ... Sherbourne, C. D. (1999).
Panic disorder in the primary care setting: Comorbidity, disability,
service utilization, and treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60,
492--499. Rueter, M. A., Scaramella, L., Wallace, L. E., & Conger, R. D.
(1999). First onset of depressive or anxiety disorders predicted by the
longitudinal course of internalizing symptoms and parent--adolescent
disagreements. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 726--732.

References Safren, S. A., Gershuny, B. S., Marzol, P., Otto, M. W., &
Pollack, M. H. (2002). History of childhood abuse in panic disorder,
social phobia, and generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 190, 453--456. Sakai, Y., Kumano, H., Nishikawa, M.,
Sakano, Y., Kaiya, H., Imabayashi, E., ... Kuboki, T. (2005). Cerebral
glucose metabolism associated with a fear network in panic disorder.
Neuroreport, 16(9), 927--931. Sakolsky, D. J., McCracken, J. T., &
Nurmi, E. L. (2012). Genetics of pediatric anxiety disorders. Child &
Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 21(3), 479--500.
Salkovskis, P. M. (1988). Phenomenology, assessment, and the cognitive
model of panic. In S. Rachman & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Panic: Psychological
perspectives (pp. 111--136). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Salkovskis, P. M.,
Clark, D. M., & Hackmann, A. (1991). Treatment of panic attacks using
cognitive therapy without exposure or breathing retraining. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 29, 161--166. Salkovskis, P. M., Clark, D. M.,
Hackmann, A., Wells, A., & Gelder, M. G. (1999). An experimental
investigation of the role of safety behaviours in the maintenance of
panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37,
559--574. Sanchez-Meca, J., Rosa-Alcazar, A. I., Marin-Martinez, F., &
Gomez-Conesa, A. (2010). Psychological treatment of panic disorder with
or without agoraphobia: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review,
30(1), 37--50. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2009.08.011 Sanderson, W. C., Rapee,
R. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1989). The influence of an illusion of control
on panic attacks induced via inhalation of 5.5% carbon dioxide-enriched
air. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 157--162. Sandin, B.,
Sánchez-Arribas, C., Chorot, P., & Valiente, R. M. (2015). Anxiety
sensitivity, catastrophic misinterpretations and panic self-efficacy in
the prediction of panic disorder severity: Towards a tripartite
cognitive model of panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 67,
30--40. Scherrer, J. F., True, W. R., Xian, H., Lyons, M. J., Eisen, S.
A., Goldberg, J., ... Tsuang, M. T. (2000). Evidence for genetic
influences common and specific to symptoms of generalized anxiety and
panic. Journal of Affective Disorders, 57, 25--35. Schinka, J. A.,
Busch, R. M., & Robichaux-Keene, N. (2004). A meta-analysis of the
association between

143

the serotonin transporter gene polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and trait
anxiety. Molecular Psychiatry, 9(2), 197--202. Schmidt, N. B., Buckner,
J. D., Pusser, A., WoolawayBickel, K., Preston, J. L., & Norr, A.
(2012). Randomized controlled trial of false safety behavior elimination
therapy: A unified cognitive behavioral treatment for anxiety
psychopathology. Behavior Therapy, 43(3), 518--532. Schmidt, N. B.,
Lerew, D. R., & Jackson, R. J. (1997). The role of anxiety sensitivity
in the pathogenesis of panic: Prospective evaluation of spontaneous
panic attacks during acute stress. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106,
355--364. Schmidt, N. B., Lerew, D. R., & Jackson, R. J. (1999).
Prospective evaluation of anxiety sensitivity in the pathogenesis of
panic: Replication and extension. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108,
532--537. Schmidt, N. B., Trakowski, J. H., & Staab, J. P. (1997).
Extinction of panicogenic effects of a 35% CO2 challenge in patients
with panic disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 630--638.
Schneider, R. L., Arch, J. J., & Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B. (2015). The
state of personalized treatment for anxiety disorders: A systematic
review of treatment moderators. Clinical Psychology Review, 38, 39--54.
Schneider, S., Houweling, J. E., Gommlich-Schneider, S., Klein, C.,
Nündel, B., & Wolke, D. (2009). Effect of maternal panic disorder on
mother--child interaction and relation to child anxiety and child
self-efficacy. Archives of Women's Mental Health, 12(4), 251--259.
Schroijen, M., Pappens, M., Schruers, K., Van den Bergh, O., Vervliet,
B., & Van Diest, I. (2015). Generalization of fear to respiratory
sensations. Behavior Therapy, 46(5), 611--626. Schwartz, O. S., Dudgeon,
P., Sheeber, L. B., Yap, M. B., Simmons, J. G., & Allen, N. B. (2012).
Parental behaviors during family interactions predict changes in
depression and anxiety symptoms during adolescence. Journal of Abnormal
Child Psychology, 40(1), 59--71. Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M., &
Teasdale, J. D. (2002). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
depression: A new approach to preventing relapse. New York, NY: Guilford
Press. Sen, S., Burmeister, M., & Ghosh, D. (2004). Metaanalysis of the
association between a serotonin transporter promoter polymorphism
(5-HTTLPR) and anxiety-related personality traits. American Journal

144

Panic Disorder

of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 127(1), 85--89.
Shandley, K., Austin, D. W., Klein, B., Pier, C., Schattner, P., Pierce,
D., & Wade, V. (2008). Therapistassisted, internet-based treatment for
panic disorder: Can general practitioners achieve comparable patient
outcomes to psychologists? Journal of Medical Internet Research, 10(2),
e14. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1033 Sharp, D., Power, K., & Swanson, V. (2004).
A comparison of the efficacy and acceptability of group versus
individual cognitive behaviour therapy in the treatment of panic
disorder and agoraphobia in primary care. Clinical Psychology &
Psychotherapy, 11(2), 73--82. Shear, M. K., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H.,
Money, R., Sholomskas, D. E., Woods, S. W., ... Papp, L. A. (1997).
Multicenter collaborative panic disorder severity scale. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 154(11), 1571--1575. Shear, M. K., Polan, J. J.,
Harshfield, G., Pickering, T., Mann, J. J., Frances, A., & James, G.
(1992). Ambulatory monitoring of blood pressure and heart rate in panic
patients. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 6(3), 213--221. Shear, M. K.,
Rucci, P., Williams, J., Frank, E., Grochocinski, V., Vander Bilt, J.,
Houck, P., & Wang, T. (2001). Reliability and validity of the Panic
Disorder Severity Scale: Replication and extension. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 35(5), 293--296. Shibuki, K., Hamamura, M., &
Yagi, K. (1984). Conditioned heart rate response: Testing under
anaesthesia in rats. Neuroscience Research, 1, 373--378. Shioiri, T.,
Kojima, M., Toshihiro, H., Kitamura, H., Tanaka, A., Yoshizawa, M., ...
Someya, T. (2005). Dysfunctional baroreflex regulation of sympathetic
nerve activity in remitted patients with panic disorder: A new
methodological approach. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 255, 293--298. Siegmund, A., Golfels, F., Finck, C.,
Halisch, A., Räth, D., Plag, J., & Ströhle, A. (2011). D-cycloserine
does not improve but might slightly speed up the outcome of in-vivo
exposure therapy in patients with severe agoraphobia and panic disorder
in a randomized double blind clinical trial. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 45(8), 1042--1047. Singareddy, R., & Uhde, T. W. (2009).
Nocturnal sleep panic and depression: Relationship to subjective

sleep in panic disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 112(1--3),
262--266. Skapinakis, P., Bellos, S., Koupidis, S., Grammatikopoulos,
I., Theodorakis, P. N., & Mavreas, V. (2013). Prevalence and
sociodemographic associations of common mental disorders in a nationally
representative sample of the general population of Greece. BMC
Psychiatry, 13. doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-13-163 Slaap, B. R., Nielen, M.
M., Boshuisen, M. L., van Roon, A. M., & den Boer, J. A. (2004).
Five-minute recordings of heart rate variability in obsessivecompulsive
disorder, panic disorder and healthy volunteers. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 78, 141--148. Sokolowska, M., Siegel, S., & Kim, J. A.
(2002). Intra-administration associations: Conditional hyperalgesia
elicited by morphine onset cues. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 28, 309--320. Stein, M. B., Schork, N. J., &
Gelernter, J. (2008). Geneby-environment (serotonin transporter and
childhood maltreatment) interaction for anxiety sensitivity, an
intermediate phenotype for anxiety disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology,
33(2), 321--329. Stein, M. B., Walker, J. R., Anderson, G., Hazen, A.
L., Ross, C. A., Eldridge, G., ... Forde, D. R. (1996). Childhood
physical and sexual abuse in patients with anxiety disorders and a
community sample. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 275--277.
Stewart, R. E., & Chambless, D. L. (2009). Cognitivebehavioral therapy
for adult anxiety disorders in clinical practice: A meta-analysis of
effectiveness studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
77(4), 595. Stewart, S. H., Taylor, S., Jang, K. L., Cox, B. J., Watt,
M. C., Fedoroff, I. C., & Borger, S. C. (2001). Causal modeling of
relations among learning history, anxiety sensitivity, and panic
attacks. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39(4), 443--456. Stonerock, G.
L., Hoffman, B. M., Smith, P. J., & Blumenthal, J. A. (2015). Exercise
as treatment for anxiety: Systematic review and analysis. Annals of
Behavioral Medicine, 49(4), 1--15. Strug, L. J., Suresh, R., Fyer, A.
J., Talati, A., Adams, P. B., Li, W., ... Weissman, M. M. (2010). Panic
disorder is associated with the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) but
not the promoter region (5-HTTLPR). Molecular Psychiatry, 15(2),
166--176.

References Stubbe, D. E., Zahner, G. E. P., Goldstein, M. J., & Leckman,
J. F. (1993). Diagnostic specificity of a brief measure of expressed
emotion: A community study of children. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 34, 139--154. Sturges, L. V., Goetsch, V. L., Ridley, J., &
Whittal, M. (1998). Anxiety sensitivity and response to hyperventilation
challenge: Physiologic arousal, interoceptive acuity, and subjective
distress. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 12, 103--115. Swinson, R. P.,
Soulios, C., Cox, B. J., & Kuch, K. (1992). Brief treatment of emergency
room patients with panic attacks. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149,
944--946. Sy, J. T., Dixon, L. J., Lickel, J. J., Nelson, E. A., &
Deacon, B. J. (2011). Failure to replicate the deleterious effects of
safety behaviors in exposure therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
49(5), 305--314. Taylor, C. B., Sheikh, J., Agras, W. S., Roth, W. T.,
Margraf, J., Ehlers, A., ... Gossard, D. (1986). Ambulatory heart rate
changes in patients with panic attacks. American Journal of Psychiatry,
143, 478--482. Taylor, S., Koch, W. J., & McNally, R. J. (1992). How
does anxiety sensitivity vary across the anxiety disorders? Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 6, 249--259. Taylor, S., Zvolensky, M. J., Cox, B.
J., Deacon, B., Heimberg, R. G., Ledley, D. R., ... Cardenas, S. J.
(2007). Robust dimensions of anxiety sensitivity: Development and
initial validation of the Anxiety Sensitivity Index--3. Psychological
Assessment, 19(2), 176. Telch, M. J., Kamphuis, J. H., & Schmidt, N. B.
(2011). The effects of comorbid personality disorders on cognitive
behavioral treatment for panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 45(4), 469--474. Telch, M. J., Shermis, M. D., & Lucas, J. A.
(1989). Anxiety sensitivity: Unitary personality trait or
domain-specific appraisals? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 3, 25--32.
Telch, M. J., Sloan, T., & Smits, J. (2000, November). Safety-behavior
fading as a maintenance treatment for panic disorder. Symposium
presentation at the Annual Meeting of the Association for Advancement of
Behavior Therapy, New Orleans, LA. Telch, M. J., Valentiner, D. P.,
Ilai, D., Young, P. R., Powers, M. B., & Smits, J. A. J. (2004). Fear
activation and distraction during the emotional processing

145

of claustrophobic fear. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 35, 219--232. Thayer, J. F., Friedman, B. H., Borkovec, T.
D., Johnsen, B. H., & Molina, S. (2000). Phasic heart period reactions
to cued threat and nonthreat stimuli in generalized anxiety disorder.
Psychophysiology, 37, 361--368. Thyer, B. A., Himle, J., Curtis, G. C.,
Cameron, O. G., & Nesse, R. M. (1985). A comparison of panic disorder
and agoraphobia with panic attacks. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 26,
208--214. Tibi, L., van Oppen, P., Aderka, I. M., van Balkom, A. J.,
Batelaan, N. M., Spinhoven, P., ... Anholt, G. E. (2013). Examining
determinants of early and late age at onset in panic disorder: An
admixture analysis. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47, 1870--1875.
Treanor, M. (2011). The potential impact of mindfulness on exposure and
extinction learning in anxiety disorders. Clinical Psychology Review,
31(4), 617--625. Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., &
Craske, M. G. (2005). Impact of cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic
disorder on comorbidity: A controlled investigation. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 43, 959--970. Tull, M. T., & Roemer, L. (2007). Emotion
regulation difficulties associated with the experience of uncued panic
attacks: Evidence of experiential avoidance, emotional nonacceptance,
and decreased emotional clarity. Behavior Therapy, 38(4), 378--391.
Turner, S. M., Williams, S. L., Beidel, D. C., & Mezzich, J. E. (1986).
Panic disorder and agoraphobia with panic attacks: Covariation along the
dimensions of panic and agoraphobic fear. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 95, 384--388. Uchida, R. R., Del-Ben, C. M., Santos, A. C.,
Araujo, D., Crippa, J. A., Guiamaraes, F. S., ... Graeff, F. G. (2003).
Decreased left temporal lobe volume of panic patients measured by
magnetic resonance imaging. Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological
Research, 36, 925--929. Uno, T. (1970). The effects of awareness and
successive inhibition on interoceptive and exteroceptive conditioning of
the galvanic skin response. Psychophysiology, 7, 27--43. van Balkom, A.
J., de Beurs, E., Koele, P., Lange, A., & van Dyck, R. (1996). Long-term
benzodiazepine use is associated with smaller treatment gain in panic

146

Panic Disorder

disorder with agoraphobia. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
184(2), 133--135. van Beek, N., Schruers, K. R. J., & Griez, E. J. L.
(2005). Prevalence of respiratory disorders in first-degree relatives of
panic disorder patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 87, 337--340.
van den Heuvel, O. A., Veltman, D. J., Groenewegen, H. J., Witter, M.
P., Merkelbach, J., Cath, D. C., ... van Dyck, R. (2005).
Disorder-specific neuroanatomical correlates of attentional bias in
obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorder, and hypochondriasis.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 922--933. van den Hout, M., Arntz,
A., & Hoekstra, R. (1994). Exposure reduced agoraphobia but not panic,
and cognitive therapy reduced panic but not agoraphobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 32, 447--451. van den Hout, M., Engelhard, I. M.,
Toffolo, M. B. J., & van Uijen, S. L. (2011). Exposure plus response
prevention versus exposure plus safety behaviours in reducing feelings
of contamination, fear, danger and disgust: An extended replication of
Rachman, Shafran, Radomsky & Zysk (2011). Journal of Behavior Therapy
and Experimental Psychiatry, 42(3), 364--370. doi:
10.1016/j.jbtep.2011.02.009 van Duinen, M. A., Schruers, K. R., Maes,
M., & Griez, E. J. (2007). CO2 challenge induced HPA axis activation in
panic. International Journal of NeuroPsychopharmacology, 10(6),
797--804. Veltman, D. J., van Zijderveld, G., Tilders, F. J. H., & van
Dyck, R. (1996). Epinephrine and fear of bodily sensations in panic
disorder and social phobia. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 10, 259--265.
Veltman, D. J., van Zijderveld, G. A., van Dyck, R., & Bakker, A.
(1998). Predictability, controllability, and fear of symptoms of anxiety
in epinephrine-induced panic. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 1017--1026.
Verburg, K., Griez, E., Meijer, J., & Pols, H. (1995). Respiratory
disorders as a possible predisposing factor for panic disorder. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 33, 129--134. Verschoor, E., & Markus, C. R.
(2012). Physiological and affective reactivity to a 35% CO(2) inhalation
challenge in individuals differing in the 5-HTTLPR genotype and trait
neuroticism. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 22(8), 546--554.

Vickers, K., Jafarpour, S., Mofidi, A., Rafat, B., & Woznica, A. (2012).
The 35% carbon dioxide test in stress and panic research: Overview of
effects and integration of findings. Clinical Psychology Review, 32(3),
153--164. Vøllestad, J., Sivertsen, B., & Nielsen, G. H. (2011).
Mindfulness-based stress reduction for patients with anxiety disorders:
Evaluation in a randomized controlled trial. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 49(4), 281--288. Wardle, J., Hayward, P., Higgitt, A., Stabl,
M., Blizard, R., & Gray, J. (1994). Effects of concurrent diazepam
treatment on the outcome of exposure therapy in agoraphobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 32, 203--215. Ware, J. E. (1993). SF-36 health
survey manual and interpretation guide. Boston, MA: Health Institute,
New England Medical Center. Warren, R., & Zgourides, G. (1988). Panic
attacks in high school students: Implications for prevention and
intervention. Phobia Practice and Research Journal, 1, 97--113. Watson,
D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition to
experience aversive emotional states. Psychological Bulletin, 96,
465--490. Watt, M. C., Stewart, S. H., & Cox, B. J. (1998). A
retrospective study of the learning history origins of anxiety
sensitivity. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 505--525. Wenzlaff, R.
M., & Wegner, D. M. (2000). Thought suppression. Annual Review of
Psychology, 51, 59--91. Westra, H. A., Stewart, S. H., & Conrad, B. E.
(2002). Naturalistic manner of benzodiazepine use and cognitive
behavioral therapy outcome in panic disorder with agoraphobia. Journal
of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 233--246. Whaley, S. E., Pinto, A., & Sigman,
M. (1999). Characterizing interactions between anxious mothers and their
children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 826--836.
Wheaton, M. G., Deacon, B. J., McGrath, P. B., Berman, N. C., &
Abramowitz, J. S. (2012). Dimensions of anxiety sensitivity in the
anxiety disorders: Evaluation of the ASI-3. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 26(3), 401--408.

References Wheeler, E. O., White, P. D., Reed, E. W., & Cohen, M. E.
(1950). Neurocirculatory asthenia, anxiety neurosis, effort syndrome,
neurasthenia: A 20 year follow-up study of 173 patients. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 142, 878--889. White, K. S., & Barlow, D.
H. (2002). Panic disorder and agoraphobia. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.),
Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic
(pp. 328--379). New York, NY: Guilford Press. White, K. S., Payne, L.
A., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., Woods, S. W., Saksa, J. R., & Barlow,
D. H. (2013). Does maintenance CBT contribute to long-term treatment
response of panic disorder with or without agoraphobia? A randomized
controlled clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 81(1), 47. Wilkinson, D. J., Thompson, J. M., Lambert, G.
W., Jennings, G. L., Schwarz, R. G., Jefferys, D., ... Esler, M. D.
(1998). Sympathetic activity in patients with panic disorder at rest,
under laboratory mental stress, and during panic attacks. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 55, 511--520. Williams, S. L., & Falbo, J. (1996).
Cognitive and performance-based treatments for panic attacks in people
with varying degrees of agoraphobic disability. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 34(3), 253--264. Windmann, S., Sakhavat, Z., & Kutas, M.
(2002). Electrophysiological evidence reveals affective evaluation
deficits early in stimulus processing in patients with panic disorder.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 357--369. Wittchen, H.-U., & Essau,
C. A. (1991). The epidemiology of panic attacks, panic disorder and
agoraphobia. In J. R. Walker, G. R. Norton, & C. A. Ross (Eds.), Panic
disorder and agoraphobia (pp. 103--149). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Wittchen, H.-U., Gloster, A. T., Beesdo-Baum, K., Fava, G. A., & Craske,
M. G. (2010). Agoraphobia: A review of the diagnostic classificatory
position and criteria. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 113--133. Wittchen,
H.-U., Reed, V., & Kessler, R. C. (1998). The relationship of
agoraphobia and panic in a community sample of adolescents and young
adults. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 1017--1024. Wolgast, M.,
Lundh, L. G., & Viborg, G. (2013). Experiential avoidance as an emotion
regulatory

147

function: An empirical analysis of experiential avoidance in relation to
behavioral avoidance, cognitive reappraisal, and response suppression.
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 42(3), 224--232. Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B.,
Arch, J. J., Rosenfield, D., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Moderators and
non-specific predictors of treatment outcome for anxiety disorders: A
comparison of cognitive behavioral therapy to acceptance and commitment
therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(5), 786--799.
Wolitzky-Taylor, K., Zimmermann, M., Arch, J. J., De Guzman, E., &
Lagomasino, I. (2015). Has evidence-based psychosocial treatment for
anxiety disorders permeated usual care in community mental health
settings? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 72, 9--17. Wood, J., McLeod,
B., Sigman, M., Hwang, W., & Chu, B. (2003). Parenting and childhood
anxiety: Theory, empirical findings, and future directions. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 44, 134--151.
Wooley, C. F. (1982). Jacob Mendez DaCosta: Medical teacher, clinician,
and clinical investigator. American Journal of Cardiology, 50,
1145--1148. Xuei, X., Flury-Wetherill, L., Dick, D., Goate, A.,
Tischfield, J., Nurnberger, J., Jr., ... Edenberg, H. J. (2010). GABRR1
and GABRR2, encoding the GABA-A receptor subunits ρ1 and ρ2, are
associated with alcohol dependence. American Journal of Medical Genetics
Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 153(2), 418--427. Zarate, R., Rapee,
R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1988). Response-norms for symptom
induction procedures. Poster presented at the 22nd Annual AABT
Convention, New York, NY. Zinbarg, R. E., & Barlow, D. H. (1996).
Structure of anxiety and the anxiety disorders: A hierarchical model.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105, 184--193. Zinbarg, R. E., Barlow,
D. H., & Brown, T. A. (1997). Hierarchical structural and general factor
saturation of the anxiety sensitivity index: Evidence and implications.
Psychological Assessment, 9, 277--284. Zinbarg, R. E., Mineka, S.,
Craske, M. G., Griffith, J. W., Sutton, J., Rose, R. D., ... Waters, A.
M. (2010). The Northwestern-UCLA youth emotion project:

148

Panic Disorder

Associations of cognitive vulnerabilities, neuroticism and gender with
past diagnoses of emotional disorders in adolescents. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 48(5), 347--358. Zlotnick, C., Johnson, J., Kohn, R.,
Vicente, B., Rioseco, P., & Saldivia, S. (2008). Childhood trauma,
trauma in adulthood, and psychiatric diagnoses: Results from a community
sample. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 49(2), 163--169. Zucker, B. G., &
Craske, M. G. (2001). Prevention of anxiety disorders: A model for
intervention. Applied & Preventive Psychology, 10, 155--175.

Zvolensky, M. J., & Eifert, G. H. (2001). A review of psychological
factors/processes affecting anxious responding during voluntary
hyperventilation and inhalations of carbon dioxide-enriched air.
Clinical Psychology Review, 21(3), 375--400. Zvolensky, M. J., Kotov,
R., Antipova, A. V., & Schmidt, N. B. (2005). Diathesis stress model for
panic-related distress: A test in a Russian epidemiological sample.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 521--532.

Chapter 4 Generalized Anxiety Disorder Karen Rowa, Stephanie Waechter,
Heather K. Hood, and Martin M. Antony

G

eneralized anxiety disorder (GAD) is characterized by excessive worry
about a variety of topics. Until the publication of the revision of the
third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-III-R; American Psychiatric Association \[APA\], 1987),
the diagnostic features of this disorder were not well established, and
GAD was essentially a residual diagnostic category for individuals with
persistent anxiety whose symptoms did not meet criteria for another
anxiety disorder. Since the publication of DSM-III-R and in each
subsequent edition of the DSM, the key feature of GAD has been chronic
and excessive worry, and GAD is no longer considered a residual
category. However, problems with unreliability in the diagnostic
criteria, as well as considerable revisions from one version of DSM to
the next, have taken their toll on the empirical status of knowledge
regarding this disorder. Changing criteria have made it difficult for
researchers to identify the essential biological and psychological
underpinnings of GAD. Until recently, treatment efforts were restricted
by the inherent instability of the core features of this disorder. Now,
however, GAD has finally begun to receive the research emphasis it
deserves, and studies have built a more stable foundation of theory and
knowledge regarding the nature and phenomenology of this disorder.

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria The central feature of GAD according to
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-5; APA, 2013) is excessive worry, occurring on more days than not,
about a number of events, activities, or topics. Worry must persist for
at least 6 months, and can involve a wide variety of topics such as work
or school, finances, health, safety, and minor matters. Interestingly,
the worries typically seen in GAD are indistinguishable in content from
those reported by nonclinical samples (Becker, Goodwin, Hölting, Hoyer,
& Margraf, 2003), although they are distinguishable from cognitions seen
in panic disorder (Breitholtz, Johansson, & Öst, 1999) and social
anxiety disorder (Hoyer, Becker, & Roth, 2001), and appear to be more
future oriented than worries found in other anxiety disorders (Dugas,
Gagnon, Ladouceur, & Freeston, 1998). However, the features that seem to
best distinguish the worries found in GAD from normal worries include

149

150

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

increased frequency and intensity, and the individual's perceived
inability to control the worry (Craske, Rapee, Jackel, & Barlow, 1989).
As a result of such findings, difficulty controlling the worry was added
as a diagnostic criterion in DSM-IV (APA, 1994) and remains in DSM-5. In
addition to the presence of uncontrollable and persistent worry, the
diagnosis of GAD requires the presence of at least three out of six
symptoms reflecting physiological or psychological arousal that
accompany the worry. These include feeling keyed up, restless, or on
edge; difficulty concentrating or having one's mind go blank due to
worry; disrupted sleep due to worry; muscle tension; irritability; and
fatigue. DSM-5 requires that a diagnosis of GAD not be made if the worry
is better explained by another mental disorder. In addition, because
worry is a particularly common feature of depressive disorders, bipolar
and related disorders, and psychotic disorders, DSM-5 states (in the
text, rather than the official criteria) that GAD should not be
diagnosed if excessive worry occurs only during the course of a disorder
from one of these three categories. In other words, to establish a
comorbid diagnosis of GAD with depression, bipolar disorder, or a
psychotic disorder, the presence of excessive worry should predate the
onset of the other condition or continue to be present even during
periods of remission from the other disorder (e.g., Uher, Payne,
Pavlova, & Perlis, 2014). As with other diagnoses, the worry and
associated symptoms of GAD must lead to significant distress or
impairment in a person's life. Further, the symptoms must not be better
accounted for by another disorder (e.g., fear of negative evaluation in
social anxiety disorder), by another medical condition, or by the use of
a substance.

Historical Perspectives on Diagnostic Criteria for GAD Prior to 1980,
generalized anxiety disorder symptoms would have likely been subsumed
under the broad categories of anxiety reaction (DSM-I; APA, 1952) and
anxiety neurosis (DSM-II; APA, 1968). The diagnosis of GAD was first
introduced in DSM-III (APA, 1980). To meet criteria for GAD according to
the DSM-III, three of the following four symptoms needed to be met for
at least 1 month: (1) symptoms reflecting startle, tension, and
restlessness; (2) symptoms reflecting autonomic hyperactivity; (3)
symptoms of anxious apprehension (e.g., worry, rumination); and (4)
symptoms of hypervigilance. Thus, according to this diagnostic scheme,
worry could be part of the diagnostic picture, but did not need to be
present to meet criteria for a diagnosis of GAD. Further, according to
DSM-III, GAD could be diagnosed only if all other anxiety disorders were
ruled out, and none of the anxiety disorders could be diagnosed if
another more pervasive problem had been diagnosed (e.g., a depressive or
psychotic disorder). Thus, GAD was truly a residual category. The
1-month symptom duration also meant that a broader range of symptom
presentations were able to meet criteria because of the inclusion of
symptoms of a short duration. Accordingly, the reliability of this
diagnostic category was poor (Di Nardo, O'Brien, Barlow, Waddell, &
Blanchard, 1983). Changes in the DSM-III-R attempted to rectify some of
the difficulties with the original diagnostic criteria for GAD, though
these changes led to only a small increase in the reliability of the
diagnosis (Di Nardo, Moras, Barlow, Rapee, & Brown, 1993). It was in the
DSM-III-R that for the first time, worry became the central feature of
GAD, with excessive worry about at least two life circumstances having
to be present. Further, symptoms had to be present for at least 6
months,

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors

151

raising the stringency for meeting criteria for GAD. Although
establishing a minimum 6-month duration of symptoms appeared to be a
reasonable strategy for increasing the meaningfulness of the diagnosis,
more recent research questions whether this duration is necessary (Lee
et al., 2009). DSM-III-R also addressed some of the hierarchical
rule-outs that had contributed to GAD's residual status: for example, it
allowed the diagnosis of GAD even in the presence of another disorder
(except for a mood disorder), as long as the GAD symptoms were not
better accounted for by the other disorder. Despite these changes, the
associated symptoms of GAD remained somewhat problematic, with the list
of possible associated symptoms being too broad (6 out of 18 associated
symptoms were required for a GAD diagnosis in DSM-III-R). Subsequent
research provided useful suggestions for further revision to identify
the most relevant associated symptoms. For example, Marten and
colleagues (1993) found that symptoms of autonomic arousal (e.g.,
palpitations) were the least reliable in distinguishing individuals with
GAD from nonanxious controls, and therefore these symptoms were removed
in DSM-IV. More recently, studies have provided additional clarity on
the symptoms most distinctively associated with GAD (Aldao, Mennin,
Linardatos, & Fresco, 2010).

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors It has been difficult to
establish prevalence estimates for GAD due to the shifts in diagnostic
criteria. The first prevalence estimates based on DSM-III-R criteria
came from the National Comorbidity Survey. This study found that GAD was
relatively rare in terms of current prevalence (1.6%), but was more
common (approximately 5%) when lifetime prevalence was examined
(Wittchen, Zhao, Kessler, & Eaton, 1994). The replication of the
National Comorbidity Survey suggested a lifetime prevalence of GAD of
5.7% (Kessler et al., 2005). Rates of GAD in primary care appear to be
even higher. A review of prevalence rates in primary care indicate a
median point prevalence of this disorder of 5.8%, suggesting that people
with GAD may be more likely to seek medical attention than individuals
with other disorders and are therefore more highly represented in
primary care settings than in the general population (Roy-Byrne &
Wagner, 2004). In the replication of the National Comorbidity Survey,
the median age of onset of GAD was 31 (Kessler et al., 2005). In a study
of individuals who presented at an anxiety disorders clinic, mean age of
onset was substantially lower at 21 (Brown, Campbell, Lehman, Grisham, &
Mancill, 2001). Studies suggest that earlier onset of this disorder is
associated with higher levels of symptom severity, comorbidity, and
vulnerability to other disorders (Campbell, Brown, & Grisham, 2003).
Studies of the long-term course of GAD suggest that it is a chronic and
relapsing disorder with some fluctuation in course. A 5-year follow-up
of clients with GAD found that only 18% of these clients achieved full
remission at the follow-up assessment compared to 45% of clients with
panic disorder (Woodman, Noyes, Black, Schlosser, & Yagla, 1999). A
recent 5-year prospective study found that the probability of full
remission at some point over the 5 years was 38% and the probability of
partial remission was 47%, with accompanying high levels of relapse
(Yonkers, Dyck, Warshaw, & Keller, 2000). Results from a longitudinal
study of individuals with GAD in primary care revealed a chronic

152

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

course of illness, in which many individuals experienced periods of
symptom improvement or recovery over a 2-year follow-up, with most
experiencing a subsequent recurrence of symptoms (Rodriguez et al.,
2006). In this study, predictors of chronicity included being female,
having greater comorbidity (especially depression and the anxiety
disorders), and demonstrating more severe psychosocial impairment. Other
predictors of a negative clinical course appear to be certain comorbid
disorders (Bruce et al., 2005), such as Cluster B or C personality
disorders (Ansell et al., 2011; Yonkers et al., 2000). Decreased life
satisfaction and difficult family relationships are also associated with
a more severe clinical course (Yonkers et al., 2000). GAD appears to be
more common in women than men, with some estimates indicating that women
are almost twice as likely to meet diagnostic criteria for GAD at some
time in their lives (McLean, Asnaani, Litz, & Hofmann, 2011).
Importantly, these gender differences are associated with different
patterns of comorbidity and disability. In one study, men with GAD had
higher rates of comorbid alcohol and substance use, whereas women with
GAD had higher rates of comorbid mood and anxiety disorders and a
greater degree of disability (Vesga-López et al., 2008). One explanation
for this gender difference is that women may use less effective
strategies to manage worry. One study found that women were more likely
than men to use thought suppression and to have a more negative problem
orientation in response to worry (Robichaud, Dugas, & Conway, 2003).
Other hypotheses suggest that there is a complex, bidirectional
interaction of genetic vulnerabilities, such as higher trait anxiety and
negative affectivity, with environmental factors, such as gender role
socialization, that increases the likelihood that women will develop
problems with anxiety and worry (for a review, see McLean & Anderson,
2009). Minimal research has examined differences in symptom presentation
across different ethnic or cultural groups. Theories of the impact of
sociocultural factors on the onset of psychological disorders suggest
that some racial or ethnic groups may have a greater vulnerability to
developing psychological symptoms owing to their differential exposure
to stressful events, lower socioeconomic position, and culturally
specific beliefs about coping (Dohrenwend & Dohrenwend, 1969). Some
studies have found no differences in GAD symptoms across ethnic groups
(Ghafoori, Barragan, Tohidian, & Palinkas, 2012), while others show
higher endorsement of GAD symptoms by Caucasian individuals (Asnaani,
Richey, Dimaite, Hinton, & Hofmann, 2010). Other studies indicate that
the content and severity of worry domains are not uniform across ethnic
groups. For example, Scott, Eng, and Heimberg (2002) found that African
American individuals reported less worry than Asian or Caucasian
individuals on the topics of self-confidence, future goals, work
competence, and relationship stability. Asian individuals reported more
worry than the other groups on future goals, and African Americans
reported the most frequent worry about financial issues, despite similar
levels of socioeconomic status across the groups. Although GAD was once
considered a minor disorder, the significant impairment associated with
it is now well established. Individuals with GAD have functional
impairment similar to that of individuals with major depression, and the
impairment is worse for those with both conditions (Wittchen, 2002).
Some individuals with GAD report severe disability across domains, but
particularly in the area of romantic relationships (Henning, Turk,
Mennin, Fresco, & Heimberg, 2007). Compared to individuals without GAD,
people with GAD also report higher work absences and more health care
visits (Toghanian, DiBonaventura, Järbrink, & Locklear, 2014). In
addition, compared to

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

153

nonanxious controls, individuals with GAD report significantly lower
overall quality of life and life satisfaction on a wide range of
indices, including self-esteem, work, health, and social relationships
(Henning et al., 2007).

Comorbidity Even though GAD was once conceptualized as a "residual
disorder" that was most likely a secondary problem, research suggests
that a principal diagnosis of GAD is common and that numerous other
psychiatric problems often co-occur with it. For example, data from the
first National Comorbidity Survey found that 80% of respondents with a
principal diagnosis of GAD also had a comorbid mood disorder (Judd et
al., 1998). A 32-year longitudinal study found that the onset of GAD was
as likely to precede the onset of a major depressive episode as follow
it, suggesting that GAD is not simply a secondary condition (Moffitt et
al., 2007). Research regarding the comorbidity of GAD, using DSM-IV
criteria, suggests that a current principal diagnosis of GAD is highly
comorbid with other disorders, including panic disorder with or without
agoraphobia (41%), social phobia (42%), and major depressive disorder
(MDD) (29%) (Brown et al., 2001). Comorbidity rates are even higher when
lifetime diagnoses are studied. High rates of comorbidity in GAD are
associated with high levels of trait anxiety and negative affect,
variables that are consistently elevated in GAD patients (Chambers,
Power, & Durham, 2004). In addition, rates of personality disorders are
also elevated in individuals with GAD, including avoidant (26%),
paranoid (10%), and schizotypal (10%) personality disorders
(Brawman-Mintzer et al., 1993). The authors also found that anxiety
symptoms per se did not contribute to personality disorder symptoms,
suggesting that other variables in these patients (e.g., interpersonal
sensitivity) may explain the high comorbidity rates with personality
disorders (Mavissakalian, Hamann, Haidar, & de Groot, 1995). Prospective
studies find that rates of comorbidity increased over a 4-year follow-up
period for individuals with GAD, and that this comorbidity had negative
implications for the likelihood of remission from GAD symptoms (Bruce,
Machan, Dyck, & Keller, 2001). Importantly, comorbidity rates appear to
diminish with successful treatment (Newman, Przeworski, Fisher, &
Borkovec, 2010).

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors To
understand the psychopathology of generalized anxiety disorder, one
needs to view it from a biopsychosocial perspective. The following
sections review research findings on the neurobiology and
psychophysiology of GAD and the social and psychological correlates of
this disorder.

Neurobiology Studies on the neurobiology of generalized anxiety disorder
are limited, and no integrated neurobiological theory of the development
of the disorder has been put forth. However,

154

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

studies do implicate certain brain regions and neurotransmitters in
understanding this disorder (see Sinha, Mohlman, & Gorman, 2004). A
number of neurotransmitter systems have been studied in GAD, each of
which has previously been implicated in fear and anxiety. One such
neurotransmitter is gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Hypotheses involving
GABA in GAD revolve around GABA's inhibitory role in the brain, aiding
inhibition of subcortical circuits that are stimulated by threat (Thayer
& Lane, 2000). It is thought that individuals with GAD and other anxiety
disorders may have decreased GABA activity (Friedman, 2007), which leads
to less inhibition of these threat-activated structures. Further,
individuals with GAD may also have reduced benzodiazepine receptor
sensitivity, which contributes to anxiety because the binding of a
benzodiazepine receptor actually facilitates GABA binding, which then
inhibits excitatory responses in the brain (Sinha et al., 2004).
Research to support these ideas includes the findings that (a) GABA
receptors appear to be densely congregated in brain areas implicated in
fear and anxiety, such as the frontal cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala
(Petrovich & Swanson, 1997); (b) binding of a benzodiazepine to its
receptor appears to increase the ability of GABA receptors to bind with
available GABA (Goddard & Charney, 1997); and (c) benzodiazepines appear
to be an effective treatment for GAD (reviewed later in this chapter).
Norepinephrine has also been implicated in GAD; however, data regarding
the role of norepinephrine in GAD are mixed. Norepinephrine is the
primary neurotransmitter in the sympathetic nervous system, which is the
system responsible for the fight-or-flight response. Studies have
demonstrated that norepinephrine levels are elevated in certain other
anxiety disorders (e.g., Ballenger, 2001), raising the possibility that
norepinephrine may also be elevated in GAD. However, other studies have
been equivocal (see Sinha et al., 2004). To date, the majority of
studies that have examined the role of norepinephrine in GAD have found
no differences between clinical and control groups, despite the use of
various methodologies and biological challenges (Kalk, Nutt, &
Lingford-Hughes, 2011). Serotonin (5-HT) is also broadly implicated
across the anxiety disorders, with studies suggesting that low levels of
serotonin or serotonin receptor dysfunction, particularly in the
midbrain region, are linked with increased anxiety (Nikolaus, Antke,
Beu, & Müller, 2010). However, studies of serotonin in GAD have also
yielded inconclusive results. Some studies have found that serotonin
agonists lead to increased anxiety in GAD (Germine, Goddard, Woods,
Charney, & Heninger, 1992). Cholecystokinin (CCK) has been linked to the
panic attacks sometimes seen in GAD. One study found that a CCK agonist
induced panic attacks in 71% of participants with GAD as compared to 14%
of control participants (Brawman-Mintzer et al., 1997). However, studies
have failed to find an anxiolytic effect of CCK receptor antagonists
(Adams, Pyke, Costa, & Cutler, 1995). Cortisol levels, which suggest
increased functioning of the limbic-hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal (LHPA)
axis, are also hallmark biochemical markers of stress and anxiety. Some
evidence of overproduction of cortisol in GAD exists, though research
findings are not consistent (Tiller, Biddle, Maguire, & Davies, 1988). A
recent study provided evidence implicating hyperactivity of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis in GAD, in which elevated
salivary cortisol levels were significantly reduced following selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatment for GAD, and reduced
cortisol was associated with lower reported anxiety (Lenze et al.,
2011). There tends to be a more consistent relationship in older adults
between GAD symptom severity

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

155

and elevated cortisol levels, perhaps due to age-associated alterations
in the HPA axis (Mantella et al., 2008). There have been few
neuroimaging studies completed in GAD. Those that have been completed
suggest larger amygdala volumes in children with GAD (De Bellis et al.,
2000), and in adults, larger superior temporal gyrus volumes (De Bellis
et al., 2002), lower metabolic rates in the basal ganglia (Wu et al.,
1991), and hypermetabolism in the prefrontal cortex (Wu et al., 1991).
Recent studies have also identified decreased hypothalamus volumes as a
possible risk factor for lifetime GAD. For example, Hettema and
colleagues (2012) collected neuroimaging data from a small sample of
female monozygotic twin pairs and found that lifetime GAD diagnosis and
genetic risk for internalizing disorders significantly predicted smaller
left hippocampal volumes. Other studies have noted decreased bilateral
hippocampal volumes among individuals with GAD (Terlevic et al., 2013).
Structural and functional neuroanatomical studies have identified
increased amygdala volumes among individuals with GAD compared to
healthy controls, and disrupted connectivity of the amygdala with other
cortical and subcortical regions involved in anticipatory anxiety and
emotional processing of threat (Etkin, Prater, Hoeft, Menon, &
Schatzberg, 2010). In a study of adolescents with GAD, neuroimaging
revealed greater activation in response to angry faces in the right
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, but this activation had a negative
relationship with subjective anxiety levels. This finding is
inconsistent with other imaging studies, which have found a positive
relationship between anxiety levels and prefrontal cortex activation
(Monk et al., 2006). To explain this discrepancy, the authors postulated
that activation in the prefrontal cortex may play a compensatory
function, helping to regulate activation in subcortical structures. In
support of this hypothesis, a follow-up study by Monk et al. (2008)
found that adolescents with GAD showed hyperactivation of the right
amygdala in response to masked angry faces compared to healthy controls.
Further, functional connectivity between the right amygdala and the
right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex was weaker in the GAD group,
suggesting that the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in GAD individuals
may be less effective at downregulating the amygdala response to
threatening emotional stimuli. Studies have also noted a similar
inhibitory role of the prefrontal cortex in adults with GAD,
particularly in the anterior cingulate cortex, a region of the medial
prefrontal cortex. For example, Tromp et al. (2012) found structural
abnormalities in the connectivity of the anterior cingulate cortex and
the amygdala. Further, two studies have found that pretreatment activity
in the anterior cingulate cortex was associated with better response to
an 8-week trial of venlafaxine for patients with GAD (Nitschke et al.,
2009; Whalen et al., 2008). Taken together, these studies suggest that
the anterior cingulate cortex and the amygdala may be integral to
understanding the emotional processing deficits seen in GAD.

Psychophysiology Chronic worry is also associated with reduced autonomic
variability during stressful tasks. This recent focus on the inhibitory
function of the parasympathetic nervous system has helped in
understanding central nervous system functioning in GAD. Earlier studies
tended to focus more exclusively on the excitation end of the equation
(Friedman, 2007).

156

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

However, as Friedman (2007) points out, physiological variability is
actually the most effective way that organisms can maintain stability of
their systems. The more variability an organism can show in responding
to threat cues (a sympathetic system function) and recovering from
threat cues (a parasympathetic system function), the more able to adapt
to the environment the organism is likely to be. Thus, autonomic
rigidity is thought to lead to less adaptive behavioral and emotional
responses to stressful events in comparison to an adaptive system where
a more flexible autonomic system can help a person organize his or her
physiological responses (Porges, 1995). Thus, autonomic rigidity may
play an important role in maintaining GAD. The most commonly used marker
of autonomic rigidity is lower levels of heart rate variability in
response to various stressors. Research suggests that individuals with
GAD demonstrate lower heart rate variability during periods of worry and
rest, decreased parasympathetic activity during periods of worry and
rest (Thayer, Friedman, & Borkovec, 1996), and impaired habituation of
heart rate activity to neutral words (Thayer, Friedman, Borkovec,
Molina, & Johnsen, 2000). Although there is evidence that all anxiety
disorders are characterized by reduced baseline heart rate variability
compared to healthy controls, heart rate variability is associated with
symptom severity only in GAD (Pittig, Arch, Lam, & Craske, 2013). This
finding may suggest that decreased heart rate variability reflects a
shared biological dysfunction across anxiety disorders, but the specific
manifestation of this feature may vary across disorders. However,
autonomic rigidity in worry has not been consistently demonstrated, with
one study finding no evidence for autonomic rigidity as measured by
heart rate variability during periods of relaxation, nonstressful
cognitive tasks, worry, and negative imagery (Davis, Montgomery, &
Wilson, 2002). Thus, more research is still necessary to fully
understand the rigidity of the physiological system underlying GAD. In
summary, neurobiological indices suggest that individuals with GAD have
a dysregulated central nervous system that may take longer to recover
from a stressor than individuals without GAD. Further, the suppressed
and rigid autonomic activity that is associated with worry may have
implications for the maintenance of worry, providing individuals with
short-term avoidance of physiological responses to stress, but impairing
long-term adaptation to these stressors. These ideas will be discussed
more thoroughly in the following sections (see, especially, the section
on avoidance theories of worry). However, there still exist many
inconsistencies across studies on the neurobiology of GAD, and further
research is necessary to aid in the development of a more coherent
understanding of the neurobiology of GAD.

Cognitive and Behavioral Correlates of GAD Life Events A small body of
research has investigated the role that stressful life events might play
in the development of chronic worry and GAD. An early study found that
the presence of at least one stressful life event defined as unexpected,
negative, and very important was associated with an increased risk of
developing GAD symptoms (Blazer, Hughes, & George, 1987). This
association was even more dramatic for men who had experienced more than
four stressful life events; these men had a risk of GAD that was over
eight times greater than

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

157

men reporting zero to three life events. In addition, stressful life
events appear to predict relapse in previously remitted GAD patients,
although specific worry themes were not strongly related to the
likelihood of relapse (Francis, Moitra, Dyck, & Keller, 2012). It
appears that stressful life events may be a general risk factor for the
development and relapse of a depressive or anxiety disorder, perhaps
because stressful life events alter the stress response and,
consequently, activity of the HPA axis, creating a vulnerability to
psychopathology (Faravelli et al., 2012).

Problem-Solving Ability Researchers have also questioned the association
between chronic, elevated worry and problem-solving ability in
understanding GAD. Worrying has been conceptualized as an attempt to
anticipate or solve real-life problems (Tallis, Davey, & Capuzzo, 1994),
and worry frequency is related to constructive, problem-focused coping
(Davey, Hampton, Farrell, & Davidson, 1992). However, at some point, the
worry process as constructive problem solving breaks down. Davey et
al. (1992) hypothesized that pathological worry may be associated with
either poor problem-solving ability or poor confidence in problem
solving, which would prevent individuals from reaching acceptable
solutions to perceived problems, leading to further worry.
Interestingly, individuals with chronic worry do not have deficits in
problem-solving ability (Dugas, Freeston, & Ladouceur, 1997), but do
hold a negative problem orientation in response to problems (Belzer,
D'Zurilla, & Maydeu-Olivares, 2002). Negative problem orientation refers
to dysfunctional attitudes (e.g., low confidence) about one's own
ability to solve problems. Individuals with GAD tend to have a more
negative problem orientation than individuals with other anxiety
disorders (Ladouceur et al., 1999) and controls (Dugas, Gagnon, et al.,
1998). In a sample of individuals with mood and anxiety disorders,
Fergus, Valentiner, Wu, and McGrath (2015) showed that negative problem
orientation was more strongly associated with worry than other mood and
anxiety symptoms. Negative problem orientation, together with
intolerance of uncertainty, were also the strongest predictors of worry
severity, and differentiated individuals with moderate and severe GAD
symptoms from those with mild GAD symptoms (Dugas et al., 2007).
Further, manipulating problem-solving confidence through false feedback
has been found to result in higher anxiety and personal worry (Davey,
Jubb, & Cameron, 1996). This study lends credence to the notion that low
problem-solving confidence may play a causal role in determining
subsequent levels of worry. Results for problem-solving ability in
relation to orientation are similar to those found when examining the
relationship between time management and worry. Worry has been found to
have no relationship with time management behaviors (e.g., setting
goals, employing organizational skills), but does have a negative
relationship with time structure and purpose (e.g., possessing the
notion that one's time use has a purpose, being present-focused,
demonstrating persistence when completing tasks) (Kelly, 2003). Thus,
pathological worry as seen in GAD is likely influenced by the thoughts
and feelings individuals have toward their problem-solving abilities and
the perception that they are not using their time for a purpose. Studies
have also examined the strategies people with GAD use in response to
their chronic worry. Similar to strategies used by individuals with
other anxiety disorders, individuals with GAD reported a greater use of
worry (e.g., thinking about more minor

158

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

problems) and punishment (e.g., shouting at oneself) strategies than did
nonanxious controls, and less use of distraction (e.g., thinking about
something else) and social control (e.g., talking to a friend)
strategies (Coles & Heimberg, 2005). Chronic worriers also appear to
catastrophize about positive aspects of their lives as well as
hypothetical situations (Davey & Levy, 1998).

Probability Overestimation and Catastrophizing Excessive worry, the
defining feature of GAD, is essentially a cognitive phenomenon. Adults
with GAD (Provencher, Freeston, Dugas, & Ladouceur, 2000) and childhood
worriers (Suarez & Bell-Dolan, 2001) exhibit cognitive errors that
include probability overestimation (thinking a feared consequence is
more likely to occur than it really is) and catastrophizing (assuming
that an outcome will be much less manageable than it actually is).
Estimates of the cost of one's worry are related to worry severity, such
that greater cost estimates are linked with greater worry severity
(Berenbaum, Thompson, & Pomerantz, 2007). Information Processing Biases
in Worry Individuals with GAD pay greater attention to threatening
stimuli, preferentially encode this information, interpret ambiguous
stimuli as threatening, and have biases in memory for threatening
events. Through such processes, individuals have greater access to
frightening and threatening information, leading to increased states of
anxiety. Thus, these attentional biases are hypothesized to play a
potential causal role in the development of anxiety disorders (see Van
Bockstaele et al., 2014, for a review). A meta-analysis examining
threat-related attentional biases in anxiety found that the anxiety
disorders, including GAD, are characterized by heightened attentional
and memory biases for threat (Bar-Haim, Lamy, Pergamin,
Bakermans-Kranenburg, & van IJzendoorn, 2007). Importantly, these biases
are robust across a variety of experimental paradigms, age groups, and
stimuli that require conscious processing and that are presented
subliminally. Specific characteristics of these attentional biases
include selective attention toward, difficulty disengaging from, and
attentional avoidance of threatening stimuli (Cisler & Koster, 2010).
Research using the emotional Stroop paradigm has provided evidence for a
cognitive bias in GAD (Mogg & Bradley, 2005). In the emotional Stroop
paradigm, participants are presented with threatening and neutral words
presented in different colors. Participants are asked to quickly name
the color of the word, while ignoring the meaning of the word. The
inability to ignore the meaning of the word (thus suggesting
preferential encoding of threat meanings) is deduced from slower color
naming. Individuals with GAD appear to have difficulty with the Stroop
task, taking longer to name the colors of threatening words (e.g.,
"disgrace") than nonthreatening words (e.g., "carpet") (Mathews &
MacLeod, 1985). This result is consistent when stimuli involve general
threat words (Martin, Williams, & Clark, 1991), when stimuli are
relevant to the participant's idiosyncratic concerns (Mathews & Klug,
1993), and when stimuli are general emotional words, including positive
emotional words (Becker, Rinck, Margraf, & Roth, 2001). Further, the
Stroop effect is also seen when word stimuli are masked: that is, when
words are followed by a masking stimulus designed to restrict the
participant's conscious awareness of the word (Bradley, Mogg, Millar, &
White, 1995). This attentional bias appears to be modifiable by
treatment, such

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

159

that color-naming interference in GAD participants is ameliorated by
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT; Mogg, Bradley, Millar, & White,
1995). The visual dot-probe task is another paradigm for studying
attentional biases in GAD. Individuals are asked to respond to a probe
stimulus (e.g., a small dot) presented on a screen. Just prior to this
probe stimulus, participants are presented with stimuli on the screen,
one of which is the experimental stimulus (e.g., a threatening word or
face). If participants respond more quickly to a probe stimulus that
appears in the same spot as the threatening stimulus, it is assumed that
the participant was attending to that threat cue, and is therefore
demonstrating an attentional bias for the threat cue. Individuals with
GAD demonstrate an attentional bias on this task in response to threat
words (MacLeod, Mathews, & Tata, 1986), negative words (Mogg, Bradley, &
Williams, 1995), emotional faces (Bradley, Mogg, White, Groom, & de
Bono, 1999), and aversive pictures (MacNamara & Hajcak, 2010). Further,
this bias is also demonstrated when stimuli are masked, suggesting that
the processing of threat cues may not be at a conscious level (Mogg,
Bradley, Millar, et al., 1995). Individuals with GAD were more likely to
look at threat faces rather than neutral faces in a visual probe task
than were nonanxious controls and individuals with depression (Mogg,
Millar, & Bradley, 2000). Individuals with GAD also appear to interpret
ambiguous stimuli in a negative or threatening manner. For example, when
presented with a number of homophones with both a threatening and
nonthreatening meaning (e.g., "die" versus "dye") and asked to write out
these words, individuals with GAD tend to write down a greater
proportion of the threatening spellings of these words than do control
participants (Mogg, Baldwin, Brodrick, & Bradley, 2004). Similarly, when
GAD participants are presented with sentences that have a threatening or
nonthreatening interpretation and are then asked to pick out recognized
sentences whose meaning has been clarified by context, they have better
recognition for the sentences that were given a threatening meaning by
context compared to those given a nonthreatening meaning (Eysenck, Mogg,
May, Richards, & Mathews, 1991). Biases in memory for threatening cues
have also been studied in GAD. Researchers have hypothesized that
individuals with GAD would demonstrate better memory for threatening
than nonthreatening stimuli, and also that compared to control
participants, they would demonstrate enhanced memory for threatening
stimuli. Support for memory biases in GAD is not as consistent as the
support for other types of cognitive biases. Generally, individuals with
GAD do not appear to preferentially recall more threatening stimuli
(e.g., Becker, Roth, Andrich, & Margraf, 1999), though there are
exceptions to these findings. For example, memory biases in GAD tend to
be more pronounced when the stimulus words are ideographically selected
and more personally relevant to the participant (Coles, Turk, &
Heimberg, 2007). However, several studies have found an implicit memory
bias in GAD such that threatening information may be preferentially
activated in individuals with GAD even when stimuli are not consciously
perceived. For example, MacLeod and McLaughlin (1995) presented
threatening and nonthreatening words to individuals with GAD and
nonanxious controls, and then asked these participants to identify
briefly presented words. Individuals with GAD were more readily able to
identify the threatening words. Although there is other evidence for an
implicit memory bias in GAD, results are still equivocal (for a review,
see MacLeod & Rutherford, 2004).

160

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Clearly, individuals with GAD demonstrate a number of biases for
threat-relevant information, and these biases may be an important aspect
of the development and maintenance of this disorder. What is still
unclear is the relationship between these cognitive biases and the
physiology of GAD. One would assume that preferentially encoding threat
information would lead to sympathetic arousal, but as reviewed earlier,
individuals with GAD do not demonstrate such arousal. In addition, the
mechanisms underlying these attentional biases are not fully understood.
Various models propose that attentional biases are mediated by
impairment in the attentional control system, inappropriate use of
emotion regulation strategies, specific neural mechanisms (e.g.,
activation in the amygdala and prefrontal cortex), and stage of
information processing (for a review, see Cisler & Koster, 2010).
Although each of these mediating variables accounts for some facets of
the observed attentional biases, a comprehensive model incorporating
these aspects has yet to be tested. A comprehensive model would help to
guide studies of the mechanisms of action of CBT and possibly identify
specific treatment targets.

Avoidance Theories of Worry Researchers have proposed that individuals
engage in worry to cope with perceived threat (see Borkovec, Alcaine, &
Behar, 2004). The cognitive avoidance theory of worry proposes that
worry is an attempt at cognitive avoidance, which is similar in function
to the behavioral avoidance seen in many types of anxiety disorders. In
other words, the verbal activity of worry distracts individuals from the
full experience of fear (e.g., feared imagery, sensations of arousal,
etc.) and other negative emotional states. Evidence for the notion of
worry as cognitive avoidance stems from a number of lines of research.
Studies suggest that worry is primarily a verbal and linguistic activity
rather than an imagery-based process (Behar, Zuellig, & Borkovec, 2005).
Further, worry tends to be less concrete and more abstract (Stöber,
1998) than other types of thought, making it less likely to activate
emotional processing. Verbal recounting of feared material is thought to
produce less sympathetic nervous system response than imagining feared
images. Thus, worry in the face of perceived threat would be negatively
reinforced because it allows a person to experience a reduction in
distress and arousal in the short term when confronted by a stressful
trigger (e.g., a deadline at work or a family member's illness). College
students who meet diagnostic criteria for GAD report more use of worry
to distract themselves from emotional topics than do control
participants (Borkovec & Roemer, 1995). For example, an individual with
GAD might worry about a number of topics (e.g., work, finances,
relationships) to avoid confronting in depth the emotions associated
with his or her most feared scenario (e.g., an ill parent dying). People
with GAD report higher levels of experiential avoidance than do control
individuals (Roemer, Salters, Raffa, & Orsillo, 2005), and self-reported
worriers avoid anxiety-provoking images even when instructed to attend
to them (Laguna, Ham, Hope, & Bell, 2004). Worrying appears to provide
only short-term benefit, and is associated with increased arousal in the
long term (Wells & Papageorgiou, 1995). Borkovec et al. (2004) suggest
that worrying may ultimately interfere with emotional processing of
stressful stimuli. Thus, just as situational avoidance provides only
short-term but not long-term reduction in anxiety, worry does the same.
In partial support of this cognitive avoidance model of worry,
Stapinski, Abbott, and Rapee (2010) found that individuals instructed to
worry in response to an

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

161

anxiety-provoking trigger maintained threat expectancies and decreased
perceptions of control compared to those who used imaginal processing or
relaxation/distraction. However, contrary to predictions, worry did not
reduce physiological arousal relative to imaginal processing or
relaxation, as denoted by increased skin conductance. In addition, there
was no long-term maintenance of worry among those in the worry
condition, suggesting that worry is not necessarily a self-perpetuating
process and the effects of worry may be short-term. Newman and Llera
(2011) proposed an extension and modification of the cognitive avoidance
theory that focuses on experiential avoidance in GAD. Specifically,
their contrast avoidance model draws on evidence that worry does not
necessarily enable avoidance of negative emotional experiences; instead,
individuals with GAD use worry to avoid sharp increases in negative
emotions, also known as negative contrast (Llera & Newman, 2010). They
posited that the chronic distress associated with worry helps
individuals prepare for negative events and precludes an increase in
distress should the negative outcome occur. Further, the positive
contrast between anxiety-related distress and relief is heightened when
the anticipated negative outcome fails to occur. Evidence for this model
comes from Llera and Newman (2014), who asked participants with GAD and
nonanxious controls to worry or relax prior to exposure to emotional
film clips. Both self-reported emotional changes and skin conductance
changes were collected. The worry condition resulted in higher negative
emotionality compared to baseline for all participants, which remained
during the film clips. In contrast, low emotion during relaxation and
neutral inductions led to sharp increases in negative emotionality for
all participants in response to the film clips. Importantly, GAD
participants reported that the worry condition helped them to cope with
the film clips, while the controls reported the opposite. Although this
model requires further empirical support, it appears to provide a
synthesis of the extant literature.

Intolerance of Uncertainty Dugas, Buhr, and Ladouceur (2004) have
proposed that a central difficulty in GAD involves an individual's
tendency to react negatively to uncertain or ambiguous situations,
sometimes preferring a negative outcome to an uncertain one. They
suggest that intolerance of uncertainty is a cognitive filter through
which a person with GAD views his or her world. Because many events and
situations are characterized by uncertainty, the outcome of having this
filter is an enhanced likelihood of worrying. Intolerance of uncertainty
is increasingly being recognized as a transdiagnostic feature across
anxiety and mood disorders. In a recent study comparing intolerance of
uncertainty across diagnostic groups, individuals with GAD, social
anxiety disorder (SAD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and major
depressive disorder (MDD) reported significantly greater intolerance of
uncertainty compared to undergraduate and community samples, though
there were no differences among the clinical groups (Carleton, Mulvogue,
et al., 2012). This study suggests that intolerance of uncertainty may
represent a vulnerability factor for mood and anxiety symptoms. A
taxometric analysis indicated that intolerance of uncertainty is not a
categorical variable that differentiates diagnostic groups, but rather a
continuous variable that appears to be present in varying degrees in the
general population (e.g., community members; Carleton, Weeks, et al.,
2012). These data are consistent with the interpretation that
intolerance of uncertainty may be an underlying vulnerability factor for
the development of psychopathology.

162

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Studies suggest that intolerance of uncertainty is related to worry in
nonclinical participants (Freeston, Rhéaume, Letarte, Dugas, &
Ladouceur, 1994) and is elevated in individuals with GAD (Dugas, Gagnon,
et al., 1998). Although some studies indicate that elevated levels of
intolerance of uncertainty are specific to GAD (e.g., Dugas, Marchand, &
Ladouceur, 2005), this is likely an artifact of the measures used to
assess intolerance of uncertainty. For example, a meta-analysis found
that intolerance of uncertainty was more strongly related to GAD when
using a definition of intolerance of uncertainty developed specifically
for GAD, and similarly associated with OCD, MDD, and GAD when using an
OCD-specific definition (Gentes & Ruscio, 2011). Carleton, Mulvogue, et
al. (2012) found that self-reported intolerance of uncertainty in
individuals with GAD did not differ from that of individuals with other
emotional disorders (e.g., social anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, or depression). Experimental manipulation of intolerance of
uncertainty has shown that increasing participants' level of intolerance
of uncertainty leads to increased catastrophic worrying and low mood
(Meeten, Dash, Scarlet, & Davey, 2012). Further, time-series analyses of
the temporal sequence of change in CBT for GAD found that, for the
majority of participants, changes in intolerance of uncertainty preceded
changes in time spent worrying (Dugas, Langlois, Rhéaume, & Ladouceur,
1998). Thus, evidence is accumulating to suggest that intolerance of
uncertainty may play a causal role in the development or exacerbation of
pathological worry in GAD. Researchers have also studied the
relationship between intolerance of uncertainty and other variables
demonstrated to be important in understanding GAD. For example,
intolerance of uncertainty and negative problem orientation both
contribute to the prediction of worry in nonclinical (Dugas et al.,
1997) and clinical (Dugas et al., 2007) samples. Intolerance of
uncertainty has also been linked to an information processing bias, such
that participants high in intolerance of uncertainty recalled a greater
proportion of words involving uncertainty (e.g., "inconclusive" and
"unclear") and were more concerned about ambiguous situations than
participants low in intolerance of uncertainty (Dugas, Hedayati, et al.,
2005). In a replication and extension of this study, Koerner and Dugas
(2008) found that individuals high in intolerance of uncertainty were
more likely to make negative appraisals of ambiguous scenarios than
those low in intolerance of uncertainty, even after controlling for
gender, low mood, and GAD severity. Further, negative appraisals
mediated the relationship between intolerance of uncertainty and worry,
and, conversely, worry was a partial mediator of the relationship
between intolerance of uncertainty and negative appraisals. This
indicates that intolerance of uncertainty represents a cognitive
vulnerability for the development of mood and anxiety symptoms only when
other cognitive biases are present. Although it is not clear how these
cognitive biases develop, Dugas et al. (2004) theorized that intolerance
of uncertainty might affect people's perception of their problem-solving
abilities, such that they feel less capable of effectively solving
problems as they arise, leading to pathological worry instead of problem
solutions.

Metacognition and GAD Wells (e.g., Wells, 1999) has proposed a
metacognitive model of GAD that involves positive and negative beliefs
about worry, as well as two types of worry content. Metacognition refers
to the act of thinking about one's thought processes. Wells (1999)
suggests that it is not typical worry per se that is the most
significant problem in GAD, but rather the way

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

163

one thinks about and reacts to this typical worry. Type 1 worry refers
to this so-called typical worry---worry triggered by everyday events
(e.g., worries about health, safety, or relationships). Type 2 worry
consists of worry about these cognitive processes, or in other words,
worry about worry. In this model, Wells proposes that positive beliefs
that a person holds about worry (e.g., "Worry will help me cope") cause
a person to actively select worry as a coping strategy when faced with
some sort of stressor. As a result, Type 1 worry is activated. In some
circumstances, the process of worry is terminated by a felt sense that
the person will be able to cope with the particular stressor. However,
if this felt sense is not achieved, Type 2 beliefs about worry might be
activated. These might include beliefs that worry is uncontrollable
and/or beliefs that worrying might have negative mental or physical
consequences for an individual. The activation of Type 2 worry is
thought to produce excessive levels of anxiety, as well as to lead to
unhelpful behavioral coping and thought control strategies, such that
Type 2 worries cannot be disconfirmed and the worry cycle is maintained.
For example, an increase in anxiety interferes with a person's ability
to achieve a felt sense that he or she can cope, so the person begins to
avoid feared situations as a means of coping. Unfortunately, avoidance
of the situations that trigger worry does not allow the person to
experience disconfirmatory information about the impact of worry on his
or her functioning. Studies confirm that individuals hold both positive
and negative beliefs about worrying. For example, Davey, Tallis, and
Capuzzo (1996) found that individuals' beliefs about worrying clustered
into three factors representing negative consequences (i.e., worry
disrupting performance, worry exaggerating the problem, and worry
causing emotional distress), and two factors representing positive
consequences (i.e., worry as motivation and worry as helping analytical
thinking). Cartwright-Hatton and Wells (1997) developed the
Meta-Cognitions Questionnaire, and found that three subscales uniquely
predicted worry: positive beliefs about worry, negative beliefs about
the controllability of thoughts, and cognitive confidence (i.e., lack of
confidence in one's cognitive skills). In a case study of CBT for an
individual with GAD, modifying positive beliefs about worry led to
positive treatment outcomes (Borkovec, Hazlett-Stevens, & Diaz, 1999).
Although it is clear that positive beliefs about worry are an important
aspect of GAD, they are not the most robust predictor of GAD severity
(Dugas et al., 2007) and they are not considered unique to GAD (Penney,
Mazmanian, & Rudanycz, 2013). In contrast, negative beliefs that worry
is uncontrollable or dangerous appear to be central to the maintenance
of GAD symptoms. Studies have provided support for the presence of Type
2 worry and its unique association with pathological worry, even when
Type 1 worries and trait anxiety are controlled (Wells & Carter, 1999).
For example, Ruscio and Borkovec (2004) compared the appraisals of worry
following a stressor task by high worriers with and without GAD. They
found that individuals with GAD were more likely to endorse beliefs that
worry was uncontrollable and dangerous, and reported lower confidence in
their cognitive abilities. However, the groups did not differ in their
positive beliefs about worry. In a follow-up study with a nonclinical
sample, negative beliefs about the uncontrollability and dangerousness
of worry, but not positive beliefs about worry, mediated the
relationship between trait worry and GAD symptoms (Penney et al., 2013).
These results suggest that individuals with high trait worry who
perceive their worry as dangerous or uncontrollable are more likely to
experience GAD. There is also evidence of the specificity of meta-worry
to GAD. Individuals with GAD scored higher

164

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

on measures of meta-worry than did nonclinical control participants and
nonworried anxious controls (Davis & Valentiner, 2000), as well as
individuals with social phobia, panic disorder, depression (Wells &
Carter, 2001), and OCD (Barahmand, 2009). Clearly, the role of
metacognitive factors in GAD has provided a useful way of understanding
why individuals with GAD routinely choose worry as a coping strategy.

Emotional Correlates Individuals with GAD may have difficulties with
emotion regulation (Mennin, Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2005). More
specifically, individuals with GAD may experience more intense emotions;
have more difficulty naming, understanding, and accepting emotions
(especially negative emotions); and demonstrate difficulty regulating
negative emotions that do occur (Mennin et al., 2005). Although each of
these emotion regulation deficits appears to be present in other
disorders, heightened intensity of emotion is a particularly strong
predictor of GAD, differentiating GAD from social anxiety and major
depressive disorder and suggesting that there may be some disorder
specificity in emotion regulation deficits (Mennin, Holaway, Fresco,
Moore, & Heimberg, 2007). Individuals with GAD report being more fearful
of depression and having more intense emotions than do individuals with
social phobia and nonanxious controls (Turk, Heimberg, Luterek, Mennin,
& Fresco, 2005). In an experimental study in which fear of anxiety was
manipulated, nonclinical participants in the increased fear of anxiety
condition reported significantly greater worry following an
anxiety-provoking task than those in the decreased fear of anxiety group
(Buhr & Dugas, 2009). Fear of anxiety has been shown to predict worry
over and above other variables associated with worry, including
avoidance and intolerance of uncertainty (Buhr & Dugas, 2012). Further,
self-reported worry has been associated with general and specific
emotion regulation deficits, including deficits in the ability to engage
in goal-directed activity when distressed, control over impulses,
acceptance of emotions, clarity of emotional state, and access to
self-regulation strategies, even when controlling for general negative
affect (Salters-Pedneault, Roemer, Tull, Rucker, & Mennin, 2006). Mennin
et al. (2005) found that students who endorsed criteria for GAD on a
questionnaire had a stronger physiological reaction to a mood induction
than did controls, and reported more difficulty accepting and
influencing their emotional state than controls. Thus, there is
preliminary evidence that emotion regulation deficits may be an
important variable for understanding the chronic worry seen in GAD.
Individuals with GAD may also find their worry process affected by
preexisting negative emotional states. Davey and colleagues (e.g.,
Startup & Davey, 2001, 2003) found evidence for a "mood-as-input"
approach to understanding perseverative, catastrophic worry like that
found in GAD. They suggest that individuals who have pathological worry
use rules in order to decide when to stop worrying. The stop rules they
have identified are (a) "feel like continuing," which is when
individuals continue to try to solve a problem until they do not feel
like continuing to work on it, and (b) "as many as can," which is when
individuals persist with problem-solving attempts until they feel they
have generated as many possible responses as they possibly can (Davey,
2006). When the "as many as can" stop rule is paired with negative mood,
the person is unlikely to feel that he or she has generated as many
possible responses as possible after reasonable effort, leading to
perseveration on a given task. In applying this specifically to
pathological worry, Davey

Environmental and Family Factors

165

(2006) suggests that worriers are likely candidates for perseveration.
       He notes that worriers are often in a negative mood state, the
       task of worrying has no obvious end point, and worriers often
       apply an "as many as can" rule to determine when to stop
       worrying. Thus, this model predicts that pathological worriers
       will frequently be subject to entering an iterative worry cycle
       that is not easily exited. This group of researchers has provided
       empirical support for the assertion that a negative mood
       induction actually increased the number of catastrophizing steps
       individuals made when asked to worry about a particular topic.
       Worriers who were asked to use an "as many as can" stop rule
       generated more catastrophizing steps than nonworriers (Startup &
       Davey, 2001). In a sample of worriers, the interaction of
       negative mood and increased responsibility yielded greater
       catastrophizing, suggesting that levels of inflated
       responsibility may be one reason worriers use an "as many as can"
       stop rule (Startup & Davey, 2003). Research has investigated
       differences between worry and related symptoms such as rumination
       and obsessions. Worry and rumination both involve repetitive,
       negative thinking and are correlated in nonclinical (Fresco,
       Frankel, Mennin, Turk, & Heimberg,

<!-- -->

2002) and clinical (Segerstrom, Tsao, Alden, & Craske, 2000) samples. On
      a measure assessing nine ways in which these cognitive processes
      might differ, seven significant differences emerged between
      ruminative and worrisome thoughts (Watkins, Moulds, & Mackintosh,
      2005). For example, worries were reported as having a longer
      duration, the content of worries was associated more strongly with
      future events and less with past events, worries were rated as
      more disturbing and less realistic, and worries were associated
      with greater feelings of insecurity. More recent research suggests
      that worry is related to both anxious and depressive symptoms,
      whereas rumination is more uniquely associated with depression
      (Hong, 2007). There is also evidence for physiological differences
      in the manifestation of worry and rumination, with worry, but not
      rumination, having a strong negative relationship with heart rate
      variability across emotional contexts (Aldao, Mennin, &
      McLaughlin, 2013). Thus, although worry and rumination share core
      features, they appear to be functionally different constructs.
      Research also suggests that worry and obsessional thinking are
      similar but distinct processes. Comer, Kendall, Franklin, Hudson,
      and Pimentel (2004) concluded that worrisome thoughts can be best
      differentiated from obsessions by the presence of an identifiable
      trigger, less mental imagery, and metacognitive beliefs about the
      dangerousness and uncontrollability of worry. Langlois, Freeston,
      and Ladouceur (2000) found that nonclinical participants rated
      their worrisome thoughts as being more realistic, less ego
      dystonic, more persistent, and more verbally oriented than
      obsessions. Thus, although similarities exist between worry and
      related symptoms such as rumination and obsessions, worry appears
      to be a distinct cognitive phenomenon.

Environmental and Family Factors Environmental and family factors appear
to play a number of roles in the development, phenomenology, and
maintenance of generalized anxiety disorder. For example, among
individuals with a propensity to worry, actual situations of enhanced
risk appear to trigger a tendency to overestimate the likelihood of risk
associated with a task (Constans, 2001).

166

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Factors related to family environment and parenting styles may also be
relevant for understanding GAD. Critically, most studies on this topic
have relied on self-report or retrospective reports of family
environments, which may be affected by bias. Despite this limitation,
results converge to suggest that people with GAD may have experienced
unpleasant, negative, and rejecting family environments. For example, a
study of self-reported parenting styles and GAD symptoms found a
relationship between perceived parental alienation and rejection on the
one hand and GAD symptoms in a sample of community adolescents on the
other (Hale, Engels, & Meeus, 2006). Further, college students who
endorsed criteria for GAD on a questionnaire also endorsed less secure
attachment to their parents than did control participants (Eng &
Heimberg, 2006). A recent longitudinal study found a bidirectional
relationship between perceived father-adolescent attachment
relationships and GAD symptoms, but a unidirectional relationship for
the mother-adolescent attachment relationship, with GAD symptoms leading
to a lower-quality relationship (van Eijck, Branje, Hale, & Meeus,
2012). Although this study relies on adolescents' self-reported GAD
symptoms and perceived attachment, it suggests that the effects of
attachment are more nuanced than previously believed. Other researchers
have argued that interpersonal problems, in general, may play a causal
role in the development of GAD. For example, Crits-Christoph, Gibbons,
Narducci, Schamberger, and Gallop (2005) have emphasized the high
frequency of interpersonal themes in worry content and biases to social
threat cues in GAD. Those with GAD show more parent-child boundary
problems than do individuals without GAD (Cassidy & Shaver, 1999).
Drawing from these ideas, these investigators examined the change in
interpersonal problems across the course of brief psychodynamic
treatment for GAD and found that changes in self-reported interpersonal
problems were significantly related to improvements in worry symptoms.
Similarly, Borkovec, Newman, Pincus, and Lytle (2002) found that
participants in a CBT trial for GAD demonstrated interpersonal
difficulties at posttreatment, and that these difficulties were
associated with fewer gains and improvements across follow-up. However,
other research suggests that interpersonal problems in GAD may be more
focused, with no evidence of disrupted peer relationships in a college
sample who endorsed criteria for GAD on a questionnaire (Eng & Heimberg,
2006). The role of interpersonal difficulties in GAD, therefore, is not
clearly understood, including whether interpersonal difficulties are a
cause or a consequence of excessive worry and anxiety.

Assessment As noted earlier, the inherent instability in the diagnostic
criteria for GAD has made it difficult to reliably diagnose and assess
these disorders. As diagnostic criteria have become more stable,
reliable means of assessing GAD and chronic worry have also become more
available; however, reliably assessing for GAD still presents
challenges. For example, the DSM-5 field trials had clinicians conduct
diagnostic interviews with patients based on checklists of the DSM-5
criteria. The results of the field trial showed low interrater
reliability for GAD (kappa = 0.2; Clarke et al., 2013). It has been
suggested that a comprehensive assessment of GAD should examine the
following: worry, beliefs about worry, intolerance of uncertainty,
anxiety, associated features (e.g., tension), comorbid symptoms, goals
and

Assessment

167

areas of behavioral inactivation, and emotional avoidance (Roemer &
Medaglia, 2001). In this section, we review several useful tools for the
assessment of GAD according to DSM-5 criteria.

Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5 (ADIS-5) The
ADIS-5 (Brown & Barlow, 2014) is a clinician-administered semistructured
interview that provides DSM-5 diagnostic information about a range of
psychological problems, including anxiety disorders,
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, trauma- and stressor-related
disorders, mood disorders, somatic symptom disorders, and substance use
disorders. Screening questions are provided for other conditions,
including impulse control disorders, hoarding disorder, eating
disorders, attention deficit disorder, dissociative disorders, and
psychotic disorders. Depending on the version of the ADIS-5 used
(standard versus lifetime version), current and lifetime diagnoses can
be assigned. Clinicians require extensive training in the administration
of this interview, and the interview duration can be lengthy,
particularly for the lifetime version (i.e., several hours). Despite
these drawbacks to use in everyday practice, the ADIS-5 has the benefit
of providing clear questions to help determine the presence or absence
of GAD and common comorbid disorders. Although there have been no
published investigations of the reliability of the ADIS-5, its
precursor, the ADIS-IV (Brown, DiNardo, & Barlow, 2004), has
demonstrated good reliability. Gordon and Heimberg (2011) examined the
reliability and validity of particular features of GAD assessed using
the ADIS-IV. Interrater reliability was strongest when assessing
excessiveness and uncontrollability of worry, interference, and severity
of fatigue, but was lowest when evaluating subjective distress. The
authors concluded that GAD can be reliably diagnosed using the ADIS-IV,
though there are limitations with the reliability of certain features of
the disorder. Because of the overlap in diagnostic criteria for GAD from
DSM-IV to DSM-5, these findings on reliability may also apply to the
ADIS-5.

Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5) The SCID-5 (First,
Williams, Karg, & Spitzer, 2015) is also a clinician-administered
semistructured interview that provides diagnostic decisions about a wide
range of psychiatric disorders. Two versions are available---a clinician
version (SCID-5-CV) and a research version (SCID-5-RV). The clinician
version was designed for use in clinical settings and has a less
extensive coverage of disorders. Extensive training is required to
administer the SCID-5, and administration can be lengthy, especially for
the research version. There have been no published investigations of the
reliability of the SCID-5 to date.

Self-Report Measures Self-report measures of GAD have been developed for
a number of purposes, including assessing the presence of diagnostic
criteria, the severity of worry, and the range and content of worry
topics. Further, there are a number of self-report measures designed to

168

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

measure constructs thought to be important in the theoretical
understanding of this disorder (e.g., measures of intolerance of
uncertainty and meta-worry). In this section, we briefly review some of
the most often used self-report measures of worry and GAD. It is notable
that some of these measures (e.g., GADQ-IV; GAD-7) are based on DSM-IV
criteria.

Generalized Anxiety Disorder Questionnaire The Generalized Anxiety
Disorder Questionnaire for DSM-IV (GADQ-IV; Newman et al., 2002) is an
efficient and useful tool for assessing the presence of the GAD
diagnostic criteria, especially when it is not practical to use a
semistructured interview. It is a brief and simple measure to administer
and score, making it a popular tool in research involving analogue
samples. Most questions involve yes or no responses, two questions
involve a severity scale, and one question is open-ended, asking for a
list of frequent worries. Thus, the GADQ-IV provides both diagnostic and
content-related information about a person's symptoms. The psychometric
properties of this measure are quite strong, as it has demonstrated good
test-retest reliability and good convergence with diagnoses made using
the ADIS-IV (Newman et al., 2002). Because diagnostic criteria for GAD
are essentially unchanged in the DSM-5, the GADQ-IV may be used for
assessing GAD based on DSM-5 criteria. Generalized Anxiety Disorder
7-Item Scale The Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-Item Scale (GAD-7;
Spitzer, Kroenke, Williams, & Löwe, 2006) is a brief, self-report
screening measure of DSM-IV GAD diagnosis and symptom severity, intended
for use in primary care settings. Individuals rate how often over the
past 2 weeks they have been bothered by symptoms, using a scale of 0
(not at all) to 3 (nearly every day), with total scores ranging from 0
to 21. According to the development and validation study (Spitzer et
al., 2006), a total score of 10 or greater provides the optimal cut
score for identifying cases of GAD. Further, the GAD-7 provides an index
of symptom severity, with cases identified as mild (5--9), moderate
(10--14), or severe (15--21). The scale has good psychometric properties
(Spitzer et al., 2006). Self-Report Measures of Worry Severity and Worry
Content The Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ; Meyer, Miller,
Metzger, & Borkovec, 1990) is a brief self-report measure that was
designed to measure a person's tendency to worry excessively, without
assessing the content of the worry. It is a widely used measure that has
demonstrated strong psychometric properties (see Roemer, 2001, for a
review). In contrast, the Worry Domains Questionnaire (WDQ; Tallis,
Eysenck, & Mathews, 1992) provides an assessment of the content of
worry. More specifically, it assesses the degree to which a person
worries about relationships, lack of confidence, the future, work, and
finances. Its psychometric properties are also strong (Roemer, 2001).
The content of worry can also be assessed with the Anxious Thoughts
Inventory (AnTI; Wells, 1994), which assesses social worry, health
worry, and meta-worry. Self-Report Measures of Theoretical Constructs
Relevant to GAD Several other self-report measures assess theoretical
constructs believed to be important in understanding a person's GAD
symptoms. For example, metacognitions about worry can be assessed by the
Metacognitions Questionnaire (MCQ; Cartwright-Hatton &

Treatment

169

Wells, 1997), and its 30-item short form, the MCQ-30 (Wells &
Cartwright-Hatton, 2004). This measure assesses positive beliefs about
worry, the belief that worry is dangerous and harmful, lack of
confidence in one's cognitive functioning, negative consequences or
fears about worrying, and the degree to which an individual monitors his
or her thinking. It has demonstrated good internal consistency and
test-retest reliability (Cartwright-Hatton & Wells, 1997), and
individuals with GAD score higher on this measure than do those with
other anxiety disorders or related conditions (Wells & Carter, 2001).
Positive beliefs about worry can be assessed using the Why Worry Scale
and Why Worry Scale--II (Freeston et al., 1994). Both negative and
positive beliefs about worry can be ascertained using the Consequences
of Worrying Scale (Davey, Tallis, et al., 1996). As described earlier,
intolerance of uncertainty has been proposed to be an important
construct in understanding the development and maintenance of worry. The
Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale (Freeston et al., 1994) consists of
statements describing how one might react to uncertainties (e.g., "I
always want to know what the future has in store for me"), and
respondents indicate how characteristic each statement is of them. This
measure has demonstrated good psychometric properties (see Roemer,
2001). A 12-item short form of the Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale has
been developed that appears to retain the strong psychometric properties
of the longer version (Carleton, Norton, & Asmundson, 2007; Hale et al.,
2015).

Ongoing Assessment and Follow-Up Assessment should not end after
establishing a diagnosis and understanding the features of the disorder
at hand. All of the above-cited assessment tools can be used at any
stage of contact, therapy, or follow-up. Indeed, it may be most
beneficial to use a complement of diagnostic and descriptive tools in
ongoing assessments to have a thorough understanding of the course of a
person's symptoms and diagnosis. For example, follow-up studies of the
outcome of interventions often assess diagnostic status (using, e.g.,
the SCID, ADIS, or GADQ-IV), worry severity (e.g., the PSWQ), as well as
other constructs of interest to the particular study. In addition,
ongoing assessment often involves the assessment of more general
constructs such as functional impairment due to anxiety symptoms,
disability, interpersonal functioning, and quality of life.

Treatment There has been considerable interest in finding effective
psychological or biological interventions for generalized anxiety
disorder. Results are encouraging, though further research and
refinements in treatment options are necessary. We review the state of
both psychological and biological interventions for GAD in the following
section.

Psychological Interventions Research on the efficacy of psychological
treatments for generalized anxiety disorder has expanded considerably in
the last decade with theoretical advances in the understanding of GAD
and pathological worry. Given this improved understanding, several newer

170

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

treatments derived from various models of GAD have been developed (for a
review, see Behar, DiMarco, Hekler, Mohlman, & Staples, 2009). Although
each treatment approach attempts to target the precise mechanisms
relevant to its respective theoretical models, most of these approaches
are derivatives of previous cognitive-behavioral protocols for treating
GAD. Indeed, cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for GAD is the
best-studied psychological intervention for this disorder and has shown
good outcomes in the few randomized controlled trials that have been
completed. It is with traditional CBT interventions that this review
begins.

Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Although different CBT protocols contain
somewhat different components, the most commonly used components are
psychoeducation, relaxation training, monitoring of cues and triggers
for worry, imaginal exposure, in vivo exposure (if necessary), and
cognitive restructuring (for a review, see Ouimet, Covin, & Dozois,
2012). Psychoeducation involves providing information about GAD, worry,
and anxiety. Further, individuals are provided with an overview of the
rationale for CBT. Relaxation training can involve a number of
strategies, including progressive muscle relaxation and breathing
techniques. Monitoring forms are used to identify environmental triggers
for worry and anxiety, to record the content of worries, and to become
aware of behavioral and physiological consequences of worry. Imaginal
and in vivo exposure techniques are used in a CBT protocol when relevant
for a client's symptoms. For example, if someone is avoiding reading the
newspaper for fear that it will trigger unwanted worries about world
events, exposure to reading news stories would likely be an important
component of treatment. Imaginal exposure (repeated exposure to
catastrophic images and fears) is used to help individuals become more
comfortable with the content of their most feared consequences.
Cognitive restructuring is the process by which individuals challenge
their fearful thoughts and learn to consider realistic alternatives. In
a number of investigations, CBT has proven superior to wait-list
controls and nonspecific alternative treatments (Mitte, 2005; Ouimet et
al., 2012); a meta-analysis also showed that the effects of CBT are
similar to pharmacological interventions (Mitte, 2005). To isolate the
effects of CBT on worry, the core symptom of GAD, a meta-analysis
examined only those studies using the PSWQ as an outcome measure and
found that effect sizes for CBT interventions were large (g = --1.15)
when compared to nonspecific or no-treatment control conditions (Covin,
Ouimet, Seeds, & Dozois, 2008). This meta-analysis found that the
effects of CBT were moderated by age, with younger age groups responding
more strongly to CBT than older cohorts, although the effect sizes were
in the large range across age groups. In meta-analyses comparing CBT
with pharmacological interventions, effect sizes for CBT and
pharmacotherapy are similar, although there appears to be an advantage
for CBT for long-term maintenance of treatment gains (Gould, Otto,
Pollack, & Yap, 1997) and for patient acceptability and tolerability
(Mitte, 2005). CBT has also been found useful in helping individuals
discontinue their benzodiazepine use (Gosselin, Ladouceur, Morin, Dugas,
& Baillargeon, 2006). CBT appears to be effective not only for
decreasing symptoms of worry, anxiety, and depression but also for
decreasing related symptoms such as insomnia (Bélanger, Morin, Langlois,
& Ladouceur, 2004) and improving quality of life (Hofmann, Wu, &
Boettcher, 2014).

Treatment

171

Studies have also investigated the specific components of CBT protocols.
For example, a study by Arntz (2003) compared applied relaxation to
cognitive strategies. Both treatments were effective across a number of
outcome measures, with an initial follow-up advantage for relaxation
lost at 6-month follow-up. Both treatments appeared to be effective at
6-month follow-up, with just over half of the sample demonstrating a
strong outcome on measures of anxiety. In another study, problem-solving
training (which is often used in CBT protocols for GAD) was compared to
imaginal exposure, and again both treatment components yielded
significant improvements on a variety of symptom measures (Provencher,
Dugas, & Ladouceur, 2004). In a meta-analysis, Hanrahan, Field, Jones,
and Davey (2012) found large effect sizes for the efficacy of cognitive
therapy in reducing worry at posttreatment and 12-month follow-up.
Although there was some conceptual overlap in terms of the treatment
comparison groups (i.e., cognitive and cognitive-behavioral treatments
were not isolated), this meta-analysis suggests that treatment models
targeting cognitive variables, such as intolerance of uncertainty and
meta-worry, can be effective in treating the core symptoms of GAD.
Despite these successes, more work is needed to understand the
individual differences and treatment-specific variables affecting
outcomes in order to enhance treatment efficacy.

Recent Advances in CBT for GAD As reviewed earlier in this chapter,
there is considerable evidence that GAD is characterized by heightened
levels of intolerance of uncertainty. Accordingly, treatment protocols
that have been developed to specifically target intolerance of
uncertainty have produced encouraging results. In an initial study of
this protocol, 26 individuals with GAD were assigned to active treatment
or a delayed treatment condition. Treatment was a modification of a CBT
protocol that targeted intolerance of uncertainty, positive and negative
beliefs about worry, negative problem-solving orientation, and cognitive
avoidance. This protocol led to significant and lasting improvements on
GAD diagnostic status and associated symptoms (Ladouceur et al., 2000).
Positive outcomes are seen whether this treatment is offered in group
formats (Dugas et al., 2003) or individual formats (Dugas et al., 2010).
Interestingly, CBT targeting intolerance of uncertainty resulted in
similar posttreatment improvements in worry compared to applied
relaxation, but the gains were maintained only in the CBT condition
(Dugas et al., 2010), indicating that the effects of CBT are more
durable than effects of applied relaxation. Therapy based on Wells's
metacognitive theory of GAD (Wells, 1995) has also demonstrated positive
results. This treatment focuses on modifying individuals' negative
beliefs about the uncontrollability of worry, negative beliefs about the
danger of worry, and positive beliefs about the utility of worry (Wells,
2006). A meta-analysis, which included five studies with GAD patients,
found that metacognitive therapies were more effective than wait-list
control conditions across mood and anxiety disorders (Normann, van
Emmerik, & Morina, 2014). An open trial of metacognitive therapy for GAD
found strong effect sizes on measures of worry, anxiety, and depression,
and recovery rates remained strong at 12-month follow-up (Wells & King,
2006). A pilot randomized controlled trial found metacognitive therapy
for GAD to be superior to applied relaxation at posttreatment and
follow-up (Wells et al., 2010). When directly compared, CBT targeting
metacognition and CBT targeting intolerance of uncertainty both produced

172

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

significant and lasting improvements in GAD symptoms. However, the
therapy derived from Wells's metacognitive model produced significantly
greater reductions on all measures (van der Heiden, Muris, & van der
Molen, 2012). Another modification of a traditional CBT protocol for GAD
has involved the incorporation of mindfulness and acceptance strategies
into therapy. This change is based on evidence that individuals with GAD
may be using worry to avoid negative emotional experiences. The
inclusion of mindfulness and acceptance strategies encourages a client
to accept his or her emotional experience and to move toward valued
goals rather than engage in typical worry-related behaviors. This
approach derives from acceptance-based therapies developed by Hayes,
Strosahl, and Wilson (1999) and Linehan (1993). Case studies (e.g.,
Fresco, Mennin, Heimberg, & Ritter, 2013), open trials (Roemer &
Orsillo, 2007), and randomized controlled trials (Roemer, Orsillo, &
Salters-Pedneault, 2008) suggest that the incorporation of these
strategies shows promise for individuals with GAD. Clients in these
studies specifically acknowledged the mindfulness and acceptance
elements of therapy as beneficial. In addition, augmenting CBT with
motivational interviewing (MI), which is a client-centered approach
focused on facilitating a client's own motivation for change, appears to
reduce treatment resistance (Aviram & Westra, 2011) and enhance efficacy
(Westra, Arkowitz, & Dozois, 2009). A recent randomized controlled trial
compared 15 sessions of traditional CBT with a 15-session integrated
protocol (4 sessions of MI and 11 sessions of MI-enhanced CBT) (Westra,
Constantino, & Antony, 2016) for individuals with GAD. Although
treatment outcomes were similar immediately after treatment, the MI plus
CBT showed more change (more reduction in worry and general distress) at
12-month follow up. These results suggest that augmenting CBT with MI
approaches may result in better long-term outcomes for individuals with
GAD. In summary, CBT has been shown to be an effective intervention for
individuals with GAD, demonstrating superiority to results for wait-list
controls and alternative therapies. It is still unclear which components
of the CBT protocol are the most useful, and whether new variants can
outperform standard CBT in randomized controlled trials. However,
despite the benefits accrued by CBT, outcome data continue to be modest
and large percentages of clients continuing to experience significant
symptoms at posttreatment and follow-up. Thus, more work is necessary to
identify the elements needed for an optimal psychological intervention
for GAD.

Biological Interventions Recent revisions to clinical practice
guidelines recommend that selection of treatment approach be based on
the client's preference, as there is no conclusive evidence that
biological or psychological interventions for GAD are superior to one
another (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2011).
Conclusions about effective pharmacological interventions for GAD are
limited by several factors. Most studies have examined benzodiazepines
as a treatment for GAD, with only a handful of more recent studies
investigating the utility of antidepressants and other medications for
this condition. Further, most randomized controlled trials limit the
comorbid psychological conditions that study participants can have. They
tend to include only "pure GAD" cases. As noted earlier, GAD is highly
comorbid with other disorders, making it difficult to find these pure
cases

Treatment

173

and further limiting the generalizability of study results to the
treatment of individuals with more complicated diagnostic profiles. The
lack of consistent diagnostic criteria for GAD has also hampered our
knowledge of effective pharmacological interventions, as many medication
trials have used DSM-III or DSM-III-R criteria. The response of GAD to
placebo appears to be particularly high (e.g., greater than 40%;
Schweizer & Rickels, 1997), making it more difficult to find active
pharmacological agents that can demonstrate significantly better effects
than this. Despite these limitations, there is an accumulating body of
research on pharmacological agents for GAD (for a review, see Baldwin,
Waldman, & Allgulander, 2011). Research generally supports the
effectiveness of benzodiazepines when compared to placebo for GAD (see
Anderson & Palm, 2006), although initial benefits were not maintained in
some studies (e.g., Pourmotabbed, McLeod, Hoehn-Saric, Hipsley, &
Greenblatt, 1996). Benzodiazepines appear to reduce symptoms of worry,
tension, and concentration in addition to the somatic features of GAD. A
meta-analysis of studies comparing pharmacotherapy (usually
benzodiazepines) to CBT concluded that the two interventions appear to
be similarly effective (Mitte, 2005). However, due to concerns about the
development of potential tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal symptoms,
recommendations have been made to prescribe benzodiazepines only under
limited circumstances, such as for short-term treatment (i.e., less than
4 weeks), as an adjunct to antidepressant medication, or in cases of
severe, treatment-resistant GAD symptoms (Baldwin et al., 2011). In
reviews of pharmacotherapy for GAD, SSRIs are identified as a first-line
therapy (see Baldwin et al., 2011). More specifically, approved
medications include paroxetine, sertraline, and escitalopram, with each
medication demonstrating efficacy compared to pill placebo (Lenze et
al., 2009). Escitalopram may also be more efficacious than paroxetine
(Baldwin, Huusom, & Maehlum, 2006), may be better tolerated than
paroxetine (Bielski, Bose, & Chang, 2005), and is more effective than
placebo in preventing relapse after successful pharmacotherapy of GAD
symptoms (Allgulander, Florea, & Huusom, 2006). Further, a small pilot
study presented preliminary evidence that escitalopram may provide
additional benefits to partial responders and nonresponders following a
course of CBT for GAD (Schneier, Belzer, Kishon, Amsel, & Simpson,
2010). Agents other than SSRIs have been studied in GAD. Although there
is consistent evidence that buspirone, a partial agonist of the
presynaptic serotonin receptors, is an effective medication,
demonstrating a moderate effect size in a recent meta-analysis (Mitte,
Noack, Steil, & Hautzinger, 2005), it appears to be less well tolerated
in clinical practice (see Anderson & Palm, 2006) and less effective than
SSRI treatments (Egger & Hebert, 2011). Studies suggest that the
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor venlafaxine is also
effective for GAD, demonstrating a moderate effect size across studies
(Mitte et al., 2005) and showing effects similar to paroxetine (Kim et
al., 2006). This medication has also demonstrated effectiveness over
longer treatment trials (Gelenberg et al., 2000). However, some authors
argue that it should remain a second-line treatment for GAD due to
concerns about its safety in overdose and cardiac implications (see
Anderson & Palm, 2006). The serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor
duloxetine has also been shown as an effective treatment (e.g., Hartford
et al., 2007). Recent evidence is emerging for the efficacy of
alternative psychotropic treatment approaches. For example, pregabalin,
an analogue of the neurotransmitter GABA, has been demonstrated in
several randomized controlled trials to be an efficacious treatment

174

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

for GAD. A meta-analysis of seven randomized controlled trials found
small to moderate effect sizes for pregabalin compared to placebo, and
the effect was more pronounced for reducing psychological distress
relative to somatic symptoms of GAD (Boschen, 2011). A recent study
investigated pregabalin as an adjunctive therapy for individuals with
GAD who had not fully responded to other pharmacotherapy, and found
better outcomes for the pregabalin group compared to the placebo group
(Rickels et al., 2012). Currently, however, limited evidence is
available comparing pregabalin to other active pharmacological or
psychological treatments for GAD. Second-generation antipsychotic
medications have failed to demonstrate consistent efficacy as an
augmentation treatment for treatment-refractory GAD (Lalonde & Van
Lieshout, 2011). However, based on a limited number of controlled
trials, quetiapine monotherapy appears to be more effective than placebo
in producing clinically significant improvement in GAD symptoms (Baldwin
et al., 2011; Lalonde & Van Lieshout, 2011). Unfortunately, patients
treated with quetiapine are more likely to report significant side
effects, such as weight gain, and to discontinue treatment (Lalonde &
Van Lieshout, 2011), calling into question the clinical utility of
antipsychotic medications as stand-alone or adjunctive treatments for
GAD.

Summary and New Directions Generalized anxiety disorder is a prevalent,
chronic, and debilitating disorder. Unfortunately, research on this
condition has suffered due to the unreliable and changing diagnostic
status of GAD. Compared to criteria for other anxiety disorders, the
criteria used to diagnose GAD dramatically fluctuated across earlier
editions of the DSM. There is still debate about the essential criteria
and duration of symptoms that would be optimal to achieve greater
reliability of diagnosis. For example, several studies suggest that the
6-month minimum duration of excessive worry and anxiety may not be
necessary and will miss a small, but significant, number of individuals
who present with all the other symptoms of GAD for a shorter duration
(e.g., Angst et al., 2006). Thus, the first challenge in the field
appears to be to address the diagnostic criteria of GAD to ensure that
these criteria are capturing the essence of this disorder but are not so
restrictive as to exclude clinically meaningful cases of the disorder.
Additional work needs to be done to improve reliability. Although
interrater reliability estimates for GAD on the SCID-IV and ADIS-IV were
adequate, they fell below those for other psychological disorders.
Studies suggest that the source of diagnostic unreliability was often
that GAD was assigned at a threshold level in some instances and labeled
as a subthreshold constellation of symptoms in other instances (Brown et
al., 2001). This suggests that, once again, the essential features and
duration of this disorder require further clarification. More
optimistically, the identification of excessive worry as the essential
feature of GAD has led to a proliferation of theorizing and research on
this disorder over the past two decades. Our understanding of the
psychopathology of excessive worry and GAD is quite strong, with a
number of complementary theories regarding the development and
maintenance of GAD being extensively studied by numerous research
groups. These research groups, each with its own ideas about the central
issues in GAD, appear to have been able

Summary and New Directions

175

to incorporate others' ideas into their own understanding of the
disorder. For example, more recent ideas about intolerance of
uncertainty and meta-worry blend nicely with earlier theories of worry
as a means of emotional avoidance (Borkovec et al., 2004). As the field
continues to progress, it will be interesting to see whether differing
theoretical positions will continue to converge or will become
increasingly divergent. It will also be interesting to see whether
neuroanatomical, physiological, and other biological studies will be
consistent with the growing information on the psychology of GAD, as
well as add to our understanding of the essential components and
processes of pathological worry. Although existing theories of GAD and
worry are complementary, there is less convergence in terms of
identifying the essential components of a CBT program for GAD. Different
review articles and chapters recommend different CBT strategies for
treating GAD. Ongoing research is focusing on multiple new components of
psychotherapy for GAD, with minimal overlap with earlier components.
Dismantling studies have yet to suggest exactly what therapists should
be doing with their GAD clients. Furthermore, although CBT has been
shown to be an efficacious therapy for GAD, effectiveness data are still
needed. Thus, it is clear that much work is needed to allow a better
understanding of how to best treat GAD from a psychological perspective.
Similarly, much work remains to be done to understand how best to
utilize biological treatments for GAD. Although recommendations exist
for first- and second-line pharmacological treatments for GAD, progress
in this area has been hampered by shifts in diagnostic criteria, by a
focus on benzodiazepines as a first-line treatment, and by selecting
individuals for medication trials who do not represent a typical
individual with GAD. With the continued consistency of diagnostic
criteria, it is hoped that some of these hurdles can be overcome to
allow researchers to investigate new and potentially useful medications.
Research has begun to examine the effectiveness of treatments adjunctive
to SSRIs (e.g., Bandelow et al., 2010), but further research is
warranted. Further understanding of the biological, biochemical, and
neuroanatomical aspects of GAD will also help in understanding the types
of pharmacological agents that might best help individuals with GAD. It
is clear that GAD has enormous personal and societal costs for afflicted
individuals. Thus, effective treatment programs need to be balanced with
research on the prevention of the onset or exacerbation of symptoms. We
know that GAD shares a genetic diathesis with depression (Roy, Neale,
Pedersen, Mathe, & Kendler, 1995), that anxiety disorders run in
families (Merikangas, Avenevoli, Dierker, & Grillon, 1999), and that
specific life events are associated with heightened symptoms of
generalized anxiety (e.g., the postpartum period; Wenzel, Haugen,
Jackson, & Robinson, 2003). Prevention efforts need to make use of such
information to target higher risk populations before symptoms become
debilitating.

References Adams, J. B., Pyke, R. E., Costa, J., & Cutler, N. R. (1995).
A double-blind, placebo-controlled study of a CCK-B receptor antagonist,
CI-988, in patients with generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 15, 428--434. Aldao, A., Mennin, D. S.,
Linardatos, E., & Fresco, D. M. (2010). Differential patterns of
physical symptoms and subjective processes in generalized anxiety
disorder and unipolar depression. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24,
250--259. Aldao, A., Mennin, D. S., & McLaughlin, K. A. (2013).
Differentiating worry and rumination: Evidence from heart rate
variability during spontaneous regulation. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 37, 613--619. Allgulander, C., Florea, I., & Huusom, A. K. T.
(2006). Prevention of relapse in generalized anxiety disorder by
escitalopram treatment. International Journal of
Neuropsychopharmacology, 9, 495--505. American Psychiatric Association.
(1952). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1968).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1980).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.).
Arlington, VA: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1987).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., rev.).
Arlington, VA: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1994).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.).
Arlington, VA: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (2013).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. Anderson, I. M., & Palm, M. E. (2006).
Pharmacological treatments for worry: Focus on generalized anxiety
disorder. In G. C. L. Davey & A. Wells (Eds.), Worry and its
psychological disorders: Theory, assessment, and treatment
(pp. 305--334). Chichester, England: Wiley. Angst, J., Gamma, A.,
Bienvenu, O. J., Eaton, W. W., Ajdacic, V., Eich, D., & Rössler, W.
(2006). Varying temporal criteria for generalized anxiety disorder:

Prevalence and clinical characteristics in a young age cohort.
Psychological Medicine, 36, 1283--1292. Ansell, E. B., Pinto, A.,
Edelen, M. O., Markowitz, J. C., Sanislow, C. A., Yen, S., ...
Gunderson, J. G. (2011). The association of personality disorders with
the prospective 7-year course of anxiety disorders. Psychological
Medicine, 41, 1019--1028. Arntz, A. (2003). Cognitive therapy versus
applied relaxation as a treatment of generalized anxiety disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 633--646. Asnaani, A., Richey, J.
A., Dimaite, R., Hinton, D. E., & Hofmann, S. G. (2010). A cross-ethnic
comparison of lifetime prevalence rates of anxiety disorders. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 198, 551--555. Aviram, A., & Westra, H. A.
(2011). The impact of motivational interviewing on resistance in
cognitive behavioural therapy for generalized anxiety disorder.
Psychotherapy Research, 21, 698--708. Baldwin, D. S., Huusom, A. K. T.,
& Maehlum, E. (2006). Escitalopram and paroxetine in the treatment of
generalized anxiety disorder: Randomized, placebo-controlled,
double-blind study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 264--272.
Baldwin, D. S., Waldman, S., & Allgulander, C. (2011). Evidence-based
pharmacological treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. International
Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 14, 697--710. Ballenger, J. C.
(2001). Treatment of anxiety disorders to remission. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 62, 5--9. Bandelow, B., Chouinard, G., Bobes, J., Ahokas,
A., Eggens, I., Liu, S., & Eriksson, H. (2010). Extendedrelease
quetiapine fumarate (quetiapine XR): A once-daily monotherapy effective
in generalized anxiety disorder. Data from a randomized, double-blind,
placebo- and active-controlled study. International Journal of
Neuropsychopharmacology, 13, 305--320. Bar-Haim, Y., Lamy, D., Pergamin,
L., BakermansKranenburg, M., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (2007).
Threat-related attentional bias in anxious and nonanxious individuals: A
meta-analytic study. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 1--24. Barahmand, U.
(2009). Meta-cognitive profiles in anxiety disorders. Psychiatry
Research, 169, 240--243. Becker, E. S., Goodwin, R., Hölting, C., Hoyer,
J., & Margraf, J. (2003). Content of worry in the

176

References community: What do people with generalized anxiety disorder
or other disorders worry about? Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
191, 688--691. Becker, E. S., Rinck, M., Margraf, J., & Roth, W. T.
(2001). The emotional Stroop effect in anxiety disorders: General
emotionality or disorder specificity? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 15,
147--159. Becker, E. S., Roth, W. T., Andrich, M., & Margraf, J. (1999).
Explicit memory in anxiety disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
108, 153--163. Behar, E., DiMarco, I. D., Hekler, E. B., Mohlman, J., &
Staples, A. M. (2009). Current theoretical models of generalized anxiety
disorder (GAD): Conceptual review and treatment implications. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 23, 1011--1023. Behar, E., Zuellig, A. R., &
Borkovec, T. D. (2005). Thought and imaginal activity during worry and
trauma recall. Behavior Therapy, 36, 157--168. Bélanger, L., Morin, C.
M., Langlois, F., & Ladouceur, R. (2004). Insomnia and generalized
anxiety disorder: Effects of cognitive behavior therapy for GAD on
insomnia patients. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 18, 561--571. Belzer,
K. D., D'Zurilla, T. J., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2002). Social problem
solving and trait anxiety as predictors of worry in a college student
population. Personality and Individual Differences, 33, 573--585.
Berenbaum, H., Thompson, R. J., & Pomerantz, E. M. (2007). The relation
between worrying and concerns: The importance of perceived probability
and cost. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 301--311. Bielski, R. J.,
Bose, A., & Chang, C. (2005). A doubleblind comparison of escitalopram
and paroxetine in the long-term treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 17, 65--69. Blazer, D., Hughes,
D., & George, L. K. (1987). Stressful life events and the onset of a
generalized anxiety syndrome. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144,
1178--1183. Borkovec, T. D., Alcaine, O., & Behar, E. (2004). Avoidance
theory of worry and generalized anxiety disorder. In R. G. Heimberg, C.
L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances
in research and practice (pp. 77--108). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Borkovec, T. D., Hazlett-Stevens, H., & Diaz, M. L. (1999). The role of
positive beliefs about worry in generalized anxiety disorder and its
treatment. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 6, 126--138.

177

Borkovec, T. D., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., & Lytle, R. (2002). A
component analysis of cognitivebehavioral therapy for generalized
anxiety disorder and the role of interpersonal problems. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 288--298. Borkovec, T. D., &
Roemer, L. (1995). Perceived functions of worry among generalized
anxiety disorder subjects: Distraction from more emotional topics?
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 26, 25--30.
Boschen, M. J. (2011). A meta-analysis of the efficacy of pregabalin in
the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry, 56, 558--566. Bradley, B. P., Mogg, K., Millar, N., & White,
J. (1995). Selective processing of negative information: Effects of
clinical anxiety, concurrent depression, and awareness. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 104, 532--536. Bradley, B. P., Mogg, K., White, J.,
Groom, C., & de Bono, J. (1999). Attentional bias for emotional faces in
generalised anxiety disorder. British Journal of Clinical Psychology,
38, 267--278. Brawman-Mintzer, O., Lydiard, R. B., Bradwejn, J.,
Villarreal, G., Knapp, R., Emmanuel, N., ... Ballenger, J. C. (1997).
Effects of the cholecystokinin agonist pentagastrin in patients with
generalized anxiety disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154,
700--702. Brawman-Mintzer, O., Lydiard, B., Emmanuel, N., Payeur, R.,
Johnson, M., Roberts, J., ... Ballenger, J. C. (1993). Psychiatric
comorbidity in patients with generalized anxiety disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 1216--1218. Breitholtz, E., Johansson, B., &
Öst, L. G. (1999). Cognitions in generalized anxiety disorder and panic
disorder patients: A prospective approach. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 37, 533--544. Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2014). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5 (ADIS-5)--Adult Version. Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press. Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman,
C. L., Grisham, J. R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current and lifetime
comorbidity of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical
sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 585--599. Brown, T. A.,
DiNardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2004). Anxiety Disorders Interview
Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

178

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Bruce, S. E., Machan, J. T., Dyck, I., & Keller, M. B. (2001).
Infrequency of "pure" GAD: Impact of psychiatric comorbidity on clinical
course. Depression and Anxiety, 14, 219--225. Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K.
A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, J. L., Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M., ... Keller,
M. B. (2005). Influence of psychiatric comorbidity on recovery and
recurrence in generalized anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic
disorder: A 12-year prospective study. American Journal of Psychiatry,
162, 1179--1187. Buhr, K., & Dugas, M. J. (2009). The role of fear of
anxiety and intolerance of uncertainty in worry: An experimental
manipulation. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47, 215--223. Buhr, K., &
Dugas, M. J. (2012). Fear of emotions, experiential avoidance, and
intolerance of uncertainty in worry and generalized anxiety disorder.
International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 5, 1--17. Campbell, L. A.,
Brown, T. A., & Grisham, J. R. (2003). The relevance of age of onset to
the psychopathology of generalized anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy,
34, 31--48. Carleton, R. N., Mulvogue, M. K., Thibodeau, M. A., McCabe,
R. E., Antony, M. M., & Asmundson, G. J. G. (2012). Increasingly certain
about uncertainty: Intolerance of uncertainty across anxiety and
depression. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 468--479. Carleton, R. N.,
Norton, M. A. P., & Asmundson, G. J. G. (2007). Fearing the unknown: A
short version of the Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 21, 105--117.
Carleton,R.N.,Weeks,J.W.,Howell,A.N.,Asmundson, G. J. G., Antony, M. M.,
& McCabe, R. E. (2012). Assessing the latent structure of the
intolerance of uncertainty construct: An initial taxometric analysis.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 150--157. Cartwright-Hatton, S., &
Wells, A. (1997). Beliefs about worry and intrusions: The
Meta-Cognitions Questionnaire and its correlates. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 11, 279--296. Cassidy, J. A., & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (1999).
Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications. New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Chambers, J. A., Power, K. G., & Durham, R. C.
(2004). The relationship between trait vulnerability and anxiety and
depressive diagnoses at long-term follow-up of generalized anxiety
disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 18, 587--607.

Cisler, J. M., & Koster, E. H. W. (2010). Mechanisms of attentional
biases towards threat in anxiety disorders: An integrative review.
Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 203--216. Clarke, D. E., Narrow, W. E.,
Regier, D. A., Kuramoto, S. J., Kupfer, D. J., Kuhl, E. A., ... Kraemer,
H. C. (2013). DSM-5 field trials in the United States and Canada: Part
I. Study design, sampling strategy, implementation, and analytic
approaches. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170(1), 43--58. Coles, M.
E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2005). Thought control strategies in generalized
anxiety disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29, 47--56. Coles, M.
E., Turk, C. L., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Memory bias for threat in
generalized anxiety disorder: The potential importance of stimulus
relevance. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 36, 65--73. Comer, J. S.,
Kendall, P. C., Franklin, M. E., Hudson, J. L., & Pimentel, S. S.
(2004). Obsessing/worrying about the overlap between
obsessive-compulsive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder in youth.
Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 663--683. Constans, J. I. (2001). Worry
propensity and the perception of risk. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
39, 721--729. Covin, R., Ouimet, A. J., Seeds, P. M., & Dozois, D. J. A.
(2008). A meta-analysis of CBT for pathological worry among clients with
GAD. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 108--116. Craske, M. G., Rapee,
R. M., Jackel, L., & Barlow, D. H. (1989). Qualitative dimensions of
worry in DSM-III-R generalized anxiety disorder subjects and nonanxious
controls. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 397--402. Crits-Christoph,
P., Gibbons, M. B. C., Narducci, J., Schamberger, M., & Gallop, R.
(2005). Interpersonal problems and the outcome of interpersonally
oriented psychodynamic treatment of GAD. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, and Training, 42, 211--224. Davey, G. C. L. (2006).
A mood-as-input account of perseverative worrying. In G. C. L. Davey &
A. Wells (Eds.), Worry and its psychological disorders: Theory,
assessment, and treatment (pp. 217--238). Chichester, England: Wiley.
Davey, G. C. L., Hampton, J., Farrell, J., & Davidson, S. (1992). Some
characteristics of worrying: Evidence for worrying and anxiety as
separate constructs. Personality and Individual Differences, 13,
133--147.

References Davey, G. C. L., Jubb, M., & Cameron, C. (1996). Catastrophic
worrying as a function of changes in problem-solving confidence.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 20, 333--344. Davey, G. C. L., & Levy,
S. (1998). Catastrophic worrying: Personal inadequacy and a
perseverative iterative style as features of the catastrophizing
process. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 576--586. Davey, G. C. L.,
Tallis, F., & Capuzzo, N. (1996). Beliefs about the consequences of
worrying. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 20, 499--520. Davis, M.,
Montgomery, I., & Wilson, G. (2002). Worry and heart rate variables:
Autonomic rigidity under challenge. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16,
639--659. Davis, R. N., & Valentiner, D. P. (2000). Does meta-cognitive
theory enhance our understanding of pathological worry and anxiety?
Personality and Individual Differences, 29, 513--526. De Bellis, M. D.,
Casey, B. J., Dahl, R. E., Birmaher, B., Williamson, D. E., Thomas, K.
M., ... Ryan, N. D. (2000). A pilot study of amygdala volumes in
pediatric generalized anxiety disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 48,
51--57. De Bellis, M. D., Keshavan, M. S., Shifflett, H., Iyengar, S.,
Dahl, R. E., Axelson, D. A., ... Ryan, N. D. (2002). Superior temporal
gyrus volumes in pediatric generalized anxiety disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 51, 553--562. Di Nardo, P., Moras, K., Barlow, D. H., Rapee,
R. M., & Brown, T. A. (1993). Reliability of DSM-III anxiety disorder
categories. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 251--256. Di Nardo, P.
A., O'Brien, G. T., Barlow, D. H., Waddell, M. T., & Blanchard, E. B.
(1983). Reliability of DSM-III anxiety disorder categories using a new
structured interview. Archives of General Psychiatry, 40, 1070--1074.
Dohrenwend, B. P., & Dohrenwend, B. S. (1969). Social status and
psychological disorder: A causal inquiry. New York, NY: Wiley. Dugas, M.
J., Brillon, P., Savard, P., Turcotte, J., Gaudet, A., Ladouceur, R.,
... Gervais, N. J. (2010). A randomized clinical trial of
cognitive-behavioral therapy and applied relaxation for adults with
generalized anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 41, 46--58. Dugas, M.
J., Buhr, K., & Ladouceur, R. (2004). The role of intolerance of
uncertainty in etiology and maintenance. In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk,
& D. S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized anxiety disorder:

179

Advances in research and practice (pp. 143--163). New York, NY: Guilford
Press. Dugas, M. J., Freeston, M. H., & Ladouceur, R. (1997).
Intolerance of uncertainty and problem orientation in worry. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 21, 593--606. Dugas, M. J., Gagnon, F., Ladouceur,
R., & Freeston, M. H. (1998). Generalized anxiety disorder: A
preliminary test of a conceptual model. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
36, 215--226. Dugas, M. J., Hedayati, M., Karavidas, A., Buhr, K.,
Francis, K., & Phillips, N. A. (2005). Intolerance of uncertainty and
information processing: Evidence of biased recall and interpretation.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29, 57--70. Dugas, M. J., Ladouceur, R.,
Léger, E., Freeston, M. H., Langlois, F., Provencher, M. D., & Boisvert,
J. M. (2003). Group cognitive-behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety
disorder: Treatment outcome and long-term follow-up. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 821--825. Dugas, M. J.,
Langlois, F., Rhéaume, J., & Ladouceur, R. (1998, November). Intolerance
of uncertainty and worry: Investigating causality. In J. Stöber (Chair),
Worry: New findings in applied and clinical research. Symposium
presented at the annual meeting of the Association for the Advancement
of Behavior Therapy, Washington, DC. Dugas, M. J., Marchand, A., &
Ladouceur, R. (2005). Further validation of a cognitive-behavioral model
of generalized anxiety disorder: Diagnostic and symptom specificity.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 19, 329--343. Dugas, M. J., Savard, P.,
Gaudet, A., Turcotte, J., Laugesen, N., Robichaud, M., ... Koerner, N.
(2007). Can the components of a cognitive model predict the severity of
generalized anxiety disorder? Behavior Therapy, 38, 169--178. Egger, J.
F., & Hebert, C. (2011). Buspirone: Anxiolytic, antidepressant, or
neither? Psychiatric Annals, 41, 166--175. Eng, W., & Heimberg, R. G.
(2006). Interpersonal correlates of generalized anxiety disorder: Self
versus other perception. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 20, 380--387.
Etkin, A., Prater, K. E., Hoeft, F., Menon, V., & Schatzberg, A. F.
(2010). Failure of anterior cingulate activation and connectivity with
the amygdala during implicit regulation of emotional processing

180

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

in generalized anxiety disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167,
545--554. Eysenck, M. W., Mogg, K., May, J., Richards, A., & Mathews, A.
(1991). Bias in interpretation of ambiguous sentences related to threat
in anxiety. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 144--150. Faravelli,
C., Sauro, C. L., Godini, L., Lelli, L., Benni, L., Pietrini, F., ...
Ricca, V. (2012). Childhood stressful events, HPA axis and anxiety
disorders. World Journal of Psychiatry, 22, 13--25. Fergus, T. A.,
Valentiner, D. P., Wu, K. D., & McGrath, P. B. (2015). Examining the
symptom-level specificity of negative problem orientation in a clinical
sample. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 44, 153--161. First, M. B.,
Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-5--Research Version (SCID-5-RV). Arlington,
VA: American Psychiatric Association. Francis, J. L., Moitra, E., Dyck,
I., & Keller, M. B. (2012). The impact of stressful life events on
relapse of generalized anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 29,
386--391. Freeston, M. H., Rhéaume, J., Letarte, H., Dugas, M. J., &
Ladouceur, R. (1994). Why do people worry? Personality and Individual
Differences, 17, 791--802. Fresco, D. M., Frankel, A. N., Mennin, D. S.,
Turk, C. L., & Heimberg, R. G. (2002). Distinct and overlapping features
of rumination and worry: The relationship of cognitive production to
negative affective states. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 26, 179--188.
Fresco, D. M., Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., & Ritter, M. (2013).
Emotion regulation therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. Cognitive
and Behavioral Practice, 20, 282--300. Friedman, B. H. (2007). An
autonomic flexibilityneurovisceral integration model of anxiety and
cardiac vagal tone. Biological Psychiatry, 74, 185--199. Gelenberg, A.
J., Lydiard, R. B., Rudolph, R. L., Aguiar, L., Haskins, J. T., &
Salinas, E. (2000). Efficacy of venlafaxine extended-release capsules in
nondepressed outpatients with generalized anxiety disorder: A 6-month
randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 283, 3082--3088. Gentes, E. L., &
Ruscio, A. M. (2011). A meta-analysis of the relation of intolerance of
uncertainty to symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder, major
depressive disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Clinical
Psychology Review, 31, 923--933.

Germine, M., Goddard, A. W., Woods, S. W., Charney, D. S., & Heninger,
G. R. (1992). Anger and anxiety responses to m-chlorophenylpiperazine in
generalized anxiety disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 32, 457--461.
Ghafoori, B., Barragan, B., Tohidian, N., & Palinkas, L. (2012). Racial
and ethnic differences in symptom severity of PTSD, GAD, and depression
in traumaexposed, urban, treatment-seeking adults. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 25, 106--110. Goddard, A. W., & Charney, D. S. (1997). Toward an
integrated neurobiology of panic disorder. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 58, 4--12. Gordon, D., & Heimberg, R. G. (2011). Reliability
and validity of DSM-IV generalized anxiety disorder features. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 25, 813--821. Gosselin, P., Ladouceur, R., Morin, C.
M., Dugas, M. J., & Baillargeon, L. (2006). Benzodiazepine
discontinuation among adults with GAD: A randomized trial of
cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 74, 908--919. Gould, R. A., Otto, M. W., Pollack, M. H., &
Yap, L. (1997). Cognitive behavioral and pharmacological treatment of
generalized anxiety disorder: A preliminary meta-analysis. Behavior
Therapy, 28, 285--305. Hale, W. W., Engels, R., & Meeus, W. (2006).
Adolescent's perceptions of parenting behaviors and its relationship to
adolescent generalized anxiety disorder symptoms. Journal of
Adolescence, 29, 407--417. Hale, W., Richmond, M., Bennett, J., Berzins,
T., Fields, A., Weber, D., ... Osman, A. (2015). Resolving uncertainty
about the Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale--12: Application of modern
psychometric strategies. Journal of Personality Assessment, 98,
200--208. Hanrahan, F., Field, A. P., Jones, F., & Davey, G. C. (2012).
A meta-analysis of cognitive therapy for worry in generalized anxiety
disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 33, 120--132. Hartford, J.,
Kornstein, S., Liebowitz, M., Pigott, T., Russell, J., Detke, M., ...
Erickson, J. (2007). Duloxetine as an SNRI treatment for generalized
anxiety disorder: Results from a placebo and activecontrolled trial.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 22, 167--174. Hayes, S. C.,
Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment
therapy: An experiential approach to behavior change. New York, NY:
Guilford Press.

References Henning, E. R., Turk, C. L., Mennin, D. S., Fresco, D. M., &
Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Impairment and quality of life in individuals
with generalized anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 24, 342--349.
Hettema, J. M., Kettenmann, B., Ahluwalia, V., McCarthy, C., Kates, W.
R., Schmitt, J. E., ... Fatouros, P. (2012). Pilot multimodal twin
imaging study of generalized anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety,
29, 202--209. Hofmann, S. G., Wu, J. Q., & Boettcher, H. (2014). Effect
of cognitive-behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders on quality of
life: A meta-analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
82, 375--391. Hong, R. Y. (2007). Worry and rumination: Differential
associations with anxious and depressive symptoms and coping behavior.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 277--290. Hoyer, J., Becker, E. S.,
& Roth, W. T. (2001). Characteristics of worry in GAD patients, social
phobics, and controls. Depression and Anxiety, 13, 89--96. Judd, L. L.,
Kessler, R. C., Paulus, M. P., Zeller, P. V., Wittchen, H.-U., &
Kunovac, J. L. (1998). Comorbidity as a fundamental feature of
generalized anxiety disorder: Results from the National Comorbidity
Study (NCS). Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98, 6--11. Kalk, N. J.,
Nutt, D. J., & Lingford-Hughes, A. (2011). The role of central
noradrenergic dysregulation in anxiety disorders: Evidence from clinical
studies. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25, 3--16. Kelly, W. E. (2003).
No time to worry: The relationship between worry, time structure, and
time management. Personality and Individual Differences, 35, 1119--1126.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., &
Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset
distributions of DSM-III-R disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593--602. Kim, T., Pae,
C., Yoon, S., Bahk, W., Jun, T., Rhee, W., & Chae, J. (2006). Comparison
of venlafaxine extended release versus paroxetine for treatment of
patients with generalized anxiety disorder. Psychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 60, 347--351. Koerner, N., & Dugas, M. J. (2008). An
investigation of appraisals in individuals vulnerable to excessive
worry: The role of intolerance of uncertainty. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 32(5), 619--638.

181

Ladouceur, R., Dugas, M. J., Freeston, M. H., Léger, E., Gagnon, E., &
Thibodeau, N. (2000). Efficacy of a new cognitive-behavioral treatment
for generalized anxiety disorder: Evaluation in a controlled clinical
trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 957--964.
Ladouceur, R., Dugas, M. J., Freeston, M. H., Rhéaume, J., Blais, F.,
Boisvert, J., ... Thibodeau, N. (1999). Specificity of generalized
anxiety disorder symptoms and processes. Behavior Therapy, 30, 191--207.
Laguna, L. B., Ham, L. S., Hope, D. A., & Bell, C. (2004). Chronic worry
as avoidance of arousal. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 28, 269--281.
Lalonde, C. D., & Van Lieshout, R. J. (2011). Treating generalized
anxiety disorder with second generation antipsychotics: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 31,
326--333. Langlois, F., Freeston, M. H., & Ladouceur, R. (2000).
Differences and similarities between obsessive intrusive thoughts and
worry in a non-clinical population: Study 1. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 38, 157--173. Lee, S., Tsang, A., Ruscio, A. M., Haro, J. M.,
Stein, D. J., Alonso, J., ... Kessler, R. C. (2009). Implications of
modifying the duration requirement of generalized anxiety disorder in
developed and developing countries. Psychological Medicine, 39,
1163--1176. Lenze, E. J., Mantella, R. C., Shi, P., Goate, A. M.,
Nowotny, P., Butters, M. A., ... Rollman, B. L. (2011). Elevated
cortisol in older adults with generalized anxiety disorder is reduced by
treatment: A placebo-controlled evaluation of escitalopram. American
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 19, 482--490. Lenze, E. J., Rollman, B.
L., Shear, M. K., Dew, M. A., Pollock, B. G., Ciliberti, C., ...
Reynolds, C. F. (2009). Escitalopram for older adults with generalized
anxiety disorder: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 301, 295--303.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline
personality disorder. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Llera, S. J., &
Newman, M. G. (2010). Effects of worry on physiological and subjective
reactivity to emotional stimuli in generalized anxiety disorder and
nonanxious control participants. Emotion, 10, 640--650.

182

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Llera, S. J., & Newman, M. G. (2014). Rethinking the role of worry in
generalized anxiety disorder: Evidence supporting a model of emotional
contrast avoidance. Behavior Therapy, 45(3), 283--299. MacLeod, C.,
Mathews, A., & Tata, P. (1986). Attentional bias in emotional disorders.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 15--20. MacLeod, C., & McLaughlin,
K. (1995). Implicit and explicit memory bias in anxiety: A conceptual
replication. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 1--14. MacLeod, C., &
Rutherford, E. (2004). Informationprocessing approaches: Assessing the
selective functioning of attention, interpretation, and retrieval. In R.
G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized anxiety
disorder: Advances in research and practice (pp. 109--142). New York,
NY: Guilford Press. MacNamara, A., & Hajcak, G. (2010). Distinct
electrocortical and behavioral evidence for increased attention to
threat in generalized anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 27,
234--243. Mantella, R. C., Butters, M. A., Amico, J. A., Mazumdar, S.,
Rollman, B. L., Begley, A. E., ... Lenze, E. J. (2008). Salivary
cortisol is associated with diagnosis and severity of late-life
generalized anxiety disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 33, 773--781.
Marten, P. A., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Borkovec, T. D., Shear, M.
K., & Lydiard, R. B. (1993). Evaluation of the ratings comprising the
associated symptom criterion of DSM-III-R generalized anxiety disorder.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 181, 676--682. Martin, M.,
Williams, R., & Clark, D. (1991). Does anxiety lead to selective
processing of threat-related information? Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 29, 147--160. Mathews, A., & Klug, F. (1993). Emotionality and
interference with color-naming in anxiety. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 31, 57--62. Mathews, A., & MacLeod, C. (1985). Selective
processing of threat cues in anxiety states. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 23, 563--569. Mavissakalian, M. R., Hamann, M. S., Haidar, S.
A., & de Groot, C. M. (1995). Correlates of DSM-III personality disorder
in generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9,
103--115. McLean, C. P., & Anderson, E. R. (2009). Brave men and timid
women? A review of the gender differences

in fear and anxiety. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 496--505. McLean,
C. P., Asnaani, A., Litz, B. T., & Hofmann, S. G. (2011). Gender
differences in anxiety disorders: Prevalence, course of illness,
comorbidity and burden of illness. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45,
1027--1035. Meeten, F., Dash, S. R., Scarlet, A. L. S., & Davey, G. C.
L. (2012). Investigating the effect of intolerance of uncertainty on
catastrophic worrying and mood. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50,
690--698. Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D. M.
(2005). Preliminary evidence for an emotion dysregulation model of
generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43,
1281--1310. Mennin, D. S., Holaway, R. M., Fresco, D. M., Moore, M. T.,
& Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Delineating components of emotion and its
dysregulation in anxiety and mood psychopathology. Behavior Therapy, 38,
284--302. Merikangas, K. R., Avenevoli, S., Dierker, L., & Grillon, C.
(1999). Vulnerability factors among children at risk for anxiety
disorders. Society for Biological Psychiatry, 99, 172--179. Meyer, T.
J., Miller, M. L., Metzger, R. L., & Borkovec, T. D. (1990). Development
and validation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 28, 487--495. Mitte, K. (2005). Meta-analysis of
cognitive-behavioral treatments for generalized anxiety disorder: A
comparison with pharmacotherapy. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 785--795.
Mitte, K., Noack, P., Steil, R., & Hautzinger, M. (2005). A
meta-analytic review of the efficacy of drug treatment in generalized
anxiety disorder. Psychopharmacology, 176, 141--150. Moffitt, T. E.,
Harrington, H., Caspi, A., Kim-Cohen, J., Goldberg, D., Gregory, A. M.,
& Poulton, R. (2007). Depression and generalized anxiety disorder:
Cumulative and sequential comorbidity in a birth cohort followed
prospectively to age 32 years. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64,
651--660. Mogg, K., Baldwin, D. S., Brodrick, P., & Bradley, B P.
(2004). Effect of short-term SSRI treatment on cognitive bias in
generalized anxiety disorder. Psychopharmacology, 176, 466--470. Mogg,
K., & Bradley, B. P. (2005). Attentional bias in generalized anxiety
disorder versus depressive disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29,
29--45.

References Mogg, K., Bradley, B. P., Millar, N., & White, J. (1995). A
follow-up study of cognitive bias in generalized anxiety disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 927--935. Mogg, K., Bradley, B. P.,
& Williams, R. (1995). Attentional bias in anxiety and depression: The
role of awareness. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 34, 17--36.
Mogg, K., Millar, N., & Bradley, B. P. (2000). Biases in eye movements
to threatening facial expressions in generalized anxiety disorder and
depressive disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 695--704.
Monk, C. S., Nelson, E. E., McClure, E. B., Mogg, K., Bradley, B. P.,
Leibenluft, E., ... Pine, D. S. (2006). Ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
activation and attentional bias in response to angry faces in
adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 163, 1091--1097. Monk, C. S., Telzer, E. H., Mogg, K.,
Bradley, B. P., Mai, X., Louro, H. M. C., ... Pine, D. S. (2008).
Amygdala and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activation to masked angry
faces in children and adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 65, 568--576. National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence. (2011). Generalised anxiety disorder and
panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia) in adults: Management in
primary, secondary and community care. Manchester, England: Author.
Newman, M. G., & Llera, S. J. (2011). A novel theory of experiential
avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder: A review and synthesis of
research supporting a contrast avoidance model of worry. Clinical
Psychology Review, 31, 371--382. Newman, M. G., Przeworski, A., Fisher,
A. J., & Borkovec, T. D. (2010). Diagnostic comorbidity in adults with
generalized anxiety disorder: Impact of comorbidity on psychotherapy
outcome and impact of psychotherapy on comorbid diagnoses. Behavior
Therapy, 41, 59--72. Newman, M. G., Zuellig, A. R., Kachin, K. E.,
Constantino, M. J., Przeworski, A., Erickson, T., & Cashman-McGrath, L.
(2002). Preliminary reliability and validity of the Generalized Anxiety
Disorder Questionnaire--IV: A revised self-report diagnostic measure of
generalized anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 33, 215--233. Nikolaus,
S., Antke, C., Beu, M., & Müller, H. (2010). Cortical GABA, striatal
dopamine and midbrain

183

serotonin as the key players in compulsive and anxiety
disorders---results from in vivo imaging studies. Reviews in the
Neurosciences, 21, 119--139. Nitschke, J. B., Sarinopoulos, I., Oathes,
D. J., Johnstone, T., Whalen, P. J., Davidson, R. J., & Kalin, N. H.
(2009). Anticipatory activation in the amygdala and anterior cingulate
in generalized anxiety disorder and prediction of treatment response.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 302--310. Normann, N., van Emmerik,
A. A., & Morina, N. (2014). The efficacy of metacognitive therapy for
anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic review. Depression and Anxiety,
31, 402--411. Ouimet, A. J., Covin, R., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2012).
Generalized anxiety disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook
of evidence-based practice in clinical psychology: Vol. 2. Adult
disorders (pp. 651--679). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Penney, A. M., Mazmanian,
D., & Rudanycz, C. (2013). Comparing positive and negative beliefs about
worry in predicting generalized anxiety disorder symptoms. Canadian
Journal of Behavioural Science, 45, 34--41. doi: 10.1037/a0027623
Petrovich, G. D., & Swanson, L. W. (1997). Projections from the lateral
part of the central amygdalar nucleus to the postulated fear
conditioning circuit. Brain Research, 763, 247--254. Pittig, A., Arch,
J. J., Lam, C. W. R., & Craske, M. G. (2013). Heart rate and heart rate
variability in panic, social anxiety, obsessive-compulsive, and
generalized anxiety disorders at baseline and in response to relaxation
and hyperventilation. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 87,
19--27. doi: 10.1016/ j.ijpsycho.2012.10.012 Porges, S. W. (1995).
Orienting in a defensive world: Mammalian modifications of our
evolutionary heritage. A polyvagal theory. Psychophysiology, 32,
301--318. Pourmotabbed, T., McLeod, D. R., Hoehn-Saric, R., Hipsley, P.,
& Greenblatt, D. J. (1996). Treatment, discontinuation, and psychomotor
effects of diazepam in women with generalized anxiety disorder. Journal
of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 16, 202--207. Provencher, M. D., Dugas,
M. J., & Ladouceur, R. (2004). Efficacy of problem-solving training and
cognitive exposure in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: A
case replication series. Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 11,
404--414.

184

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Provencher, M. D., Freeston, M. H., Dugas, M. J., & Ladouceur, R.
(2000). Catastrophizing assessment of worry and threat schemata among
worriers. Behavioral and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 28, 211--224. Rickels,
K., Shiovitz, T. M., Ramey, T. S., Weaver, J. J., Knapp, L. E., &
Miceli, J. J. (2012). Adjunctive therapy with pregabalin in generalized
anxiety disorder patients with partial response to SSRI or SNRI
treatment. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 27, 142--150.
Robichaud, M., Dugas, M. J., & Conway, M. (2003). Gender differences in
worry and associated cognitive-behavioral variables. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 17, 501--516. Rodriguez, B. F., Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M.
E., Bruce, S. E., Spencer, M. A., Culpepper, L., & Keller, M. B. (2006).
Characteristics and predictors of full and partial recovery from
generalized anxiety disorder in primary care patients. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 194, 91--97. Roemer, L. (2001). Measures for
generalized anxiety disorder. In M. M. Antony, S. M. Orsillo, & L.
Roemer (Eds.), Practitioner's guide to empirically based measures of
anxiety (pp. 197--210). New York, NY: Springer. Roemer, L., & Medaglia,
E. (2001). Generalized anxiety disorder: A brief overview and guide to
assessment. In M. M. Antony, S. M. Orsillo, & L. Roemer (Eds.),
Practitioner's guide to empirically based measures of anxiety
(pp. 189--195). New York, NY: Springer. Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M.
(2007). An open trial of an acceptance-based behavior therapy for
generalized anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 38, 72--85. Roemer, L.,
Orsillo, S. M., & Salters-Pedneault, K. (2008). Efficacy of an
acceptance-based behavior therapy for generalized anxiety disorder:
Evaluation in a randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76, 1083--1089. Roemer, L., Salters, K., Raffa, S.
D., & Orsillo, S. M. (2005). Fear and avoidance of internal experiences
in GAD: Preliminary tests of a conceptual model. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 29, 71--88. Roy, M., Neale, M. C., Pedersen, N. L., Mathe, A.
A., & Kendler, K. S. (1995). A twin study of generalized anxiety
disorder and major depression. Psychological Medicine, 25, 1037--1049.
Roy-Byrne, P., & Wagner, A. (2004). Primary care perspectives on
generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65(Suppl.
13), 20--26.

Ruscio, A. M., & Borkovec, T. D. (2004). Experience and appraisal of
worry among high worriers with and without generalized anxiety disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42(12), 1469--1482. Salters-Pedneault,
K., Roemer, L., Tull, M. T., Rucker, L., & Mennin, D. S. (2006).
Evidence of broad deficits in emotion regulation associated with chronic
worry and generalized anxiety disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
30, 469--480. Schneier, F. R., Belzer, K. D., Kishon, R., Amsel, L., &
Simpson, H. B. (2010). Escitalopram for persistent symptoms of
generalized anxiety disorder after CBT: A pilot study. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 198, 458--461. Schweizer, E., & Rickels, K.
(1997). Placebo response in generalized anxiety: Its effect on the
outcome of clinical trials. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 58, 30--38.
Scott, E. L., Eng, W., & Heimberg, R. G. (2002). Ethnic differences in
worry in a nonclinical population. Depression and Anxiety, 15, 79--82.
Segerstrom, S. C., Tsao, J. C. I., Alden, L. E., & Craske, M. G. (2000).
Worry and rumination: Repetitive thought as a concomitant and predictor
of negative mood. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 24, 671--688. Sinha,
S. S., Mohlman, J., & Gorman, J. M. (2004). Neurobiology. In R. G.
Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized anxiety
disorder: Advances in research and practice (pp. 187--216). New York,
NY: Guilford Press. Spitzer, R. L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J. B. W., &
Löwe, B. (2006). A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety
disorder: The GAD-7. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 1092--1097.
Stapinski, L. A., Abbott, M. J., & Rapee, R. M. (2010). Evaluating the
cognitive avoidance model of generalised anxiety disorder: Impact of
worry on threat appraisal, perceived control and anxious arousal.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 1032--1040. Startup, H. M., & Davey,
G. C. L. (2001). Mood as input and catastrophic worrying. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 110, 83--96. Startup, H. M., & Davey, G. C. L.
(2003). Inflated responsibility and the use of stop rules for
catastrophic worrying. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 495--503.
Stöber, J. (1998). Worry, problem elaboration and suppression of
imagery: The role of concreteness. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36,
751--756.

References Suarez, L., & Bell-Dolan, D. (2001). The relationship of
child worry to cognitive biases: Threat interpretation and likelihood of
event occurrence. Behavior Therapy, 32, 425--442. Tallis, F., Davey, G.
C. L., & Capuzzo, N. (1994). The phenomenology of non-pathological
worry: A preliminary investigation. In G. C. L. Davey & F. Tallis
(Eds.), Worrying: Perspectives on theory, assessment, and treatment
(pp. 61--89). Chichester, England: Wiley. Tallis, F., Eysenck, M., &
Mathews, A. (1992). A questionnaire for the measurement of
nonpathological worry. Personality and Individual Differences, 13,
161--168. Terlevic, R., Isola, M., Ragogna, M., Meduri, M., Canalaz, F.,
Perini, L., ... Brambilla, P. (2013). Decreased hypothalamus volumes in
generalized anxiety disorder but not in panic disorder. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 146, 390--394. doi: 10.1016/j.jad .2012.09.024
Thayer, J. F., Friedman, T., & Borkovec, T. D. (1996). Autonomic
characteristics of generalized anxiety disorder and worry. Biological
Psychiatry, 39, 255--266. Thayer, J. F., Friedman, T., Borkovec, T. D.,
Molina, S., & Johnsen, B. H. (2000). Phasic heart period reactions to
cued threat and non-threat stimuli in generalized anxiety disorder.
Psychophysiology, 37, 361--368. Thayer, J. F., & Lane, R. D. (2000). A
model of neurovisceral integration in emotion regulation and
dysregulation. Journal of Affective Disorders, 61, 201--216. Tiller, J.
W., Biddle, N., Maguire, K. P., & Davies, B. M. (1988). The
dexamethasone suppression test and plasma dexamethasone in generalized
anxiety disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 23, 261--270. Toghanian, S.,
DiBonaventura, M., Järbrink, K., & Locklear, J. C. (2014). Economic and
humanistic burden of illness in generalized anxiety disorder: An
analysis of patient survey data in Europe. Clinicoeconomics and Outcomes
Research, 6, 151--163. Tromp, D. P., Grupe, D. W., Oathes, D. J.,
McFarlin, D. R., Hernandez, P. J., Kral, T. R., ... Nitschke, J. B.
(2012). Reduced structural connectivity of a major frontolimbic pathway
in generalized anxiety disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69,
925--934. Turk, C. L., Heimberg, R. G., Luterek, J. A., Mennin, D. S., &
Fresco, D. M. (2005). Emotion dysregulation in generalized anxiety
disorder: A comparison with social anxiety disorder. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 29, 89--106.

185

Uher, R., Payne, J. L., Pavlova, B., & Perlis, R. H. (2014). Major
depressive disorder in DSM-5: Implications for clinical practice and
research of changes from DSM-IV. Depression and Anxiety, 31, 459--471.
Van Bockstaele, B., Verschuere, B., Tibboel, H., De Houwer, J., Crombez,
G., & Koster, E. H. (2014). A review of current evidence for the causal
impact of attentional bias on fear and anxiety. Psychological Bulletin,
140, 682--721. van der Heiden, C., Muris, P., & van der Molen, H. T.
(2012). Randomized controlled trial on the effectiveness of
metacognitive therapy and intolerance-ofuncertainty therapy for
generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50,
100--109. van Eijck, F. E. A. M., Branje, S. J. T., Hale, W. W., &
Meeus, W. H. J. (2012). Longitudinal associations between perceived
parent-adolescent attachment relationship quality and generalized
anxiety disorder symptoms in adolescence. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 40, 871--883. Vesga-López, O., Schneier, F. R., Wang, S.,
Heimberg, R. G., Liu, S., Hasin, D. S., & Blanco, C. (2008). Gender
differences in generalized anxiety disorder: Results from the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC). Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 1606--1616. Watkins, E., Moulds, M., &
Mackintosh, B. (2005). Comparisons between rumination and worry in a
non-clinical population. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1577--1585.
Wells, A. (1994). A multi-dimensional measure of worry: Development and
preliminary validation of the Anxious Thoughts Inventory. Anxiety,
Stress, and Coping, 6, 280--299. Wells, A. (1995). Meta-cognition and
worry: A cognitive model of generalised anxiety disorder. Behavioural
and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23, 301--320. Wells, A. (1999). A
metacognitive model and therapy for generalized anxiety disorder.
Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 6, 86--95. Wells, A. (2006). The
metacognitive model of worry and generalised anxiety disorder. In G. C.
L. Davey & A. Wells (Eds.), Worry and its psychological disorders:
Theory, assessment, and treatment (pp. 179--200). Chichester, England:
Wiley. Wells, A., & Carter, K. (1999). Preliminary tests of a cognitive
model of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
37, 585--594.

186

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Wells, A., & Carter, K. (2001). Further tests of a cognitive model of
generalized anxiety disorder: Metacognitions and worry in GAD, panic
disorder, social phobia, depression, and nonpatients. Behavior Therapy,
32, 85--102. Wells, A., & Cartwright-Hatton, S. (2004). A short form of
the Metacognitions Questionnaire: Properties of the MCQ-30. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 42, 385--396. Wells, A., & King, P. (2006).
Metacognitive therapy for generalized anxiety disorder: An open trial.
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 37, 206--212.
Wells, A., & Papageorgiou, C. (1995). Worry and the incubation of
intrusive images following stress. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33,
579--583. Wells, A., Welford, M., King, P., Papageorgiou, C., Wisely,
J., & Mendel, E. (2010). A pilot randomized trial of metacognitive
therapy vs applied relaxation in the treatment of adults with
generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48,
429--434. Wenzel, A., Haugen, E. N., Jackson, L. C., & Robinson, K.
(2003). Prevalence of generalized anxiety at eight weeks postpartum.
Archives of Women's Mental Health, 6(1), 43--49. doi: 10.1007
/s00737-002-0154-2 Westra, H. A., Arkowitz, H., & Dozois, D. J. A.
(2009). Adding a motivational interviewing pretreatment to cognitive
behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder: A preliminary
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23,
1106--1117.

Westra, H. A., Constantino, M. J., & Antony, M. M. (2016). Integrating
motivational interviewing with cognitive-behavioral therapy for severe
generalized anxiety disorder: An allegiance-controlled randomized
clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 84(9),
768--782. doi: 10.1037/ ccp0000098 Whalen, P. J., Johnstone, T.,
Somerville, L. H., Nitschke, J. B., Polis, S., Alexander, A. L., ...
Kalin, N. H. (2008). A functional magnetic resonance imaging predictor
of treatment response to venlafaxine in generalized anxiety disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 63, 858--863. Wittchen, H.-U. (2002). Generalized
anxiety disorder: Prevalence, burden, and cost to society. Depression
and Anxiety, 16, 162--171. Wittchen, H.-U., Zhao, S., Kessler, R. C., &
Eaton, W. W. (1994). DSM-III-R generalized anxiety disorder in the
National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51,
355--364. Woodman, C. L., Noyes, R., Jr., Black, D., Schlosser, S., &
Yagla, S. (1999). A 5-year follow-up study of generalized anxiety
disorder and panic disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 187,
3--9. Wu, J. C., Buchsbaum, M. S., Hershey, T. G., Hazlett, E., Sicotte,
N., & Johnson, J. C. (1991). PET in generalized anxiety disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 29, 1181--1199. Yonkers, K. A., Dyck, I. R.,
Warshaw, M., & Keller, M. B. (2000). Factors predicting the clinical
course of generalized anxiety disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry,
176, 544--549.

Chapter 5 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders Jonathan S.
Abramowitz and Shannon M. Blakey

O

bsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is one of the most devastating
psychological disorders. Its symptoms often interfere with work or
school, with interpersonal relationships, and with activities of daily
living (e.g., watching television, child care). Moreover, the
psychopathology of OCD is among the most complex of the psychological
disorders. Sufferers appear to struggle against seemingly ubiquitous
unwanted thoughts, doubts, and urges that, while senseless on the one
hand, are perceived as signs of danger on the other. The wide array of
symptoms and intricate associations between behavioral and cognitive
symptoms can perplex even the most experienced of clinicians. This
chapter describes the nature of OCD symptoms, the leading explanatory
theories, and the empirically supported approaches to assessment and
treatment.

The Nature of OCD: Diagnostic Criteria Obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD) is defined by the presence of obsessions or compulsions that
produce significant distress and cause noticeable interference with
various aspects of role functioning (e.g., academic or occupational
functioning) (American Psychiatric Association \[APA\], 2013). The DSM-5
diagnostic criteria appear in Table 5.1. Obsessions are intrusive
thoughts, ideas, images, impulses, or doubts that the person experiences
as senseless and that evoke anxiety. Examples include unwanted ideas of
germs and contamination, unwanted doubts that one has been negligent,
and unacceptable thoughts of a violent, sexual, or blasphemous nature.
Compulsions are urges to perform overt (e.g., checking, washing) or
mental (e.g., praying) rituals in response to obsessions or to reduce
anxiety or distress. The person typically perceives these compulsive
rituals as senseless or excessive. Traditionally, OCD has been
considered an anxiety disorder because its cardinal features are anxiety
and fear, and efforts to control and escape from anxiety and fear. In
DSM-5, however, OCD has been removed from the anxiety disorders and is
now the flagship diagnosis for a new diagnostic category:
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders (OCRDs). Other conditions in
this category include body dysmorphic disorder, hair pulling disorder
(aka trichotillomania), skin picking disorder, and hoarding disorder.

187

188

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders TABLE 5.1

Clinical Features of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

Diagnosis requires either obsessions or compulsions, or both: Obsessions
are recurrent, persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are intrusive
and unwanted, which the individual tries to ignore, suppress, or
neutralize. Compulsions are repetitive behaviors or mental acts that are
intended to prevent or reduce anxiety or distress or to prevent a
dreaded event that the person feels driven to do, either to neutralize
an obsession or prevent an event, even though the behaviors or mental
acts are not reasonably related to the obsession or are excessive. In
addition, the obsessions and compulsions must be time-consuming (more
than an hour a day) and cause distress or impairment, not be due to
other substances or medical conditions, and not be better explained by
other mental conditions. Specifiers: Note if good/fair insight
(recognition that beliefs probably not true), poor insight (believed to
be probably true), or absent insight/delusional (believed to be
definitely true). Note if tic-related (current or past history of a tic
disorder). Source: Based on DSM-5.

Signs and Symptoms of OCD A multifaceted condition, OCD involves not
only different types of symptoms but also different thematic variations
within each symptom. This section describes the primary symptoms of the
disorder, along with a number of other conditions that have been grouped
together with OCD.

Obsessions As mentioned previously, obsessions are thoughts, images,
impulses, doubts, and ideas that are experienced as unwanted,
persistent, and intrusive; anxiety- or guilt-provoking; or repugnant and
senseless (APA, 2013). Although highly individualized, the general
themes of obsessions can be organized into categories such as
contamination; guilt and responsibility for harm (to self or others);
uncertainty; taboo thoughts about sex, violence, and blasphemy; and the
need for order and symmetry. Most patients evince multiple obsessional
themes and forms, and sometimes there are shifts in the content of these
phenomena. Unlike other types of repetitive thoughts, obsessions are
experienced as unwanted or uncontrollable in that they intrude into
consciousness (often triggered by something in the environment). The
content of obsessions is also incongruent with the individual's belief
system and is not the type of thought the person would expect of himself
or herself. Finally, obsessions are resisted; that is, they are
accompanied by the sense that they must be "dealt with," neutralized, or
altogether avoided. The motivation to resist is activated by the fear
that if action is not taken, disastrous consequences may occur. Table
5.2 presents examples of common obsessions observed in people with OCD.

Signs and Symptoms of OCD TABLE 5.2

189

Examples of Obsessions Reported by Clinic Patients with OCD

Category

Example

Contamination

What if I get rabies from driving over a dead animal on the street? I
used a public bathroom; what if I have someone else's germs on me?

Responsibility for harm or mistakes

By mistake, I might have kissed someone other than my spouse without
realizing it. What if I left the door unlocked and someone will break
into my home? What if I called my friend a racial slur without realizing
it? What if I hit someone with my car without realizing it?

Symmetry/order

Odd numbers are incorrect. The books must be evenly placed on the shelf
or else I will have bad luck.

Unacceptable thoughts with immoral, sexual, or violent content

Image of Jesus with an erection on the Cross. Image of my grandparents
having sex. Thought about stabbing my husband in his sleep.

Compulsions Compulsive rituals are the most conspicuous features of OCD
and often the most functionally impairing. They typically belong to the
following categories: decontamination (washing/cleaning), checking
(including asking others for reassurance), repeating routine activities
(e.g., going back and forth through a doorway), ordering and arranging,
and mental rituals. Compulsions are senseless and excessive, and often
need to be performed according to rules. They are also intentional, in
contrast to mechanical or robotic repetitive behaviors such as tics.
Finally, rituals in OCD are performed to reduce distress, in contrast to
repetitive behaviors in addictive or impulse-control disorders (e.g.,
sexual addiction, trichotillomania), which are carried out because they
produce pleasure, distraction, or gratification (APA, 2013). In most
instances, compulsive rituals are performed to reduce obsessional
anxiety about particular feared consequences that the individual can
articulate. Examples include excessively checking appliances to reduce
fears of electrical fires and excessive cleaning to avoid a feared
sickness. In other cases, patients have difficulty articulating the
presence of obsessionally feared consequences, and instead perform
rituals to reduce feelings of anxiety or to achieve a feeling of
completeness. Table 5.3 presents examples of common compulsive rituals
observed in people with OCD. As Table 5.3 shows, compulsions can be
overt or covert. Additional examples of covert (mental) rituals include
repetition of "safe" phrases or prayers in a specific manner, and
mentally checking ("analyzing" or "reviewing") one's previous
conversations to be sure one has not said anything offensive. In
response to their obsessional fears, most people with OCD also deploy
strategies that do not meet DSM criteria for compulsions (i.e., the
strategies are not rule-bound or repeated over and over). Examples
include purposeful distraction and thought suppression. Such rituals can
take infinitely diverse forms, and

190

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders TABLE 5.3

Examples of Compulsive Rituals Reported by Clinic Patients with OCD

Category

Example

Decontamination

Hand washing for 45 minutes in response to using the bathroom. Wiping
down all objects brought into the house for fear of germs from recently
applied pesticides on an adjacent lawn.

Checking

Driving back to recheck that no accidents were caused at the
intersection. Returning home after seeing a fire engine to make sure the
house wasn't on fire.

Repeating routine activities

Going through a doorway over and over to prevent bad luck. Retracing
one's steps to make sure that no mistakes were made.

Ordering/arranging

Saying the word "left" whenever one hears the word "right." Rearranging
the books on the bookshelf until they are "just right."

Mental rituals

Canceling a bad thought by thinking of a good thought. Excessive praying
to prevent feared disastrous consequences.

some may be remarkably subtle. Functionally, however, all of these
behaviors serve to neutralize obsessional thoughts or fears. The
following examples illustrate neutralization strategies. • One man
gripped the steering wheel tightly when he had distressing thoughts of
driving his car into opposing traffic. • A woman with obsessional
thoughts of her child drowning tried to suppress and dismiss such images
when they came to mind (thought suppression). • A woman with obsessions
about harming her husband confessed these thoughts to him whenever they
came to her mind. She explained, "If I tell my husband that I'm thinking
about hurting him, he'll be ready to stop me if I start to act." Many
individuals with OCD also engage in repeated attempts to gain ultimate
certainty that obsessional doubts are invalid. Such attempts to gain
assurances might be overt (e.g., asking questions, checking the
Internet) or covert (checking one's body for signs of sexual arousal in
response to inappropriate stimuli), although the most straightforward
style is asking similar questions over and over.

Avoidance Avoidance behavior is present in most people with OCD and is
intended to prevent obsessional fears and compulsive urges altogether.
The aim of avoidance in some cases might be to thwart specific
consequences such as contamination or illness, whereas in other
instances avoidance is focused on preventing obsessional thoughts from
occurring in the first place. For example, one woman avoided using
knives because they evoked thoughts and fears of impulsively stabbing
her children. Other patients engage in avoidance so they do not have to
carry out tedious compulsive rituals. For instance, a young man with
obsessional fears of contamination from his family's home computer
(because it had been used

Signs and Symptoms of OCD

191

to view pornography) engaged in elaborate and time-consuming compulsive
cleaning and showering rituals. During the morning and afternoon he
avoided the computer room so that he would not have to perform these
rituals during the day. In the evening, however, he relaxed his
avoidance and allowed himself to enter the room and become contaminated
knowing that he could "work in" his ritualistic showering before
bedtime.

Subtypes and Dimensions of OCD Although there are grounds for
conceptualizing OCD as a single disorder, research has identified four
reliable and valid OCD symptom dimensions (Abramowitz et al., 2010;
McKay et al., 2004). These include (a) contamination (contamination
obsessions and decontamination rituals), (b) responsibility for harm and
mistakes (aggressive obsessions and checking rituals), (c)
incompleteness (obsessions about order or exactness and arranging
rituals), and (d) unacceptable taboo violent, sexual, or blasphemous
thoughts with mental rituals.

Poor Insight As is shown in Table 5.1, the DSM-5 criteria for OCD
include the specifiers "good or fair insight," "poor insight," and
"absent insight" to denote the degree to which the person views his or
her obsessional fears and compulsive behavior as reasonable. Although
most people with OCD recognize that their obsessions and compulsions are
senseless and excessive, there is a continuum of insight, with 4% of
patients convinced that their symptoms are realistic (i.e., they have
poor or absent insight; Foa & Kozak, 1995). Poorer insight appears to be
associated with religious obsessions, fears of mistakes, and aggressive
obsessional impulses (Tolin, Abramowitz, Kozak, & Foa, 2001).

Tic-Related OCD The DSM-5 criteria also denote a subtype of OCD in which
the individual has a history of tic disorders, such as Tourette's
syndrome. While the data are inconclusive, this putative variant of OCD
appears to run in families and to involve an early onset and male
predominance. The patient's obsessions typically concern symmetry and
exactness, and their compulsions often involve ordering and arranging.

Interpersonal Aspects of OCD OCD frequently has a negative impact on the
sufferer's interpersonal relationships---such as those with a romantic
partner, spouse, or other family members. In turn, dysfunctional
relationship patterns can promote the maintenance of OCD symptoms so
that a vicious cycle develops. For example, a partner or spouse might
inadvertently behave in ways that maintain OCD symptoms by helping with
compulsive rituals and avoidance behavior out of love, care, and concern
for the sufferer (i.e., symptom accommodation). OCD symptoms also create
relationship distress and conflict, which exacerbate the anxiety and
obsessional symptoms. In this section we discuss these patterns and
their effects on OCD symptoms.

192

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

Symptom Accommodation Accommodation occurs when a friend or relative
participates in the loved one's rituals, facilitates avoidance
strategies, assumes daily responsibilities for the sufferer, or helps to
resolve problems that have resulted from the patient's obsessional fears
and compulsive urges. The accommodation might occur at the request (or
demand) of the individual with OCD, who deliberately tries to involve
loved ones to help with controlling his or her anxiety. In other
instances, loved ones voluntarily accommodate because they feel the need
to empathize with their suffering partners and do not wish to see them
become highly anxious. Table 5.4 shows examples of accommodation
behaviors we have observed in our work with couples in which one partner
has OCD. Conceptually, because avoidance and compulsive rituals prevent
the natural extinction of obsessional fear and ritualistic urges,
accommodation by a relative or close friend perpetuates OCD symptoms.
For instance, consider a woman with obsessional fears of acting on
unwanted impulses to molest her newborn infant, who requests that her
husband change and bathe their newborn child. By engaging in this
behavior by himself (i.e., by accommodating his wife's OCD symptoms), he
prevents his wife from learning that she is unlikely to act on her
unwanted obsessional thoughts. Furthermore, she misses the opportunity
to learn that she could manage the temporary anxiety that accompanies
her repugnant obsessions. Indeed, researchers have found that family
accommodation predicts an attenuated response to cognitive-behavioral
treatment for OCD (Steketee & Van Noppen, 2003). Relationship Conflict
Relationship stress and conflict also play an important role in the
maintenance of OCD. Couples in which one partner suffers with OCD often
report problems with interdependency, unassertiveness, and avoidant
communication patterns that foster stress and conflict. In all
likelihood, OCD symptoms and relationship distress influence each other,
rather TABLE 5.4

Examples of Family Accommodation Behaviors in OCD

OCD Symptom

Partner Accommodation Behavior

Contamination and washing symptoms

Washing or cleaning for the patient Doing extra laundry Avoiding
contaminated stimuli

Obsessional doubting and compulsive checking

Assisting with checking rituals Providing reassurance Helping the
patient avoid ambiguous situations that might trigger doubts

Violent, sexual, and religious obsessions

Providing reassurance Helping with avoidance of stimuli that trigger
obsessional thoughts Helping with praying or interpreting Bible passages
or religious doubts

Ordering and symmetry ("not just right") obsessions and compulsions

Checking to make sure things are in order or arranged properly Repeating
answers until they are just right

Signs and Symptoms of OCD

193

than one exclusively leading to the other. For example, a husband's
contentious relationship with his wife might contribute to overall
anxiety and uncertainty that develops into his obsessional doubting. His
excessive checking, reassurance seeking, and overly cautious actions
could also lead to frequent disagreements and relationship conflict.
Particular aspects of a relationship that might increase distress and
contribute to OCD maintenance include poor problem-solving skills,
hostility, and criticism. Moreover, criticism, hostility, and emotional
overinvolvement are associated with premature treatment discontinuation
and symptom relapse (Chambless & Steketee, 1999).

Obsessive-Compulsive Related Disorders In DSM-5, OCD has been removed
from its traditional categorization among the anxiety disorders, and
placed in a new category of putatively similar obsessive-compulsive and
related disorders (OCRDs), which includes body dysmorphic disorder,
hoarding disorder, skin picking disorder, and hair pulling disorder
(trichotillomania). This change has been criticized on conceptual,
practical, and empirical grounds as we briefly describe next (for a more
thorough discussion, see Abramowitz & Jacoby, 2015). One impetus for the
creation of the OCD-related disorders category in DSM-5 is the fact that
the disorders of this group all involve repetitive thoughts or
behaviors. Repetitive behaviors are indeed present in both OCD and the
OCRDs---for example, trichotillomania (now called hair pulling disorder
in DSM-5) and excessive skin picking. Whereas compulsive rituals in OCD
are performed in response to obsessional fear and they function as an
escape from distress, hair pulling and skin picking are not triggered by
obsessions or fear, and do not function to reduce fears of negative
consequences (e.g., Stanley, Swann, Bowers, & Davis, 1992). Although
individuals with these problems may experience guilt, shame, and anxiety
associated with their repetitive behaviors, this is not the same as
obsessional fear.

Body Dysmorphic Disorder (BDD) Both BDD and OCD can involve intrusive,
distressing thoughts concerning one's appearance, and repeated checking
might be observed in both disorders. However, the focus of BDD symptoms
is limited to one's appearance, whereas people with OCD also tend to
have other obsessions. Nevertheless, similar psychological treatments
can be effective for both conditions. Hoarding Once considered to be a
symptom of OCD, hoarding is now understood as a separate problem.
Indeed, many individuals with hoarding do not meet diagnostic criteria
for OCD (Pertusa et al., 2010), and hoarding symptoms are no more
prevalent in patients with OCD than in patients with other psychological
disorders (Abramowitz, Wheaton, & Storch, 2008). Hoarding also differs
from other OCD symptom domains and does not fit into conceptual
frameworks for understanding OCD (Rachman, Elliot, Shafran, & Radomsky,
2009). Hoarding typically involves thoughts about acquiring and
maintaining possessions, thoughts that are not particularly intrusive or
unwanted; in fact, these thoughts are generally emotionally positive or
neutral and thus do not meet criteria for obsessions (Rachman et al.,
2009). It is also difficult to conceptualize excessive saving as

194

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

compulsive or ritualistic, and this behavior does not result in an
escape from (or neutralization of) obsessional anxiety in the way that
checking or washing compulsions do (Rachman et al., 2009).

Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder (OCPD) OCPD involves the
presence of personality traits such as excessive perfectionism,
inflexibility, and need for control that negatively impact interpersonal
relationships, occupational functioning, or other important domains of
an individual's life. Individuals with this condition often maintain
strict principles and are intolerant of others who do not conform to
their standards. Historically, clinical opinion has proposed a special
relationship between OCPD and OCD, which can be traced back to Freud's
anecdotal account of the "Rat Man," who was described as having both
conditions. Similarities between OCD and OCPD can sometimes be observed,
such as excessive list making and arranging. However, the functional
roles of these symptoms are notably distinct in each syndrome. The
experience of individuals with OCPD is ego-syntonic in that they
consider their behaviors and urges as rational and appropriate. In
contrast, the obsessive thoughts experienced by individuals with OCD are
ego-dystonic in that they are experienced as unwanted, upsetting, and
personally repugnant. People with OCD harming obsessions may feel
compelled to write down everything they have done during a day in order
to reassure themselves that they have not caused a catastrophe, whereas
an individual with OCPD may believe that making lists of daily
activities maximizes efficiency and ensures that no details are
overlooked. Although distinct, OCD and OCPD may co-occur. Comorbidity
estimates have suggested that between 23% and 32% of OCD patients also
display one or more symptoms of OCPD, and some studies have suggested
that comorbid OCPD is associated with poorer treatment outcome for OCD
(Eisen, Mancebo, Chiappone, Pinto, & Rasmussen, 2008). However, OCPD has
also been found to co-occur with a variety of other anxiety disorders as
well as depression (Dowson & Grounds, 1995). In addition, other
personality disorders, such as avoidant and dependent personality
disorder, have been estimated to co-occur with OCD at least as
frequently as OCPD, if not more so (Pfohl & Blum, 1991), suggesting the
lack of a unique relationship between OCD and OCPD.

Prevalence and Epidemiology of OCD Once considered a rare condition, OCD
is now known to be among the most common psychological disorders. Data
consistently show that the prevalence and course of OCD are similar
cross-culturally and worldwide.

Prevalence The lifetime prevalence of OCD has been estimated at between
0.7% and 2.9% (e.g., Kessler et al., 2005) and there is a slight
preponderance of females (Rasmussen & Eisen, 1992a). The disorder
typically begins by age 25, although childhood or adolescence onset is
not rare. Mean onset age is earlier in males (about 21 years) than in
females (22 to 24 years) (Rasmussen & Eisen, 1992b).

Psychological Models

195

Course OCD is a chronic condition with a low rate of spontaneous
remission. Left untreated, symptoms fluctuate, with worsening during
periods of increased life stress. Fortunately, more patients now receive
effective treatments than ever before, leading to increased rates of
symptom remission. Full recovery, however, is the exception rather than
the rule.

Psychological Models Early conceptualizations of OCD were dominated by
the Freudian psychoanalytic tradition---the disorder was viewed as
arising from unconscious conflicts Those from the behavioral tradition,
however, rejected psychoanalytic approaches because of the lack of
scientific validity, and instead relied on empirically demonstrable
principles of learning and conditioning to explain the problem.
Cognitive theorists later considered the need to incorporate the role of
one's thinking (whether normal and abnormal) in understanding the OCD,
leading to contemporary cognitive-behavioral conceptualizations.

Learning Models Behavioral (conditioning) models of OCD are based on
Mowrer's (1960) two-stage theory of fear acquisition and maintenance. In
the first stage (classical conditioning), a previously neutral stimulus
(the conditioned stimulus, or CS) is paired with an aversive stimulus
(the unconditioned stimulus, or UCS; e.g., a traumatic experience), so
that the CS comes to elicit a conditioned fear response, or CR. As a
result, situations (e.g., driving, using the bathroom); objects (e.g.,
door handles, knives); and thoughts, images, doubts, or impulses (e.g.,
thoughts of harm) that pose no objective threat come to evoke
obsessional fear. In the second stage (operant conditioning), avoidance
behaviors develop as a means of reducing anxiety; avoidance is
negatively reinforced by the immediate (albeit temporary) reduction in
distress it engenders. Compulsive rituals, which develop as an escape
behavior from obsessional fear when avoidance is impossible, are also
negatively reinforced in this way. Avoidance and escape behaviors,
however, prevent the natural extinction of obsessional fears, and
thereby maintain such fear. Although the conditioning explanation has
fallen out of favor as an explanation for the development of OCD
symptoms, operant conditioning (negative reinforcement) does appear to
play a role in the maintenance of OCD symptoms. Experimental research,
for example, has repeatedly found that compulsive behavior leads to
anxiety reduction (e.g., Hodgson & Rachman, 1972). Overall, then,
negative reinforcement provides an empirically valid explanation for the
persistence of compulsive rituals and avoidance behavior in OCD.

Cognitive Deficit Models Memory Some theorists have proposed that OCD
symptoms arise from abnormally functioning cognitive processes, such as
memory. Compulsive checking, for example, could develop as

196

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

a consequence of not being able to remember whether one has locked the
door, and so on. Research, however, has found no evidence of a memory
deficit in OCD (e.g., Abramovitch, Abramowitz, & Mittleman, 2013; Woods,
Vevea, Chambless, & Bayen, 2002). In fact, patients appear to have a
selectively better memory for OCD-related information relative to
non-OCD-relevant stimuli (Radomsky, Rachman, & Hammond, 2001).

Reality Monitoring It has also been proposed that OCD is related to
problems with reality monitoring---the ability to discriminate between
memories of actual versus imagined events. Compulsive checking, for
example, could be prompted by difficulties discerning whether an action
(e.g., locking the door) was really carried out or merely imagined.
Across a series of studies addressing this issue, however, no
differences in reality monitoring between OCD patients and control
groups were found (Woods et al., 2002). Inhibitory Deficits The
intrusive and repetitious quality of obsessions has led some researchers
to hypothesize that OCD is characterized by deficits in cognitive
inhibition---the ability to dismiss extraneous mental stimuli. Studies
examining recall and recognition suggest that people with OCD have more
difficulty forgetting negative material and material related to their
obsessional fears relative to other sorts of material. Synthesis
Cognitive deficit models of OCD have a number of limitations. First,
they do not account for the heterogeneity of OCD symptoms (e.g., why do
some people have washing compulsions while others have checking
rituals?). Second, they do not account for the fact that similar mild
cognitive deficits have been found in many psychological disorders.
Thus, if cognitive deficits play a causal role in OCD, it is most likely
to be a nonspecific vulnerability factor, as opposed to a specific cause
(e.g., Abramovitch et al., 2013).

Cognitive-Behavioral Models The most promising psychological model of
OCD is the cognitive-behavioral model, which is based on Beck's (1976)
cognitive theory that emotional disturbance is brought about not by
situations and stimuli themselves, but by how one makes sense out of
such situations or stimuli. Accordingly, obsessions and compulsions are
thought to arise from specific sorts of dysfunctional beliefs, with the
strength of these beliefs influencing the person's degree of insight
into his or her OCD symptoms. In particular, the cognitive-behavioral
model of OCD is based on the finding that unwanted intrusive thoughts
(i.e., thoughts, images, and impulses that intrude into consciousness)
are a normal experience (e.g., Rachman & de Silva, 1978). These normal
intrusions are postulated to develop into clinical obsessions when they
are appraised as significant and harmful. To illustrate, consider an
intrusive thought to push an innocent person in front of traffic. Most
people experiencing such an intrusion would regard it as an
insignificant cognitive event. Such an intrusion, however, could develop
into a clinical obsession if the person appraises it as having serious
consequences; for example: "If I think about it, I might lose control
and do it," or "I must take extra precautions to ensure that it doesn't

Psychological Models

197

happen." Such appraisals evoke distress and motivate attempts to
suppress or remove the unwanted intrusion (e.g., by replacing it with a
"good" thought), or prevent any harmful events associated with it (e.g.,
by avoidance of busy street corners). According to this model,
compulsive rituals and avoidance represent efforts to remove intrusions
and prevent feared consequences. Salkovskis (1996) advanced two reasons
that compulsions and avoidance become persistent and excessive. First,
they are negatively reinforced by their ability to reduce distress (as
in the learning model). Second, they prevent people from learning that
their appraisals of intrusions are exaggerated and unrealistic. That is,
performing the ritual robs the person of the opportunity to discover
that the anticipated negative outcome would most likely not have
occurred in the first place. If the individual avoids obsessional
triggers, there is no opportunity to learn that distressing obsessional
thoughts do not pose danger. The cognitive-behavioral model has a good
deal of empirical support (e.g., Clark, 2004). Psychometric research
indicates that there are three principal domains of dysfunctional
beliefs (shown in Table 5.5) associated with OCD symptoms (e.g.,
Wheaton, Abramowitz, Berman, Riemann, & Hale, 2010), and laboratory
experiments have demonstrated that inducing such beliefs influences
dysfunctional appraisals and exacerbates obsessional symptoms (e.g.,
Rassin, Merckelbach, Muris, & Spaan, 1999). Longitudinal prospective
research has also found that these types of beliefs confer vulnerability
to the onset or worsening of obsessive-compulsive symptoms under certain
conditions (e.g., Abramowitz, Khandher, Nelson, Deacon, & Rygwall,
2006).

Implications The cognitive-behavioral model implies that a successful
treatment for OCD symptoms must accomplish two things: (1) the
correction of maladaptive beliefs and appraisals that lead to
obsessional fear, and (2) the termination of avoidance and compulsive
rituals that prevent the self-correction of maladaptive beliefs and
extinction of anxiety. In short, the task of cognitive behavior therapy
(CBT) for OCD is to foster an evaluation of obsessional stimuli as
nonthreatening and therefore not demanding of further action. Patients
must come to understand their problem not in terms of the risk of feared
consequences, but in

TABLE 5.5

Domains of Dysfunctional Beliefs in OCD

Belief

Description

Inflated responsibility/ overestimation of threat

Belief that one has the power to cause and/or the duty to prevent
negative outcomes Belief that negative events are likely and would be
unmanageable

Exaggeration of the importance of thoughts and need to control thoughts

Belief that the mere presence of a thought indicates that the thought is
significant Belief that complete control over one's thoughts is both
necessary and possible

Perfectionism/intolerance of uncertainty

Belief that mistakes and imperfection are intolerable Belief that it is
necessary and possible to be 100% certain that negative outcomes will
not occur

198

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

terms of how they are thinking and behaving in response to stimuli that
objectively pose a low risk of harm.

Neurobiological Models of OCD Neurobiological models of OCD focus on
putative neurochemical abnormalities and structural or functional brain
dysfunctions. Such models became fashionable in the 1980s with the
DSM-III's "medicalization" of psychiatric nomenclature. The availability
of neuroimaging technology in the 1980s also made it easier to examine
the brains of people with OCD. To date, however, as described in this
section, neurobiological research has generally failed to deliver a
conceptually coherent or empirically stable biological model of this
condition.

Serotonin Hypothesis The serotonin hypothesis proposes that obsessions
and compulsions arise from abnormalities in this neurotransmitter
system, specifically a hypersensitivity of the postsynaptic serotonergic
receptors (Zohar & Insel, 1987). Three lines of evidence are cited to
support the serotonin hypothesis: medication outcome studies, biological
marker studies, and biological challenge studies in which OCD symptoms
are evoked using serotonin agonists and antagonists. The most consistent
findings come from the pharmacotherapy literature, which suggests that
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) medications (e.g.,
fluoxetine) are more effective than medications with other mechanisms of
action (e.g., imipramine) in reducing OCD symptoms. In contrast, studies
of biological markers---such as blood and cerebrospinal fluid levels of
serotonin metabolites---have provided inconclusive results regarding a
relationship between serotonin and OCD (e.g., Insel, Mueller, Alterman,
Linnoila, & Murphy, 1985). Similarly, results from studies using the
pharmacological challenge paradigm are largely incompatible with the
serotonin hypothesis (Hollander et al., 1992).

Structural Models Structural models hypothesize that OCD is caused by
neuroanatomical and functional abnormalities in particular areas of the
brain, specifically the orbitofrontal-subcortical circuits, which are
thought to connect brain regions involved in processing information with
those involved in the initiation of behavioral responses. The classical
conceptualization of this circuitry consists of a direct and an indirect
pathway. The direct pathway projects from the cerebral cortex to the
striatum to the internal segment of the globus pallidus/substantia nigra
pars reticulata complex, then to the thalamus and back to the cortex.
The indirect pathway is similar, but projects from the striatum to the
external segment of the globus pallidus to the subthalamic nucleus
before returning to the common pathway. Overactivity of the direct
circuit is thought to give rise to OCD symptoms. Structural models of
OCD are derived from neuroimaging studies in which activity levels in
specific brain areas are compared between people with and without the
condition.

Assessment

199

Investigations using positron-emission tomography (PET) have found
increased glucose utilization in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC),
caudate, thalamus, prefrontal cortex, and anterior cingulate among
patients with OCD compared to nonpatients (e.g., Baxter et al., 1988).
Studies using single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) have
reported decreased blood flow to the OFC, caudate, various areas of the
cortex, and thalamus in OCD patients compared to nonpatients (for a
review see Whiteside, Port, & Abramowitz, 2004). Finally, studies
comparing individuals with OCD to healthy controls using magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (MRS) have reported decreased levels of various
markers of neuronal viability in the left and right striatum and in the
medial thalamus (e.g., Fitzgerald, Moore, Paulson, Stewart, & Rosenberg,
2000). Although findings vary across studies, a meta-analysis of 10 PET
and SPECT studies found that relative to healthy individuals, those with
OCD evince more activity in the orbital gyrus and the head of the
caudate nucleus (Whiteside et al., 2004).

Evaluation of Biological Models One limitation of biological models is
that no explanation has been offered for how neurotransmitter or
neuroanatomical abnormalities translate into OCD symptoms (e.g., why
does hypersensitivity of postsynaptic receptors cause obsessional
thoughts or compulsive rituals?). In addition, biological models are
unable to explain (a) why OCD symptoms are generally constrained to the
particular themes discussed earlier, and (b) why someone would
experience one type of obsession (e.g., contamination) but not another
(e.g., sexual). A third problem with biological models is their logical
(as opposed to empirical) basis. Since the serotonin hypothesis
originated from the findings of preferential efficacy of serotonergic
medication (SSRIs) over nonserotonergic antidepressants (e.g.,
imipramine), the assertion that the effectiveness of SSRIs supports the
serotonin hypothesis is circular. Further still, there is a logical
fallacy in deriving etiological models from treatment results. This
fallacy is best illustrated with the following example: "When I use
steroid cream, my rash goes away. Therefore, the reason I got the rash
in the first place was that my steroid level was too low." Evidence from
controlled studies of differences in serotonergic functioning between
individuals with and without OCD is especially inconsistent, so there is
actually little convincing evidence that OCD is caused by an abnormally
functioning serotonin system. A final problem with biological models is
that they are based on correlational studies, which cannot address (a)
whether true abnormalities exist and (b) whether the observed
relationships are causal.

Assessment There are no biological tests for OCD. The presence and
severity of the disorder must be assessed using a clinical interview or
self-report questionnaire. A number of such instruments have been
developed to aid in making the diagnosis and measuring severity. In
addition to conducting a diagnostic assessment, it is important to
understand the patient-specific parameters of obsessions and compulsions
so that effective psychological treatment can be tailored individually.

200

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

Diagnostic Interviews The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5
Disorders (SCID-5; First, Williams, Karg, & Spitzer, 2016); the Mini
International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI; Sheehan et al., 1998);
and the Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5
(ADIS-5; Brown & Barlow, 2014) all assess the cardinal features of OCD.
The ADIS provides the most detail about OCD symptoms, assessing their
severity using dimensional rating scales.

Clinician-Rated Severity Scales The Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive
Scale (Y-BOCS; Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b) is the most widely used
clinician-rated measure of OCD. It contains three parts: first, the
interviewer provides definitions of obsessions and compulsions to help
in identifying these symptoms. Second, using a symptom checklist of over
50 common obsessions and compulsions, the interviewer asks the patient
to indicate whether each symptom is currently present, is absent, or was
present only in the past. The clinician and patient then generate a list
of the three most severe obsessions, compulsions, and OCD-related
avoidance behaviors. The third section is a 10-item severity scale that
assesses the (a) time spent with, (b) interference from, (c) distress
associated with, (d) efforts to resist, and (e) ability to control
obsessions (items 1--5) and compulsions (items 6--10). Each item is
rated on a scale from 0 (no symptoms) to 4 (extremely severe), and
scores on the 10 items are summed to produce a total score ranging from
0 to 40. In most instances, scores of 0 to 7 represent subclinical OCD
symptoms, those from 8 to 15 represent mild symptoms, scores of 16 to 23
relate to moderate symptoms, scores from 24 to 31 suggest severe
symptoms, and scores of 32 to 40 imply extreme symptoms. The Y-BOCS is
sensitive to multiple aspects of OCD severity independent of the number
or types of different obsessions and compulsions. A limitation, however,
is that the symptom checklist contains some items that are not genuine
obsessions or compulsions (e.g., hair pulling). Research indicates that
the Y-BOCS possesses adequate reliability, validity, and sensitivity to
treatment (Taylor, Thordarson, & Sochting, 2002). Conelea, Freeman, and
Garcia (2012) have described ways to use the Y-BOCS that are consistent
with recent conceptualizations of the links between obsessions and
compulsions. The Brown Assessment of Beliefs Scale (BABS; Eisen et al.,
1998) is a 7-item interview assessing the degree of insight into the
senselessness of OCD symptoms. The individual's main obsessional fear
(e.g., "If I do not perform a prayer ritual, my mother will die") is
rated along the following parameters of insight: (1) conviction (that
the belief is accurate), (2) perception of others' views (about the
fear's accuracy), (3) explanation for any difference between the
patient's and others' views of the belief, (4) whether the person could
be convinced that the belief is wrong (i.e., fixity), (5) attempts to
disprove beliefs, (6) whether the person recognizes that the belief has
a psychological cause, and (7) an optional item assessing delusions of
reference. Each item is rated from 0 to 4, with higher scores indicating
poorer insight; the first six items are summed to create a total score
(range, 0 to 24). The seventh item is not included in the total score
because referential thinking is characteristic of some disorders but not
others. The BABS has strong internal consistency (α = .87), strong
interrater and test-retest reliability, and good convergent and
discriminant validity.

Assessment

201

Self-Report Measures An array of self-report and interview measures has
been developed to assess OC symptoms. These include the Obsessive
Compulsive Inventory (OCI) and its revision (OCI-R; Foa et al., 2002),
the Padua Inventory (PI; Sanavio, 1988) and its revision (PI-R; Burns,
Keortge, Formea, & Sternberger, 1996), and the Vancouver Obsessive
Compulsive Inventory (VOCI; Thordarson et al., 2004). These instruments
measure the wide range of possible obsessions and compulsions and
generally contain items assessing specific and quintessential types of
obsessions and compulsions (e.g., "I feel that there are good and bad
numbers"; Foa et al., 2002). The items are rated on a Likert-type scale
of agreement, personal relevance, or associated distress. Although
widely used, many self-report measures of OCD have drawbacks that
detract from their ability to provide a time-efficient, empirically
consistent, and conceptually clear assessment of OCD symptom severity.
One limitation is that relative to respondents with fewer (or more
circumscribed) types of obsessions and compulsions, those with multiple
types of symptoms will endorse a greater number of scale items, and
therefore (all else being equal) obtain more severe scores. Thus, many
OCD symptom measures confound severity with the range of symptoms
present. Actual OCD severity, however, is independent of the number of
different types of symptoms reported (e.g., McKay et al., 2004). For
example, one patient might be singly obsessed with contamination yet be
severely impaired by fear, avoidance, and compulsive washing rituals,
whereas another patient might have sexual, religious, and violent
obsessions, as well as mental rituals, yet experience only mild fear,
avoidance, and impairment. The heterogeneous and idiosyncratic nature of
obsessions and compulsions also challenges authors of self-report scales
to pick and choose which symptoms to include in scale items (a scale
including items to match all possible OCD symptoms would be extremely
long, and many items would not apply to any given respondent). As a
result, respondents whose obsessions and compulsions happen to match
those chosen by scale authors to be represented by items on the measure
will appear more severe than those whose symptoms do not match. For
example, the PI-R contains an abundance of items related to obsessions
about harm; thus individuals with more harming obsessions (as opposed to
symmetry obsessions, which are not assessed on the PI-R) will have
higher scores than those with fewer harming obsessions. Often,
obsessions that are uncommon (e.g., obsessional fear of developing
schizophrenia) and rituals that are covert (e.g., mental rituals) are
underrepresented on self-report measures. Thus, such scales also
confound severity with the level of obscurity of the respondent's
obsessions and compulsions. Another limitation is that existing
self-report measures of OCD contain a onedimensional assessment of
severity. For example, on the VOCI, respondents indicate how much each
symptom-based item is "true of you" (e.g., "not at all" to "very much").
Similarly, on the OCI-R, respondents rate their level of "distress"
associated with 18 different types of obsessions and compulsions. OCD
symptom severity, however, is multidimensional; it consists of
parameters such as distress, functional interference, and the frequency
or duration of obsessions and compulsions. The use of a single rating of
item relevance, severity, or distress might account for the fact that
some existing self-report measures of OCD symptoms show strong
correlations with measures of general anxiety and depression.

202

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

A fourth weakness of existing self-report OCD measures is that these
instruments assess obsessions separately from compulsions, thus treating
these symptoms as disconnected phenomena. As indicated earlier, however,
structural analyses indicate that OCD psychopathology does not distill
neatly into obsessions and compulsions, but rather into dimensions
characterized by both obsessions and compulsions. Relatedly, avoidance
behavior is not adequately captured on most OCD self-report measures.
The general failure to account for avoidance, however, leads to
underestimating OCD symptom severity because avoidance is often used in
place of compulsive rituals to reduce obsessional anxiety (e.g.,
avoiding public bathrooms in place of lengthy compulsive washing
rituals). Thus, individuals with OCD who do not endorse many compulsions
might have severe avoidance strategies that, while an important (and
functionally debilitating) element of their OCD symptom picture, are not
captured on existing rating scales. Finally, with the exception of the
PI and PI-R, self-report OCD measures include items assessing hoarding,
which appears to be distinct from OCD. As a result, these measures are
inconsistent with the most up-to-date, empirically derived structural
framework of OCD symptoms. Moreover, such measures are likely to
overestimate OC symptom severity among individuals with hoarding
behaviors. To address many of the aforementioned limitations, Abramowitz
et al. (2010) developed the Dimensional Obsessive-Compulsive Scale
(DOCS), a 20-item self-report measure that assesses the severity of the
four most consistently replicated OCD symptom dimensions (which
correspond to four DOCS subscales): (1) contamination, (2)
responsibility for harm and mistakes, (3) symmetry/ordering, and (4)
unacceptable thoughts. To accommodate the heterogeneity of OCD symptoms
and the presence of obsessions and rituals within each symptom
dimension, each subscale begins with a description of the symptom
dimension along with examples of representative obsessions and rituals.
The examples clarify the form and function of each dimension's
fundamental obsessional fears, compulsive rituals, and avoidance
behaviors. Within each symptom dimension, five items (rated 0 to 4)
assess the following parameters of severity (over the past month): (1)
time occupied by obsessions and rituals, (2) avoidance behavior, (3)
associated distress, (4) functional interference, and (5) difficulty
disregarding the obsessions and refraining from the compulsions. The
DOCS subscales have excellent reliability in clinical samples (𝛼 = .94
to .96) and the measure converges well with other measures of OCD
symptoms (Abramowitz et al., 2010).

Functional Assessment Functional assessment is the compiling of detailed
patient-specific information about the antecedents and consequences of
target behaviors and emotions, usually for the purposes of developing a
treatment plan. Behavioral or cognitive-behavioral theory dictates what
information is collected and how it is organized to form a
conceptualization of the problem that will drive therapeutic
intervention (usually cognitive-behavioral treatment). We provide a
framework for the functional assessment of OCD in the following
paragraphs.

Assessment of Obsessional Stimuli This assessment includes compiling a
comprehensive list of the external and internal stimuli that evoke
obsessional fear. External triggers include objects, situations, places,
and the like that give rise to obsessional thinking and urges to
ritualize (e.g., trash cans, hammers,

Assessment

203

religious icons, the number 666, locking doors, and schoolyards).
Examples of questions to elicit this information include: • What kinds
of situations make you feel anxious? • What kinds of things do you
avoid? • What triggers you to want to do rituals? Internal obsessional
stimuli include recurring ideas, images, doubts, and impulses that the
individual finds unwanted, upsetting, immoral, repulsive, or otherwise
unacceptable (i.e., obsessional thoughts). Examples include thoughts of
bacteria, ideas of harming loved ones, unwanted sexual or blasphemous
images, doubts about completing paperwork incorrectly, and impulses to
harm babies. Examples of questions to elicit this information include: •
What intrusive thoughts do you have that trigger anxiety? • What
thoughts do you try to avoid, resist, or dismiss? It is similarly
important to obtain information about the cognitive basis of the
individual's obsessional anxiety (i.e., the feared consequences). For
example, what does the person fear if exposed to obsessional stimuli?
Examples of questions to elicit feared consequences include: • What is
the worst thing you imagine happening if you are exposed to
\[obsessional trigger\]? rituals? • What do you think might happen if
you don't do your The cognitive-behavioral model proposes that
misinterpretations of unwanted thoughts, impulses, and images give rise
to OCD symptoms. Therefore, assessment should include identification of
mistaken beliefs about the presence and meaning of such stimuli. For
example, "Thinking about molesting a child could lead me to actually
become a child molester," "God will punish me for thinking immoral
thoughts," and "I'm a pervert if I have unwanted thoughts about sex."
Examples of questions to elicit this information include: • What do you
think it means that you have this thought? • What will happen if you
think this thought too much? • Why do you try to avoid or dismiss these
thoughts? Some individuals with OCD fear that if obsessional anxiety is
evoked, anxiety and related bodily sensations will persist indefinitely
or spiral out of control. For example, "If I don't arrange the pictures
on the wall perfectly, I will always feel that things aren't just
right." Questions to help elicit these types of cognitions include: • Do
you worry that you will become anxious and that the anxiety will never
go away? • What might happen to you if you remained anxious for long
periods of time? Two self-report questionnaires, the Obsessive Beliefs
Questionnaire (OBQ) and the Interpretation of Intrusions Inventory
(III), have been developed to systematically measure a range of
pertinent OCD-related beliefs and misinterpretations (Frost & Steketee,
2002).

204

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

These psychometrically validated instruments are useful to include in
the functional assessment to augment interview data.

Assessment of Avoidance and Compulsive Rituals The cognitive-behavioral
model proposes that avoidance and compulsive behavior maintain
obsessional fear. It is, therefore, necessary to include such behaviors
in a functional assessment. Most individuals with OCD avoid obsessional
stimuli in order to reduce anxiety over feared disasters. Examples
include avoidance of certain people (e.g., religious leaders), places
(e.g., cemeteries), situations (e.g., being the last one to leave the
house), and words (e.g., "murder"). Examples of questions to elicit this
information include: • What situations do you avoid because of
obsessional fear? • Can you ever confront this situation? • How does
avoiding make you feel more comfortable? If avoidance is impossible,
compulsive behaviors are performed to escape from distress or reduce the
probability of feared consequences. In addition to gathering detailed
information about all rituals (e.g., cleaning, checking, repeating
actions, arranging objects, and asking for reassurance), subtle mini
rituals such as wiping, using special soaps, and brief checks must be
assessed. The cognitive motivation of all rituals should also be
clarified as well (e.g., checking to prevent a break-in, using a certain
soap to target certain contaminants). Examples of questions to elicit
this information include: • What do you do when you can't avoid \[insert
situation\]? • Tell me about the strategies or rituals you use to reduce
obsessional fear of \[insert obsessional fear\]? • How does doing this
ritual reduce your discomfort? • What might happen if you didn't engage
in this ritual? Mental rituals are often overlooked in the functional
assessment of OCD because they are not directly observable. Thus, it is
important to ascertain any cognitive strategies the patient uses in
response to obsessional stimuli. Examples include thinking "good"
thoughts, repeating mantras in a certain way, excessively mentally
reviewing one's own actions to gain assurance, and habitual thought
suppression and mental distraction. As with overt rituals, it is
necessary to ascertain the cognitive links between mental rituals and
the obsessional thoughts. For example, repeating the phrase "God is
good" to avoid punishment for having blasphemous thoughts, and
suppression of sexual thoughts to prevent acting inappropriately.
Examples of questions to elicit this information include: • What kinds
of mental strategies do you use to dismiss unwanted thoughts? • What
might happen if you didn't use the strategy?

Self-Monitoring Self-monitoring of rituals and avoidance behavior is an
excellent tool for collecting real-time data on OCD symptoms. A log
sheet can be given to the patient on which he or

Psychological Treatment

205

she records the (a) date, (b) time, (c) obsessional thought or stimulus
that triggers anxiety, (d) level of anxiety on a 0 to 10 scale, and (e)
ritual or avoidance behavior employed. Self-monitoring helps both the
clinician and the patient gain an accurate picture of OCD symptom
severity and the functional relationship between obsessions and
compulsions. It also helps the patient identify obsessions and rituals
that he or she might not be aware of.

Case Conceptualization The main value of a functional assessment is that
it yields information from which to synthesize a case conceptualization.
The case conceptualization is an individualized blueprint of OCD
symptoms and is derived by listing (a) the situations and thoughts that
trigger obsessional fear, (b) the associated cognitive variables (i.e.,
dysfunctional beliefs and appraisals), and (c) avoidance and compulsive
rituals. Next, using the cognitive-behavioral model of OCD (as discussed
previously) as a framework, links between these phenomena are sketched
as shown in Figure 5.1. The individual in this case had obsessional
fears of contamination along with decontamination rituals.

Psychological Treatment Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), a set of
techniques derived from the cognitivebehavioral theoretical model
described earlier, is considered the most effective approach to the
psychological treatment of OCD. Two specific CBT methods have been
examined in clinical studies: behavior therapy by exposure and response
prevention (ERP) and cognitive therapy (CT). This section provides a
concise description of these procedures and reviews research
substantiating their effectiveness. Detailed guidelines for planning and
implementing CBT techniques are provided in various treatment manuals
(e.g., Abramowitz & Jacoby, 2014).

Exposure and Response Prevention Exposure and response prevention (ERP)
entail confrontation with stimuli that provoke obsessional fear, but
that objectively pose a low risk of harm. Exposure can occur in the form
of repeated actual encounters with the feared situations (situational or
in vivo exposure), or in the form of imagined confrontation with the
feared disastrous consequences of confronting these situations (imaginal
exposure). For example, an individual with obsessional fears of causing
fires would be asked to practice leaving the home without checking to
make sure appliances were turned off properly for situational exposure.
She would also practice imaginal exposure to thoughts of possibly having
caused a fire and being held responsible. A patient with fears of
contaminating his mother might be asked to touch objects that he
considers unclean---a trash can, his genitals, a neighbor's pet---before
handling objects that belong to his mother---for situational exposure.
He would then confront thoughts of his mother coming down with a serious
illness as a result of his carelessness with these perceived
contaminants. As might be anticipated, initiating exposure tasks evokes
the patient's anxiety. Patients are encouraged to engage in such tasks
completely, and to allow themselves to experience this obsessional
distress without resisting the feelings of anxiety. Over time, the
anxiety

206

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

External Triggers (e.g., driving, gasoline stations, bleaches,
detergents, paints, smells)

Intrusive Obsessional Thoughts

Dysfunctional Beliefs • Overestimates of the probability and severity of
danger. • An inflated sense of responsibility for harm. • I can and
should control my thoughts. • Thought-action fusion.

Ideas : I'm contaminated with chemicals. Doubts : I might make my
daughter sick from exposure to chemicals. Images : My daughter dying of
cancer in 10 years.

Hypervigilance leads to noticing more obsessional cues.

Misappraisals of Obsessional Thoughts • I can't take the chance that
this will happen. • I must do everything I can to prevent this. • The
more I think it, the more likely it is. • I can and should control my
thoughts or I am fully responsible for the outcome.

Obsessional Anxiety/Fear

Rituals and avoidance prevent the correction of dysfunctional beliefs.

Anxiety-Reduction Strategies Negative Reinforcement Rituals and
avoidance reduce distress.

• Avoidance (e.g., chemicals, daughter, spouse) • Rituals (e.g.,
washing, cleaning, showering, changing clothes)

Short-Term Anxiety/Fear Reduction

FIGURE 5.1

Case Conceptualization of an Individual with OCD

(and associated physiological responding) naturally subsides---a process
called habituation. With each repetition of the exposure task,
habituation occurs more rapidly. Moreover, by engaging in exposures
without ritualizing, patients have the opportunity to learn that feared
outcomes are less likely or less severe than they had anticipated. The
response prevention component of ERP entails refraining from compulsive
rituals and other subtle avoidance behaviors that serve as an escape
from obsessive fear. Response prevention helps to prolong exposure and
to facilitate the eventual extinction of obsessional anxiety. In the
previous examples, the first patient might practice refraining

Psychological Treatment

207

from any strategies she typically uses to reassure herself that no fires
will have occurred, such as returning home to check, or asking neighbors
to check. The second patient would be instructed to refrain from
decontamination rituals such as washing or cleaning.

The Delivery of ERP The way ERP is delivered can vary widely. One format
that has been found to produce particularly potent effects includes a
few hours of assessment and treatment planning followed by 15 (daily or
twice-weekly) treatment sessions, lasting about 90 minutes each
(Abramowitz, Foa, & Franklin, 2003). When pragmatic concerns render
intensive regimens impractical, conducting the treatment sessions on a
weekly basis works very well for individuals with less severe OCD
(Warren & Thomas, 2001). Self-supervised exposure homework practice
should be assigned for completion between sessions. It is important that
home-based self-supervised exposure exercises (as with
therapist-supervised exposure) last long enough for the patient to learn
either that anxiety dissipates (i.e., habituation occurs) or that he or
she can tolerate the anxiety. A course of ERP ordinarily begins with the
assessment of obsessions, compulsive rituals, avoidance strategies, and
anticipated consequences of confronting feared situations. Information
gathered during the assessment sessions is then used to plan the
specific exposure exercises that will be pursued. Importantly, the term
response prevention does not imply that the therapist physically
restrains the patient from performing rituals. Instead, the therapist
must convince patients to resist their own urges to carry out these
behaviors. The therapist must also provide a cogent rationale for how
exposure and response prevention will be helpful in reducing OCD. This
rationale must motivate the patient to tolerate the distress that
typically accompanies therapy. The treatment rationale also lets the
patient know that this distress is temporary and that it usually
subsides with repeated practice, although learning how to tolerate
anxiety is an important part of long-term success with ERP. The exposure
exercises in ERP might begin with moderately distressing situations,
stimuli, and images, and progress to the most distressing situations,
although progressing in such a hierarchy-driven manner is not essential.
On the one hand, beginning with less anxiety-evoking exposure tasks
might increase the likelihood that the patient will learn to manage his
or her distress. This also increases confidence in the treatment. On the
other hand, by completing more difficult exposures early on, patients
might learn quickly that they are better at coping with anxiety than
they had thought. At the end of each treatment session, the therapist
instructs the patient to continue that session's exposure for several
hours and in different environmental contexts without the therapist.
Exposure to the most anxiety-evoking situations---which must be
faced---is completed during the middle of the treatment program (as
opposed to waiting until the very end). This allows the patient ample
opportunity to repeat such exposures in different contexts to allow
generalization of treatment effects. During later sessions, the
therapist emphasizes the importance of generalization and of the
individual continuing to apply the ERP procedures learned during
treatment. Mechanisms of Change Foa and Kozak (1986) hypothesized that
ERP produces its effects by correcting patients' overestimates of danger
that underlie obsessional anxiety. These authors point to three

208

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

requirements for a successful outcome with ERP. First, physiological
arousal and subjective fear must be evoked during exposure. Second, the
fear responses must gradually diminish during the exposure session in
the absence of compulsive rituals (within-session habituation). Third,
the initial fear response at the beginning of each exposure session
should decline across sessions (between-sessions habituation). More
recently, Craske and colleagues (2008) have emphasized the role of
inhibitory learning in exposure-based therapy. According to this
approach, original fear-based associations (e.g., floors are dangerous)
are neither corrected nor replaced during exposure, but rather new
safety-based associations (e.g., floors are generally safe) are formed,
and they compete with the fear-based associations. The aim of ERP for
OCD, then, is to help the patient develop this new learning and then
enhance the recall of the new associations relative to the older,
threat-based associations (Abramowitz & Arch, 2014; Craske et al.,
2008). Several dismantling studies have examined the individual effects
of exposure and response prevention techniques (e.g., Foa, Steketee,
Grayson, Turner, & Lattimer, 1984), finding that whereas exposure
produces the greatest effects on obsessional anxiety, response
prevention produces the greatest reduction of compulsive rituals.
Nevertheless, there is an additive effect of combining the two
techniques: using both exposure and response prevention is more
effective than using either of these components alone (Foa et al.,
1984).

The Efficacy of ERP The numerous trials evaluating the effects of ERP
for OCD consistently show that patients who receive and complete this
intervention attain clinically significant and durable improvement.
Average improvement rates are typically from 50% to 70% in these studies
(Olatunji, Davis, Powers, & Smits, 2012). A review of 16 trials
(involving 756 patients) indicated that ERP was substantially more
effective than comparison treatments (e.g., relaxation, anxiety
management training, waiting list, medication), above and beyond the
effects of nonspecific factors such as the therapeutic relationship and
spontaneous improvement. Moreover, the effects of ERP are not limited to
highly selected research samples or to treatment as delivered in
specialty clinics. Effectiveness studies conducted with nonresearch
patients (e.g., Franklin, Abramowitz, Foa, Kozak, & Levitt, 2000) show
that over 80% of patients who complete ERP achieve clinically
significant improvement. While ERP is effective for most people with
OCD, about 20% do not respond and about 25% to 30% drop out of therapy.

Cognitive Therapy The basis of cognitive therapy (CT) for OCD is the
rational and evidence-based challenging and correction of faulty and
dysfunctional thoughts and beliefs that underlie emotional distress. As
has been discussed, individuals with OCD hold characteristic faulty
beliefs that lead to obsessive fear. It is these beliefs that are
targeted in CT, including overestimates of the probability and severity
of danger and misinterpretations of intrusive thoughts as having
implications for responsibility for harm.

Biological Treatment

209

Delivery of CT Cognitive therapy typically begins with the therapist
presenting a rationale for treatment that incorporates the notion that
intrusive obsessional thoughts are normal experiences and not harmful or
significant. The patient is then socialized to the cognitive-behavioral
framework for understanding OCD, as discussed earlier in this chapter. A
central aim of CT is therefore to reduce obsessional fear and the need
for compulsive rituals by helping the patient correct dysfunctional
thinking and behavioral responses to obsessional stimuli (situations,
thoughts, images) so that such situations no longer require avoidance
and intrusive thoughts are no longer perceived as needing to be
controlled or neutralized via rituals. Various CT techniques are used to
help patients identify and correct their erroneous appraisals, such as
didactic presentation of educational material, Socratic dialogue, and
cognitive restructuring aimed at helping patients recognize and remedy
dysfunctional thinking patterns. Behavioral experiments, in which
patients enter situations that exemplify their fears, are often used to
facilitate the acquisition of corrective information about the realistic
risks associated with obsessional fears. For a detailed manual
describing the use of CT techniques for OCD, see Wilhelm and Steketee
(2006). CT Versus ERP A handful of studies have addressed the relative
efficacy of CT and ERP by directly comparing variants of the two
interventions. Although most of these studies have found that these
treatments produced equivalent effects, methodological problems prevent
definitive conclusions. In earlier studies, for example, both ERP and CT
yielded minimal improvements in OCD symptoms. The efficacy of ERP was
likely attenuated by the lack of therapist-supervised exposure, and CT
programs were likely enhanced by the use of supervised behavioral
experiments, which mimic the effects of exposure. Vogel, Stiles, and
Götestam (2004), however, found that the inclusion of CT was useful in
reducing dropout from ERP. Thus, there are likely benefits to
incorporating CT techniques along with ERP; perhaps CT techniques
improve the acceptability of ERP.

Biological Treatment Biological treatments for OCD include medications
and certain types of neurosurgeries. This section provides an overview
of these approaches.

Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors Pharmacotherapy using selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) medication is the most widely used treatment
for OCD. The specific agents in this class of drugs include fluoxetine,
paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram, and fluvoxamine. Clomipramine, a
tricyclic medication that also possesses serotonergic properties, is
also used in the treatment of OCD. Problems with the serotonin
hypothesis (as discussed earlier in this chapter) notwithstanding, it is
this model that provides the rationale for the use of

210

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

serotonergic medications to treat OCD. On average, serotonin medications
produce a 20% to 40% reduction in obsessions and compulsions (Rauch &
Jenike, 1998). The major strengths of a pharmacological approach to
treating OCD include the convenience and the requirement of little
effort on the patient's part. Limitations include the relatively modest
improvement and likelihood of residual symptoms, high rate of
nonresponse (40% to 60% of patients do not show any favorable response),
and the prospect of unpleasant side effects (which can often be
stabilized, however, by adjusting the dose). Moreover, once SSRIs are
terminated, OCD symptoms typically return rapidly (Pato, Zohar-Kadouch,
Zohar, & Murphy, 1988).

Neurosurgical Treatment Although they have received little in the way of
controlled empirical evaluation, four neurosurgical procedures have been
reported with OCD patients: (1) subcaudate tractotomy, (2) limbic
leucotomy, (3) cingulotomy, and (4) capsulotomy. These operations
involve severing interconnections between areas of the brain's frontal
lobes and the limbic system. Surgical procedures are recommended only in
cases where severe and unmanageable OCD and depressive symptoms persist
despite adequate trials of all other available treatments; the risks of
neurosurgery include permanent alterations in cognitive functioning and
personality. Although clinical improvement has been observed in some
cases, it remains unknown why these procedures are successful for only a
subset of OCD patients (Jenike, 2000). There is also an increased risk
of suicide following failure with this approach.

Summary and Future Directions Few syndromes in psychopathology have
generated as much curiosity and clinical exploration as has OCD. Since
the 1970s, research on OCD has increased exponentially, leading to a
clearer understanding of the heterogeneity of the disorder, its
boundaries with other syndromes, and the development of increasingly
sophisticated theoretical models of etiology and maintenance. Perhaps
most important, research has led to advances in treatment; and whereas
the first-line therapies (ERP and serotonergic medication) are not
entirely effective for every patient, they have transformed OCD from an
unmanageable lifetime affliction into a treatable problem that need not
reduce quality of life. Despite the aforementioned advances, a number of
unresolved disagreements concerning OCD have emerged. Differences, for
example, have surfaced over phenomenological issues, etiological models,
and approaches to treatment. These disagreements occur predominantly
along disciplinary lines between biologically oriented and
cognitive-behaviorally oriented schools of thought. Biologically
inclined theorists view OCD as a medical condition involving abnormal
neurological or neurotransmitter-based processes, whereas psychosocial
formulations emphasize the role of learning and dysfunctional
cognitions. Yet, because of the relative insularity within each camp,
theoretical conjecture and empirical findings from within different
approaches are typically addressed toward distinct and narrow audiences.
Clinicians, researchers, and students with broad interests are hindered
from gaining a clear understanding of the diverse

Summary and Future Directions

211

(and sometimes polarized) perspectives. Most likely, the etiology of OCD
involves a complex interaction of both biological and environmental
factors. We presently stand at a time when we can look to the past and
to the future with hope. In looking back, we can be glad that the days
are gone when individuals with OCD had little hope of receiving the help
that they needed, or worse, underwent years of ineffective treatment
with false hopes of improvement. Today, we can see that there are
treatments that are useful and oftentimes highly effective. We can also
see that there is energetic disagreement among experts in the OCD
research communities, and it is the sort of disagreement that can lead
to productive outcomes, fruitful debate, and more refined care of
individuals with OCD. Although cognitive-behavioral treatments can be
highly effective, one challenge for the future involves helping patients
without good access to this therapy. Other challenges include helping
individuals with motivational problems, and those with families and
other social circles that reinforce OCD symptoms, to enter and succeed
with treatment. In looking forward, we can also hope that investigators
with differing backgrounds and research agendas will engage with one
another as they pursue their own work, so that at the close of this
century we will have an understanding of OCD that integrates the best
methods of behavioral science with the best methods of neurochemistry
and neurophysiology.

References Abramovitch, A., Abramowitz, J. S., & Mittleman, A. (2013).
The neuropsychology of adult obsessivecompulsive disorder: A
meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 33, 1163--1171. doi:
10.1016/j.cpr .2013.09.004 Abramowitz, J. S., & Arch, J. J. (2014).
Strategies for improving long-term outcomes in cognitive behavioral
therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: Insights from learning
theory. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 21, 20--31. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpra .2013.06.004 Abramowitz, J. S., Deacon, B., Olatunji,
B., Wheaton, M. G., Berman, N., Losardo, D., ... Hale, L. (2010).
Assessment of obsessive-compulsive symptom dimensions: Development and
evaluation of the Dimensional Obsessive-Compulsive Scale. Psychological
Assessment, 22, 180--198. doi: 10.1037/ a0018260 Abramowitz, J. S., Foa,
E. B., & Franklin, M. E. (2003). Exposure and ritual prevention for
obsessivecompulsive disorder: Effects of intensive versus twice-weekly
sessions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 394--398.
doi: 10.1037/0022 -006X.71.2.394 Abramowitz, J. S., & Jacoby, R. J.
(2014). Obsessivecompulsive disorder in adults. Boston, MA: Hogrefe.
Abramowitz, J. S., & Jacoby, R. J. (2015). Obsessivecompulsive related
disorders: A critical review of the new diagnostic class. Annual Review
of Clinical Psychology, 11, 165--186. doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy
-032813-153713. Abramowitz, J. S., Khandher, M., Nelson, C., Deacon, B.
J., & Rygwall, R. (2006). The role of cognitive factors in the
pathogenesis of obsessive-compulsive symptoms: A prospective study.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 1361--1374. doi: 10.1016/j.brat
.2005.09.011 Abramowitz, J., Wheaton, M., & Storch, A. (2008). The
status of hoarding as a symptom of obsessivecompulsive disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46, 1026--1033. doi:
10.1016/j.brat.2008.05.006 American Psychiatric Association. (2013).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. Baxter, L. R., Jr., Schwartz, J. M., Mazziotta,
J. C., Phelps, M. E., Pahl, J. J., Guze, B. H., & Fairbanks, L.

(1988). Cerebral glucose metabolic rates in nondepressed patients with
obsessive-compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 145,
1560--1563. Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy of the emotional
disorders. New York, NY: International Universities Press. Brown, T. A.,
& Barlow, D. H. (2014). Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5
(ADIS-5)--Adult Version. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Burns, G. L., Keortge, S. G., Formea, G. M., & Sternberger, L. G.
(1996). Revision of the Padua Inventory for obsessive compulsive
disorder symptoms: Distinctions between worry, obsessions, and
compulsions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 163--173. doi:
10.1016/0005-7967(95)00035-6 Chambless, D. L., & Steketee, G. (1999).
Expressed emotion and behavior therapy outcome: A prospective study with
obsessive-compulsive and agoraphobic outpatients. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 67, 658--665. doi: 10.1037//0022-006X .67.5.658
Clark, D. A. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for OCD. New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Conelea, C. A., Freeman, J. B., & Garcia, A. M. (2012).
Integrating behavioral theory with OCD assessment using the
Y-BOCS/CY-BOCS symptom checklist. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and
Related Disorders, 1, 112--118. Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K.,
Zelikowsky, M., Mystkowski, J., Chowdhury, N., & Baker, A. (2008).
Optimizing inhibitory learning during exposure therapy. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 46, 5--27. Dowson, J. H., & Grounds, A. T. (1995).
Personality disorders: Recognition and clinical management. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press. Eisen, J. L., Mancebo, M. C.,
Chiappone, K. L., Pinto, A., & Rasmussen, S. A. (2008).
Obsessivecompulsive personality disorder. In J. A. Abramowitz, D. McKay,
& S. Taylor (Eds.), Clinical handbook of obsessive-compulsive disorder
and related problems (pp. 316--333). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press. Eisen, J. L., Phillips, K. A., Baer, L., Beer, D. A.,
Atala, K. D., & Rasmussen, S. A. (1998). The Brown Assessment of Beliefs
Scale: Reliability and validity. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155,
102--108.

212

References First, M. B., Williams, J., Karg, R., & Spitzer, R. (2015).
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Association. Fitzgerald, K. D., Moore, G. J., Paulson, L.
A., Stewart, C. M., & Rosenberg, D. R. (2000). Proton spectroscopic
imaging of the thalamus in treatment-naive pediatric
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 47, 174--182. doi:
10.1016/S0006 -3223(99)00286-3 Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., Leiberg, S.,
Langner, R., Kichic, R., Hajcak, G., & Salkovskis, P. M. (2002). The
Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory: Development and validation of a short
version. Psychological Assessment, 14, 485--496. doi: 10.1037/1040-3590
.14.4.485 Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of
fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological Bulletin, 99,
20--35. doi: 10.1037//0033 -2909.99.1.20 Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J.
(1995). DSM-IV field trial: Obsessive-compulsive disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 90--96. Foa, E. B., Steketee, G, Grayson,
J., Turner, R., & Lattimer, P. (1984). Deliberate exposure and blocking
of obsessive-compulsive rituals: Immediate and long-term effects.
Behavior Therapy, 15, 450--472. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7894(84)80049-0
Franklin, M., Abramowitz, J., Foa, E., Kozak, M., & Levitt, J. (2000).
Effectiveness of exposure and ritual prevention for obsessive-compulsive
disorder: Randomized compared with nonrandomized samples. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 594--602. doi:
10.1037//0022-006X.68.4.594 Frost, R. O., & Steketee, S. (2002).
Cognitive approaches to obsessions and compulsions: Theory, assessment,
and treatment. Oxford, England: Elsevier. Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H.,
Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Delgado, P., Heninger, G. R., & Charney,
D. (1989a). The Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale: Validity.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1012--1016. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.1989 .01810110054008 Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H.,
Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Fleischmann, R. L., Hill, C. L., ...
Charney, D. (1989b). The Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale:
Development, use, and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46,
1006--1011. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1989.01810110048007 Hodgson, R., &
Rachman, S. (1972). The effects of contamination and washing in
obsessional patients.

213

Behaviour Research and Therapy, 10, 111--117. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7967(72)80003-2 Hollander, E., DeCaria, C. M., Nitescu,
A., Gully, R., Suckow, R. F., Cooper, T. B., ... Liebowitz, M. R.
(1992). Serotonergic function in obsessivecompulsive disorder:
Behavioral and neuroendocrine responses to oral m-chlorophenylpiperazine
and fenfluramine in patients and healthy volunteers. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 49, 21--28. doi: 10.1001/ archpsyc.1992.01820010021003
Insel, T. R., Mueller, E. A., Alterman, I., Linnoila, M., & Murphy, D.
L. (1985). Obsessive-compulsive disorder and serotonin: Is there a
connection? Biological Psychiatry, 20, 1174--1188. doi: 10.1016/0006
-3223(85)90176-3 Jenike, M. (2000). Neurosurgical treatment of
obsessive-compulsive disorder. In W. Goodman, J. Maser, & M. V. Rudorfer
(Eds.), Obsessivecompulsive disorder (pp. 457--482). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum. Kessler, R., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K.,
& Walters, E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions
of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593--602. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.593 McKay, D., Abramowitz, J. S., Calamari, J. E.,
Kyrios, M., Radomsky, A. S., Sookman, D., ... Wilhelm, S. (2004). A
critical evaluation of obsessive-compulsive disorder subtypes: Symptoms
versus mechanisms. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 283--313. doi:
10.1016/j.cpr.2004.04.003 Mowrer, O. (1960). Learning theory and
behavior. New York, NY: Wiley. Olatunji, B. O., Davis, M. L., Powers, M.
B., & Smits, J.A.J. (2012). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
obsessive-compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis of treatment outcome and
moderators. Journal of Psychiatric Research. Advance online publication.
doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2012.08.020 Pato, M. T., Zohar-Kadouch, R.,
Zohar, J., & Murphy, D. L. (1988). Return of symptoms after
discontinuation of clomipramine in patients with obsessive-compulsive
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 1521--1525. Pertusa, A.,
Frost, R. O., Fullana, M. A., Samuels, J. F., Steketee, G., Tolin, D.
F., ... Mataix-Cols, D. (2010). Refining the diagnostic boundaries of
compulsive hoarding: A critical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 30,
371--386. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2010.01.007

214

Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

Pfohl, B., & Blum, N. (1991). Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder:
A review of available data and recommendations for DSM-IV. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 5, 363--375. doi: 10.1521/pedi.1991 .5.4.363
Rachman, S., & de Silva, P. (1978). Abnormal and normal obsessions.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 16, 233--248. doi:
10.1016/0005-7967(78)90022-0 Rachman, S., Elliot, C. M., Shafran, R., &
Radomsky, A. S. (2009). Separating hoarding from OCD. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 47, 520--522. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2009.02.014 Radomsky, A.
S., Rachman, S., & Hammond, D. (2001). Memory bias, confidence and
responsibility in compulsive checking. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
39, 813--822. doi: 10.1016/S0005 -7967(00)00079-6 Rasmussen, S. A., &
Eisen, J. L. (1992a). The epidemiology and clinical features of
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 15,
743--758. Rasmussen, S. A., & Eisen, J. L. (1992b). The epidemiology and
differential diagnosis of obsessivecompulsive disorder. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 53, 4--10. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-77608-3_1 Rassin,
E., Merckelbach, H., Muris, P., & Spaan, V. (1999). Thought-action
fusion as a causal factor in the development of intrusions. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 37, 231--237. doi: 10.1016/S0005 -7967(98)00140-5
Rauch, S., & Jenike, M. (1998). Pharmacological treatment of obsessive
compulsive disorder. In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to
treatments that work (345--360). London, England: Oxford University
Press. Salkovskis, P. (1996). Cognitive-behavioral approaches to the
understanding of obsessional problems. In R. Rapee (Ed.), Current
controversies in the anxiety disorders (pp. 103--133). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Sanavio, E. (1988). Obsessions and compulsions: The
Padua Inventory. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 26, 169--177. doi:
10.1016/0005-7967(88)90116-7 Sheehan, D., Lecrubier, Y.,
Harnett-Sheehan, K., Amoriam, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., ... Dunbar,
G. (1998). The Mini International Neuropsychiatric

Interview (M.I.N.I.): The development and validation of a structured
diagnostic interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 59(Suppl. 20), 22--33. Stanley, M., Swann, A., Bowers, T., &
Davis, M. (1992). A comparison of clinical features in trichotillomania
and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 30,
39--44. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(92)90094-W Steketee, G., & Van Noppen, B.
(2003). Family approaches to treatment for obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Brazilian Journal of Psychiatry, 25(1), 43--50. Taylor, S.,
Thordarson, D., & Sochting, I. (2002). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In
M. Antony & D. H. Barlow (Eds.), Handbook of assessment and treatment
planning for psychological disorders (pp. 182--214). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Thordarson, D. S., Radomsky, A. S., Rachman, S.,
Shafran, R., Sawchuk, C. N., & Hakstian, A. (2004). The Vancouver
Obsessional Compulsive Inventory (VOCI). Behaviour Research and Therapy,
42, 1289--1314. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2003.08.007 Tolin, D. F.,
Abramowitz, J. S., Kozak, M. J., & Foa, E. B. (2001). Fixity of belief,
perceptual aberration, and magical ideation in obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 15, 501--510. doi:
10.1016/S0887-6185(01)00078-0 Vogel, P. A., Stiles, T. C., & Götestam,
K. G. (2004). Adding cognitive therapy elements to exposure therapy for
obsessive compulsive disorder: A controlled study. Behavioural and
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 32, 275--290. doi: 10.1017/S1352465804001353
Warren, R., & Thomas, J. C. (2001). Cognitive-behavior therapy of
obsessive-compulsive disorder in private practice: An effectiveness
study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 15, 277--285. doi: 10.1016/S0887
-6185(01)00063-9 Wheaton, M. G., Abramowitz, J. S., Berman, N. C.,
Riemann, B. C., & Hale, L. R. (2010). The relationship between obsessive
beliefs and symptom dimensions in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Behavior Research and Therapy, 48, 949--954. doi: 10.1016/
j.brat.2010.05.027 Whiteside, S. P., Port, J. D., & Abramowitz, J. S.
(2004). A meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatry

References Research: Neuroimaging, 132, 69--79. doi: 10.1016/
j.pscychresns.2004.07.001 Wilhelm, S., & Steketee, G. (2006). Cognitive
therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A guide for professionals.
Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. Woods, C. M., Vevea, J. L., Chambless, D.
L., & Bayen, U. J. (2002). Are compulsive checkers impaired in memory? A
meta-analytic review.

215

Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 9, 353--366. doi:
10.1093/clipsy/9.4.353 Zohar, J., & Insel, T. R. (1987).
Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Psychobiological approaches to diagnosis,
treatment, and pathophysiology. Biological Psychiatry, 22, 667--687.
doi: 10.1016/0006 -3223(87)90199-5

Chapter 6 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Patricia A. Resick, Candice M.
Monson, and Stefanie T. LoSavio

P

rior to the publication of the third edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III; American Psychiatric
Association \[APA\]) in 1980, the condition we now know as posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) went by many names, such as "traumatic neurosis,"
"gross stress reaction," "war neurosis," and "combat fatigue" (Monson,
Friedman, & La Bash, 2014). Following the return of thousands of
veterans from Vietnam, many of whom exhibited difficulties adjusting
back to civilian life, along with the rise of the women's movement,
which heightened consciousness of the effects of sexual and physical
victimization (e.g., rape trauma syndrome, battered women's syndrome),
the modern diagnosis became known as posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD). Over the past three decades, the study of PTSD has evolved
through a large body of research that has established the reliability
and validity of the diagnosis; associated biological, cognitive,
affective, perceptual, and behavioral characteristics; and a number of
highly effective treatments. For students of psychopathology, it should
be pointed out that PTSD contrasts to most other disorders in that it is
a disorder of nonrecovery. PTSD is one of the few disorders in which
researchers and clinicians can pinpoint the genesis of the disorder and
can study risk and resilience factors as people grapple with some of
life's worst events. Prospective studies can be mounted from the time of
a traumatic event, and in some cases before exposure, to study how
people react and recover. The strongest emotions, biological reactions,
thoughts, and escape-and-avoidance behaviors occur during and soon after
the traumatic event. Those who are eventually diagnosed with PTSD do not
typically develop greater symptoms over time; rather, they stall out in
their recovery. Those who do not go on to have PTSD, in contrast,
continue to recover over the months after the event has occurred
(Gutner, Rizvi, Monson, & Resick, 2006; Rothbaum, Foa, Riggs, & Walsh,
1992). This chapter provides an overview of this recovery process with
regard to symptoms comprising the disorder; its epidemiology and
comorbidity factors; the biological, cognitive, emotional, and
behavioral components of the disorder; assessment; and treatment.

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
and acute stress disorder are among the only disorders in our current
classification system that require an identifiable external event as a

216

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

217

precursor to the disorder's existence. The Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5; APA, 2013) was
unveiled in May 2013, and with this new edition, the symptoms of PTSD
were modified for the first time since the DSM-III-R (APA, 1987).
Furthermore, the biggest change may be the move of PTSD out of the
anxiety disorders section and into a chapter on stress and trauma
disorders. This move could change the focus of mechanisms research from
considering PTSD from a fear circuitry model to including top-down
cognitive models and greater focus on other emotions such as guilt,
anger, shame, and sadness. Research is ongoing comparing the old and new
criteria for PTSD. Given the relative recency of the change in
diagnostic criteria, much of the research presented in this chapter is
based on the DSM-IV (APA, 1994) PTSD diagnosis, unless otherwise noted.
According to the DSM-5, in order for a diagnosis of PTSD to be
considered, an individual must have experienced, witnessed, or learned
about the traumatic event of a loved one, or have experienced repeated
exposure to the aftermath of traumas, such as the experiences of first
responders (Criterion A). In addition to exposure to a Criterion A
event, an individual must also be experiencing a qualifying number of
symptoms in each of four clusters of symptoms: intrusion, avoidance,
negative alterations in cognitions and mood, and alterations in arousal
and reactivity (Criteria B, C, D, and E, respectively). Namely, an
individual must exhibit at least one of the intrusion (Criterion B)
symptoms, which include persistent and distressing memories of the
trauma, recurrent distressing nightmares about the traumatic event,
dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks), and intense psychological or
physiological responses when exposed to cues (internal or external) that
resemble the trauma. The individual must also exhibit at least one of
the avoidance (Criterion C) symptoms: effortful avoidance of internal
cues and efforts to avoid external reminders of the trauma like places,
people, or situations. These symptoms reflect strategies that
individuals use in order to reduce coming into contact with events,
places, thoughts, or emotions that remind them of the traumatic event.
In addition, the individual must exhibit two or more of the negative
cognitions and mood (Criterion D) symptoms; these symptoms reflect the
range of affect, from numbing and amnesia (and inability to have
positive feelings) to strong negative emotions such as guilt, anger, or
fear; distorted self-blame or erroneous blame of others who did not
cause or intend the event; and negative beliefs about self, others, and
the world as a consequence of the traumatic event. The individual must
also meet at least two of the arousal and reactivity (Criterion E)
symptoms, which include sleep difficulties, concentration impairment,
exaggerated startle response, and hypervigilance, but also irritable or
aggressive behaviors and reckless or self-destructive behavior. All the
symptoms of PTSD must have started or worsened after the traumatic
event. However, it is important to recognize that such an assessment may
be difficult, especially in cases in which the trauma occurred in the
distant past or in the presence of a comorbid mood disorder. The
required number of symptoms from the four clusters must be present
concurrently for at least 1 month in order to receive a diagnosis of
PTSD, and they must be perceived as distressing or causing functional
impairment. Furthermore, a diagnosis of PTSD with delayed expression can
be made in cases in which the diagnostic threshold is not met or
exceeded until at least 6 months after the traumatic event. Cases of
true delayed onset are extremely rare and are more likely to occur as
reactivation or exacerbation of prior symptoms or just failing to meet
criteria earlier versus later (e.g., Andrews, Brewin,

218

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

Philpott, & Stewart, 2007). That is, it is highly unlikely that an
individual will be completely symptom-free following a trauma only to be
diagnosed with PTSD at a later time. The DSM-5 specifies two (unrelated)
subtypes that can be identified. The first is a subtype for children
younger than 6 years of age. This subtype takes into account the
differences in presentation of PTSD in the very young (Scheeringa,
Myers, Putnam, & Zeanah, 2012; Scheeringa, Zeanah, & Cohen, 2011). For
example, young children do not display as many avoidance and negative
alterations in cognitions and mood symptoms as adults; therefore, the
required number of symptoms for diagnosis among young children across
these two clusters is reduced. Additionally, symptoms in this subtype
are more behaviorally anchored (e.g., children may present with social
withdrawal rather than feelings of detachment, or with constriction of
play instead of diminished interest in activities). The second subtype
is PTSD with prominent dissociative symptoms. This subtype is for
individuals who meet full criteria for PTSD and also experience either
persistent or frequent experiences of depersonalization or
derealization. The dissociative subtype was added to DSM-5 in the face
of mounting evidence that those with severe PTSD and dissociative
responses are qualitatively different from those with severe PTSD
without dissociation (e.g., Griffin, Resick, & Mechanic, 1997; Lanius,
Brand, Vermetten, Frewen, & Spiegel, 2012; Wolf et al., 2012). As noted
earlier, the current diagnostic criteria for PTSD represent a change
from the criteria of the DSM-IV. The DSM-IV specified that an event is
considered traumatic if it involved actual or threatened death, serious
injury, or threat to physical integrity (Criterion A1). Furthermore, at
the time of the event, the individual must have responded with intense
fear, helplessness, or horror (Criterion A2). However, based on
empirical research that suggests limited utility to the A2 criterion
(e.g., Friedman, Resick, Bryant, & Brewin, 2011), the DSM-5 eliminates
A2 as a criterion. In the DSM-5, it is also not sufficient to be exposed
to events on television or learn about events to others who are unknown
to the person. Another change in the DSM-5 involves expanding the number
of domains of PTSD symptoms. What were previously 17 symptoms organized
into three clusters (i.e., reexperiencing symptoms, avoidance and
numbing symptoms, and physiological hyperarousal symptoms) are now 20
symptoms categorized into the four domains discussed earlier. New
symptoms were added to DSM-5 (e.g., cognitions and negative emotions;
reckless or self-destructive behaviors), while some other symptoms were
reformulated. Finally, the two aforementioned PTSD subtypes are new to
DSM-5 as well. One of the most important changes from the DSM-IV was
moving PTSD out of the anxiety disorders to a chapter with other
trauma-related disorders, to move it away from being conceptualized as a
fear-based disorder.

Case Example Anne was a 30-year-old woman who presented for treatment
wanting help to manage "anger and anxiety." She lived alone and, with
the exception of two female friends, had no significant social
relationships. She further reported that she had not had any romantic
relationships during her adult life. She had been unemployed for the
past 3 months, having been fired from her last job due to "anger
problems." She was currently supporting herself with savings, which were
quickly waning; however, she expressed ambivalence about finding another
job because, she stated, she "didn't like being around most people."

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors

219

During a standard intake interview, Anne, with much trepidation,
acknowledged that she had been raped more than 10 years earlier. She
stated that she had not told anyone about this previously. The rape
occurred when she was out on a first date with a man she knew casually
from one of her college classes. After dinner, he suggested a walk on
the beach, during which he became sexually suggestive and began to
fondle her. Anne reported that she initially resisted his advances but
he became more aggressive and eventually physically restrained her,
pinning her down with his body and covering her mouth with his hand.
Anne remarked that she "shut down" and felt numb all over during the
rape. Immediately afterward, the man told her that she "just got what
she wanted" and that if she told anyone about what occurred, he would
deny it. He further said that since he was a popular person on campus,
everyone would believe him and think that she was "easy." Anne
remembered returning to her dormitory room, where she immediately
showered and then told everyone that she wasn't feeling well so that she
could stay alone in her room for several days. Anne reported that since
then she had thought about the rape every day, often with perseveration
about how she might have prevented it or how she might get revenge
against the rapist. She frequently had nightmares about being restrained
and would wake up in a sweat. In addition, she frequently exhibited a
generalized response of anger toward men and reported feeling suspicious
of all men, with only a few exceptions. She stated that she felt "men
were only after one thing" and were "manipulators and liars." Because of
this, Anne reported that she avoided all social situations because she
did not want to interact with men on a social level. When she couldn't
avoid it (e.g., family weddings), she would feel extreme anxiety and
would often respond to fairly innocuous comments (e.g., "You look nice
tonight") with an outburst of anger. She reported that she had gained
the reputation of being the black sheep of the family as a result. She
further stated that because the rape occurred on a beach, she had not
been to a beach since because she feared it would bring up memories too
intense to manage. Anne reported that prior to the rape she had had good
peer relationships, and stated that she had many life goals, including a
career in journalism. She stated that after the rape she lost interest
in her goals and in being with others, and barely graduated from
college. She spent most of her time alone. Anne described feeling angry
a good portion of the day and said that she felt she had a "short fuse";
many things irritated her that would not irritate others. Throughout her
adult life she had held a string of temporary jobs, mostly as a
receptionist, and would often get terminated due to complaints from
customers that she was rude. She stated that she often slept only 3 to 4
hours a night and would wake up feeling frightened from her nightmares.
When this occurred, she would go around her apartment to check the locks
on the windows and doors because she felt unsafe and was worried that an
intruder would break in. She stated that she often had intrusive images
of the rapist's face, and when this happened, she would have panic-like
symptoms and be "filled with rage and self-loathing."

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors Large, nationally representative,
epidemiological studies estimating the prevalence of trauma exposure and
PTSD have not yet been reported based on DSM-5 criteria. Thus, the

220

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

following estimates are based on DSM-IV criteria, and DSM-5 findings are
noted when available. Results from several epidemiological studies
indicate that experiencing a traumatic event in one's life is the rule
rather than the exception. For example, in an examination of the
prevalence and effects of trauma in individuals from the National
Comorbidity Survey, Kessler, Sonnega, Bromet, Hughes, and Nelson (1995)
found that approximately 60.7% of men and 51.2% of women had experienced
at least one trauma in their lifetime. In comparison with women, men
were more likely to report experiencing a physical attack, being
threatened with a weapon, being in an accident, or witnessing a trauma.
Women were more likely to report rape, molestation, neglect, or physical
abuse. Furthermore, Norris (1992) has highlighted the significance of
motor vehicle accidents (MVAs) in terms of both prevalence and rates of
PTSD. Approximately 23% of the population is estimated to experience at
least one MVA in their lifetime, and the incidence of PTSD from MVAs is
estimated at 12%. As noted earlier, most individuals exhibit PTSD
symptoms immediately following trauma exposure. For example, 2 weeks
after a sexual assault, 80% to 94% of victims would meet DSM-IV criteria
for PTSD if not for the duration requirement; however, 3 months after
the rape, the rates of PTSD drop to approximately 50% (Gutner et al.,
2006; Rothbaum & Foa, 1993). These statistics suggest that perhaps the
important question to ask is not, "Who develops PTSD?" but rather, "Who
fails to recover following a traumatic event?" Events considered to be
more heterogeneous in terms of severity and less personal---such as
accidents or natural disasters---are associated with lower rates of PTSD
than sexual assault (Kessler et al., 1995). In terms of prevalence,
epidemiological studies suggest that less than 7% of the population will
have had PTSD at some point in their lifetime (Kessler et al., 2005).
Rates of PTSD are significantly higher among war veterans (Dohrenwend et
al., 2006; Kulka et al., 1990; Ramchand et al., 2010). Additionally, the
impact of recent, large-scale man-made and natural disasters, such as
the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the Asian tsunami of
December 2004, has been assessed in terms of large-scale population
surveys. Although these studies typically do not use gold standard
assessments to diagnose PTSD, they provide snapshot indices of PTSD
symptomatology in trauma-exposed communities. For example, a phone
survey of adult residents of Manhattan conducted 1 to 2 months after
9/11 found 7.5% of individuals to endorse symptoms suggestive of a PTSD
diagnosis (Galea et al., 2002). This rate increased to 20% for
individuals who lived in close proximity to the World Trade Center site.
A study of people affected by the Asian tsunami used a multistaged,
cluster, population-based mental health survey (specifically, the
Short-Form Health Survey \[SF-36\]) to assess outcomes. Participants
were displaced and nondisplaced persons in the Phang Nga province of
Thailand, where more than 5,000 individuals were confirmed dead. The
researchers found that 12% of displaced persons and 7% of nondisplaced
persons evidenced PTSD symptoms 8 weeks after the tsunami (van Griensven
et al., 2006). A follow-up survey 9 months after the tsunami
demonstrated that the percentage of individuals reporting PTSD
symptomatology had decreased to 7% of displaced persons and 3% of
nondisplaced persons. Undoubtedly, we will soon learn about any changes
in prevalence rates given the shift to DSM-5 criteria for PTSD. Although
not using a true random sample, the National Stressful Events Survey
collected data from a large and diverse sample recruited from

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors

221

an online panel of U.S. census-matched adults, and these data were used
to compare DSM-IV and DSM-5 rates of trauma exposure and PTSD status
(Kilpatrick et al., 2013). According to this study, 89.7% of the sample
reported lifetime exposure to at least one DSM-5 Criterion A event
(modal number of events was 3), suggesting high rates of lifetime trauma
exposure. The percentage of individuals meeting DSM-5 criteria tended to
be lower than the percentage of those meeting DSM-IV criteria, but this
difference was not consistently statistically significant (Kilpatrick et
al., 2013). Other studies suggest that rates of diagnosis may be
comparable across measures corresponding to DSM-IV and DSM-5 criteria.
For example, in a study of self-reported PTSD symptoms among U.S.
soldiers, 13% screened positive for DSM-IV PTSD, while 12% screened
positive for DSM-5 criteria (Hoge, Riviere, Wilk, Herrell, & Weathers,
2014). However, in spite of general agreement in diagnostic status
across measures (k = 0.67), 45% of soldiers had discordant results
(i.e., meeting criteria for DSM-IV but not DSM-5 criteria or meeting
DSM-5 criteria only). In another study using a gold-standard clinical
interview in a sample of individuals hospitalized for a severe injury,
rates of diagnosis were not significantly different across DSM-IV and
DSM-5 versions of the interview (O'Donnell et al., 2014).

Sex Differences There appears to be a sex difference in rates of PTSD,
with women nearly three times as likely as men to have a lifetime
diagnosis (9.7% to 3.6%; Kessler et al., 2005). This pattern was also
observed in the aforementioned National Stressful Events Survey of DSM-5
PTSD (Kilpatrick et al., 2013). In Hoge and colleagues' studies of men
and women deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan, 23.6% of women reported
mental health concerns compared with 18.6% of the men (Hoge,
Auchterlonie, & Milliken, 2006). A meta-analysis of sex differences in
risk for PTSD demonstrated that, consistent with the summarized data
discussed previously, although females are more likely than males to
meet criteria for PTSD, they are less likely to have experienced
potentially traumatic events (Tolin & Foa, 2006). Moreover, even when
type of trauma is controlled, women still appear to exhibit higher rates
of PTSD, suggesting that risk of exposure to particular types of trauma
only partially explains the differential PTSD rates in men and women. A
number of explanations for this difference have been offered, including
biological, psychological, and sociocultural points of view (Kimerling,
Ouimette, & Wolfe, 2002). However, in a recent study of 340 female and
252 male veterans who had been deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan, Vogt et
al. (2011), using standardized measures rather than screening tools,
found no sex differences in the overall number of traumatic events
during deployment or in rates of PTSD. The men had experienced more
combat, but the women had experienced more perceived threat and other
types of trauma, such as sexual assault. The same findings are reported
by Street, Gradus, Giasson, Vogt, and Resick (2013) from 2,000 men and
women who were deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan. These researchers found
that 20% of each sex had probable PTSD.

Comorbidity and Personality Posttraumatic stress disorder is associated
with very high rates of comorbidity. Brown, Di Nardo, Lehman, and
Campbell (2001) examined comorbidity patterns of 1,126

222

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

community outpatients and found that PTSD had the highest and most
diverse rate of comorbid disorders (over 90%), with the most frequent
comorbid disorder being major depressive disorder (77%), followed by
generalized anxiety disorder (38%) and alcohol abuse/dependence (31%).
Studies of military veterans have found rates of comorbidity from 50% to
80% (Kulka et al., 1990; Orsillo et al., 1996). Thus, the question of
why comorbid conditions are so common in PTSD arises. Recent research on
the dimensional nature of psychopathology may provide an explanation
along with an understanding of the function of the comorbid symptoms in
managing PTSD intrusion and arousal. Psychopathology and personality
researchers have examined the latent dimensions of internalizing and
externalizing that underlie adult disorders. A series of factor analytic
studies have determined that comorbid disorders fall along these
dimensions (e.g., Cox, Clara, & Enns, 2002; Krueger, McGue, & Iacono,
2001), such that substance abuse disorders and antisocial personality
load on the externalizing dimension, while mood and anxiety disorders
load on the internalizing dimension. Widiger and Simonsen (2005) have
proposed a hierarchical structure to personality disorders as well, with
internalization and externalization at the highest level of this
structure. Immediately beneath these higher-order dimensions are three
to five broad domains of personality functioning, followed by
personality trait constructs, and at the lowest level the more
behaviorally specific diagnostic criteria. Studies have examined whether
the internalizing-externalizing model is relevant to patterns of
posttraumatic psychopathology (e.g., Miller, Fogler, Wolf, Kaloupek, &
Keane, 2008; Miller & Resick, 2007), particularly with regard to
explanations for the high levels of comorbidity among those with PTSD or
the consideration of complex PTSD. Miller and colleagues have evidence
of internalizing and externalizing subtypes of PTSD in both male and
female samples totaling over 1,000 subjects through a series of cluster
analytic studies of personality inventories (Miller, Greif, & Smith,
2003; Miller, Kaloupek, Dillon, & Keane, 2004; Miller & Resick, 2007).
Across these three studies, Miller and colleagues found that there are
people who score low on both internalizing and externalizing who could
be conceptualized as displaying a subtype of simple PTSD. A second
subtype, externalizing, is characterized by the tendency to outwardly
express distress through antagonistic interactions with others, blaming
others, and coping through acting out. Individuals in this subgroup
endorsed elevated levels of anger and aggression, substance-related
disorders, and Cluster B personality disorder features. They described
themselves as impulsive, with little regard for the consequences of
their actions, easily upset, and chronically stressed. On measures of
personality disorder symptoms, they described themselves as tending
toward manipulative, exhibitionistic, and unconventional behavior.
Externalizers described themselves as being emotionally labile,
overactive, fearless, and feeling chronically betrayed and mistreated by
others. In both studies of veterans, in which data on pre-military
characteristics were available, those with externalizing tendencies
reported higher rates of pre-military delinquency, suggesting the
influence of externalizing personality traits was present prior to the
trauma. The third subtype, the internalizing subtype, is characterized
by the tendency to direct posttraumatic distress inwardly through shame,
self-defeating and self-deprecating beliefs, anxiety, avoidance,
depression, and withdrawal. Across the three studies, people in this
subtype reported the highest levels of PTSD and reported high rates of
comorbid major depression and panic disorder, schizoid and avoidant
personality disorder features,

Biological Factors

223

and personality profiles defined by high negative emotionality combined
with low positive emotionality. Members of this subtype also described
themselves as unenthusiastic, uninspired, easily fatigued, and lacking
interests. They endorsed having few friends, being aloof and distant
from others, preferring to spend time alone, having a restricted range
of emotions in interpersonal settings, and experiencing feelings of
social inhibition, inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative
evaluation. These findings suggest that the internalizing-externalizing
subtypes of psychopathology, originally developed to account for
covariation among broad classes of mental disorders (cf. Krueger, Caspi,
Moffitt, & Silva, 1998; Krueger et al., 2001), are relevant to the
understanding of the heterogeneity of PTSD comorbidity. These profiles
suggest that different underlying personality processes may influence
later presentation of psychopathology. Again, more research on DSM-5
comorbidity is underway; however, initial research suggests similar
patterns of association between PTSD and commonly co-occurring
disorders. The aforementioned study comparing DSM-IV and DSM-5 versions
of a PTSD self-report measure found that the two versions of the measure
had nearly identical associations with major depression, generalized
anxiety, and alcohol misuse (Hoge et al., 2014). Likewise, PTSD
comorbidity with depression, assessed using a structured interview
format among severe injury survivors, was not significantly different
when using DSM-IV versus DSM-5 criteria (O'Donnell et al., 2014). Thus,
there is little evidence so far to suggest that the move from DSM-IV to
DSM-5 symptoms results in differential comorbidity rates, but future
epidemiological studies will shed more light on this topic and provide
more conclusive findings. In sum, epidemiological research on trauma and
PTSD has consistently found that exposure to trauma is a common
experience. Prevalence rates of PTSD in the general U.S. population are
about 7% for a lifetime diagnosis, but increase substantially (up to 20%
to 30%) when examining specific trauma-exposed groups. War veterans,
rape victims, and victims of natural and man-made disasters have been
the most frequently studied populations. Increasing attention by the
research community to the effects of global events and more
sophisticated rapid assessment techniques have allowed a better
understanding of the development and maintenance of PTSD symptomatology
in trauma survivors.

Biological Factors A number of neurobiological systems have been
implicated in the pathophysiology of PTSD, including alterations in the
noradrenergic, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)/glutamate, serotonin, and dopamine
systems.

Noradrenergic System A number of studies, using various methodologies,
have provided compelling evidence for increased noradrenergic activity
in traumatized humans with PTSD (e.g., Friedman & Southwick, 1995;
Southwick et al., 1999; Yehuda et al., 1998; Young & Breslau, 2004).
Heightened norepinephrine reactivity to pharmacological and behavioral
challenge appears to be a more important marker of PTSD than high tonic
or baseline levels of

224

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

norepinephrine sampled at a single point in time (Blanchard, Kolb,
Prins, Gates, & McCoy, 1991; McFall, Murburg, Ko, & Veith, 1990;
Southwick et al., 1993). Moreover, the presence of comorbid depression
appears to be an important moderator of the association between
heightened noradrenergic output and PTSD. For example, Yehuda et
al. (1998) found that combat veterans with PTSD but without comorbid
depression had higher mean norepinephrine levels at nearly every time
point compared with combat veterans with PTSD and comorbid depression,
subjects with depression alone, and healthy controls. Neuropeptide Y
(NPY) is simultaneously released with norepinephrine during stress
provocation and acts as an endogenous antiadrenergic, thereby having
anxiolytic- and cognitive-enhancing effects. In men undergoing military
survival training involving high levels of uncontrollable stress,
Morgan, Wang, and Southwick (2000) and Morgan et al. (2001) found a
significant positive association between NPY release and superior
performance in mock training situations, as well as a significant
negative relationship between NPY and symptoms of dissociation. Compared
with healthy controls, PTSD patients have also been found to exhibit low
baseline levels of NPY and blunted NPY responses to yohimbine
stimulation (Rasmusson et al., 2000).

Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) Axis Corticotrophin-releasing
factor (CRF) promotes the release of norepinephrine from the locus
coeruleus as well as the release of corticotrophin (ACTH) from the
pituitary gland, which then promotes release of cortisol and other
glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex. Vietnam veterans with PTSD have
been shown to have elevated resting levels of cerebrospinal fluid CRF
(Baker et al., 1999; Bremner et al., 1997), and enhanced hypothalamic
release of CRF (Yehuda, 2002). Although excessive HPA dysregulation is
consistently associated with trauma exposure and PTSD, there have been
inconsistent results surrounding the nature of HPA dysfunction. Low
urinary cortisol output has been found in male combat veterans and male
and postmenopausal female Holocaust survivors. Conversely, high cortisol
output has been found most consistently in premenopausal women and
children with PTSD (e.g., Heim et al., 2000; Lipschitz, Rasmusson, &
Yehuda, 2003; Rasmusson, Vasek, & Lipschitz, 2004; Rasmusson,
Vythilingam, & Morgan, 2003; Young & Breslau, 2004). The inconsistency
in these findings is likely related to other clinical and methodological
factors associated with cortisol output and its measurement, including
sex hormones, diagnostic comorbidity (especially depression or
dissociation), age at trauma exposure, substance use, medications,
exercise, and ethnicity or genetic factors (Rasmusson et al., 2004).
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is another adrenal steroid that is
released in concert with cortisol in the face of stress. In a sample of
premenopausal women with PTSD, Rasmusson et al. (2003) found an inverse
relationship between DHEA reactivity and severity of PTSD symptoms. In
the study of military members undergoing Special Forces training
mentioned earlier, Morgan et al. (2004) found a negative relationship
between the ratio of DHEAS (the sulfated version of DHEA) to cortisol
and dissociation. They also found a positive correlation between the
DHEAS-cortisol ratio and better behavioral performance in this sample.

Biological Factors

225

There have been a few studies on allotetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone and
allopregnanolone in PTSD; these are neuroactive steroids that positively
modulate the effects of GABA (see the following discussion) and produce
anxiolytic, sedative, and analgesic effects. In a study of premenopausal
women with PTSD who were in the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle,
CSF allopregnanolone levels in the PTSD subjects were less than 40% of
those in the nontraumatized healthy subjects (Rasmusson, Pinna, &
Paliwal, 2006). The allopregnanolone-to-DHEA ratio in these subjects was
also negatively associated with reexperiencing and depressive symptoms
in the PTSD participants (Rasmusson et al., 2006).

Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA) Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the
brain's primary inhibitory neurotransmitter, which functions to counter
excitatory glutamatergic synaptic transmission. Bremner et al. (2000)
found that benzodiazepine receptor density and/or affinity was reduced
in the medial prefrontal cortex among patients with PTSD compared with
controls in a sample of accident victims. Vaiva and colleagues (2004)
reported significantly lower plasma GABA levels in subjects who
developed PTSD compared with subjects who did not.

Serotonin (5H-T) Among individuals with PTSD, a resting state has been
associated with decreased platelet serotonin uptake (Arora, Fichtner,
O'Connor, & Crayton, 1993; Bremner, Southwick, & Charney, 1999); blunted
prolactin response to d-fenfluramine (Davis, Clark, Kramer, Moeller, &
Petty, 1999); and exaggerated panic/anxiety and heart rate reactions to
a serotonergic probe, meta-chlorophenylpiperazine (Southwick et al.,
1997), relative to non-PTSD controls. Fichtner, Arora, O'Connor, and
Crayton (1994) also found that PTSD patients who responded best to the
medication paroxetine were those with the highest pretreatment platelet
affinity for the drug.

Dopamine Excessive dopamine release may play a role in the hyperarousal,
hypervigilance, and brief psychotic states sometimes observed in
individuals with PTSD. Surprisingly little research has focused on
dopamine in comparison with the neurotransmitters previously reviewed.
Elevated urinary and plasma dopamine concentrations have been found
among PTSD subjects (Hamner & Diamond, 1993; Lemieux & Coe, 1995; Yehuda
et al., 1994).

Brain Structures Brain regions implicated in PTSD are also associated
with fear conditioning and extinction, including the amygdala, the
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
and the hippocampus. Across a number of studies, investigators have
found

226

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

a positive association between PTSD severity and increased amygdala
responsivity, such that individuals with PTSD demonstrate
hyperresponsivity to both trauma-related and trauma-unrelated emotional
material (see Shin, Rauch, & Pitman, 2006, for a review). In contrast,
PTSD symptom severity is negatively related to mPFC responsivity. Among
those with PTSD, the mPFC prefrontal cortex appears to be smaller and
hyporesponsive (Shin et al., 2006). A related, adjacent brain structure,
the medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC), has also been implicated in
PTSD, such that individuals with PTSD demonstrate decreased mOFC
activity, corresponding to a failure to inhibit anxiety responses (see
Milad & Rauch, 2007, for a review). Thus, both the amygdala and portions
of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) appear to be consistently affected in
PTSD, and a reciprocal relationship has been observed between these
regions (Shin et al., 2006). Likewise, it is theorized that, among
individuals with PTSD, the ACC fails to inhibit amygdala hyperactivity.
A recent meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies
revealed a reduction in bilateral amygdala volume for individuals with
PTSD relative to healthy controls but no significant reduction compared
to trauma-exposed controls (O'Doherty, Chitty, Saddiqui, Bennett, &
Lagopoulos, 2015). They also found significant bilateral volume
reductions in the ACC among individuals with PTSD relative to healthy
controls as well as trauma-exposed controls. Finally, there appears to
be decreased hippocampal volume among individuals with PTSD relative to
control subjects without PTSD, including both PTSD-negative
traumaexposed and trauma-unexposed controls, although the evidence has
been mixed (e.g., O'Doherty et al., 2015; Shin et al., 2006).
Interestingly, this abnormality may represent a vulnerability factor
for, rather than a consequence of, PTSD based on a study reporting
reduced hippocampal volume among individuals with PTSD and their
trauma-unexposed twins (Gilbertson et al., 2002). By contrast, in a
recent meta-analysis, Woon and Hedges (2008) reported reduced
hippocampal volume among adults with childhood maltreatment-related
PTSD, whereas children with maltreatment-related PTSD did not evidence
analogous hippocampal volume deficits, suggesting that trauma exposure
or PTSD might disrupt hippocampal development. More research is
certainly warranted in this area.

Cognitive and Emotional Factors PTSD pathology is dominated by
disruptions in cognition or memory, which are reflected in the DSM-5
criteria. The symptoms that comprise the B criterion include the
hallmark symptoms of recurrent and intrusive recollections of the event,
dreams about the event, and flashbacks. One of the C criteria is
avoidance of trauma-related thoughts and images. Within the D criterion
are items about amnesia for the event and persistent and exaggerated
negative beliefs about oneself, others, or the world as well as
erroneous self-blame and blame of others. The E arousal criterion
includes difficulty concentrating, which could reflect problems of
attention, as well as arousal. Theorists and researchers have noted that
traumatized people have problems with both remembering and forgetting
traumatic events, and that cognitive processes feature prominently in
individuals' attempts to cope with intrusive memories and emotions.

Cognitive and Emotional Factors

227

Cognitions can be considered as cognitive processes or cognitive
content. Cognitive processes include attempts to cope with intrusive
recollections of the event (e.g., thought suppression,
overaccommodation) or attentional bias to direct attention to potential
danger cues. Cognitive content includes specific beliefs that become
maladaptive ("because one person assaulted me, that means no one can be
trusted") or the outcomes of cognitive or memory processes such as
amnesia for the event or fragmented memory. Most recent theories of PTSD
have incorporated cognition, along with considerations of arousal,
emotions, and avoidance (Cahill & Foa, 2007). Some theorists have
focused specifically on memory processes in PTSD (Brewin, 2007; Brewin,
Dalgleish, & Joseph, 1996; Dalgleish, 2004). The study of memory in PTSD
began with the observations of flashbacks, intrusive memories, amnesia,
and fragmented memory among those with PTSD. In order to account for
some of these phenomena, as well as to incorporate extant theories,
Brewin et al. (1996) proposed a dual representation theory of PTSD, in
which memories of a traumatic experience are thought to be stored in two
ways: 1) autobiographical memories of the experience, referred to as
verbally accessible memories (VAM), which include information the
individual attended to before, during, and after the traumatic event
with sufficient conscious processing to be transferred to long-term
memory, and 2) situationally accessible memories (SAM), which contain
extensive nonconscious and nonverbal information about the traumatic
event that cannot be deliberately accessed or easily altered. These
latter memories can, however, be triggered in the form of flashbacks,
nightmares, or intrusive images. Brewin et al. also propose two types of
emotional reactions: primary emotions, conditioned during the traumatic
event (e.g., fear, helplessness, horror), and secondary emotions that
result from post hoc consideration of the traumatic event (e.g., anger,
shame, sadness). Brewin et al. propose that successful emotional
processing of a traumatic event requires the activation of both VAM and
SAM. Resolution of schema conflicts occurs through a conscious search
for meaning during activation of SAM and VAM, resulting in an integrated
view of the trauma. Ehlers and Clark (2000) have focused on the apparent
paradox of memory in PTSD, such that someone with PTSD may have trouble
intentionally accessing his or her memory of the event but have
involuntary intrusions of parts of it. Ehlers and Clark noted that
anxiety disorders, within a cognitive framework, are focused on future
danger, while PTSD appears to be focused on an event in the past. They
resolve this discrepancy by suggesting that people with PTSD are
processing their traumatic events in idiosyncratic ways that produce an
appraisal of serious current threat. Ehlers and Clark propose that
because the memory encoded at the time of the trauma is poorly
elaborated and integrated with other memories with regard to details,
context of time, sequence, and so forth, this might explain why people
with PTSD may have poor autobiographical memory and yet may be triggered
to have memory fragments that have a here-and-now quality (no time
context) or may not have appropriate posttrauma appraisals (e.g., "I did
not die"). Ehlers and Clark also propose that like the emotional
processing models, strong associative learning is paired with fear
responses and can generalize. In response to the perceptions of threat,
people with PTSD adopt various maladaptive coping strategies, depending
on their appraisals. For example, people who believe they will go crazy
if they think about the traumatic event will attempt to avoid thoughts
about the trauma and will try to keep their minds occupied with other
things as much as

228

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

they can. Someone who believes that he or she must figure out why the
traumatic event happened to keep it from happening again will ruminate
about how it could have been prevented. Those who think that the
traumatic event was punishment for prior actions may become immobilized
and unable to make decisions. These maladaptive strategies, most often
avoidance behaviors, may (a) increase symptoms, (b) prevent change in
negative appraisals, or (c) prevent change in the trauma memory.
Social-cognitive theorists have observed that traumatic events
dramatically alter basic beliefs about the self, the world, and others.
These theorists tend to focus on the content of altered cognitions and
the processes by which trauma victims integrate traumatic events into
their overall conceptual systems, either by assimilating the information
into existing schemas or by altering existing schemas to accommodate the
new information (Hollon & Garber, 1988). Janoff-Bulman (1992) focused
primarily on three major assumptions that may be shattered in the face
of a traumatic event: personal invulnerability, the world as a
meaningful and predictable place, and the self as positive or worthy.
McCann, Sakheim, and Abrahamson (1988) proposed six major areas of
functioning, either selfor other-focused, that can be disrupted by
traumatic victimization: agency, safety, trust, power/control, esteem,
and intimacy. This theory suggests that difficulties with adaptation
following traumatic events result if previously positive schemas (basic
assumptions or conceptual systems) are disrupted by the experience or if
previous negative schemas are seemingly confirmed by the experience. In
a similar vein, Resick (1992) has proposed that when traumatic events
conflict with prior beliefs, the people affected have three
possibilities: altering their interpretations of the event in an attempt
to maintain previously held beliefs (assimilation), altering their
beliefs just enough to accommodate the new information (accommodation),
or changing their beliefs drastically (overaccommodation). Examples of
these three processes would be for someone who was attacked by a friend
to think, "It's all my fault; I must have caused him to do this"
(assimilation), "There must be something wrong with him that he would
betray me this way" (accommodation), or "This means that I can't trust
anyone" (overaccommodation). Those people who have histories of
traumatic events are particularly prone to overaccommodation, and use
experiences with disparate events as mounting proof of an extreme belief
(McCann & Pearlman, 1990). As part of a larger emotional processing
theory (see the following discussion), Foa and her colleagues (Cahill &
Foa, 2007; Foa & Rothbaum, 1998) have proposed that cognitions of people
with PTSD fall into two classes: one, that the world is dangerous, and
two, that the person himself or herself is completely incompetent. They
propose that danger cognitions emanate from the large number of stimulus
representations that can activate the mental fear structure that is
thought to underlie PTSD. Incompetence beliefs are generated from
erroneous mental representations of how the person behaved during the
trauma and from subsequent symptoms.

Research on Cognitive Processes There is evidence supporting the
fragmentation of trauma memories, cognitive avoidance by way of thought
suppression, and an attentional bias toward threat cues. Regarding
fragmentation and content of memory for traumatic events, research has
shown that recovery from a trauma event involves organizing and
streamlining the traumatic memory (e.g., Foa & Kozak, 1986; Foa & Riggs,
1993; Rachman, 1980). Consistent with this

Cognitive and Emotional Factors

229

notion, research has shown that trauma narratives that are disorganized
are associated with increased PTSD symptom severity (e.g., Foa, Molnar,
& Cashman, 1995; Jones, Harvey, & Brewin, 2007; Zoellner,
Alvarez-Conrad, & Foa, 2002). Importantly, Jones et al. (2007) found
that the disorganization of trauma narratives did not distinguish
participants who had suffered a traumatic brain injury during the
traumatic event from those who had not. Therefore, the disorganization
findings for trauma narratives do not appear to be merely the result of
cognitive deficits associated with traumatic brain injury (e.g.,
physical assault, combat injury, motor vehicle accident). Cognitive
theories of PTSD have also emphasized the importance of memory vividness
and accessibility (Brewin, 1996), and research has found that sections
of trauma narratives that are reflective of a flashback contain more
sensory words compared with other sections of the narrative (e.g.,
Brewin, 1996; Hellawell & Brewin, 2004). Foa and Kozak's (1986)
emotional processing theory also suggests that effectively accessing a
trauma memory should result in greater usage of words representing
negative emotion and trauma-associated sensory content. Consistent with
this theory, trauma narratives of PTSD individuals contain more sensory
details and negative emotion content compared with narratives of trauma
survivors who do not develop PTSD (Hellawell & Brewin, 2004; Jones et
al., 2007; Zoellner et al., 2002). Thought-suppression paradigms have
been used to examine the role of cognitive avoidance in the maintenance
of PTSD symptoms (Davies & Clark, 1998; Harvey & Bryant, 1998; McNally &
Riccardi, 1996). A rebound effect, an increase in thoughts after initial
suppression, was assumed to parallel what naturally occurs when trauma
survivors try to avoid intrusive trauma-related thoughts. In studies of
recent trauma survivors with and without acute stress disorder (Harvey &
Bryant, 1998) and in longer-term samples of women with or without PTSD
(Shipherd & Beck, 1999), the rebound effect has been demonstrated in
those with stress-related disorders compared with those without those
disorders. These findings were replicated when comparing motor vehicle
accident survivors with and without PTSD (Shipherd & Beck, 2005).
Together, these studies support the theories that emphasize the role of
cognitive avoidance as a maintaining factor in PTSD. A modified Stroop
paradigm has been used to study selective processing in people with or
without PTSD by asking participants to name the color of words that do
or don't relate to their trauma. Studies have demonstrated that people
with PTSD are slower at naming the color of trauma-related words
compared to positive words, general threat words, and neutral words.
This Stroop effect has been demonstrated in a variety of trauma
populations, including war veterans (Litz et al., 1996; McNally,
English, & Lipke, 1993; McNally, Kaspi, Riemann, & Zeitlin, 1990),
sexual assault survivors (Foa, Feske, Murdock, Kozak, & McCarthy, 1991),
survivors of a ferry disaster (Thrasher, Dalgleish, & Yule, 1994),
childhood sexual abuse survivors (Bremner et al., 2004; Field et al.,
2001), motor vehicle accident survivors (Beck, Freeman, Shipherd,
Hamblen, & Lackner, 2001; Bryant & Harvey, 1995), and child and
adolescent trauma survivors (Freeman & Beck, 2000; Moradi, Taghavi,
Neshat Doost, Yule, & Dalgleish, 1999).

Research on Cognitive Content There is also evidence regarding the
relationship between cognitive content disturbance and PTSD. Strong
correlations have been found between maladaptive beliefs regarding
safety, trust, esteem, or intimacy and PTSD symptoms among survivors of
child sexual

230

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

abuse (Wenninger & Ehlers, 1998). Using the same scale, the Personal
Beliefs and Reactions Scale (PBRS; Resick, Schnicke, & Markway, 1991),
Owens and Chard (2001) found similar findings among 53 adult survivors
of child sexual abuse. PTSD severity was correlated with cognitive
distortions on all seven subscales. Kubany (1994) specifically examined
guilt cognitions among combat veterans and battered women and found that
guilt cognitions correlated highly with several different PTSD measures.
In the development of a short form of the PBRS, called the Posttraumatic
Maladaptive Beliefs Scale (PMBS; Vogt, Shipherd, & Resick, 2012),
maladaptive cognitions were found to be significantly correlated with
PTSD severity on the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS) in a
sample of 294 women with histories of interpersonal trauma. Dunmore,
Clark, and Ehlers (1999) examined 92 assault victims with or without
PTSD in a cross-sectional study and found that those diagnosed with PTSD
reported more mental defeat, mental planning, mental confusion, and
detachment during the traumatic event. They also reported more negative
appraisals of their initial posttrauma symptoms, a more negative
perception of others' responses, a lower positive perception of others'
responses, and a greater perception of perceived permanent damage.
Furthermore, they reported a greater impact on their posttrauma beliefs.
When those who had recovered from their PTSD and those who had
persistent PTSD were compared, the important cognitive variables
associated with persistence of PTSD were mental defeat, mental
confusion, negative appraisals of emotions and symptoms, negative
responses from others, and the belief they had permanently changed and
had altered beliefs posttrauma. In a related longitudinal study,
Dunmore, Clark, and Ehlers (2001) examined assault victims within 4
months and then again at 6 and 9 months postcrime. They also found that
cognitive variables were predictive of PTSD at 6 or 9 months postcrime
either directly or indirectly, mediated by initial PTSD. There have been
a growing number of studies that have examined cognitions as a mechanism
of change in PTSD treatment. Gallagher and Resick (2012) examined
hopelessness as both an outcome and a mediator of change in PTSD among
women who had rape as their index event. Participants assigned to
cognitive processing therapy (CPT; Resick & Schnicke, 1993), a therapy
directly targeting problematic cognitions in PTSD, had larger pre-post
reductions in hopelessness than those assigned to prolonged exposure
(PE; Foa, Hearst, Dancu, Hembree, & Jaycox, 1994), and changes in
hopelessness predicted changes in PTSD symptoms in CPT participants more
so than in PE participants. Gilman, Schumm, and Chard (2012) also
examined hope (rather than hopelessness, with a different measure than
Gallagher and Resick used) in veterans seeking treatment for PTSD.
Measures of PTSD symptoms, depression, and hope were gathered across the
course of treatment in a residential program. Gilman et al. (2012) found
that higher levels of hope midtreatment were associated with reductions
in PTSD and depression from mid- to posttreatment, and not the other way
around, thus supporting that hope is a change mechanism toward symptom
reduction. Schumm, Dickstein, Walter, Owens, and Chard (2015) conducted
a cross-lagged panel analysis from pretreatment to midtreatment to
posttreatment CPT among male and female veterans to determine the
longitudinal relationship between cognitions (negative beliefs about
self, negative beliefs about the world, and self-blame), PTSD, and
depression. They found significant improvements in all the scales over
the course of treatment. They also found that that pre- to midtreatment
change in self-blame and negative beliefs about the

Behavioral Factors

231

self positively predicted and temporally preceded mid- to posttreatment
change in PTSD symptomatology. They also found that changes in negative
beliefs about the self preceded changes in depression but that pre- to
midtreatment changes in depression preceded changes in self-blame and
PTSD. These findings support the idea that improvement in negative
cognitions is an important mechanism of change in PTSD.

Emotional Factors The emotion that has received the lion's share of
theoretical and research attention in PTSD is fear. Prior to DSM-5, PTSD
had been classified as an anxiety disorder; thus theories regarding fear
and anxiety have been applied to PTSD. There is ample evidence that fear
and anxiety play a large role in PTSD. However, clinicians and
researchers have long noted that people with PTSD also have serious
problems with anger, shame, and guilt (e.g., Andrews, Brewin, Rose, &
Kirk, 2000; Henning & Frueh, 1997; Kubany, 1994; Leskela, Dieperink, &
Thuras, 2002; Riggs, Dancu, Gershuny, Greenberg, & Foa, 1992; Wong &
Cook, 1992). Brewin, Andrews, and Rose (2000) found that in addition to
fear, emotions of helplessness or horror experienced within 1 month of
the crime were predictive of PTSD status 6 months later. Also, shame and
anger predicted later PTSD status, even after controlling for intense
emotions of fear, helplessness, and horror. Pitman, Orr, Forgue, and
Altman (1990) also found that combat veterans with PTSD reported
experiencing a range of emotions other than fear while listening to
individualized traumatic scripts. In fact, veterans with PTSD were no
more likely to report experiencing fear than other emotions. Similarly,
in a study examining responses at the time of the trauma, Rizvi and
colleagues (Rizvi, Kaysen, Gutner, Griffin, & Resick, 2008) have
demonstrated that rape victims reported a wide range of emotional
responses during the rape and that emotions other than fear (e.g.,
sadness, humiliation, and anger) were more predictive of later PTSD
symptomatology than was fear. Ramage and colleagues (2016) noted that
emotions like disgust, guilt, shame, or sadness, which may be more
common during traumas involving traumatic loss or moral injury, engage
different neural systems than fear, which may be more common during
traumas involving threat to personal safety. In support of this
position, Ramage et al. (2016) found evidence of neural markers for
potential "subtypes" of PTSD based on the nature of the worst traumatic
event. They compared U.S. soldiers with PTSD resulting from danger-based
traumas (e.g., personal exposure to threat of death or serious injury)
to soldiers with PTSD resulting from non-danger-based traumas (e.g.,
exposure to aftermath of violence, traumatic loss, moral injury), as
well as to combat-exposed soldiers without PTSD and non-combat controls.
In support of this theory, they found different patterns of neuronal
activity in the amygdala and precuneus among those with dangerversus
non-danger-based traumas.

Behavioral Factors Avoidance behaviors were identified early in the
study of trauma (e.g., Keane, Fairbank, Caddell, Zimering, & Bender,
1985; Kilpatrick et al., 1985). The first theories of reactions to
trauma, and subsequently PTSD, were based on a two-factor theory
(Mowrer, 1947),

232

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

which proposed that anxiety is first acquired through classical
conditioning in which an unconditioned stimulus (the traumatic event)
becomes associated with other stimuli, which then elicit conditioned
emotional responses. However, instead of extinguishing in the absence of
further traumatic events, the person escapes or avoids the conditioned
stimuli in an attempt to stop the negative emotional response. The
avoidance behavior is negatively reinforced by the short-term reduction
in anxiety but ultimately causes the initial anxious reaction to be
maintained through the second factor of operant conditioning. Avoidance
behaviors have been implicated in maintenance of PTSD symptoms in more
modern theories as well. A theory regarding the development of fear
networks in PTSD has been offered by Foa and her colleagues (e.g.,
Cahill & Foa, 2007; Foa & Kozak, 1985, 1986), following upon the work of
Lang (1979). In this theory, it is suggested that following traumatic
events, a pathological fear structure develops that is composed of
feared stimuli, responses, and meaning elements. The fear structure is
activated by stimuli in the environment that match elements of the fear
structure. When activated, cognitive, behavioral, and arousal anxiety
reactions result. If the situation were in fact dangerous, it would be
an effective program for escape or avoidance. However, a pathological
fear network triggers false alarms because of the generalization of
stimuli to nondangerous cues (Jones & Barlow, 1990). Fear elicits escape
and avoidance behavior and subsequent emotional numbing. Resick and
Schnicke (1992) have also suggested that avoidance is an important
element in the maintenance of PTSD and have suggested that many of the
symptoms and disorders that develop along with PTSD may develop as
attempts to avoid the intrusive images and strong emotions. However,
they have emphasized that fear is not the only emotion being avoided;
many traumatic events elicit anger, sadness, guilt, and horror, which
are overwhelming. These emotions, too, may trigger escape, avoidance,
and numbing. Evidence for a fear network and activation/extinction of
fear comes from two sources. Physiological reactivity to trauma cues is
associated with PTSD (Keane, Kolb, et al., 1998; Shalev, Orr, Peri, &
Schreiber, 1992; Tarrier et al., 2002), and this reactivity changes as a
function of successful treatment (Blanchard et al., 2003; Boudewyns &
Hyer, 1990). In a study of physiological reactivity comparing treatment
responders with nonresponders, Griffin, Resick, and Galovski (2006)
found that patients who responded to treatment exhibited overall
decreases in physiological responding from pretreatment to
posttreatment, whereas those who did not benefit from treatment showed
no such change. Rather than assessing physiological activation, Foa,
Riggs, Massie, and Yarczower (1995) examined facial expressions during
the first prolonged exposure session and found that greater facial
displays of fear, assumed to reflect emotional engagement, were
predictive of positive treatment outcomes.

Environmental Factors By definition, external environmental factors play
a key role in PTSD. Criterion A requires a traumatic stressor.
Interestingly, not all stressors have equal effects, which provided
support for the idea that PTSD is not just a conditioned response to a
fear-inducing situation. In the National Comorbidity Study, Kessler et
al. (1995) found that the more personally directed events, such as rape,
molestation, assault, and combat, were more likely to result

Environmental Factors

233

in PTSD than more impersonal events, such as disasters or accidents,
even though the latter were far more common. In fact, rape was the
single event most likely to result in PTSD among both men and women.
There is also a dose-response relationship such that the more traumatic
events one experiences, the more likely one is to develop PTSD (e.g.,
Fairbank, Keane, & Malloy, 1983; Foy, Carroll, & Donahoe, 1987; March,
1993; Rodriguez, Vande-Kemp, & Foy, 1998).

Importance of Social Support and Additional Life Stress Among risk
factors for the development or maintenance of PTSD, social support has
emerged as one of the most important variables. A number of studies have
found that lack of social support is a risk factor for PTSD among people
exposed to trauma (e.g., Keane, Scott, Chavoya, Lamparski, & Fairbank,
1985; King, King, Foy, Keane, & Fairbank, 1999; Solomon & Mikulincer,
1990). Brewin, Andrews, and Valentine (2000) conducted a meta-analysis
of 77 studies to evaluate risk factors for PTSD. They examined 14
predictors of PTSD that were typically examined in these studies,
including various demographics, psychiatric and trauma history, trauma
severity, lack of social support, and additional life stress. They
looked at 11 studies that measured lack of social support and 8 studies
that assessed additional life stressors. They found that factors
occurring during or after the trauma (trauma severity, lack of social
support, additional life stress) had stronger effects on PTSD than
pretrauma factors. Lack of social support had the strongest effect size
across studies, and additional life stressors demonstrated the
second-highest effect size in the Brewin, Andrews, and Valentine (2000)
meta-analysis.

Intimate Relationships and PTSD An external or interpersonal factor
associated with PTSD is intimate relationship dysfunction.
Epidemiological studies indicate that those with PTSD are as likely as
those without PTSD to be married, but both men and women with PTSD are
substantially more likely to divorce, and divorce multiple times,
following onset of the disorder (Kessler, Walters, & Forthofer, 1998).
PTSD has also been found to be associated with relationship discord,
domestic violence, sexual dysfunction, and mental health problems in the
partners of those with PTSD (e.g., Monson, Fredman, & Dekel, 2010; Taft,
Watkins, Stafford, Street, & Monson, 2011). Avoidance and numbing
symptoms of PTSD have been specifically implicated in relationship
satisfaction (Riggs, Byrne, Weathers, & Litz, 1998), and the
hyperarousal symptoms have been associated with violence perpetration
(Byrne & Riggs, 1996). Most of the research in this area has been
cross-sectional, which does not allow for conclusions about the
directionality of this association. However, there is likely a
reciprocal relationship between intimate relationship functioning and
PTSD, wherein each may serve to facilitate or exacerbate the other
(Monson, Price, & Ranslow, 2005).

Conservation of Resources Another way in which trauma interacts with the
environment to interfere with recovery from PTSD is through the loss of
resources. For example, if people have severe PTSD such

234

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

that they do not sleep and cannot concentrate at work, they may lose
their jobs. Without a job, they may lose social and family support.
Hobfoll (1989, 1991) has proposed a theory of stress called conservation
of resources (COR) that he has subsequently applied to, and tested with,
traumatic stress. The underlying tenet of COR is that people "will
strive to obtain, retain, and protect what they value" (Hobfoll, 1991,
p. 187). Stress occurs when resources are threatened or lost, or when
resources don't increase adequately following their initial investment.
Hobfoll examines four types of resources: conditions (e.g., stable
marriage or work), objects (e.g., housing, car), personal
characteristics (e.g., self-efficacy, skills), and energies, such as
credit or insurance. Because the expenditure of resources to offset
losses may deplete the person's resources, loss spirals may result.
According to COR theory, traumatic stress results in sudden and rapid
loss of resources and the resources that are most valued (e.g., trust in
self and others, perception of control, sense of well-being).
Furthermore, traumatic events make excessive demands, for which people
have little experience and therefore fewer strategies for coping.
Because the demands of traumatic stressors are excessive, there is
typically no amount of resources that would prevent an initial reaction.
However, those who possess abundant personal, social, and financial
resources would be expected to recover more quickly, whereas those who
are already facing additional life stressors or whose resources are
depleted by the trauma may face loss spirals and a downward trajectory
of functioning.

Assessment Given the high prevalence of traumatic events in the general
population, as well as the shame and guilt that often accompanies
certain types of trauma, assessment of PTSD requires care and
sensitivity. The first task of a comprehensive assessment is to
determine whether a life event meets the requirement of a traumatic
stressor (Criterion A). Following this, the presence and severity of the
20 associated symptoms that comprise Criteria B to E must be determined.
Interviews are considered the most reliable and valid method for
assessing PTSD; however, a number of self-report questionnaires have
been developed that may provide a valid, yet quicker and less costly
alternative to an interview (Monson et al., 2014). These measures are
summarized in the following section; however, it should be noted that
there have been a limited number of studies examining the psychometric
properties of the more newly developed measures corresponding to DSM-5
criteria.

Assessment of Traumatic Events In order to determine whether the
diagnosis of PTSD is plausible, the first step in assessment is to
identify traumatic events that the individual experienced in his or her
lifetime. This history can be extraordinarily difficult to obtain,
depending on the experiences and the level of shame, self-blame, or
embarrassment the person may be suffering. For example, although
individuals may have little trouble disclosing that they experienced a
natural disaster like a hurricane or tornado, rape or child sexual abuse
victims may have greater difficulty spontaneously disclosing what
happened to them. This inhibition of disclosure is also consistent with
general patterns of avoidance of trauma-related reminders or cues (i.e.,
symptoms of avoiding talking about or thinking about what occurred).

Assessment

235

Kilpatrick (1983) has suggested several other reasons victims might not
be forthcoming with this information, including fear of a negative
reaction to disclosure, especially if previous disclosure has resulted
in disbelief or blame. The terminology used in the assessment can have
an impact on disclosure as well. For example, many trauma victims may
not recognize or label their experiences as "trauma," "rape," or
"assault," especially if the perpetrator was known to them, or if the
experience was one suffered by many, such as combat or a natural
disaster. Therefore, it is important for the assessor to use sensitive
language and, early in the assessment, be more willing to include false
positives for traumatic events than risk losing important information.
Later questioning can reduce the error of being overly inclusive. An
alternative to this relatively lengthy approach to assessing past
traumas is to use a self-report measure, such as a checklist, to acquire
initial information that can then be explored further through interview.
There are a number of such checklists that can be used as a springboard
for further inquiry. One such measure, the Life Events Checklist for
DSM-5 (LEC-5; Weathers et al., 2013b) has been updated to correspond to
events that may qualify as DSM-5 Criterion A events. The LEC-5 can be
used alone or in conjunction with PTSD symptom measures, such as the
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5; Weathers et al.,
2013a) or the PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5; Weathers et al., 2013,
discussed later). Other scales to assess for traumatic events include
the Traumatic Stress Schedule (Norris, 1990), the Trauma History
Questionnaire (THQ; Green, 1996), the Traumatic Life Events
Questionnaire (TLEQ; Kubany, Leisen, Kaplan, Watson, et al., 2000), and
the Traumatic Events Scale (Vrana & Lauterbach, 1994). With regard to
combat in particular, the Combat Exposure Scale (Keane, Fairbank,
Caddell, & Zimering, 1989) has been used widely to assess the degree of
combat exposure. Although these are useful tools that can be
administered to shorten the overall diagnostic interview, clinicians are
discouraged from relying on them exclusively, without follow-up
questions, due to the possibility of misreporting or lack of
understanding on the part of the individual answering the questions.
That is, an individual's endorsing an event on a checklist doesn't
necessarily indicate that this event would meet criteria for a traumatic
event. With the exception of the Combat Exposure Scale, most of these
measures assess a number of different types of potentially traumatic
events, including accidents, natural and man-made disasters, sexual
assault, child abuse, and physical assault.

Diagnostic Interviews A number of interviews exist that allow a
clinician to make a diagnosis of PTSD and also to assess its overall
severity. The measure often considered to be the gold standard
diagnostic assessment for PTSD is the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale
for DSM-5 (CAPS-5; Weathers et al., 2013a). This semistructured
interview provides a diagnostic decision and also produces a severity
score. The CAPS-5 also includes assessment for the dissociative subtype
of PTSD new to DSM-5. Although the CAPS-5 has not yet been thoroughly
researched, the predecessor to the CAPS-5 (the CAPS for DSM-IV; Blake et
al., 1995) has a large body of research demonstrating its reliability
and validity across a wide variety of populations (see Weathers, Keane,
& Davidson, 2001, for a review). Because of these strengths, the
CAPS/CAPS-5 is probably the most widely

236

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

used diagnostic interview for PTSD (Weathers et al., 2001; Weathers,
Ruscio, & Keane, 1999). The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5
(SCID-5; First, Williams, Karg, & Spitzer, 2015) is a semistructured
interview for a variety of Axis I disorders including PTSD. Different
versions of the SCID-5 are available, including versions for clinical or
research use. The SCID-5 was developed for use by experienced clinicians
and assesses the presence or absence of all the symptoms of PTSD, thus
yielding a decision about diagnosis. However, the SCID does not assess
for frequency or severity of individual symptoms, and it is only
possible to obtain a count of number of symptoms (in addition to a
diagnosis). The Diagnostic Interview Schedule (DIS; Robins, Helzer,
Croughan, & Ratcliff, 1981) is a structured interview that has the
advantage of requiring less training and experience than the CAPS-5 and
SCID-5. As with the SCID, one can make a diagnosis of PTSD with the DIS,
but one cannot assess its level of severity. However, to date, a version
for DSM-5 has not been released. Finally, the PTSD Symptom
Scale--Interview for DSM-5 (PSSI-5; Foa, McLean, Zang, Zhong, Rauch, et
al., 2015) is a semistructured interview that provides a diagnostic
determination as well as an estimate of symptom severity. Initial
research has provided support for the reliability and validity of the
PSSI-5 (Foa, McLean, Zang, Zhong, Rauch, et al., 2015), and its
predecessor, the PSS-I (Foa, Riggs, Dancu, & Rothbaum, 1993), has been
widely used and has also demonstrated strong psychometric properties.

Self-Report Measures A large number of self-report scales for PTSD have
been developed, many with excellent psychometric properties. One
potential problem with using a self-report measure for PTSD is that the
measure often has to rely on the participant's judgment about what
constitutes a traumatic event. In addition, some were developed with
specific trauma populations in mind and thus may be appropriate for only
a certain subset of individuals or may require knowledge about the
traumatic event prior to administration. As with any self-report
measure, it is important to recognize potential limitations in diagnosis
or assessment of symptom severity. However, these limitations can be
overcome in part by using self-report measures in conjunction with a
structured interview. In this capacity, the self-report measures can be
used as a quick screening tool or to demonstrate changes in
symptomatology over time. Two self-report measures with strong
psychometric properties that have been updated to the current criteria
are the PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5; Weathers, Litz, et al., 2013)
and the Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale for DSM-5 (PDS-5; Foa, McLean,
Zang, Zhong, Powers, et al., 2015). Both of these measures can be scored
dimensionally to assess global severity or used to make a provisional
diagnosis of PTSD by summing the number of symptoms meeting criteria in
each PTSD cluster or by using a cutoff score. Other measures include the
Mississippi Scale for Combat-Related PTSD (Keane, Cadell, & Taylor,
1988), the Purdue PTSD Scale--Revised (Lauterbach & Vrana, 1996), the
Impact of Event Scale--Revised (IES-R; Weiss & Marmar, 1997), and the
Distressing Event Questionnaire (DEQ; Kubany, Leisen, Kaplan, & Kelly,
2000), although these measures have not been updated to reflect DSM-5
PTSD criteria.

Assessment

237

Two additional measures of PTSD have been empirically derived from other
existing scales. Posttraumatic stress disorder subscales have been
derived from the Symptom Checklist-90-R (SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 1983) from
different sets of items for female crime victims (Saunders, Arata, &
Kilpatrick, 1990) and for combat veterans (Weathers et al., 1999). The
Keane-PTSD Scale (PK) of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
(MMPI) and MMPI-2 has been used successfully to discriminate Vietnam
combat veterans with and without PTSD (Keane, Malloy, & Fairbank, 1984;
Weathers & Keane, 1999). In response to the more recent need to screen
mass numbers of people for PTSD after combat or disasters, or in primary
care medical settings when time is limited, brief PTSD screens may be
used (e.g., the Primary Care PTSD Screen \[PC-PTSD\]; Prins et al.,
2004). Studies have not validated this measure according to the DSM-5
criteria, though. Finally, of all these measures, it should be noted
that few trauma-related scales include scales to assess response bias.
One notable exception is the Trauma Symptom Inventory (TSI; Briere,
1995). For forensic purposes, in which response bias may be of
particular concern, the assessor may wish to include the TSI or
administer the MMPI-2, which contains the PK scale as well as validity
subscales. In addition to clinical scales, the TSI includes subscales
assessing tendencies to overendorse unusual or bizarre symptoms, to
respond in an inconsistent or random manner, and to deny symptoms others
commonly endorse. The clinical scales include PTSD-related scales that
assess issues such as intrusive experiences, defensive avoidance, and
anxious arousal, as well as subscales that measure frequently observed
problems with depression, anger, dissociation, tension-reduction
behaviors, and disruptions in self-perception and sexual functioning.
Unfortunately, the TSI does not assess exposure to specific traumatic
events, thus requiring the clinician to establish the presence of a
Criterion A event prior to administration.

Physiological Assessment Given that physiological reactivity to trauma
cues is one of the criteria of the disorder, a comprehensive assessment
of PTSD should include psychophysiological testing, especially when the
validity of the diagnosis for a particular individual is questioned. A
number of studies have shown that Vietnam veterans with PTSD are
consistently more physiologically reactive to combat imagery than
Vietnam veterans without PTSD (Keane, Kaloupek, & Kolb, 1998; Keane,
Kolb, et al., 1998; Pitman et al., 1990; Pitman, Orr, Forgue, de Jong, &
Claiborn, 1987). Similar differences between PTSD and non-PTSD
individuals have been found in motor vehicle accident survivors
(Blanchard, Hickling, Buckley, & Taylor, 1996) and childhood sexual
abuse victims (Orr et al., 1998). A number of factors can affect
physiological reactivity, and these must be taken into account when
assessing the validity of psychophysiological findings. For example, the
presence of psychotropic drugs, especially benzodiazepines and
beta-adrenergic blockers, can affect an individual's response.
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that antisocial characteristics
can suppress levels of psychophysiological responding (Miller, Kaloupek,
& Keane, 1999). In addition to those people who do not physiologically
respond, for various reasons, there appear to be some who have an
alternative physiological response to trauma cues, which must also be
taken into account (e.g., dissociation; see Griffin et al., 1997).

238

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

Treatment As reviewed below, there are a variety of psychosocial and
biological treatments that are efficacious in the treatment of PTSD.
Moreover, there have been recent efforts to use psychopharmacological
interventions to facilitate the psychosocial treatments.

Psychosocial Treatment There have now been over 75 randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) of psychotherapy for PTSD (see Watts et al., 2013, for a
meta-analysis). Early trials compared active treatment to wait-list
control, whereas later trials have compared different psychotherapies to
one another or to therapies controlling for the nonspecific elements of
any good psychotherapy. More recent efforts have been aimed at comparing
the additive value of different types of interventions and at
determining the essential elements of a given therapy using dismantling
designs. The research suggests that psychotherapy is effective for the
treatment of PTSD, with meta-analyses indicating large effect sizes
overall (g = 1.14; Watts et al., 2013). Cognitive-behavioral therapy
(CBT) has the most evidence supporting its efficacy and has demonstrated
the largest effect size (g = 1.26; Watts et al., 2013). There are
several other types of therapies with growing evidence of efficacy based
on RCTs.

Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy As noted above, CBT has the strongest
support and is therefore considered the frontline treatment approach for
PTSD. Therapies in this category vary in terms of the degree of focus on
exposure, cognitive restructuring, and skill building. A number of RCTs
have established the efficacy of behavioral exposure to trauma-related
material in the treatment of PTSD compared to a wait-list control
condition. The exposure interventions come in the form of exposure to
the trauma memory, as in imaginal exposure, or through exposure to
trauma-related stimuli in the environment, that is, in vivo exposure.
One of the most thoroughly researched exposure therapies is prolonged
exposure (PE; Foa, Hearst, Dancu, Hembree, & Jaycox, 1994), which
includes both imaginal and in vivo exposure techniques. PE is built on
emotional processing theory (e.g., Cahill & Foa, 2007), discussed
earlier, which suggests that, for recovery from trauma to occur, the
affected person must be able to activate his or her trauma memory, block
the negative reinforcement that occurs with escape and avoidance
behavior, habituate to anxiety, and disconfirm erroneous beliefs. As
anxiety diminishes, the person learns that he or she can tolerate fear
and anxiety, and begins to change his or her incompetence beliefs.
Through exposure to both trauma memories, as well as real-life
situations, the person also learns to discriminate true danger cues from
false alarms and past experiences from the present. PE also addresses
the cognition and memory issues theorized to underlie PTSD by helping
patients organize their trauma memory in a coherent way. Consistent with
this aim, Foa, Riggs, et al. (1995) found that decreases in
disorganization of the trauma narrative from pretreatment to
posttreatment were correlated with successful treatment with PE. PE has
been shown to be efficacious in the treatment of PTSD across many
studies (see Powers, Halpern, Farenschak, Gillihan, & Foa, 2010, for a
meta-analysis). Similarly, several trials have established the efficacy
of different forms of cognitive therapy that have not included
behavioral (i.e., in vivo) exposure interventions in the

Treatment

239

treatment of PTSD (Bryant, Moulds, & Guthrie, 2003; Marks, Lovell,
Noshirvani, Livanou, & Thrasher, 1998; Resick et al., 2008; Tarrier et
al., 1999). Based in part on the social-cognitive and information
processing theories of PTSD discussed earlier, cognitive processing
therapy (CPT; Resick, Monson, & Chard, in press); Resick & Schnicke,
1993) targets unhelpful and inaccurate ways of thinking that occur
following trauma, including assimilation and over-accommodation, using
predominantly cognitive approaches with progressive worksheets to teach
the clients to become their own therapists. CPT also specifically
targets five cognitive content areas discussed earlier that tend to be
affected in PTSD: safety, trust, power/control, esteem, and intimacy.
CPT has established efficacy in the treatment of PTSD and depression in
a variety of traumatized populations (see Lenz, Bruijn, Serman, &
Bailey, 2014, for a meta-analysis). As noted earlier, investigators
found support for the proposed mechanism of CPT, such that changes in
trauma-related cognitions (i.e., self-blame and negative beliefs about
the self) preceded and predicted changes in PTSD later in treatment
(Schumm et al., 2015). Both CPT and PE are considered trauma-focused
therapies, in that they involve talking about the patient's traumatic
event. There are a few non-trauma-focused cognitivebehavioral therapies
that have been found to be more efficacious than wait-list control
conditions. For example, Stress Inoculation Therapy (SIT) without any
trauma-specific interventions has been shown to be efficacious in the
treatment of PTSD (Foa et al., 1999). Present-centered therapy (PCT),
which was originally conceived to be a control condition with a focus on
current problem solving to manage PTSD symptoms, has had good results in
several trials and is now considered to be an evidence-based treatment.
In three of five trials reviewed, it performed as well as the
evidence-based treatment comparisons (see Frost, Laska, & Wampold, 2014,
for a meta-analysis). In head-to-head trials comparing different forms
of CBT, very few differences between the therapies in their ability to
treat PTSD have generally emerged. For example, in the Resick, Nishith,
Weaver, Astin, and Feuer (2002) trial, there were no statistical
differences between CPT and PE in PTSD symptoms at any assessment point,
including PTSD and depression at a long-term follow-up (Resick et al.,
2008). There have been a few potentially important differences between
these treatments found at follow-up assessments and in the treatment of
comorbid conditions. In Foa's early trial comparing PE and SIT, there
were no differences between the two treatments at posttreatment
assessment; however, starting at 3-month follow-up, there was an
advantage of PE over SIT in treating PTSD symptoms (Foa, Rothbaum,
Riggs, & Murdock, 1991). At the 5-year follow-up of their trial
comparing imaginal exposure and cognitive therapy, Tarrier and
Sommerfield (2004) found an advantage of cognitive therapy over imaginal
exposure in maintaining diminished PTSD symptoms. With regard to
conditions often co-occurring with PTSD, Resick et al. (2002) found
statistical advantages of CPT over PE in trauma-related guilt and more
recently with hopelessness (Gallagher & Resick, 2012) and suicidal
ideation over the long term (Gradus, Suvak, Wisco, Marx, & Resick,
2013). The latest generation of studies examining specific cognitive and
behavioral interventions and their combinations in the treatment of PTSD
generally suggests that interventions with a singular element are as
efficacious as those with combined elements. Findings supporting this
conclusion come from Foa et al.'s (1999) study comparing PE to SIT and
to their combination (PE/SIT), and Foa et al.'s (2005) study comparing
PE to PE plus cognitive therapy. Similarly, in Resick et al.'s (2008)
dismantling study

240

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

comparing full CPT with the written trauma account--only element of CPT
(Writing Accounts \[WA\]) and the cognitive therapy--only element of CPT
(CPT-C), there were no differences at posttreatment or 6-month follow-up
assessment. However, Resick et al. (2008) also found that the CPT-C
version led to faster symptom improvement during treatment, differed
significantly from full CPT version until the exposure component was
completed, and differed from the WA condition until the 6-month
follow-up. Thus, the written accounts did not add benefit to the
cognitive therapy--only protocol. An exception to the trend of
equivalent efficacy in singular and combined therapies comes from Bryant
et al.'s (2003) study revealing advantages to combined imaginal exposure
and cognitive restructuring over imaginal exposure alone. An additional
caveat to the conclusion that therapies with a singular element are
equally as efficacious as combined therapies is that studies heretofore
have equated the amount of time spent in treatment sessions for each
therapy, for methodological reasons. Therefore, it is difficult to
determine whether additional elements delivered with extra time might
yield more efficacious treatment. A study of CPT by Galovski and
colleagues (Galovski, Blain, Mott, Elwood, & Houle, 2012) tested the
question of whether adding more sessions would improve outcomes for
those who had heretofore been considered treatment nonresponders with
fixed-length treatments. Galovski et al. defined a treatment completer
as a client who had reached a good end-state functioning on both PTSD
and depression self-report measures according to mutual agreement by the
therapist and the client and the independent interview of PTSD by a
blind assessor. The researchers found that 58% of the participants
needed fewer than the 12 sessions called for by the CPT protocol (mean
number of sessions was 7.5 among early completers), 8% needed exactly 12
sessions, and 26% reached good end-state functioning with 13 to 18
sessions (mean number of sessions was 15.2 in this group). When given
extra sessions, all but two of the participants no longer had PTSD by
the 3-month follow-up. More recently, researchers have expanded the
evidence base for existing frontline treatments by demonstrating their
effectiveness in new populations and through different delivery
modalities. For example, there have been studies examining
group-administered CPT-C with both veterans and active military members
(Morland, Hynes, Mackintosh, Resick & Chard, 2011; Resick et al., 2015).
Morland and colleagues (2011) compared group CPT-C delivered in person
to group CPT-C delivered via telehealth in a sample of veterans and
found that these treatments were equally effective. Resick et al. (2015)
compared group-administered CPT-C to group-administered PCT among a
sample of active military members and found that, while both produced
significant reductions in PTSD symptoms, CPT-C was significantly better
than PCT. More importantly, CPT-C produced reductions in depression
while PCT did not. Taken together, these findings suggest that CPT-C is
an effective treatment for veterans and military personnel, even when
delivered in group format or via telehealth. Finally, some new studies
are looking at the effects of CBT on other areas of functioning.
Galovski, Elwood, Blain, and Resick (2014) found that improvement in
PTSD led to improvements in trait anger and control over anger. Iverson
et al. (2011) examined the subset of women who were victims of intimate
partner violence (IPV) in the Resick et al. (2008) dismantling study.
They found that reductions in PTSD symptoms were associated with lower
rates of IPV at the 6-month follow-up. Gradus et al. (2013)

Treatment

241

examined suicidal ideation from the Resick et al. (2002) comparison of
CPT and PE, and found that while suicidal ideation was decreased for
both groups, there was a significantly greater decrease among those who
received CPT through the long-term follow-up. Wachen, Jimenez, Smith,
and Resick (2014) examined long-term functional outcomes from the Resick
et al. (2002) comparison of CPT with PE. They found that both treatments
had long-term benefits for overall functioning, social/leisure
activities, the family unit, and economic adjustment. The poorer
functioning at posttreatment and beyond found in some group members was
associated with depression rather than PTSD. Finally, Shnaider et al.
(2014) examined psychosocial functioning in a finer-grained way using
the Resick et al. (2008) data. Overall, all domains of psychosocial
functioning improved over treatment and were maintained at follow-up. On
the PTSD symptom cluster level, improvements in hyperarousal were
associated with psychosocial outcomes overall and in the specific areas
of daily living and household tasks, whereas improvements in emotional
numbing were associated with psychosocial outcomes in the nonfamily
relationships domain.

Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing Eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR; Shapiro, 1989b) is another
treatment used with individuals with PTSD, although the proposed
mechanism of the treatment has been a source of controversy. The goal of
EMDR is to help the patient process trauma-related information, but a
unique aspect of the treatment is the use of side-to-side eye movements
(or other forms of stimulation such as hand tapping or auditory stimuli)
that are theorized to help enhance information processing (e.g., Shapiro
& Maxfield, 2002). Several studies have shown that eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is more effective than wait-list
control conditions in the treatment of PTSD (e.g., Rothbaum, 1997;
Wilson, Becker, & Tinker, 1995), and a trial comparing EMDR with PE
found no differences between the two groups in their efficacy in
treating PTSD (Rothbaum, Astin, & Marsteller, 2005), although the sample
size might have been too small to detect anything but large differences.
Although EMDR may lead to improvements in PTSD symptoms, there is much
debate surrounding the active ingredients of EMDR that are considered
responsible for improvements (see Davidson & Parker, 2001, for a
meta-analysis of these and other relevant questions). RCTs in which
patients have received the treatment with and without the manipulation
of eye movements, or with eye movements versus other irrelevant
movements, have yielded no evidence supporting the specific efficacy of
eye movements (e.g., Devilly & Spence, 1999; Pitman et al., 1996). These
results have led many to conclude that the active ingredients of EMDR
are really cognitive-behavioral in nature, because EMDR includes
elements of exposure as well as cognitive reappraisal, which have been
shown to be effective without eye movements (Monson et al., 2014). Other
Therapies with Controlled Evidence Several other therapies have been
shown to be efficacious relative to wait-list and other control
conditions. Brief eclectic psychotherapy (BEP) combines
cognitive-behavioral and psychodynamic approaches and includes five
basic elements: (1) psychoeducation about PTSD, (2) imaginal exposure,
(3) writing tasks and memorabilia aimed at uncovering difficult
feelings, (4) meaning and integration, and (5) farewell ritual. It has
been shown to be efficacious compared with wait-list control conditions
in samples of police

242

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

officers (Gersons, Carlier, & Lamberts, 2000) and outpatients with a
range of traumas (Lindauer, Vlieger, & Jalink, 2005). A more recent RCT
by an independent research group also found favorable results for BEP as
compared with a minimal attention control condition (Schnyder, Muller,
Maercker, & Wittman, 2011). In another RCT comparing BEP with EMDR,
there was no significant difference in outcomes; however, those in the
EMDR condition exhibited faster recovery (Nijdam, Gersons, Reitsma, de
Jongh, & Olff, 2012). To date, no published studies have involved a
direct comparison of BEP to CBT. Thus, further research is needed to
evaluate this treatment relative to current frontline approaches.
Narrative exposure therapy (NET; Schauer, Neuner, & Elbert, 2005)
involves patients providing a detailed chronological report of their own
biographies, with a special focus on traumatic experiences. This report
is recorded in written form and read during sessions with the goal of
developing a coherent narrative of the traumatic event and the
habituation of emotional responses to reminders of the traumatic event.
There have been two controlled trials of NET showing it to be
efficacious compared with psychoeducation and supportive counseling in
survivors of political detention (Bichescu, Neuner, Schauer, & Elbert,
2007) and refugees (Neuner, Schauer, Klaschik, Karunakara, & Elbert,
2004). Other narrative writing interventions also exist (e.g.,
"interapy," "written disclosure," "expressive writing," "written
exposure therapy,") that vary greatly as to the number and content of
the writing prompts and the degree of therapist involvement. Authors of
a recent review suggest that more rigorous research is needed to
evaluate these interventions and their mechanisms before they can be
recommended for treatment of PTSD, but they may be promising options,
particularly for individuals who may not have access to evidence-based,
trauma-focused treatment (Sloan, Sawyer, Lowmaster, Wernick, & Marx,
2015). Finally, cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy for PTSD (CBCT;
Monson & Fredman, 2012) is a 15-session, manualized therapy delivered in
a conjoint format with the goals of simultaneously improving PTSD and
its comorbid symptoms while also improving interpersonal relationship
functioning. The rationale for this approach is that PTSD has been
consistently associated with problematic interpersonal relations, and
these factors have a reciprocal effect on one another. Therefore, the
treatment simultaneously targets PTSD symptoms and relationship
functioning. Three uncontrolled trials and a recent wait-list controlled
trial with a range of traumatized individuals have documented
improvements in PTSD symptoms on a par with individual evidence-based
therapies for PTSD, as well as significant improvements in intimate
relationship functioning (Monson et al., 2011, 2012; Monson, Schnurr,
Stevens, & Guthrie, 2004; Schumm, Fredman, Monson, & Chard, 2013).
Improvements in partners' psychological functioning have also been found
(e.g., Monson, Stevens, & Schnurr, 2005). Follow-up studies reveal that
those with greater pretreatment relationship distress (Shnaider et al.,
2015) and significant others who are more accommodating of their
partners' PTSD symptoms (Fredman et al., 2016) are especially likely to
profit from the treatment. Improvements in various PTSD clusters and
trauma-related cognitions with CBCT support the theory underlying the
treatment (Macdonald, Pukay-Martin, Wagner, Fredman, & Monson, in
press).

Extensions to Younger Patients Although a lengthy discussion of child
treatment is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is worth mentioning
that analogous evidence-based treatments also exist for children and

Treatment

243

adolescents with PTSD (e.g., Allen & Kronenberg, 2014). For example,
trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy (TF-CBT; Cohen, Mannarino, &
Deblinger, 2006;) is a well-established, evidence-based treatment for
children and adolescents that involves psychoeducation, parenting
skills, relaxation, affective modulation, cognitive coping and
processing, trauma narrative, in vivo mastery of trauma reminders,
conjoint child-parent sessions, and enhancing future safety and
development (see Lenz & Hollenbaugh, 2015, for a meta-analysis).
Child-parent psychotherapy (CPP; Lieberman & Van Horn, 2005) is another
evidence-based treatment for children ages 0 to 5 that focuses on the
caregiver-child attachment with the overall goal of supporting healthy
child development (Allen & Kronenberg, 2014). Finally, parent-child
interaction therapy (PCIT; Eyeberg & Funderburk, 2011) is an
evidence-based parent training intervention originally developed for
behavioral problems among children ages 2 to 7, but its application has
been expanded to address parent-child interactions in families that have
experienced violence with the goal of reducing child behavior problems,
caregiver distress, and the potential for child abuse (Allen &
Kronenberg, 2014; Herschell & McNeil, 2005). In addition to these
child-specific treatments, some of the better-established treatments
initially developed for adults have also demonstrated success when
applied to younger patient populations. For example, CPT and PE have
each been found to be effective in adolescent populations (e.g., Ahrens
& Rexford, 2002; Foa, McLean, Capaldi, & Rosenfield, 2013).

Psychopharmacological Treatment There are currently two medications,
both in the class of antidepressants, that have received indications
from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of
PTSD: sertraline and paroxetine. Both of these medications are selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), the class of medications
considered to be the frontline pharmacological treatment for PTSD in
various clinical practice guidelines. While SSRIs have generally been
effective in the treatment of PTSD (a recent meta-analysis found a
pooled effect size for SSRIs in the medium range), not all are equally
effective (Watts et al., 2013). For example, Watts et al. (2013) found
significant effects for paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline but not
citalopram. Other medications have also yielded variable results in the
treatment of PTSD.

Other Antidepressants In meta-analyses of RCTs for PTSD, researchers
have found that, in addition to SSRIs, venlafaxine, a
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), also has strong
support (Hoskins et al., 2015; Ipser & Stein, 2012; Watts et al., 2013).
According to a meta-analysis by Watts et al. (2013), tricyclic
antidepressants (TCAs), monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), and other
antidepressants (i.e., bupropion, nefazodone, and mirtazapine) had
small, nonsignificant effects and therefore have less support for their
use than SSRIs and venlafaxine. Antiadrenergics (Drugs Acting on the
Epinephrine and Norepinephrine Systems) In a meta-analysis of
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials evaluating prazosin
for the treatment of sleep disturbance among individuals with PTSD,
results were

244

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

promising, with medium to large effect sizes (Khachatryan, Groll, Booij,
Sepehry, & Schütz, 2015). While the results appear favorable for
prazosin's effect on sleep symptoms, the results are mixed on its
effects on other PTSD symptoms (e.g., Bernardy & Friedman, 2015). By
contrast, a single RCT of guanfacine found no superiority over placebo
in veterans with PTSD and a number of side effects associated with the
drug's use; thus, these results do not support the use of guanfacine in
the treatment of PTSD (Neylan et al., 2006). In addition, there was some
initial evidence that propranolol is not only an efficacious treatment
for PTSD (e.g., Famularo, Kinscherff, & Fenton, 1988) but also an
effective prophylactic agent to prevent acutely traumatized individuals
from later PTSD (e.g., Pitman et al., 2002; Vaiva et al., 2003).
However, the authors of a recent meta-analysis found inconsistent
results across five studies and concluded that propranolol after trauma
exposure did not appear to reduce the incidence of PTSD (Argolo,
Cavalcanti-Ribeiro, Netto, & Quarantini, 2015), and it is therefore not
recommended as an acute intervention (Bernardy & Friedman, 2015).

Mood Stabilizers and Anticonvulsants Research on the use of mood
stabilizers/anticonvulsants for PTSD has been mixed. Watts et al. (2013)
reported that anticonvulsants were overall ineffective in the treatment
of PTSD but reported a pooled significant effect for topiramate as
monotherapy and augmentation across three RCTs. One small RCT of
lamotrigine found improvements in the reexperiencing and avoidance
symptoms of PTSD (Hertzberg et al., 1999). A large RCT of tiagabine
found no differences from placebo (Davidson, Brady, Mellman, Stein, &
Pollack, 2007). Similarly, no differences between divalproex and placebo
were found in an RCT (Davis et al., 2008). GABA-ergic Agonists
(Antianxiety Medication) In a systematic review and meta-analysis on
benzodiazepines for PTSD, the authors concluded that benzodiazepines are
largely ineffective in the treatment of PTSD and that their risks most
likely outweigh any potential benefits (Guina, Rossetter, DeRhodes,
Nahhas, & Welton, 2015). Thus, it is recommended that providers avoid
benzodiazepines as a treatment for PTSD given the availability of other,
more promising options. Atypical Antipsychotics A few RCTs have
investigated atypical antipsychotics as monotherapy or added to augment
another treatment with mixed results. In a meta-analysis, Watts et
al. (2013) found risperidone (but not olanzapine) to have a significant
effect and to be superior to placebo; however, Bernardy and Friedman
(2015) noted that there is insufficient evidence to support the use of
risperidone for monotherapy or adjunctive therapy and highlighted
potential side effects as a deterrent to this treatment approach.
Augmentation With Partial NMDA Agonist D-cycloserine (DCS) is a partial
NMDA glutamatergic receptor agonist that has positive effects on memory
deficits in elderly volunteers (Jones, Wesnes, & Kirby, 1991) and
Alzheimer's disease patients (Schwartz, Hashtroudi, Herting, Schwartz, &
Deutsch, 1996). For PTSD, DCS has primarily been examined as a drug to
augment the effects of other interventions. It is also thought that DCS
may augment exposure therapies by

Treatment

245

enhancing extinction, but results across studies have been inconsistent.
For example, an initial placebo-controlled trial of DCS as an adjunct to
PE found no overall enhancement of treatment effects, but those
individuals with more severe pretreatment PTSD symptoms that needed more
sessions had more symptom reduction when receiving DCS compared with
placebo (de Kleine, Hendriks, Kusters, Broekman, & van Minnen, 2012).
Another placebo-controlled trial with Iraq and Afghanistan veterans
found that exposure therapy plus DCS produced worse outcomes than
exposure therapy plus placebo (Litz et al., 2012). In a sample of
individuals with PTSD secondary to the World Trade Center attacks in New
York, those receiving DCS plus virtual reality exposure therapy showed
greater improvements in PTSD symptoms, depression, sleep, and anger than
those receiving exposure plus placebo (Difede et al., 2014). Finally, in
another study with Iraq and Afghanistan veterans with military trauma
PTSD, DCS fared no better than placebo on treatment outcomes when added
to virtual reality exposure therapy, but the DCS-treated group exhibited
reduced cortisol and startle reactivity (Rothbaum et al., 2014).

Treatment Summary Several efficacious pharmacological and psychosocial
treatments are available that are capable of ameliorating the symptoms
of PTSD for many individuals. We are aware of only one published
head-to-head trial comparing medications and psychotherapy in the
treatment of PTSD, and that trial compared EMDR to fluoxetine (van der
Kolk et al., 2007). EMDR yielded greater symptom reductions that were
better sustained over time compared with fluoxetine. These results,
favoring psychotherapy over medications for PTSD, are consistent with
meta-analyses comparing medications and psychotherapies generally (Van
Etten & Taylor, 1998; Watts et al., 2013). It is also important to note
that discontinuation of medication is associated with relapse of PTSD
symptoms (e.g., Martenyi, Brown, Zhang, Koke, & Prakash, 2002), whereas
long-term follow-up of patients in PTSD psychotherapy trials indicates
maintenance of gains across different types of therapy (e.g., Resick,
Williams, et al., 2012; Schnurr et al., 2007; Tarrier & Sommerfield,
2004). Future studies that examine the combination and sequencing of
current evidence-based medication and psychosocial treatments (e.g.,
Rothbaum et al., 2006), as well as the use of medications that might
potentiate the effects of psychotherapy for PTSD, are needed to increase
the percentage of individuals who respond to treatment. Moreover, there
is room for psychosocial and pharmacological treatment innovations for
the approximately 50% of individuals in intention-to-treat samples who
do not have a remission in their PTSD diagnosis as a result of
treatment. Several psychotherapies for PTSD in development have at least
uncontrolled trial data supporting their efficacy, including such
therapies as imagery rescripting (Smucker, Dancu, Foa, & Niederee,
1995), interapy (Lange, Rietdijk, & Hudcovicova, 2003), virtual reality
exposure (Rothbaum, Hodges, & Ready, 2001), acceptance and commitment
therapy (Walser & Hayes, 2006), behavioral activation therapy (Jakupcak
et al., 2006), and cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy for PTSD
(Monson et al., 2012). Thus, while cognitive and exposure-based
therapies like CPT and PE are the most effective treatments for PTSD,
patients who do not benefit from these treatments, or who refuse them,
have other potential treatment options, and ongoing research will likely
continue to identify ways to improve treatment response through

246

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

enhancements to existing treatments as well as the development of new
treatments. Likewise, there are new drugs in development that are
theoretically likely to improve PTSD symptoms, such as the
corticotrophin-releasing factor antagonist antalarmin, which has been
shown to reduce stress-induced fearful behavior in preclinical studies
(Friedman & Davidson, 2007). There are also existing drugs, like
hydrocortisone, a glucocorticoid, or mifepristone (RU-486), which blocks
glucocorticoid receptors, that might be considered with new indications
if diminished or excessive cortisol levels (respectively) prove to be
consistently associated with the disorder (Friedman & Davidson, 2007).
Finally, ketamine is another medication currently under investigation. A
recent study provided initial evidence for a rapid reduction in symptoms
following ketamine infusion in a sample of chronic PTSD patients,
although most patients retained significant PTSD symptoms at a 1-week
follow-up (Feder et al., 2014). Furthermore, this treatment was in some
cases associated with adverse effects including temporary dissociative
symptoms and blood pressure elevation. Thus, these new avenues of
treatment approaches will require replication and further study.

Summary and Future Directions Over the past four decades of study on the
effects and treatment of traumatic stress, we have made great gains in
understanding posttraumatic responses and recovery. We now understand
that most people experience traumatic events in their lives that are of
sufficient magnitude to trigger serious posttraumatic responses.
Nevertheless, with time, the majority of people go on to recover from
these events. However, there does appear to be a limit to how much
trauma people can absorb, as demonstrated by a strong dose-response
relationship. The more traumas that people experience, the more
difficulty they will have returning to healthy and balanced functioning
without some type of assistance. A person's biological makeup and
alterations of biology that occur as a result of trauma will interact
with memory, cognition, emotions, and behavior to promote or interfere
with recovery. The external environment also has an important effect on
recovery or maintenance of PTSD symptoms. Positive and sufficient social
support, lack of negative reactions (which has a disproportionate
influence compared with good support), and sufficient resources are
important in recovery. Additional life stressors such as family
adjustment problems and problems with work or housing can all complicate
and delay, or prevent, recovery. One only has to look at situations like
Hurricane Katrina or Sandy, with the prolonged duration of each event
and each area's slow recovery, or the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, with
their multiple deployments of military personnel into highly volatile
and unpredictable violence, to understand how continued environmental
instability prevents the return to homeostasis. Fortunately, we have
treatments that work with the majority of people with PTSD (40% to 80%
have been found to fully remit, depending on the population and sampling
method). Although there is no specific PTSD medication thus far that is
as effective as psychotherapy, many medications can provide some relief
for some symptoms. Both cognitive therapy and exposure treatments are
effective, and unlike some other disorders, there is little evidence of
relapse over time. However, because PTSD is maintained over time by
avoidance and numbing, people often refuse to seek treatment even when
they

Summary and Future Directions

247

know it is available, and they may exhibit rather high dropout rates
(20% to 40%). Also, because PTSD is often accompanied by other
disorders, treatment may be complicated by substance abuse, chronic
pain, severe depression, and personality disorders. The wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan highlight the problem of head injury and PTSD; this may have
been an unidentified complication in other cases of PTSD in which head
injuries are common, such as domestic violence, child abuse, and motor
vehicle accidents. Challenges have included the incorporation of what we
have learned about PTSD into current diagnostic schemes (e.g., DSM-5) as
we move forward in ICD-11. Although most current theories of PTSD are
concerned with memory, emotions, and cognition, there was very little
mention of these in the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria. Because PTSD has
been categorized with the anxiety disorders, most of the research and
treatment focus has been on fear and anxiety to the exclusion of other
important emotions, such as anger, sadness, shame, or horror. There is
sufficient research on these topics to indicate that they may interfere
with recovery and predict poorer outcome with treatment than fear and
anxiety do. The new criteria for DSM-5 include emotions and cognitions
and will most likely spur more research on these topics. Research on
treatment is beginning to push into areas of comorbidity, and is
questioning the current wisdom of treating comorbid conditions
separately and sequentially. Research on systems of delivery such as
telehealth or internet-based therapies is currently under way. Research
on dissemination of evidence-based treatments is also under way, with a
growing understanding that books and workshops are not sufficient to
train clinicians; built-in follow-up supports and actual system change
may be needed. The best way to train clinicians to use evidence-based
treatments with fidelity in regular practice remains an open question.
It is clear that implementing trauma treatment can be a difficult
undertaking for therapists. Specific PTSD treatment elements are
challenging to master, whether they require effectively engaging
patients in imaginal exposure or identifying the impact of trauma on a
patient's belief system. Furthermore, trauma therapists must be able to
hear details of traumatic events including violent and horrific acts and
also remain objective when dealing with moral transgressions such as
acts of violence perpetrated during war. Such work is particularly
difficult when therapists have their own traumatic experiences. Thus,
for both mastering the nuances of individual protocols and remaining
attuned to personal reactions and managing one's own stress, trauma
therapists benefit from feedback and consultation. Finally, there is a
great deal of research currently being conducted on the underlying
biology of PTSD, including neurotransmitters, hormones, and brain
structures, which will fuel our understanding of the interaction of
biology, individual differences, and environment in PTSD over the next
decade.

References Ahrens, J., & Rexford, L. (2002). Cognitive processing
therapy for incarcerated adolescents with PTSD. Journal of Aggression,
Maltreatment & Trauma, 6(1), 201--216. Allen, B., & Kronenberg, M.
(Eds.). (2014). Treating traumatized children: A casebook of
evidence-based therapies. New York, NY: Guilford Press. American
Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (3rd ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author. American
Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R.,
Philpott, R., & Stewart, L. (2007). Delayed onset posttraumatic stress
disorder: A systematic review of the evidence. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 164, 1319--1326. Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R., Rose, S., &
Kirk, M. (2000). Predicting PTSD symptoms in victims of violent crime:
The role of shame, anger, and childhood abuse. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 109, 69--73. Argolo, F. C., Cavalcanti-Ribeiro, P., Netto,
L. R., & Quarantini, L. C. (2015). Prevention of posttraumatic stress
disorder with propranolol: A meta-analytic review. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 79(2), 89--93. Arora, R. C., Fichtner, C. G.,
O'Connor, F., & Crayton, J. W. (1993). Paroxetine binding in the blood
platelets of post-traumatic stress disorder patients. Life Sciences, 53,
919--928. Baker, D. G., West, S. A., Nicholson, W. E., Ekhator, N. N.,
Kasckow, J. W., Hill, K. K., ... Geracioti, T. D., Jr. (1999). Serial
CSF corticotropin-releasing hormone levels and adrenocortical activity
in combat veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 156, 585--588. Beck, J. G., Freeman, J. B., Shipherd, J.
C., Hamblen, J. L., & Lackner, J. M. (2001). Specificity of Stroop
interference in patients with pain and PTSD. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 110, 536--543.

Beckham, J. C., Feldman, M. E., & Kirby, A. C. (1998). Atrocities
exposure in Vietnam combat veterans with chronic posttraumatic stress
disorder: Relationship to combat exposure, symptom severity, guilt, and
interpersonal violence. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 11, 777--785.
Bernardy, N. C., & Friedman, M. J. (2015). Psychopharmacological
strategies in the management of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD):
What have we learned? Current Psychiatry Reports, 17(4), 1--10.
Bichescu, D., Neuner, F., Schauer, M., & Elbert, T. (2007). Narrative
exposure therapy for political imprisonment--related chronic
posttraumatic stress disorder and depression. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 45, 2212--2220. Blake, D. D., Weathers, F. W., Nagy, L. M.,
Kaloupek, D. G., Gusman, F. D., Charney, D. S., & Keane, T. M. (1995).
The development of a clinician-administered PTSD scale. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 8, 75--90. Blanchard, E. B., Hickling, E. J., Buckley,
T. C., & Taylor, A. E. (1996). Psychophysiology of posttraumatic stress
disorder related to motor vehicle accidents: Replication and extension.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 742--751. Blanchard,
E. B., Hickling, E. J., Malta, L. S., Jaccard, J., Devineni, T., Veazey,
C. H., & Galovski, T. E. (2003). Prediction of response to psychological
treatment among motor vehicle accident survivors with PTSD. Behavior
Therapy, 34, 351--363. Blanchard, E. B., Kolb, L. C., Prins, A., Gates,
S., & McCoy, G. C. (1991). Changes in plasma norepinephrine to
combat-related stimuli among Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress
disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 179, 371--373.
Boudewyns, P. A., & Hyer, L. (1990). Physiological response to combat
memories and preliminary treatment outcome in Vietnam veteran PTSD
patients treated with direct therapeutic exposure. Behavior Therapy, 21,
63--87. Bremner, J. D., Innis, R. B., Southwick, S. M., Staib, L.,
Zoghbi, S., & Charney, D. S. (2000). Decreased benzodiazepine receptor
binding in prefrontal cortex in combat-related posttraumatic stress
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1120--1126. Bremner, J.
D., Licinio, J., Darnell, A., Krystal, J. H., Owens, M. J., & Southwick,
S. M., ... Charney, D. S.

248

References (1997). Elevated CSF corticotropin-releasing factor
concentrations in posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154, 624--629. Bremner, J. D., Southwick, S., & Charney, D.
(1999). The neurobiology of posttraumatic stress disorder: An
integration of animal and human research. In P. A. Saigh & J. D. Bremner
(Eds.), Posttraumatic stress disorder: A comprehensive text
(pp. 103--143). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Bremner, J. D., Vermetten,
E., Vythilingam, M., Afzal, N., Schmahl, C., Elzinga, B., & Charney, D.
S. (2004). Neural correlates of the classic color and emotional Stroop
in women with abuse-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 55, 612--620. Brewin, C. R. (1996). Theoretical foundations
of cognitive-behavioral therapy for anxiety and depression. Annual
Review of Psychology, 47, 33--57. Brewin, C. R. (2007). Remembering and
forgetting. In M. J. Friedman, T. M. Keane, & P. A. Resick (Eds.),
Handbook of PTSD: Science and practice (pp. 116--134). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., & Rose, S. (2000). Fear,
helplessness, and horror in posttraumatic stress disorder: Investigating
DSM-IV criterion A2 in victims of violent crime. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 13, 499--509. Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., & Valentine, J. D.
(2000). Meta-analysis of risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder
in trauma-exposed adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
68, 748--766. Brewin, C. R., Dalgleish, T., & Joseph, S. (1996). A dual
representation theory of posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychological
Review, 103, 670--686. Briere, J. (1995). The Trauma Symptom Inventory
(TSI): Professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment
Resources. Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, C. L., & Campbell, L.
A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders:
Implications for the classification of emotional disorders. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 119, 49--58. Bryant, R. A., & Harvey, A. G. (1995).
Processing threatening information in posttraumatic stress disorder.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 537--541. Bryant, R. A., Moulds, M.
L., & Guthrie, R. M. (2003). Imaginal exposure alone and imaginal
exposure with cognitive restructuring in treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71,
706--712.

249

Byrne, C. A., & Riggs, D. S. (1996). The cycle of trauma: Relationship
aggression in male Vietnam veterans with symptoms of posttraumatic
stress disorder. Violence and Victims, 11, 213--225. Cahill, S. P., &
Foa, E. B. (2007). Psychological theories of PTSD. In M. J. Friedman, T.
M. Keane, & P. A. Resick (Eds.), Handbook of PTSD: Science and practice
(pp. 55--77). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A.
P., & Deblinger, E. (2006). Treating trauma and traumatic grief in
children and adolescents. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Cox, B. J.,
Clara, I. P., & Enns, M. W. (2002). Posttraumatic stress disorder and
the structure of common mental disorders. Depression and Anxiety, 15,
168--171. Dalgleish, T. (2004). Cognitive approaches to posttraumatic
stress disorder: The evolution of multirepresentational theorizing.
Psychological Bulletin, 130, 228--260. Davidson, J. R., Brady, K.,
Mellman, T. A., Stein, M. B., & Pollack, M. H. (2007). The efficacy and
tolerability of tiagabine in adult patients with post-traumatic stress
disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 27(1), 85--88. doi:
10.1097/JCP.0b013e31 802e5115 Davidson, P. R., & Parker, K. C. H.
(2001). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR): A
meta-analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69(2),
305--316. Davies, M. I., & Clark, D. M. (1998). Thought suppression
produces a rebound effect with analogue posttraumatic intrusions.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 571--582. Davis, L., Clark, D.,
Kramer, G., Moeller, F., & Petty, F. (1999). D-fenfluramine challenge in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 928--930.
Davis, L. L., Davidson, J. R., Ward, L. C., Bartolucci, A., Bowden, C.
L., & Petty, F. (2008). Divalproex in the treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in
a veteran population. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 28(1),
84--88. doi: 10.1097/JCP.0b013e3 18160f83b de Kleine, R. A., Hendriks,
G. J., Kusters, W. J., Broekman, T. G., & van Minnen, A. (2012). A
randomized placebo-controlled trial of D-cycloserine to enhance exposure
therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
71(11), 962--968. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.02.033

250

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

Derogatis, L. R. (1983). SCL-90-R: Administration, scoring and
procedures manual--II. Towson, MD: Clinical Psychometric Research.
Devilly, G. J., & Spence, S. H. (1999). The relative efficacy and
treatment distress of EMDR and a cognitive-behavior trauma treatment
protocol in the amelioration of posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal
of Anxiety Disorders, 13, 131--157. Difede, J., Cukor, J., Wyka, K.,
Olden, M., Hoffman, H., Lee, F. S., & Altemus, M. (2014). D-cycloserine
augmentation of exposure therapy for post-traumatic stress disorder: A
pilot randomized clinical trial. Neuropsychopharmacology, 39(5),
1052--1058. Dohrenwend, B. P., Turner, J. B., Turse, N. A., Adams, B.
G., Koenen, K. C., & Marshall, R. (2006). The psychological risks of
Vietnam for U.S. veterans: A revisit with new data and methods. Science,
313, 979--982. Dunmore, E., Clark, D. M., & Ehlers, A. (1999). Cognitive
factors involved in the onset and maintenance of posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) after physical or sexual assault. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 37, 809--829. Dunmore, E., Clark, D. M., & Ehlers, A. (2001). A
prospective investigation of the role of cognitive factors in persistent
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) after physical or sexual assault.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 1063--1084. Ehlers, A., & Clark, D.
M. (2000). A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 38, 319--345. Eyeberg, S. M., & Funderburk, B.
(2011). Parent-child interaction therapy protocol. Gainesville, FL: PCIT
International. Fairbank, J. A., Keane, T. M., & Malloy, P. F. (1983).
Some preliminary data on the psychological characteristics of Vietnam
veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 51, 912--919. Famularo, R., Kinscherff, R., &
Fenton, T. (1988). Propranolol treatment for childhood posttraumatic
stress disorder, acute type. American Journal of Diseases of Children,
142, 1244--1247. Feder, A., Parides, M. K., Murrough, J. W., Perez, A.
M., Morgan, J. E., Saxena, S., & ... Charney, D. S. (2014). Efficacy of
intravenous ketamine for treatment of chronic posttraumatic stress
disorder: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(6), 681--688.
doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.62

Fichtner, C., Arora, R., O'Connor, F., & Crayton, J. (1994). Platelet
paroxetine binding and fluoxetine pharmacotherapy in posttraumatic
stress disorder: Preliminary observations on a possible predictor of
clinical treatment response. Life Sciences, 54, 39--44. Field, N. P.,
Classen, C., Butler, L. D., Koopman, C., Zarcone, J., & Spiegel, D.
(2001). Revictimization and information processing in women survivors of
childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 15, 459--469.
First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015).
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders, Clinician Version
(SCID-5-CV). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association. Foa, E.
B., Dancu, C. V., Hembree, E. A., Jaycox, L. H., Meadows, E. A., &
Street, G. P. (1999). A comparison of exposure therapy, stress
inoculation training, and their combination for reducing posttraumatic
stress disorder in female assault victims. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 67, 194--200. Foa, E. B., Feske, U., Murdock, T.
B., Kozak, M. J., & McCarthy, P. R. (1991). Processing of threat-related
information in rape victims. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100,
156--162. Foa, E. B., Hearst, D. E., Dancu, C. V., Hembree, E., &
Jaycox, L. H. (1994). Prolonged exposure (PE) manual. Unpublished
manuscript. Medical College of Pennsylvania, Eastern Pennsylvania
Psychiatric Institute. Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., Cahill, S. P., Rauch,
S. A., Riggs, D. S., Feeny, N. C., & Yadin, E. (2005). Randomized trial
of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder with and without
cognitive restructuring: Outcome at academic and community clinics.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 953--964. Foa, E. B.,
& Kozak, M. J. (1985). Treatment of anxiety disorders: Implications for
psychopathology. In A. H. Tuma & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the
anxiety disorders (pp. 421--452). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Foa, E. B., &
Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to
corrective information. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 20--35. Foa, E. B.,
McLean, C. P., Capaldi, S., & Rosenfield, D. (2013). Prolonged exposure
vs supportive counseling for sexual abuse--related PTSD in adolescent
girls: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA, 310(24), 2650--2657. Foa, E.
B., McLean, C. P., Zang, Y., Zhong, J., Powers, M. B., Kauffman, B. Y.,
... Knowles, K.

References (2015). Psychometric properties of the Posttraumatic
Diagnostic Scale for DSM-5 (PDS-5). Psychological Assessment. Advance
online publication. doi: 10.1037/pas0000258 Foa, E. B., McLean, C. P.,
Zang, Y., Zhong, J., Rauch, S., Porter, K., ... Kauffman, B. Y. (2015).
Psychometric properties of the Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Symptom
Scale Interview for DSM--5 (PSSI--5). Psychological Assessment. Advance
online publication. doi: 10.1037/pas0000259 Foa, E. B., Molnar, C., &
Cashman, L. (1995). Change in rape narratives during exposure therapy
for posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 8,
675--690. Foa, E. B., & Riggs, D. S. (1993). Posttraumatic stress
disorder in rape victims. In J. Oldham, M. B. Riba, & A. Tasman (Eds.),
American Psychiatric Press review of psychiatry (pp. 273--303).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S.,
Dancu, C. V., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1993). Reliability and validity of a
brief instrument for assessing post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal
of Traumatic Stress, 6, 459--473. Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Massie, E.
D., & Yarczower, M. (1995). The impact of fear activation and anger on
the efficacy of exposure treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder.
Behavior Therapy, 26, 487--499. Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1998).
Treating the trauma of rape: Cognitive-behavioral therapy for PTSD. New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Foa, E. B., Rothbaum, B. O., Riggs, D. S., &
Murdock, T. B. (1991). Treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder in
rape victims: A comparison between cognitive-behavioral procedures and
counseling. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59, 715--723.
Foy, D. W., Carroll, E. M., & Donahoe, C. P. (1987). Etiological factors
in the development of PTSD in clinical samples of Vietnam combat
veterans. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 43, 17--27. Fredman, S. J.,
Pukay-Martin, N. D., Macdonald, A., Wagner, A. C., Vorstenbosch, V., &
Monson, C. M. (2016). Partner accommodation moderates treatment outcomes
for couple therapy for PTSD. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 84, 79--87. doi: 10.1037/ccp0000061 Freeman, J. B., & Beck,
J. G. (2000). Cognitive interference for trauma cues in sexually abused
adolescent girls with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Clinical
Child Psychology, 29, 245--256.

251

Friedman, M. J., & Davidson, J. R. (2007). Pharmacotherapy for PTSD. In
M. J. Friedman, T. M. Keane, & P. A. Resick (Eds.), Handbook of PTSD:
Science and practice (pp. 376--405). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Friedman, M. J., Resick, P. A., Bryant, R. A., & Brewin, C. R. (2011).
Considering PTSD for DSM-5. Depression and Anxiety, 28(9), 750--769.
doi: 10.1002/ da.20767 Friedman, M. J., & Southwick, S. M. (1995).
Towards pharmacotherapy for post-traumatic stress disorder. In M. J.
Friedman, D. S. Charney, & A. Y. Deutch (Eds.), Neurobiological and
clinical consequences of stress (pp. 465--482). Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott-Raven. Frost, N. D., Laska, K. M., & Wampold, B. E. (2014).
The evidence for present-centered therapy as treatment for posttraumatic
stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 27(1), 1--8. Galea, S.,
Ahern, J., Resnick, H., Kilpatrick, D., Bucuvalas, M., Gold, J., &
Vlahov, D. (2002). Psychological sequelae of the September 11 terrorist
attacks in New York City. New England Journal of Medicine, 346,
982--987. Gallagher, M. W., & Resick, P. A. (2012). Mechanisms of change
in cognitive processing therapy and prolonged exposure therapy for PTSD:
Preliminary evidence for the differential effects of hopelessness and
habituation. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 36, 750--755. doi:
10.1007/s10608-011-9423-6 Galovski, T. E., Blain, L. M., Mott, J. M.,
Elwood, L., & Houle, T. (2012). Manualized therapy for PTSD: Flexing the
structure of cognitive processing therapy. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 80, 968--981. doi: 10.1037/a0030600 Galovski, T.,
E., Elwood, L. S., Blain, B. M., & Resick, P. A. (2014). Changes in
anger in relationship to responsivity to PTSD treatment. Psychological
Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 6(1), 56--64. doi:
10.1037/a0031364 Gersons, B. P. R., Carlier, I. V. E., & Lamberts, R. D.
(2000). Randomized clinical trial of brief eclectic psychotherapy for
police officers with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 13, 333--347. Gilbertson, M. W., Shenton, M. E., Ciszewski, A.,
Kasai, K., Lasko, N. B., Orr, S. P., & Pitman, R. K. (2002). Smaller
hippocampal volume predicts pathologic vulnerability to psychological
trauma. Nature Neuroscience, 5(11), 1242--1247.

252

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

Gilman, R., Schumm, J. A., & Chard, K. M. (2012). Hope as a change
mechanism in the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder.
Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 4(3),
270--277. doi: 10.1037/a0024252 Gradus, J. L., Suvak, M. K., Wisco, B.
E., Marx, B. P., & Resick, P. A. (2013). Treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder reduces suicidal ideation. Depression and Anxiety, 30,
1046--1053. Green, B. L. (1996). Trauma History Questionnaire. In B. H.
Stamm (Ed.), Measurement of stress, trauma, and adaptation
(pp. 366--369). Lutherville, MD: Sidran. Griffin, M. G., Resick, P. A.,
& Galovski, T. E. (2006, November). Psychobiological assessment
following cognitive behavioral treatment for PTSD in rape and physical
assault survivors. Paper presented at the Psychobiology and Treatment of
PTSD symposium, International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies,
Hollywood, CA. Griffin, M. G., Resick, P. A., & Mechanic, M. B. (1997).
Objective assessment of peritraumatic dissociation: Psychophysiological
indicators. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154(8), 1081--1088. Guina,
J., Rossetter, S. R., DeRhodes, B. J., Nahhas, R. W., & Welton, R. S.
(2015). Benzodiazepines for PTSD: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 21(4), 281--303. Gutner, C., Rizvi, S.
L., Monson, C. M., & Resick, P. A. (2006). Changes in coping strategies,
relationship to the perpetrator, and posttraumatic stress disorder in
female crime victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 19, 813--823. Hamner,
M., & Diamond, B. (1993). Elevated plasma dopamine in posttraumatic
stress disorder: A preliminary report. Biological Psychiatry, 33,
304--306. Harvey, A. G., & Bryant, R. A. (1998). The effect of attempted
thought suppression in acute stress disorder. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 36, 583--590. Heim, C., Newport, D. J., Heit, S., Graham, Y. P.
Wilcox, M., Bonsall, R., ... Nemeroff, C. B. (2000). Pituitary-adrenal
and autonomic responses to stress in women after sexual and physical
abuse in childhood. JAMA, 284, 592--597. Hellawell, S. J., & Brewin, C.
R. (2004). A comparison of flashbacks and ordinary autobiographical
memories of trauma: Content and language. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 42, 1--12.

Henning, K. R., & Frueh, B. C. (1997). Combat guilt and its relationship
to PTSD symptoms. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 53, 801--808.
Herschell, A. D., & McNeil, C. B. (2005). Theoretical and empirical
underpinnings of parent-child interaction therapy with child physical
abuse populations. Education & Treatment of Children, 28(2), 142--162.
Hertzberg, M. A., Butterfield, M. I., Feldman, M. E., Beckham, J. C.,
Sutherland, S. M., Connor, K. M., & Davidson, J. R. (1999). A
preliminary study of lamotrigine for the treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 1226--1229. Hobfoll, S. E.
(1989). Conservation of resources: A new attempt at conceptualizing
stress. American Psychologist, 44, 513--524. Hobfoll, S. E. (1991).
Traumatic stress: A theory based on rapid loss of resources. Anxiety
Research, 4, 187--197. Hoge, C. W., Auchterlonie, J. L., & Milliken, C.
S. (2006). Mental health problems, use of mental health services, and
attrition from military service after returning from deployment to Iraq
or Afghanistan. JAMA, 295, 1023--1032. Hoge, C. W., Riviere, L. A.,
Wilk, J. E., Herrell, R. K., & Weathers, F. W. (2014). The prevalence of
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in US combat soldiers: A
head-to-head comparison of DSM-5 versus DSM-IV-TR symptom criteria with
the PTSD checklist. Lancet Psychiatry, 1(4), 269--277. Hollon, S. D., &
Garber, J. (1988). Cognitive therapy. In L. Y. Abramson (Ed.), Social
cognition and clinical psychology: A synthesis (pp. 204--253). New York,
NY: Guilford Press. Hoskins, M., Pearce, J., Bethell, A., Dankova, L.,
Barbui, C., Tol, W. A., ... Bisson, J. I. (2015). Pharmacotherapy for
post-traumatic stress disorder: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 206(2), 93--100. Ipser, J. C., & Stein,
D. J. (2012). Evidence-based pharmacotherapy of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology,
15(06), 825--840. Iverson, K. M., Gradus, J. L., Resick, P. A., Suvak,
M. K., Smith, K. F., & Monson, C. M. (2011). Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for PTSD and depression symptoms reduces risk for future
intimate partner violence among interpersonal trauma survivors. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79, 193--202.

References Jakupcak, M., Roberts, L., Martell, C., Mulick, P., Michael,
S., Reed, R., ... McFall, M. (2006). A pilot study of behavioral
activation for veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 19, 387--391. Janoff-Bulman, R. (1992). Shattered
assumptions: Towards a new psychology of trauma. New York, NY: Free
Press. Jones, C., Harvey, A. G., & Brewin, C. R. (2007). The
organisation and content of trauma memories in survivors of road traffic
accidents. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 151--162. Jones, J. C., &
Barlow, D. H. (1990). The etiology of posttraumatic stress disorder.
Clinical Psychology Review, 10, 299--328. Jones, R. W., Wesnes, K. A., &
Kirby, J. (1991). Effects of NMDA modulation in scopolamine dementia.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 640, 241--244. Keane, T. M.,
Caddell, J. M., & Taylor, K. L. (1988). Mississippi Scale for
Combat-Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Three studies in
reliability and validity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
56, 85--90. Keane, T. M., Fairbank, J. A., Caddell, J. M., & Zimering,
R. T. (1989). Implosive (flooding) therapy reduces symptoms of PTSD in
Vietnam combat veterans. Behavior Therapy, 20, 245--260. Keane, T. M.,
Fairbank, J. A., Caddell, J. M., Zimering, R. T., & Bender, M. E.
(1985). A behavioral approach to assessing and treating posttraumatic
stress disorder in Vietnam veterans. In C. R. Figley (Ed.), Trauma and
its wake (pp. 257--294). New York, NY: Brunner/ Mazel. Keane, T. M.,
Kaloupek, D. G., & Kolb, L. C. (1998). VA Cooperative Study #334: I.
Summary of findings on the psychological assessment of PTSD. PTSD
Research Quarterly, 9, 1--4. Keane, T. M., Kolb, L. C., Kaloupek, D. G.,
Orr, S. P., Blanchard, E. B., Thomas, R. G., ... Lavori, P. W. (1998).
Utility of psychophysiology measurement in the diagnosis of
posttraumatic stress disorder: Results from a Department of Veterans
Affairs cooperative study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 66, 914--923. Keane, T. M., Malloy, P. F., & Fairbank, J. A.
(1984). Empirical development of an MMPI subscale for the assessment of
combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 52, 888--891.

253

Keane, T. M., Scott, W. O., Chavoya, G. A., Lamparski, D. M., &
Fairbank, J. A. (1985). Social support in Vietnam veterans with
posttraumatic stress disorder: A comparative analysis. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 53, 95--102. Kessler, R. C.,
Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E.
(2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 62, 593--602. Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet,
E., Hughes, M., & Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in
the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52,
1048--1060. Kessler, R. C., Walters, E. E., & Forthofer, M. A. (1998).
The social consequences of psychiatric disorders: III. Probability of
marital stability. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 1092--1096.
Khachatryan, D., Groll, D., Booij, L., Sepehry, A. A., & Schütz, C. G.
(2015). Prazosin for treating sleep disturbances in adults with
posttraumatic stress disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. General Hospital Psychiatry. Advance
online publication. doi: 10.1016/ j.genhosppsych.2015.10.007 Kilpatrick,
D. G. (1983). Rape victims: Detection, assessment and treatment.
Clinical Psychologist, 36, 92--95. Kilpatrick, D. G., Best, C. L.,
Veronen, L. J., Amick, A. E., Villeponteaux, L. A., & Ruff, G. A.
(1985). Mental health correlates of criminal victimization: A random
community survey. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 53,
866--873. Kilpatrick, D. G., Resnick, H. S., Milanak, M. E., Miller, M.
W., Keyes, K. M., & Friedman, M. J. (2013). National estimates of
exposure to traumatic events and PTSD prevalence using DSM-IV and DSM-5
criteria. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 26(5), 537--547. Kimerling, R.,
Ouimette, P. C., & Wolfe, J. (Eds.). (2002). Gender and PTSD. New York,
NY: Guilford Press. King, D. W., King, L. A., Foy, D. W., Keane, T. M.,
& Fairbank, J. A. (1999). Posttraumatic stress disorder in a national
sample of female and male Vietnam veterans: Risk factors, war-zone
stressors, and resilience-recovery variables. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 108, 164--170. Krueger, R. F., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., &
Silva, P. A. (1998). The structure and stability of common

254

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

mental disorders (DSM-III-R): A longitudinalepidemiological study.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 216--227. Krueger, R. F., McGue,
M., & Iacono, W. G. (2001). The higher-order structure of common DSM
mental disorders: Internalization, externalization, and their
connections to personality. Personality and Individual Differences, 30,
1245--1259. Kubany, E. S. (1994). A cognitive model of guilt typology in
combat-related PTSD. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 7, 3--19. Kubany, E.
S., Leisen, M. B., Kaplan, A. S., & Kelly, M. P. (2000). Validation of a
brief measure of posttraumatic stress disorder: The Distressing Event
Questionnaire (DEQ). Psychological Assessment, 12, 197--209. Kubany, E.
S., Leisen, M. B., Kaplan, A. S., Watson, S. B., Haynes, S. N., Owens,
J. A., & Burns, K. (2000). Development and preliminary validation of a
brief broad-spectrum measure of trauma exposure: The Traumatic Life
Events Questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 12, 210--224. Kulka, R.
A., Schlenger, W. E., Fairbank, J. A., Hough, R. L., Jordan, B. K.,
Marmar, C. R., & Weiss, D. S. (1990). Trauma and the Vietnam War
generation: Report of findings from the National Vietnam Veterans
Readjustment Study. New York, NY: Brunner/Mazel. Lang, P. J. (1979). A
bio-informational theory of emotional imagery. Psychophysiology, 16,
495--512. Lange, A., Rietdijk, D., & Hudcovicova, M. (2003). Interapy: A
controlled randomized trial of the standardized treatment of
posttraumatic stress through the Internet. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 71, 901--909. Lanius, R. A., Brand, B., Vermetten,
E., Frewen, P. A., & Spiegel, D. (2012). The dissociative subtype of
posttraumatic stress disorder: Rationale, clinical and neurobiological
evidence, and implications. Depression and Anxiety, 29(8), 701--708.
doi: 10.1002/da.21889 Lauterbach, D., & Vrana, S. R. (1996). Three
studies on the reliability and validity of a self-report measure of
posttraumatic stress disorder. Assessment, 3, 17--25. Lemieux, A. M., &
Coe, C. L. (1995). Abuse-related posttraumatic stress disorder: Evidence
for chronic neuroendocrine activation in women. Psychosomatic Medicine,
57, 105--115. Lenz, S., Bruijn, B., Serman, N. S., & Bailey, L. (2014).
Effectiveness of cognitive processing therapy

for treating posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 36(4), 360. Lenz, A. S., & Hollenbaugh, K. M. (2015).
Metaanalysis of trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy for treating
PTSD and co-occurring depression among children and adolescents.
Counseling Outcome Research and Evaluation, 6(1), 18--32. Leskela, J.,
Dieperink, M., & Thuras, P. (2002). Shame and posttraumatic stress
disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 15, 223--226. Lieberman, A. F., &
Van Horn, P. (2005). Don't hit my mommy!: A manual for child-parent
psychotherapy with young witnesses of family violence. Washington, DC:
Zero to Three Press. Lindauer, R. J. L., Vlieger, E.-J., & Jalink, M.
(2005). Effects of psychotherapy on hippocampal volume in out-patients
with post-traumatic stress disorder: An MRI investigation. Psychological
Medicine, 35, 1421--1431. Lipschitz, D. S., Rasmusson, A. M., & Yehuda,
R. (2003). Salivary cortisol responses to dexamethasone in adolescents
with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of the American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 42, 1301--1317. Litz, B. T.,
Salters-Pedneault, K., Steenkamp, M. M., Hermos, J. A., Bryant, R. A.,
Otto, M. W., & Hofmann, S. G. (2012). A randomized placebocontrolled
trial of D-cycloserine and exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress
disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 46(9), 1184--1190. Litz, B.
T., Weathers, F. W., Monaco, V., Herman, D. S., Wulfsohn, M., Marx, B.,
& Keane, T. M. (1996). Attention, arousal, and memory in posttraumatic
stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 9, 497--518. Macdonald,
A., Pukay-Martin, N. D., Wagner, A., Fredman, S. J., & Monson, C. M. (In
press). Improvements in PTSD symptom clusters and trauma-related
cognitions in a randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavioral
couple therapy for PTSD. Journal of Family Psychology. March, J. S.
(1993). What constitutes a stressor? The "criterion A" issue. In J. R.
T. Davidson & E. B. Foa (Eds.), DSM-IV and beyond (pp. 37--54).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Marks, I., Lovell, K.,
Noshirvani, H., Livanou, M., & Thrasher, S. (1998). Treatment of
posttraumatic stress disorder by exposure and/or cognitive
restructuring: A controlled study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55,
317--325.

References Martenyi, F., Brown, E. B., Zhang, H., Koke, S. C., &
Prakash, A. (2002). Fluoxetine v. placebo in prevention of relapse in
post-traumatic stress disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 181,
315--320. McCann, I. L., & Pearlman, L. A. (1990). Psychological trauma
and the adult survivor: Theory, therapy, and transformation. New York,
NY: Brunner/Mazel. McCann, I. L., Sakheim, D. K., & Abrahamson, D. J.
(1988). Trauma and victimization: A model of psychological adaptation.
Counseling Psychologist, 16, 531--594. McFall, M. E., Murburg, M. M.,
Ko, G. N., & Veith, R. C. (1990). Autonomic responses to stress in
Vietnam combat veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 27, 1165--1175. McNally, R. J., English, G. E., & Lipke, H.
J. (1993). Assessment of intrusive cognition in PTSD: Use of the
modified Stroop paradigm. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 6, 33--41.
McNally, R. J., Kaspi, S. P., Riemann, B. C., & Zeitlin, S. B. (1990).
Selective processing of threat cues in posttraumatic stress disorder.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 99, 398--402. McNally, R. J., &
Riccardi, J. N. (1996). Suppression of negative and neutral thoughts.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 24, 17--25. Milad, M. R., &
Rauch, S. L. (2007). The role of the orbitofrontal cortex in anxiety
disorders. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1121(1),
546--561. Miller, M. W., Fogler, J., Wolf, E. J., Kaloupek, D. G., &
Keane, T. M. (2008). The internalizing and externalizing structure of
psychiatric comorbidity in combat veterans. Journal of Traumatic Stress,
21, 58--65. Miller, M. W., Greif, J. L., & Smith, A. A. (2003).
Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire profiles of veterans with
traumatic combat exposure: Externalizing and internalizing subtypes.
Psychological Assessment, 15, 205--215. Miller, M. W., Kaloupek, D. G.,
Dillon, A. L., & Keane, T. M. (2004). Externalizing and internalizing
subtypes of combat-related PTSD: A replication and extension using the
PSY-5 scales. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 113, 636--645. Miller, M.
W., Kaloupek, D. G., & Keane, T. M. (1999, October). Antisociality and
physiological hyporesponsivity during exposure to trauma-related stimuli
in patients with PTSD. Poster presented at the 39th Annual Meeting of
the Society for Psychophysiological Research, Granada, Spain.

255

Miller, M. W., & Resick, P. A. (2007). Internalizing and externalizing
subtypes in female sexual assault survivors: Implications for the
understanding of complex PTSD. Behavior Therapy, 38, 58--71. Monson, C.
M., & Fredman, S. J. (2012). Cognitivebehavioral conjoint therapy for
PTSD. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Monson, C. M., Fredman, S. J.,
Adair, K. C., Stevens, S. P., Resick, P. A., Schnurr, P. P., ...
Macdonald, A. (2011). Cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy for PTSD:
Pilot results from a community sample. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 24,
97--101. Monson, C. M., Fredman, S. J., & Dekel, R. (2010).
Posttraumatic stress disorder in an interpersonal context. In J. G. Beck
(Ed.), Interpersonal processes in the anxiety disorders: Implications
for understanding psychopathology and treatment (pp. 179--208).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Monson, C. M.,
Fredman, S. J., Macdonald, A., Pukay-Marin, N. D., Resick, P. A., &
Schnurr P. P. (2012). Effect of cognitive-behavioral couple therapy for
PTSD: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 308, 700--709. Monson, C. M.,
Friedman, M., & La Bash, H. A. J. (2014). A psychological history of
PTSD. In M. J. Friedman, T. M. Keane, & P. A. Resick (Eds.), Handbook of
PTSD: Science and practice (pp. 60--78). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Monson, C. M., Price, J. L., & Ranslow, E. (2005). Treating combat PTSD
through cognitive processing therapy. Federal Practitioner, 22, 75--83.
Monson, C. M., Schnurr, P. P., Stevens, S. P., & Guthrie, K. A. (2004).
Cognitive-behavioral couple's treatment for posttraumatic stress
disorder: Initial findings. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 17, 341--344.
Monson, C. M., Stevens, S. P., & Schnurr, P. P. (2005).
Cognitive-behavioral couple's treatment for posttraumatic stress
disorder. In T. A. Corales (Ed.), Focus on posttraumatic stress disorder
research (pp. 245--274). Hauppague, NY: Nova Science. Moradi, A. R.,
Taghavi, M. R., Neshat Doost, H. T., Yule, W., & Dalgleish, T. (1999).
Performance of children and adolescents with PTSD on the Stroop
colour-naming task. Psychological Medicine, 29, 415--419. Morgan, C. A.,
III, Hazlett, G., Wang, S., Richardson, E. G., Jr., Schnurr, P., &
Southwick, S. M. (2001). Symptoms of dissociation in humans experiencing
acute, uncontrollable stress: A prospective

256

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

investigation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1239--1247. Morgan,
C. A., III, Southwick, S., Hazlett, G., Rasmusson, A., Hoyt, G., Zimolo,
Z., & Charney, D. (2004). Relationships among plasma
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and cortisol levels, symptoms of
dissociation, and objective performance in humans exposed to acute
stress. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 819--825. Morgan, C. A.,
III, Wang, S., & Southwick, S. M. (2000). Plasma neuropeptide-Y
concentrations in humans exposed to military survival training.
Biological Psychiatry, 47, 902--909. Morland, L. A., Hynes, A. K.,
Mackintosh, M., Resick, P. A., & Chard, K. M. (2011). Group cognitive
processing therapy delivered to veterans via telehealth: A pilot cohort.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 24(4), 465--469. Mowrer, O. H. (1947). On
the dual nature of learning--- a re-interpretation of "conditioning" and
"problemsolving." Harvard Educational Review, 14, 102--148. Neuner, F.,
Schauer, M., Klaschik, C., Karunakara, U., & Elbert, T. (2004). A
comparison of narrative exposure therapy, supportive counseling, and
psychoeducation for treating posttraumatic stress disorder in an African
refugee settlement. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72,
579--587. Neylan, T. C., Lenoci, M., Samuelson, K. W., Metzler, T. J.,
Henn-Haase, C., Hierholzer, R. W., ... Marmar, C. R. (2006). No
improvement of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms with guanfacine
treatment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(12), 2186--2188. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.163.12.2186 Nijdam, M. J., Gersons, B. P. R., Reitsma,
J. B., de Jongh, A., & Olff, M. (2012). Brief eclectic psychotherapy v.
eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy for post-traumatic
stress disorder: Randomised controlled trial. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 200(3), 224--231. Norris, F. H. (1990). Screening for
traumatic stress: A scale for use in the general population. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 20, 1704--1718. Norris, F. H. (1992).
Epidemiology of trauma: Frequency and impact of different potentially
traumatic events on different demographic groups. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 60, 409--418. O'Doherty, D. M., Chitty, K. M.,
Saddiqui, S., Bennett, M. R., & Lagopoulos, J. (2015). A systematic
review and meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging measurement of
structural volumes in posttraumatic

stress disorder. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 232(1), 1--33. doi:
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2015 .01.002 O'Donnell, M. L., Alkemade, N.,
Nickerson, A., Creamer, M., McFarlane, A. C., Silove, D., ... Forbes, D.
(2014). Impact of the diagnostic changes to post-traumatic stress
disorder for DSM-5 and the proposed changes to ICD-11. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 205(3), 230--235. Orr, S. P., Lasko, N. B., Metzger, L.
J., Berry, N. J., Ahern, C. E., & Pitman, R. K. (1998).
Psychophysiologic assessment of women with posttraumatic stress disorder
resulting from childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 66, 906--913. Orsillo, S. M., Weathers, F. W.,
Litz, B. T., Steinberg, H. R., Huska, J. A., & Keane, T. M. (1996).
Current and lifetime psychiatric disorders among veterans with war
zone--related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 184, 307--313. Owens, G. P., & Chard, K. M. (2001).
Cognitive distortions among women reporting childhood sexual abuse.
Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 16, 178--191. Pitman, R. K., Orr, S.
P., Altman, B., Longpre, R. E., Poiré, R. E., & Macklin, M. L. (1996).
Emotional processing during eye movement desensitisation and
reprocessing therapy of Vietnam veterans with chronic posttraumatic
stress disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 37, 419--429. Pitman, R. K.,
Orr, S. P., Forgue, D. F., & Altman, B. (1990). Psychophysiologic
responses to combat imagery of Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic
stress disorder versus other anxiety disorders. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 99, 49--54. Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Forgue, D. F., de
Jong, J., & Claiborn, J. M. (1987). Psychophysiologic assessment of
posttraumatic stress disorder imagery in Vietnam combat veterans.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 970--975. Pitman, R. K., Sanders, K.
M., Zusman, R. M., Healy, A. R., Cheema, F., Lasko, N. B., ... Orr, S.
P. (2002). Pilot study of secondary prevention of posttraumatic stress
disorder with propranolol. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 189--192. Powers,
M. B., Halpern, J. M., Ferenschak, M. P., Gillihan, S. J., & Foa, E. B.
(2010). A meta-analytic review of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic
stress disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 635--641.

References Prins, A., Ouimette, P., Kimerling, R., Camerond, R. P.,
Hugelshofer, D. S., Shaw-Hegwer, J., ... Sheikh, J. I. (2004). The
Primary Care PTSD Screen (PC-PTSD): Development and operating
characteristics. Primary Care Psychiatry, 9, 9--14. Rachman, S. (1980).
Emotional processing. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 18, 51--60.
Ramage, A. E., Litz, B. T., Resick, P. A., Woolsey, M. D., Dondanville,
K. A., Young-McCaughan, S., ... the STRONG STAR Consortium. (2016).
Regional cerebral glucose metabolism differentiates danger- and
non-danger-based traumas in post-traumatic stress disorder. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience. Advance online publication. doi:
10.1093/ scan/nsv102 Ramchand, R., Schell, T. L., Karney, B. R., Osilla,
K. C., Burns, R. M., & Caldarone, L. B. (2010). Disparate prevalence
estimates of PTSD among service members who served in Iraq and
Afghanistan: Possible explanations. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 23(1),
59--68. doi: 10.1002/jts.20486 Rasmusson, A. M., Hauger, R. L., Morgan,
C. A., III, Bremner, J. D., Southwick, S. M., & Charney, D. S. (2000).
Low baseline and yohimbine stimulated plasma neuropeptide Y (NPY) levels
in combatrelated PTSD. Biological Psychiatry, 47, 526--539. Rasmusson,
A. M., Pinna, G., & Paliwal, P. (2006). Decreased cerebrospinal fluid
allopregnanolone levels in women with posttraumatic stress disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 60, 704--713. Rasmusson, A. M., Vasek, J., &
Lipschitz, D. S. (2004). An increased capacity for adrenal DHEA release
is associated with decreased avoidance and negative mood symptoms in
women with PTSD. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 1546--1557. Rasmusson, A.
M., Vythilingam, M., & Morgan, C. A., III, (2003). The
neuroendocrinology of posttraumatic stress disorder: New directions. CNS
Spectrums, 8, 651--667. Resick, P. A. (1992). Cognitive treatment of a
crimerelated post-traumatic stress disorder. In R. D. Peters, R. J.
McMahon, & V. L. Quinsey (Eds.), Aggression and violence throughout the
life span (pp. 171--191). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Resick, P. A., Monson,
C. M., & Chard, K. M. (In press). Cognitive processing therapy for PTSD:
A comprehensive manual. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Resick, P. A.,
Nishith, P., Weaver, T. L., Astin, M. C., & Feuer, C. A. (2002). A
comparison of cognitive processing therapy, prolonged exposure and a
waiting

257

condition for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder in female
rape victims. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70,
867--879. Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1992). Cognitive processing
therapy for sexual assault victims. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 60, 748--756. Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993).
Cognitive processing therapy for rape victims: A treatment manual.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Resick, P. A., Schnicke, M. K., & Markway, B. G.
(1991, November). The relation between cognitive content and PTSD. Paper
presented at the 25th Annual Convention of the Association for the
Advancement of Behavioral Therapy, New York, NY. Resick, P. A.,
Uhlmansiek, M. O., Clum, G. A., Galovski, T. E., Scher, C. D., &
Young-Xu, Y. (2008). A randomized clinical trial to dismantle components
of cognitive processing therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in
female victims of interpersonal violence. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76, 243--258. Resick, P. A., Wachen, J. S., Mintz,
J., YoungMcCaughan, S., Roache, J. D., Borah, A. M., ... Peterson, A. L.
(2015). A randomized clinical trial of group cognitive processing
therapy compared with group present-centered therapy for PTSD among
active duty military personnel. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 83(6), 1058--1068. Resick, P. A., Williams, L. F., Suvak, M.
K., Monson, C. M., & Gradus, J. L. (2012). Long-term outcomes of
cognitive-behavioral treatments for posttraumatic stress disorder among
female rape survivors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
80(2), 201--210. doi: 10.1037/a0026602 Riggs, D. S., Byrne, C. A.,
Weathers, F. W., & Litz, B. T. (1998). The quality of the intimate
relationships of male Vietnam veterans: Problems associated with
posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 11, 87--101.
Riggs, D. S., Dancu, C. V., Gershuny, B. S., Greenberg, D., & Foa, E. B.
(1992). Anger and post-traumatic stress disorder in female crime
victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 5, 613--625. Rizvi, S. L., Kaysen,
D., Gutner, C. A., Griffin, M. G., & Resick, P. A. (2008). Beyond fear:
The role of peritraumatic responses in posttraumatic stress and
depressive symptoms among female crime victims. Journal of Interpersonal
Violence, 23, 853--868. Robins, L. N., Helzer, J. E., Croughan, J., &
Ratcliff, K. S. (1981). National Institute of Mental Health

258

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

Diagnostic Interview Schedule: Its history, characteristics, and
validity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 38, 381--389. Rodriguez, N.,
Vande-Kemp, H., & Foy, D. W. (1998). Posttraumatic stress disorder in
survivors of childhood sexual and physical abuse: A critical review of
the empirical research. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 7, 17--45.
Rothbaum, B. O. (1997). A controlled study of eye movement
desensitisation and reprocessing in the treatment of posttraumatic
stress disordered sexual assault victims. Bulletin of the Menninger
Clinic, 61, 317--334. Rothbaum, B. O., Astin, M. C., & Marsteller, F.
(2005). Prolonged exposure versus eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR) for PTSD rape victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress,
18, 607--616. Rothbaum, B. O., Cahill, S., Foa, E., Davidson, J.,
Compton, J., Connor, K., ... Hahn, C. G. (2006). Augmentation of
sertraline with prolonged exposure in the treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 19, 625--638. Rothbaum, B.
O., & Foa, E. B. (1993). Subtypes of posttraumatic stress disorder and
duration of symptoms. In J. R. T. Davidson & E. B. Foa (Eds.),
Posttraumatic stress disorder: DSM-IV and beyond (pp. 23--35).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Rothbaum, B. O., Foa, E. B.,
Riggs, D. S., & Walsh, W. (1992). Posttraumatic stress disorder in rape
victims: A prospective examination of posttraumatic stress disorder and
rape victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 5, 455--475. Rothbaum, B. O.,
Hodges, L. F., & Ready, D. (2001). Virtual reality exposure therapy for
Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 62, 617--622. Rothbaum, B. O., Price, M., Jovanovic, T.,
Norrholm, S. D., Gerardi, M., Dunlop, B., ... Ressler, K. J. (2014). A
randomized, double-blind evaluation of D-cycloserine or alprazolam
combined with virtual reality exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) in Iraq and Afghanistan war veterans. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 171(6), 640--648. Saunders, B. E., Arata, C. M., &
Kilpatrick, D. G. (1990). Development of a crime-related posttraumatic
stress disorder scale for women within the Symptom Checklist-90-Revised.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 3, 439--448. Schauer, M., Neuner, F., &
Elbert, T. (2005). Narrative exposure therapy: A short-term intervention
for

traumatic stress disorders after war, terror, or torture. Ashland, OH:
Hogrefe & Huber. Scheeringa, M. S., Myers, L., Putnam, F. W., & Zeanah,
C. H. (2012). Diagnosing PTSD in early childhood: An empirical
assessment of four approaches. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 25(4),
359--367. doi: 10.1002/ jts.21723 Scheeringa, M. S., Zeanah, C. H., &
Cohen, J. A. (2011). PTSD in children and adolescents: Toward an
empirically based algorithm. Depression and Anxiety, 28, 770--782.
Schnurr, P. P., Friedman, M. J., Engel, C. C., Foa, E. B., Shea, T.,
Chow, B. K., ... Bernardy, N. (2007). Cognitive behavioral therapy for
posttraumatic stress disorder in women: A randomized controlled trial.
JAMA, 297, 820--830. Schnyder, U., Muller, J., Maercker, A., & Wittman,
L. (2011). Brief eclectic psychotherapy for PTSD: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72(4), 564--566.
Schumm, J. A., Dickstein, B. D., Walter, K. H., Owens, G. P., & Chard,
K. M. (2015). Changes in posttraumatic cognitions predict changes in
posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms during cognitive processing
therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 83(6),
1161--1166. Schumm, J. A., Fredman, S. J., Monson, C. M., & Chard, K. M.
(2013). Cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy for PTSD: Initial findings
for Operations Enduring and Iraqi Freedom male combat veterans and their
partners. American Journal of Family Therapy, 41(4), 277--287. Schwartz,
B. L., Hashtroudi, S., Herting, R. L., Schwartz, P., & Deutsch, S. I.
(1996). D-cycloserine enhances implicit memory in Alzheimer patients.
Neurology, 46, 420--444. Shalev, A. Y., Orr, S. P., Peri, T., &
Schreiber, S. (1992). Physiologic responses to loud tones in Israeli
patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 49, 870--875. Shapiro, F. (1989b). Eye movement
desensitization: A new treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder.
Journal of Behavior Therapy & Experimental Psychiatry, 20, 211--217.
Shapiro, F., & Maxfield, L. (2002). Eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR): Information processing in the treatment of trauma.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58(8), 933--946. Shin, L. M., Rauch, S.
L., & Pitman, R. K. (2006). Amygdala, medial prefrontal cortex, and
hippocampal

References function in PTSD. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
1071(1), 67--79. Shipherd, J. C., & Beck, J. G. (1999). The effects of
suppressing trauma-related thoughts on women with rape-related
posttraumatic stress disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37,
99--112. Shipherd, J. C., & Beck, J. G. (2005). The role of thought
suppression in posttraumatic stress disorder. Behavior Therapy, 36,
277--287. Shnaider, P., Pukay-Martin, N. D., Sharma, S., Jenzer, T.,
Fredman, S. J., Macdonald, A., & Monson, C. M. (2015). A preliminary
examination of the effects of pre-treatment relationship satisfaction on
treatment outcomes in cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy for PTSD.
Couple and Family Psychology: Research and Practice, 4, 229--238.
Shnaider, P., Vorstenbosch, V., Macdonald, A., Wells, S. Y., Monson, C.
M., & Resick, P. A. (2014). Associations between functioning and PTSD
symptom clusters in a dismantling trial of cognitive processing therapy
in female interpersonal violence survivors. Journal of Traumatic Stress,
27, 526--534. doi: 10.1002/jts.21954 Sloan, D. M., Sawyer, A. T.,
Lowmaster, S. E., Wernick, J., & Marx, B. P. (2015). Efficacy of
narrative writing as an intervention for PTSD: Does the evidence support
its use? Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 45(4), 215--225.
Smucker, M. R., Dancu, C., Foa, E. B., & Niederee, J. (1995). Imagery
rescripting: A new treatment for survivors of childhood sexual abuse
suffering from posttraumatic stress. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy,
9(1), 3--17. Solomon, Z., & Mikulincer, M. (1990). Life events and
combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder: The intervening role of
locus of control and social support. Military Psychology, 2, 241--256.
Southwick, S. M., Bremner, J. D., Rasmusson, A., Morgan, C. A., III,
Arnsten, A., & Charney, D. S. (1999). Role of norepinephrine in the
pathophysiology and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 46, 1192--1204. Southwick, S. M., Krystal, J. H.,
Bremner, J. D., Morgan, C. A., Nicolaou, A. L., Nagy, L. M., ...
Charney, D. S. (1997). Noradrenergic and serotonergic function in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 54,
749--758. Southwick, S. M., Krystal, J. H., Morgan, C. A., Johnson, D.,
Nagy, L. M., Nicolaou, A., ... Charney, D. S. (1993). Abnormal
noradrenergic function in

259

posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50,
266--274. Street, A. E., Gradus, J. L., Giasson, H. L., Vogt, D., &
Resick, P. A. (2013). Gender differences among veterans deployed in
support of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Journal of General Internal
Medicine, 28(2), 556--562. Taft, C. T., Watkins, L. E., Stafford, J.,
Street, A. E., & Monson, C. M. (2011). Posttraumatic stress disorder and
intimate relationship functioning: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79, 22--33. Tarrier, N., Pilgrim,
H., Sommerfield, C., Faragher, B., Reynolds, M., Graham, E., &
Barrowclough, C. (1999). A randomized trial of cognitive therapy and
imaginal exposure in the treatment of chronic posttraumatic stress
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 13--18.
Tarrier, N., & Sommerfield, C. (2004). Treatment of chronic PTSD by
cognitive therapy and exposure: 5 year follow-up. Behavior Therapy, 35,
231--246. Tarrier, N., Sommerfield, C., Connell, J., Deakin, B.,
Pilgrim, H., & Reynolds, M. (2002). The psychophysiological responses to
PTSD patients: Habituation, responses to stressful and neutral vignettes
and association with treatment outcome. Behavioral and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 30, 129--142. Thrasher, S., Dalgleish, T., & Yule, W.
(1994). Information processing in post-traumatic stress disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 247--254. Tolin, D. F., & Foa, E. B.
(2006). Sex differences in trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder: A
quantitative review of 25 years of research. Psychological Bulletin,
132, 959--992. Vaiva, G., Ducrocq, F., Jezequel, K., Averland, B.,
Lestavel, P., Brunet, A., & Marmar, C. R. (2003). Immediate treatment
with propranolol decreases posttraumatic stress disorder two months
after trauma. Biological Psychiatry, 54, 947--949. Vaiva, G., Thomas,
P., Ducrocq, F., Fontaine, M., Boss, V., & Devos, P., ... Goudemand, M.
(2004). Low posttrauma GABA plasma levels as a predictive factor in the
development of acute posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 55, 250--254. van der Kolk, B., Spinazzola, J., Blaustein,
M., Hopper, J., Hopper, E., Korn, D., & Simpson, W. B. (2007). A
randomized clinical trial of eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR), fluoxetine, and pill placebo in the treatment of
posttraumatic stress

260

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

disorder: Treatment effects and long-term maintenance. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 68, 37--46. Van Etten, M. L., & Taylor, S. (1998).
Comparative efficacy of treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder: A
meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 5, 126--144. van
Griensven, F., Chakkraband, M. L., Thienkrua, W., Pengjuntr, W., Lopes
Cardozo, B., Tantipiwatanaskul, P., & Tappero, J. W. (2006). Mental
health problems among adults in tsunami-affected areas in southern
Thailand. JAMA, 296, 537--548. Vogt, D., Shipherd, J., & Resick, P. A.
(2012). Posttraumatic maladaptive beliefs scale: Evolution of the
personal beliefs and reactions scale. Assessment, 19(3), 308--317. Vogt,
D., Vaughn, R., Glickman, M. E., Schultz, M., Drainoni, M. L., Elwy, R.,
& Eisen, S. (2011). Gender differences in combat-related stressors and
their association with postdeployment mental health in a nationally
representative sample of U.S. OEF/OIF veterans. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 120(4), 797--806. doi: 10.1037/a0023452 Vrana, S., &
Lauterbach, D. (1994). Prevalence of traumatic events and post-traumatic
psychological symptoms in a nonclinical sample of college students.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 7, 289--302. Wachen, J. S., Jimenez, S.,
Smith, K., & Resick, P. A. (2014). Long-term functional outcomes of
women receiving cognitive processing therapy and prolonged exposure.
Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 6(Suppl.
1), S58--S65. doi: 10.1037/a0035741 Walser, R. D., & Hayes, S. C.
(2006). Acceptance and commitment therapy in the treatment of
posttraumatic stress disorder: Theoretical and applied issues. In V. M.
R. Follette & I. Josef (Eds.), Cognitivebehavioral therapies for trauma
(2nd ed., pp. 146-- 172). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Watts, B. V.,
Schnurr, P. P., Mayo, L., Young-Xu, Y., Weeks, W. B., & Friedman, M. J.
(2013). Metaanalysis of the efficacy of treatments for posttraumatic
stress disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 74(6), e551--e557. doi:
10.4088/JCP.12r08225 Weathers, F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P.,
Kaloupek, D. G., Marx, B. P., & Keane, T. M. (2013a). The
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5). Interview
available from the National Center for PTSD at www.ptsd.va.gov Weathers,
F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, D. G., Marx, B. P., &
Keane, T. M. (2013b). The Life

Events Checklist for DSM-5 (LEC-5). Instrument available from the
National Center for PTSD at www .ptsd.va.gov Weathers, F. W., & Keane,
T. M. (1999). Psychological assessment of traumatized adults. In P. A.
Saigh & J. D. Bremner (Eds.), Posttraumatic stress disorder: A
comprehensive text (pp. 219--247). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Weathers,
F. W., Keane, T. M., & Davidson, J. R. (2001). Clinician-administered
PTSD scale: A review of the first ten years of research. Depression and
Anxiety, 13, 132--156. Weathers, F. W., Litz, B. T., Keane, T. M.,
Palmieri, P. A., Marx, B. P., & Schnurr, P. P. (2013). The PTSD
Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5). Scale available from the National Center
for PTSD at www.ptsd.va.gov Weathers, F. W., Ruscio, A. M., & Keane, T.
M. (1999). Psychometric properties of nine scoring rules for the
Clinician-Administered Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Scale.
Psychological Assessment, 11, 124--133. Weiss, D. S., & Marmar, C. R.
(1997). The Impact of Event Scale---Revised. In J. P. Wilson & T. M.
Keane (Eds.), Assessing psychological trauma and PTSD (pp. 399--411).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Wenninger, K., & Ehlers, A. (1998).
Dysfunctional cognitions and adult psychological functioning in child
sexual abuse survivors. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 11, 281--300.
Widiger, T. A., & Simonsen, E. (2005). Alternative dimensional models of
personality disorder: Finding a common ground. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 19, 110--130. Wilson, S. A., Becker, L. A., & Tinker, R. H.
(1995). Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR) treatment
for psychologically traumatized individuals. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 63, 928--937. Wolf, E. J., Lunney, C. A., Miller,
M. W., Resick, P. A., Friedman, M. J., & Schnurr, P. P. (2012). The
dissociative subtype of PTSD: A replication and extension. Depression
and Anxiety, 29(8), 679--688. doi: 10.1002/da.21946 Wong, M. R., & Cook,
D. (1992). Shame and its contribution to PTSD. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 5, 557--562. Woon, F. L., & Hedges, D. W. (2008). Hippocampal
and amygdala volumes in children and adults with childhood
maltreatment-related posttraumatic stress disorder: A meta-analysis.
Hippocampus, 18(8), 729--736.

References Yehuda, R. (2002). Current status of cortisol findings in
post-traumatic stress disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 2,
341--348. Yehuda, R., Giller, E. L., Southwick, S. M., Kahana, B.,
Boisneau, D., Ma, X., & Mason, J. W. (1994). Relationship between
catecholamine excretion and PTSD symptoms in Vietnam combat veterans and
holocaust survivors. In M. M. Murburg (Ed.), Catecholamine function in
post-traumatic stress disorder: Emerging concepts (pp. 203--220).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Yehuda, R., Siever, L. J.,
Teicher, M. H., Levengood, R. A., Gerber, D. K., Schmeidler, J., & Yang,
R. K. (1998). Plasma norepinephrine and 3-methoxy-4hydroxyphenylglycol
concentrations and severity of

261

depression in combat posttraumatic stress disorder and major depressive
disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 56--63. Young, E. A., & Breslau, N.
(2004). Cortisol and catecholamines in posttraumatic stress disorder: An
epidemiologic community study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61(4),
394--401. doi: 10.1001/ archpsyc.61.4.394 Zoellner, L. A.,
Alvarez-Conrad, J., & Foa, E. B. (2002). Peritraumatic dissociative
experiences, trauma narratives, and trauma pathology. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 15, 49--57.

Chapter 7 Depressive Disorders W. Edward Craighead, Daniel N. Klein,
Charles F. Gillespie, Lorie A. Ritschel, and Katherine E. Phillips

D

escriptions of individuals suffering from depressive disorders have been
remarkably similar for centuries, though the designation of specific
criteria for diagnosis of these disorders has been relatively recent.
Descriptions of depression exist in literary references across the world
and throughout history; one of the very earliest examples is the
biblical description of Job's depression. In U.S. history, a number of
well-known individuals from all walks of life have suffered from
depression. These include Abraham Lincoln, who suffered at least two
depressive episodes; William James, one of the founders of psychology
and the primary force in establishing it as a discipline at Harvard
University in the 1890s; actors such as Anne Hathaway, Jon Hamm, and
Brad Pitt; J. K. Rowling, author of the world-renowned Harry Potter book
series; astronaut Buzz Aldrin, who was the second human to walk on the
moon; television personalities such as Drew Carey, David Letterman, and
newscaster Mike Wallace; musicians such as Beyoncé Knowles, Bruce
Springsteen, and Sheryl Crow; and athletes such as Delonte West, an NBA
basketball player, and Amanda Beard, a gold-medal-winning Olympic
swimmer. Although each had a somewhat different experience and course of
the disorder, the symptoms and defining characteristics were remarkably
similar. It is fairly common to hear someone remark, "I am so
depressed," because almost everyone has experienced a sad mood, one of
the primary indicators of clinical depression. Most often, however, this
comment describes transient feelings of sadness, dysphoria, or
disappointment that dissipate within a fairly brief period of time. At
clinical levels, the symptoms of both major depressive disorder (MDD)
and persistent depressive disorder (PDD or chronic depression) are
clearly distinguishable from the transient dysphoric states that most
people are experiencing when they somewhat casually refer to themselves
as "depressed." The feelings of sadness and anhedonia indicative of
clinical depression are of much greater intensity, depth, and duration
and are more encompassing than the typical negative mood states
accompanying the more casual complaint of being "depressed."
Furthermore, clinical depression, by definition, is disruptive to the
individual's life and environment, including characteristic patterns of
behavioral, cognitive, emotional, and biological dysfunction far beyond
the level of disruption caused by blue, sad, or depressed transient mood
states, even when this dysphoric mood state might continue for several
days.

262

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

263

In addition to extraordinary personal and family suffering, depression
also produces significant societal burdens, such as an increased use of
social and medical services (Marcus & Olfson, 2010). There are also
enormous financial costs for its treatment and for lost productivity due
to impairment at work or absenteeism (Bruffaerts et al., 2012;
Greenberg, Fournier, Sisitsky, Pike, & Kessler, 2015). In fact, when
considered among all diseases, depressive disorders rank first among
disorders responsible for the global disease burden with all concomitant
economic costs to society, and it also ranks first among the
disabilities of 15- to 44-year-old U.S. citizens (Greenberg et al.,
2015; World Health Organization \[WHO\], 2015). Furthermore, depression,
especially recurrent or chronic depression, is very strongly related to
suicide attempts and completions (Mościcki, 2001; WHO, 2015),
particularly when depressed individuals reach a state of hopelessness
regarding the disorder or not finding a way to overcome it. This chapter
focuses on major depressive disorder (MDD), the most prevalent form of
depression, and persistent depressive disorder (PDD), which accounts for
almost 30% of all cases of depressive disorders (Murphy & Byrne, 2012).

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria Depression (formerly called
melancholia) was first described in a systematic fashion by the Greek
physician Hippocrates (ca. 460 to 377 bce). He based his naturalistic
classification system on the writings of Greek philosophers such as
Thales, who had lived about a century earlier. At that point in history,
Greek philosophers posited that the basic elements of the world
comprised earth, air, fire, and water. Hippocrates maintained that each
of these elements was represented in the body by one of four
humors---yellow bile, black bile, phlegm, and blood. In a healthy person
these humors were maintained in balance, but disease occurred when the
humors were out of balance. Melancholia, it was hypothesized, resulted
from the presence of too much black bile. This "scientific" view of
human disease was distinct from earlier, more religious interpretations.
Eventually, the great Greek physician Galen (128 to ca. 200 ce)
successfully interpreted this model in such a fashion as to make it
palatable to the Christian religion, so it found some favor through the
Middle Ages. In relatively modern times, the German psychiatrist Emil
Kraepelin (1856--1926) first used the word depression to characterize
his clinical observations of patients being treated in German hospitals
where he served as chief psychiatrist. In the sixth edition of his
Textbook of Psychiatry (1899), Kraepelin described both "dementia
praecox" and "manic-depressive insanity" (see Decker, 2004). These
disorders roughly correspond to current diagnoses of schizophrenia
(dementia praecox) and bipolar disorder (manic-depressive insanity).
Depression continued to be viewed as one end of the manic-depressive
continuum for much of the 20th century. The major exceptions to this
were Adolf Meyer's more psychosocially based description of a
"depressive reaction" to negative life experiences, and the
psychodynamic descriptions of depression by Abraham (1911) and Freud
(1917/1950). Even within these alternative conceptual frameworks, the
descriptions of the phenomenology of depression remained essentially
identical to the clinical characterization of depression articulated by
Kraepelin. Over the course of the last half of the 20th century,
empirical data and theoretical developments led to

264

Depressive Disorders

the separation and specific distinctions of depression and
manic-depressive disorders. Consequently, criteria for MDD and PDD were
developed and presented formally as psychiatric diagnoses in the
American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders---first as a depressive reaction and manic depressive
illness, depressed type (DSM-II; American Psychiatric Association
\[APA\], 1968) and then as major depressive disorder and dysthymic
disorder, a conglomeration of earlier constructs of neurotic depression
and depressive personality, respectively (DSM-III; APA, 1980). In the
DSM-IV (APA, 1994), the primary clinical forms of depression were major
depressive disorder (with categorizations for both single episode and
recurrent or chronic cases), dysthymia, and depressive episodes as they
occur in the context of bipolar disorder. The DSM-5 (APA, 2013a)
includes major depressive disorder (MDD) as one of the depressive
disorders, and there were no significant changes from DSM-IV in the
primary criteria for MDD. DSM-5 also combined two previous
diagnoses---dysthymic disorder and major depressive episode, chronic
subtype---under a single rubric labeled persistent depressive disorder
(PDD). The other depressive disorders include disruptive mood regulation
disorder (included in an attempt to reduce the number of children
perhaps inappropriately diagnosed with bipolar disorder---see Chapter
8), premenstrual dysphoric disorder, substance- or medication-induced
depressive disorder, depressive disorder due to another medical
condition, and other specified and unspecified depressive disorders (see
APA, 2013a). In this chapter, we focus solely on MDD and PDD.

Major Depressive Disorder DSM-5 identifies nine symptoms of depression,
and a formal diagnosis is made when a person meets at least five of the
nine symptoms (see Figure 7.1). Of those five, the person must endorse
one or both of the following symptoms: (1) dysphoric mood (sad, empty,
or tearful) and/or (2) anhedonia, or the loss of interest or pleasure in
almost all activities (APA, 2013a). In addition, the individual must
also experience at least four additional symptoms (three if both
dysphoric mood and anhedonia are present), as shown in Figure 7.1.
Finally, the person must report experiencing marked distress or a
decrease in functioning for at least 2 weeks during which these symptoms
were present for most of the day, for more days than not. Notably, a
person can meet criteria for MDD without exhibiting all the listed
symptoms, and different people may have different combinations of the
symptoms, resulting in a variety of presentations of the disorder.
Although we follow the DSM-5 diagnostic system, perhaps the rapidly
increasing view is that depression is not a single disorder but rather
comprises heterogeneous disorders, a view that influences the writing at
various places throughout this chapter. When diagnosing MDD, it is
important to consider other problems that might cause an individual to
experience depression. In particular, DSM-5 specifies that when the
depressive symptoms are substance-induced (either by prescription
medications or by recreational drugs) or are directly attributable to a
general medical illness, then MDD is not the appropriate primary
diagnosis. For example, a person with hypothyroidism may meet all the
criteria for MDD (the symptoms of the two disorders demonstrate
substantial overlap); however, in this case hypothyroidism may better
account for the presence of these symptoms than MDD and therefore should
be the primary diagnosis. Of course, it is entirely possible for a
person to meet criteria for both hypothyroidism and MDD, which

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

265

• Significant weight gain/loss or change in appetite • Insomnia or
hypersomnia • Psychomotor agitation or retardation

Plus at least 3 of: AND

Dysphoria

Anhedonia OR

Plus at least 4 of:

• Fatigue or loss of energy • Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or
inappropriate guilt • Decreased concentration or indecisiveness •
Recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation, plan, or attempt

Symptoms present most of the day, nearly every day for 2 weeks

Significant distress or decrease in functioning

Diagnosis of MDD FIGURE 7.1

A Schematic Illustration of the Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depression

underscores the importance of conducting thorough diagnostic assessments
that include questions about related medical illnesses, substances that
can cause or mimic depression, and other possible primary DSM disorders.
There are a number of additional diagnostic elements called specifiers
that need to be incorporated into a clinical assessment of MDD. First,
the clinician indicates whether this is a single (i.e., first) episode
of major depression or a recurrent form of depression. A second
important specifier is the level of depression severity. Specifically, a
major depressive episode may be characterized as mild, moderate, or
severe; when assigning a "severe" specifier, the clinician also
indicates whether psychotic features are part of the clinical
presentation. Other depression specifiers that have potential
implications for treatment decisions include the following: 1. Chronic
MDD, in which depression occurs continuously and without remission for
at least 2 years. In the DSM-5, chronic MDD has been consolidated with
dysthymia into PDD, which is explained further in this chapter. 2.
Atypical MDD, which characterizes approximately 15% of depressed
patients and is marked by mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in
response to positive events or potential positive events), hypersomnia,
extended fatigue, heightened sensitivity to criticism, and a significant
increase in appetite and weight gain.

266

Depressive Disorders

3.  Peripartum (formerly postpartum) MDD, in which a major depressive
    episode occurs during pregnancy or within the 4 weeks following
    delivery. It is estimated that 3% to 6% of pregnancies include a
    depressive episode either during or in the month following pregnancy
    (APA, 2013a). Two other specifiers, melancholia and seasonal
    pattern, retain the DSM-IV terminology but do not appear to be of
    great clinical significance. That is, knowing that a person may be
    more vulnerable to depression onset in the fall (or even another
    season) might help in earlier identification of an episode, but the
    data for differing treatments based on either of these specifiers
    are meager, and there are no data to suggest that a fundamentally
    differential course of treatment is warranted. DSM-5 added two new
    specifiers for MDD (APA, 2013a). For patients who meet criteria for
    MDD and who endorse at least three symptoms of a manic or hypomanic
    episode but who do not meet the full criteria for bipolar disorder,
    the specifier "with mixed features" can appropriately be added. This
    specifier is intended to allow the clinician to note the presence of
    symptoms that are of clinical significance with regard to the
    potential future emergence of a manic or hypomanic episode. In
    addition, the clinician may add the specifier "with anxious
    distress" for those individuals who display considerable overlap
    between symptoms of depression and anxiety. This specifier was added
    based on the body of literature that has emerged over the past
    several decades and indicates that the presence of anxiety in the
    course of MDD can affect treatment decisions and prognosis. Finally,
    DSM-5 has removed the DSM-IV bereavement exclusion criterion that
    applied when the disorder occurred within 2 months of a significant
    loss. DSM-5 encourages the clinician to make a differential
    diagnosis between bereavement and MDD.

Persistent Depressive Disorder Chronic depression can take a number of
forms that vary in their pattern of severity over time. DSM-IV (APA,
1994) used the separate diagnostic labels of dysthymic disorder and
major depressive episode, chronic. As noted, these categories were
combined under the rubric of persistent depressive disorder (PDD) in
DSM-5 (APA, 2013b). DSM-5 identifies six symptoms of depression
typically seen in patients with PDD. A formal diagnosis is made when a
person meets at least two of six symptoms accompanied by the occurrence
of a depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, for at
least 2 years. The six symptoms include poor appetite or overeating,
insomnia or hypersomnia, low energy or fatigue, low self-esteem, poor
concentration or difficulty making decisions, and feelings of
hopelessness. A minimum of two symptoms must be present consistently
throughout the 2-year duration; in addition the patient must report that
the symptoms have never remitted for more than 2 months during the
2-year period. Finally, the person must report experiencing marked
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning. The amalgamation of the DSM-IV diagnoses of dysthymia
and chronic major depressive episode as PDD in DSM-5 was based on
research indicating that there are virtually no differences between
patients with each of these conditions on comorbidity, psychosocial
functioning, depressive cognitions, coping style, early adversity,
family history, and treatment response (McCullough et al., 2000, 2003).

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

267

DSM-5 includes a number of diagnostic specifiers that need to be
incorporated into a clinical assessment of PDD. The clinician can use
these specifiers to note the severity, age of onset and state of
remission. As is the case with MDD, a diagnosis of PDD can include
specifiers of anxious distress, mixed features, and melancholic
features, among others. More specific to the PDD diagnosis are four
specifiers that indicate the course of the chronic depression. These are
• Pure dysthymic syndrome, which indicates that full criteria for MDD
have not been met in the previous 2 years. • Persistent depressive
episode, which indicates full criteria for major depressive episode have
been met at some point in the preceding 2-year period. • Intermittent
major depressive episode, with current episode, which is designed to
capture individuals who are currently in a nonchronic major depressive
episode. • Intermittent major depressive episode, without current
episode, which indicates that the full criteria for a nonchronic major
depressive episode were previously met at some point in the preceding 2
years.

Distinction Between Chronic and Nonchronic Depression Despite their
similarities, there are a number of differences between PDD and MDD that
support their separation. Given the recent DSM-5 changes outlined above,
little research has been done looking specifically at differences
between MDD and the recently defined PDD. However, there is a
substantial literature comparing individuals with dysthymic disorder and
major depressive episode, chronic, to those with nonchronic MDD. Given
the substantial overlap between PDD and what was formerly labeled as
dysthymia and major depressive episode, chronic, we will use the term
chronic depression to encompass all PDD diagnoses in summarizing the
data comparing chronic and nonchronic depression. Persons with chronic
depression have greater comorbidity with anxiety, substance use, and
personality disorders than persons with nonchronic MDD (Blanco et al.,
2010; Gilmer et al., 2005; Klein, Shankman, Lewinsohn, Rohde, & Seeley,
2004; Pepper et al., 1995; Sang et al., 2011). In addition, chronic
depression is associated with more extreme normal-range personality
traits, such as higher neuroticism and lower extraversion (Hirschfeld,
Klerman, Andreasen, Clayton, & Keller, 1986; Klein, Taylor, Dickstein, &
Harding, 1988; Sang et al., 2011); lower self-esteem (Blanco et al.,
2010); higher levels of at least some depressive cognitive biases (Klein
et al., 1988; Riso et al., 2003); higher levels of experiential
avoidance (Barnhofer Brennan, Crane, Duggan, & Williams, 2014), and
greater suicidality (Garvey, Tollefson, & Tuason,1986; Gilmer et al.,
2005; Holm-Denoma, Berlim, Fleck, & Joiner, 2006; Klein, Shankman, &
Rose, 2006). Compared to persons with nonchronic MDD, individuals with
chronic depression also report having experienced greater early
adversity, maladaptive parenting, and childhood emotional abuse
(Barnhofer et al., 2014; Fisher et al., 2013; Lizardi et al., 1995;
Wiersma et al., 2011), and are more likely to have a family history of
depression among first-degree relatives (Blanco et al., 2010; Klein et
al., 1995; Klein, Shankman, Lewinsohn, Rohde, & Seeley, 2004; Sang et
al., 2011). Chronic depression aggregates specifically in families;

268

Depressive Disorders

the relatives of probands with chronic depression have significantly
higher rates of chronic depression than the relatives of patients with
nonchronic MDD (Klein et al., 1995; Klein, Shankman, et al., 2004;
Mondimore et al., 2006). Consistent with its definition, chronic
depression predicts a more persistent course and poorer outcomes than
nonchronic MDD (Rhebergen et al., 2009). For example, in a 10-year
follow-up study, patients with chronic depression had a significantly
higher level of depressive symptomatology, spent a significantly greater
portion of the follow-up meeting criteria for a depressive disorder
(i.e., a significantly smaller proportion recovered from all depressive
disorders during the follow-up period), and had a greater number of
suicide attempts and hospitalizations than patients with nonchronic MDD.
Moreover, the distinction between chronic and nonchronic depression was
very stable over time (Klein et al., 2006). Finally, patients with forms
of chronic depression that include periods of major depression have
lower response and remission rates following intensive treatment than
patients with nonchronic MDD (Köhler et al., 2015) and are more likely
to profit from a combination of antidepressant medications and
psychotherapy (Craighead & Dunlop, 2014). Thus, despite PDD being
closely related to classic episodic MDD, the two conditions appear to
differ in significant ways. Interestingly, although PDD is thought of as
symptomatically milder, the cumulative burden of persistent depressive
symptoms and impaired functioning is substantial and can be greater than
that of episodic MDD (Blanco et al., 2010; Gilmer et al., 2005;
Hellerstein, Agosti, Bosi, & Black, 2010; Leader & Klein, 1996). Given
the differences between PDD and MDD, a final question concerns whether
the two groups differ qualitatively or by only degree. The specificity
of familial aggregation (Klein et al., 1995; Mondimore et al., 2006) and
stability over time (Klein et al., 2006) raise the possibility of
qualitative differences. Klein and Kotov (2016) directly addressed the
issue of whether chronicity lies on a continuum or manifests natural
boundaries in a 10-year follow-up of depressed outpatients. They found
strong and consistent evidence for a nonlinear relationship between
degree of chronicity during the first 30 months of follow-up and
symptoms and psychosocial functioning at the 10-year follow-up,
supporting the existence of qualitatively distinct subgroups. Moreover,
when the course data were used to generate empirically defined
persistent and nonpersistent subgroups, the two groups differed on most
of the features previously reported to distinguish chronic and
nonchronic depression. In light of these differences, it appears
worthwhile to search for etiological and pathophysiological differences
between PDD and nonchronic MDD. Unfortunately, there is a paucity of
research on this topic.

Prevalence Prevalence of MDD Major depressive disorder is one of the
most commonly diagnosed psychiatric disorders among adults, with U.S.
lifetime prevalence rates of approximately 17%. Prevalence rates are
between 20% and 25% for women and from 9% to 12% for men; point
prevalence rates are approximately 6% for women and 3% for men (Kessler,
Chiu, Demler, & Walters, 2005). In keeping with these prevalence
statistics women, starting in adolescence, are 1.5 to 3 times more
likely than men to experience MDD (Hankin et al., 1998).

Psychological Models of Depression

269

Prevalence of MDD shows variability among different racial and ethnicity
groups in the United States. Lifetime prevalence rates of depression are
highest among Native Americans (19.2%), while lifetime prevalence rates
among African Americans and Asian Americans are lower at 8.9% and 8.8%,
respectively. Hispanic/Latino Americans generally experience a 9.6%
lifetime prevalence of MDD, but the rates are higher among certain
Latino subgroups (i.e., Puerto Ricans) and among U.S.-born,
English-language-proficient, and third-generation Latinos (Alegría et
al., 2007; Hasin, Goodwin, Stinson, & Grant, 2005; Alderete, Vega,
Colody, & Aguilar-Gaxiola, 1999). Although it is a debated issue (see
Costello, Erkanli, & Angold, 2006), the prevalence of MDD and depressive
symptoms appears to have increased among recent birth cohorts
(Fergusson, Horwood, Ridder, & Beautrais, 2005; Twenge et al., 2010;
Twenge, 2015) and in the population in general (Hidaka, 2012), which
suggests that the lifetime prevalence may ultimately be higher for
current younger cohorts. The age at which the first episode of MDD
occurs also has been decreasing, such that peak years for first onset
currently are between 15 and 29 years of age, with the peak onset for
females being even earlier at 15 to 20 (Fergusson et al., 2005; Weissman
et al., 2006). At least one half of these individuals with early onset
will experience subsequent depressive episodes, and a substantial
minority will go on to experience chronic depression (Mueller et al.,
1999; Rohde, Lewinsohn, Klein, Seeley, & Gau, 2012). Thus, MDD is a
major health problem for which it is important to develop a better
understanding and interventions.

Prevalence of PDD Epidemiological studies of nationally representative
samples in the United States have reported 12-month prevalence rates of
dysthymic disorder (now PDD) that range from 0.5% to 2.5%; lifetime
prevalence has ranged from 0.9% to 6.4% (Blanco et al., 2010; Kessler et
al., 1994; Kessler, Berglund, Demler, Jin, & Walters, 2005; Riolo,
Nguyen, Greden, & King, 2005). The World Mental Health Surveys indicate
that rates of what is now termed PDD are higher in developed countries
than in developing countries (Gureje, 2011). In the only published
epidemiological study of chronic MDD, Blanco et al. (2010) reported
12-month and lifetime prevalence rates of 1.5% and 3.1%, respectively.
Finally, Murphy and Byrne (2012) recently reported that among a
nationally representative Australian sample, the lifetime prevalence of
all forms of chronic depression combined was 4.6%. The prevalence of PDD
is almost two times greater among women than men (Blanco et al., 2010;
Kessler et al., 1994). PDD is associated with lower income; data on the
effects of race, ethnicity, and education are inconsistent (Blanco et
al., 2010; Riolo et al., 2005).

Psychological Models of Depression Depression is frequently thought of
as a disturbance of mood or emotion (Engel & DeRubeis, 1993); however,
not everyone who meets criteria for depression reports feeling sad.
Although the diagnostic criteria require the presence of either a sad
mood or loss of interest or pleasure, the remaining criteria are related
to changes in behavior,

270

Depressive Disorders

physiology, or cognition (APA, 2013a). The DSM-5 criteria for
MDD---which must be present most of the day nearly every day during a
2-week period---can be broadly categorized as follows: Emotional
Symptoms of Depression • Depressed mood Behavioral or Physiological
Symptoms of Depression • Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in
all, or almost all, activities (anhedonia) • Significant weight loss
(when not dieting) or weight gain, or a significant increase or decrease
in appetite • Insomnia or hypersomnia • Psychomotor agitation or
retardation • Fatigue or loss of energy Cognitive Symptoms of Depression
• Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt •
Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness •
Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal ideation without a
specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing
suicide The symptoms of PDD are similar to MDD, except that they must be
present most of the day more days than not for a 2-year period, and
there are additional cognitive symptoms (feelings of hopelessness and
poor self-esteem). Some of the MDD symptoms (e.g., psychomotor agitation
and recurrent thoughts of death, among others), however, are not
included in the symptom criteria for PDD. It is possible to receive a
diagnosis of PDD and MDD simply by endorsing predominantly behavioral,
biological, or cognitive symptoms. Because both behaviors and cognitions
play such important roles in the etiology and maintenance of depression,
it is critical to understand both categories of dysfunctions for
research and clinical purposes, so we now turn to an overview of the
major behavioral (including interpersonal behaviors), cognitive, and
biological theories and research regarding depression.

Behavioral Models of Depression The 1960s and 1970s were marked by the
development and expansion of behavioral models of the etiology and
maintenance of depression (e.g., Ferster, 1965, 1966, 1973; Lewinsohn,
1974). Skinner (1953) previously had proposed that depression is related
to a reduction in behaviors that elicit positive reinforcement from the
environment. Ferster elaborated on Skinner's ideas and postulated that
three proximal causes were likely to contribute to a depressive shift in
affect. First, infrequent positive reinforcement is likely to lead to an
overall decline in behaviors. Second, behaviors are further inhibited by
the presence of anxiety. Third, unexpected changes in environmental
stimuli (including interpersonal interactions and human relationships)
decrease the frequency of behaviors.

Behavioral Models of Depression

271

In other words, people tend to withdraw in the absence of positive
reinforcement and when anxiety or unexpected environmental changes
occur. Ferster (1973) also posited that a decrease in positive
environmental reinforcement is likely to result in a narrowing of an
individual's behavioral repertoire in an effort to prevent further loss
of positive reinforcement. Within this framework, depression is caused
by behavioral inhibition and maintained through a process of avoidance
or escape (negative reinforcement). Lewinsohn and colleagues (Lewinsohn,
1974; Lewinsohn & Gotlib, 1995; Lewinsohn, Youngren, & Grosscup, 1979)
further refined Ferster's work with a focus on schedules of positive
reinforcement. Lewinsohn agreed with his behavioral predecessors that
depression develops when individuals experience a low rate of positive
reinforcement for their behavior. He extended previous
conceptualizations by positing that the rate of positive reinforcement
is contingent upon three elements: (1) the number of reinforcing
activities in which an individual engages, (2) the amount of positive
reinforcement that the environment is able to provide, and (3) the
skillfulness of the individual in eliciting reinforcement from the
environment (i.e., social and interpersonal skills deficiencies are
fundamentally related to low rates of environmental reinforcement).
Lewinsohn further hypothesized that, in addition to low rates of
positive reinforcement, depression could be caused by elevated rates of
aversive experiences or events. Some scholars theorized that depression
results from the interaction of cognitive and behavioral difficulties.
For example, Pyszcynski and Greenberg (1987) concurred with early
behaviorists that depression is related to decreases in environmental
reinforcement. They posited, additionally, that cognitive and emotional
changes initiate and perpetuate behavioral changes in depression.
Specifically, they hypothesized that onset and maintenance of depression
are predicated upon a loss of a source of self-esteem that is followed
by an increase in self-focused attention (see Mor & Winquist, 2002).
They suggested that this process increases the salience of the lost
source of esteem as well as the negative affect induced by the loss. The
resulting self-criticism interferes with social performance, which the
individual perceives as validation of the self-criticism. As a result,
self-criticism and negative affect increase, thereby perpetuating the
cycle. Taken together, these behavioral theories called attention to the
importance of both positive and negative reinforcement in the etiology
and maintenance of depression. The question, then, is how these models
translate into observable human behaviors. The next section describes
the clinical presentation of the behavioral symptoms of depression and
the empirical evidence supporting behavioral theories of depression.

Behavioral Deficits in MDD Three symptom classes commonly found in
depression are anhedonia, amotivation, and avoidance. Together, they
weave a vicious web that perpetuates depressive episodes. As individuals
lose interest in activities that previously brought them pleasure
(anhedonia), they subsequently lose the desire to continue to attempt
those activities (amotivation). As energy and motivation decrease,
individuals often prefer not to engage in activities or spend time with
other people because these activities (a) require energy they do not
have and (b) are no longer rewarding. Depressed individuals,
consequently, find greater satisfaction in doing nothing (avoidance). As
a result, amotivation and avoidance are targeted as primary behavioral
deficits in the behavioral treatment of depression.

272

Depressive Disorders

Amotivation and Anhedonia One of the most commonly reported symptoms of
depression is a loss of motivation or ability to carry out the necessary
tasks of one's life. Many depressed individuals know what they need to
do; they simply lack the motivation or energy to engage in tasks of
living. For example, it is not unusual for patients to report that they
have difficulty getting out of bed and going to work or school. They
also may be neglecting activities at home, such as washing the dishes or
cleaning the house. In more extreme cases, they may not even attend to
personal tasks such as exercise, dressing, or showering. Completing
small tasks often has the effect of helping patients build self-efficacy
(Bandura, 1977) or mastery, increasing the likelihood that they will
receive positive reinforcement from their environment. Patients are,
therefore, encouraged to engage in behaviors despite their lack of
motivation, under the assumption that motivation will follow activity
rather than the inverse. Neuropsychological research suggests that
behavioral symptoms in depression are related to deficits in the
behavioral activation system. Gray (1987) proposed that behavior is
largely monitored by two systems: the behavioral activation system
(BAS), which is responsive to reward cues, and the behavioral inhibition
system (BIS), which is responsive to punishment cues (i.e., the BAS is
behavior generating, whereas the BIS is behavior inhibiting). Applying
Gray's model, Davidson (1992) posited that an underactive BAS is related
to reductions in positive emotion and motivation. These reductions, in
turn, are risk factors for depression (see Bijttebier, Beck, Claes, &
Vandereycken, 2009, for a review). Davidson (1992, 1998) proposed a
model suggesting that behavioral activation is modulated by activity in
the left prefrontal cortex, while behavioral inhibition (or withdrawal)
is modulated by activity in the right prefrontal cortex. Several studies
have supported this hypothesis (see McFarland, Shankman, Tenke, Bruder,
& Klein, 2006, for a review). The treatment section of this chapter
presents more details regarding behavioral interventions. Avoidance and
Passivity Emotions and emotional states frequently can be identified by
the behavioral patterns that accompany them. For example, if an
individual desires to hit another person, one typically infers the
person is feeling angry. Or if an individual runs away from a particular
situation (e.g., a burning building), it would be reasonable to assume
that he is feeling fear. Similarly, sadness has a behavioral correlate:
to isolate oneself. Avoidance has long been recognized as a common
consequence of depression and may possibly play an even larger role in
depression than the more commonly studied deficits in approach (Ferster,
1973; Manos, Kanter, & Busch, 2010). For depressed individuals,
avoidance functions to minimize distress, thereby becoming a negative
reinforcer. For example, if a patient calls in sick to work because he
would rather lie in bed all day, he feels better in the moment because
he does not have to go to work and interact with others. In this way,
calling in sick (avoidance) has been reinforced as a solution to the
experience of dread about work. The consequences of avoidant behaviors,
however, are twofold. First, avoidance is a passive, short-term strategy
that often results in ever-mounting long-term difficulties. For example,
repeatedly calling in sick is likely to cause problems with coworkers
and bosses, and the patient may soon face disciplinary action or
termination for repeated absences. Thus, ongoing avoidance typically
creates a new set of problems to be solved. The second

Cognitive Models of Depression

273

consequence of avoidance is that it reduces the opportunity for
depressed individuals to encounter positive reinforcement in their
environment (see Dimidjian, Martell, Addis, & Herman-Dunn, 2008); that
is, it is hard to be told that you are doing a good job at work if you
are not even going to work! It is also difficult to derive pleasure from
friendly interactions when friends are avoided. This combination of
negative reinforcement and lack of positive reinforcement fuels the
cycle of avoidant behavior, and depressed individuals become more and
more withdrawn and increasingly depressed (Martell, Addis, & Jacobson,
2010). As time goes on, an individual's behavioral repertoire narrows
further until passivity is the dominant behavioral response (Dimidjian
et al., 2008). Avoidance and inhibition are both related to BIS
activation (Trew, 2011); higher BIS sensitivity is commonly found in
depressed samples and changes in this sensitivity have been found to
predict changes in depression over time (Bijttebier et al., 2009; Kasch,
Rottenberg, Arnow, & Gotlib, 2002; Brown, 2007).

Cognitive Models of Depression Although depressed individuals experience
different combinations of symptoms, most people who are suffering from
depression report some type of cognitive disturbance. During the 1970s,
there was a veritable explosion of research regarding cognitive theories
of depression. The following sections review the relevant cognitive
models that continue to guide current research regarding the major
cognitive deficits present in depression (for more extensive reviews,
see Joormann & Quinn, 2014; Kircanski, Joormann, & Gotlib, 2012; Snyder,
2013).

Beck's Cognitive Model Beck's cognitive theory of depression (Beck,
1968, 1976; Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery, 1979) grew out of his experiences
working with depressed patients who often made personally evaluative
statements that were negatively biased. His model comprises three
components: negative self-statements, cognitive errors, and underlying
schemas or core beliefs. In this model, the combination of information
processing deficits (cognitive errors) and enduring negative cognitive
patterns (schemas/core beliefs) contributes to the development and
maintenance of depression (see Figure 7.2). That is, Beck postulates
that the processes and ways that people think about a situation are
critical elements in the development of depression. Furthermore,
cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) focuses on teaching patients to change
these statements, processes, and beliefs so they become more adaptive
and the more positive views are internalized.

Automatic Thoughts Automatic thoughts are the words that go through
one's mind frequently in response to an event. They are considered
automatic because one does not have to work to generate these thoughts;
rather, they arise spontaneously without effort. Beck and colleagues
(1979) noted that depressed individuals tend to have negative automatic
thoughts or self-statements. These thoughts may be about themselves, the
world, and the future (frequently referred to as the cognitive triad).
Although depressed individuals generally

274

Depressive Disorders

Life Event

Automatic Thoughts

Depression

Cognitive Errors

Core Belief (Schema)

FIGURE 7.2

A Graphic View of Beck's Cognitive Model of Depression

are aware of these thoughts, they often are unaware that their thoughts
contain errors or distortions and that these automatic thoughts serve to
maintain or exacerbate negative mood. Consider a situation in which you
are walking down the hallway at work and you pass by a colleague who
does not acknowledge you. Assuming that you are not depressed, you might
say something to yourself like, "Tom must be awfully busy today," or, "I
wonder what Tom was reading---he looked like he was really into it."
According to Beck's model, a depressed individual would be more likely
to have the automatic thought, "Tom probably didn't acknowledge me
because he doesn't like me. Nobody does---I'm not a very likable person.
I guess I'll never fit in or have friends." Hence, the depressed
individual tells himself that he is inherently unlikable (negative view
of self), that he does not fit in (negative view of the world), and that
this condition will last indefinitely (negative view of the future). In
this example, the depressed individual is aware of his thoughts but does
not seem to question them as invalid. Rather, he believes them to be
true. For someone vulnerable to depression, the emotional response is
similar to what it would be if the distorted automatic thoughts were
actually true.

Cognitive Distortions A central tenet of Beck's cognitive theory of
depression is that the thinking of a depressed individual is not only
negatively biased and automatic, but also fraught with cognitive errors.
According to Beck, these errors are activated by continuous negative
self-statements or they derive from the individual's self-schema or core
beliefs. Some examples of cognitive errors are (adapted from J. S. Beck,
1995): • All-or-nothing thinking: viewing things in black-and-white
terms, rather than as occurring on a continuum. • Example: "I got only a
B on that test. What a total failure." • Arbitrary inference: drawing
negative conclusions in the absence of corroborating evidence. •
Example: "My husband always comes home late from work; he must be having
an affair."

Cognitive Models of Depression

275

• Overgeneralization: drawing conclusions that far exceed the bounds of
the current situation. • Example: "I don't get along with my neighbor.
I'll never get along with anyone." • Selective abstraction:
concentrating on one detail about a situation and ignoring others,
thereby not seeing the whole picture. • Example: "My teacher took 2
points off my essay. I'm a terrible writer." •
Magnification/minimization: tending to unreasonably magnify the negative
aspects of a person or situation and minimize the positive aspects. •
Example: "Who cares that I got a good overall performance evaluation? I
got a 'needs improvement' in one area." • Personalization: believing
that external events happen because of one's own inherent inadequacy,
weakness, or other flaw; disregarding contradictory evidence. • Example:
"That person just cut me off in traffic because he thinks I'm a bad
driver." • Emotional reasoning: thinking something must be true because
of the strength of the feeling behind the thought. • Example: "I know my
boyfriend says I'm a great person with lots of great qualities, but I
just feel like an awful, worthless person." As is evident in these
examples, these kinds of cognitive processing errors function to screen
out positive information and to bias negative or neutral information in
a negative way.

Core Beliefs Sacco and Beck (1995) noted that the cognitive theory of
depression is predicated on a diathesis-stress model. Depressogenic
schemas begin to develop early in life (diathesis) and in most cases are
latent until they are activated by life events (usually negative and
stressful) and after that serve as a filter for incoming information.
Hence, depressogenic schemas ultimately predispose individuals to
depression because they increase the likelihood of cognitive errors and
negative self-statements or automatic thoughts and result in negative
emotional states. In addition to the cognitive triad, Beck postulated
that depressed individuals also show a stable negative cognitive pattern
when interpreting environmental information. As described, these
patterns are based on an individual's fundamental beliefs or
assumptions---schemas---that he holds about himself. Humans use various
schemas to organize incoming data and to enhance processing speed in
everyday life. For example, if you are sitting in a booth and someone
hands you a menu and gives you silverware, your "restaurant schema" will
be activated, and you will have a certain set of expectations about what
will happen next (e.g., a person will soon come to the table and ask you
what you want to eat and drink). Hence, schemas can effectively
streamline cognitive processing by consolidating mental effort. In
depression, however, people often hold fundamental beliefs about
themselves that are far less innocuous. For example, a depressed
individual might believe she is unlovable, that she must be perfect, or
that she is worthless. Hence, all incoming information is organized
according to these schemas, which results in cognitive distortions or
errors when basic beliefs are not accurate reflections of reality.

276

Depressive Disorders

Learned Helplessness Model and Explanatory Style The learned
helplessness theory (Peterson, Maier, & Seligman, 1993; Seligman, 1975),
which developed within a behavioral learning framework, proposed that
individuals become depressed because they view their situations as
futile, and they view themselves as unable to bring about changes in
these situations. The authors of this theory posited that people begin
to experience feelings of helplessness in situations where outcomes are
perceived to be independent of behavior. In essence, people give up
trying when they have determined that an aversive situation is unlikely
to change no matter what they do. Further, Seligman specifically
hypothesized that helplessness was related to the motivational,
emotional, behavioral, and cognitive deficits often seen in depression
(see Engel & DeRubeis, 1993). As Seligman and his colleagues refined the
research on learned helplessness, they began to explore the concept of
attributional styles. Specifically, they posited that the crux of
helplessness did not develop because people perceived there was no
relationship between their actions and situational outcomes; rather, it
was the way people explained this lack of a contingency to themselves
that was crucial (Abramson, Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989; Seligman, Abramson,
Semmel, & von Baeyer, 1979). According to the revised model of learned
helplessness (Abramson et al., 1989; Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale,
1978), three essential belief dimensions are considered in regard to the
preponderance of depressive symptoms: internal-external;
global-specific, or stable-unstable. People may make attributions about
causality that run the gamut from "not at all my fault" to "completely
my fault." Abramson et al. (1978) refer to these attributions as
external or internal styles. For example, the student from a previous
example may attribute her test failure to her teacher by saying, "That
teacher is so unfair" (external style). Alternatively, she may blame
herself for her failure by saying, "I am so stupid" (internal style).
The second dimension refers to the specificity or universality of a
belief. For example, on the one hand, an individual who gets into a
fender bender may say to herself, "I am a terrible driver" (specific
style); on the other hand, she may say, "I am always terrible at
everything" (global style). Finally, stable-unstable refers to the
extent to which an individual believes that a problem is either
temporary or permanent. Someone who recently went through the breakup of
a relationship may say, "This is hard, but I learned a lot that will
help me in my next relationship" (unstable style). Alternatively, she
may say, "I will be alone for the rest of my life" (stable style).
Abramson and colleagues (1989) found that the most depressed individuals
have explanatory styles for negative events that are internal, global,
and stable. In the relationship example, this individual might say to
herself, "This breakup is all my fault. If only I weren't so annoying
and clingy, I wouldn't have to be alone forever." As a corollary,
depressed individuals attribute positive events to causes that are
external, unstable, and specific (Seligman et al., 1979). For example, a
student might say, "Oh sure, I passed this test, but that's only because
the teacher made this one so easy. It is only one test, and I will not
be so successful next time."

Hopelessness Theory of Depression Abramson, Metalsky, and Alloy (1989)
published an updated and refined version of learned helplessness called
the hopelessness theory of depression. They hypothesized

Cognitive Models of Depression

277

that hopelessness depression is a subtype of depression wherein
hopelessness is "an expectation that highly desired outcomes will not
occur or that highly aversive outcomes will occur coupled with an
expectation that no response in one's repertoire will change the
likelihood of occurrence" (Abramson et al., 1989, p. 359). They viewed
hopelessness as a proximal, sufficient cause of depression; in other
words, if hopelessness is present, symptoms of depression likely will be
present as well. Hopelessness theory posits that depression is more
likely to occur when (a) negative events that are important to the
individual are attributed to global and stable causes, (b) these
negative events are predicted to lead to additional negative
consequences, and (c) the individual makes a causal attribution about
the relationship between the negative event and his or her inherent
deficiencies (Abramson et al., 2002; Alloy, Abramson, Whitehouse, et
al., 2006; Liu, Kleiman, Nestor, & Cheek, 2015). In summary, these
cognitive theories emphasize the importance of the contributions of
thoughts, attributions, and schemas to the etiology and maintenance of
depression. What, however, do the data say about the contributions of
distorted thinking to mood disturbance?

Cognitive Deficits in Depression The common thread in the cognitive
theories of depression is that depression is associated with
disturbances in cognitive processes. Specifically, cognitive models have
proposed that the thinking of depressed individuals tends to be
negatively biased (Sacco & Beck, 1995). When compared to nondepressed
controls, empirical support for the hypothesized negative bias in
depressed individuals has been obtained for memory processes (e.g.,
Hamilton & Gotlib, 2008; Hertel & Brozovich, 2010; Joormann, Teachman, &
Gotlib, 2009; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005), attentional processes (e.g.,
Gotlib et al., 2004; Koster, De Raedt, Leyman, & De Lissnyder, 2010),
and most aspects of executive functioning (Snyder, 2013). Data also
indicate higher negative content in thoughts about the self, the world,
the future, and life in general (Blackburn, Jones, & Lewin, 2011;
Kleiman, Liu, Riskind, & Hamilton, 2015).

Information Processing, Learning, and Memory Cognitive distortions and
negative attentional and memory biases are thought to play a major role
in the development of negative cognitions (Sacco & Beck, 1995). All of
the aforementioned cognitive theories of depression posit that a major
vulnerability to depression occurs when depressed individuals orient
toward negatively biased self-referential information. This is the
primary premise behind Beck's theory of schemas (1967, 1987) and has
long been observed in depressed individuals (see Ingram, Miranda, &
Segal, 1998). Alloy and Abramson (1999) found that individuals
considered to be at higher risk (HR) for depression were more strongly
oriented toward negative self-referential adjectives (e.g., "failure,"
"useless") than were individuals with lower risk (LR) for depression. In
addition, HR individuals were less strongly oriented toward positive
self-referential adjectives (e.g., "worthy," "competent") compared to LR
individuals. Additionally, depressed individuals have been found to show
preferential orientation and maintenance of attention (looking for
longer) toward images of sad faces (Duque & Vázquez, 2015; Fritzsche et
al., 2010). Currently depressed individuals also

278

Depressive Disorders

demonstrate similar preferential attention (Mogg, Bradley, Williams, &
Mathews, 1993; Teachman, Joormann, Steinman, & Gotlib, 2012). Many
studies have found that depressed individuals demonstrate negative
interpretation biases (Foland-Ross & Gotlib, 2012). Initially, Butler
and Mathews (1983) found that when presented with a social situation and
options of possible interpretations, depressed patients more often
choose the negative interpretation option. This finding has been
replicated and elaborated (Nunn, Mathews, & Trower, 1997; Voncken,
Bögels, & Peeters, 2007). For example, depressed individuals are more
likely to show negative interpretation biases when hearing ambiguous
words (e.g., die/dye, weak/week) and when endorsing associations between
ambiguous sentences and negative descriptors (Mogg, Bradbury, & Bradley,
2006). Evidence for negative interpretation biases in depressed patients
also comes from emotion recognition tasks, where studies have shown that
depressed patients are slower and less accurate in recognizing neutral
facial emotions (Bourke, Douglas, & Porter, 2010; Dalili, Penton-Voak,
Harmer, & Munafò, 2015; Gollan, Pane, McCloskey, & Coccaro, 2008;
Leppänen, Milders, Bell, Terriere, & Hietanen, 2004). Multiple studies
have shown that memory processes, both verbal and visual, are affected
in the course of depression (Austin, Mitchell, & Goodwin, 2001). In
addition, depressed individuals frequently show deficits in learning and
episodic memory (McDermott & Ebmeier, 2009). In some studies, depressed
individuals show more negative bias in recognition memory and event
recall (Joormann et al., 2009) as well as in autobiographical memory
(Williams et al., 2007); in other words, these individuals are more
likely to remember bad experiences rather than good experiences.
Additionally, depressed individuals show more overgeneralization in
their autobiographical memory recall (Williams et al., 2007). Although
this is thought to be efficacious in minimizing the affect associated
with negative autobiographical memories (Foland-Ross & Gotlib, 2012),
overgeneralized memory has been correlated with rumination, cognitive
deficits, and longer durations of depressive episodes (Raes et al.,
2005; Watkins & Teasdale, 2001, 2004). Depressed individuals recall more
negative feedback and less positive feedback when compared to
nondepressed individuals (Nelson & Craighead, 1977; Ridout, Astell,
Reid, Glen, & O'Carroll, 2003); other studies, however, have shown that
anxiety may be an important component in the recall of feedback. For
example, Kennedy and Craighead (1988) found that both depressed and
anxious individuals and nondepressed and anxious individuals are more
accurate in their recall of negative feedback than
nondepressed-nonanxious people. The distortion of recall of positive
feedback, however, seemed to be a function of depression, with depressed
individuals consistently recalling having received less positive
feedback than they, in fact, had received; whereas, anxious-nondepressed
individuals and nonanxious-nondepressed individuals accurately recalled
positive feedback. Clinically, these data are relevant to the treatment
of depression because research has shown that memory functioning is
imperative for the regulation of negative affect (Joormann, Yoon, &
Siemer, 2010). First, given that depressed individuals interpret and
recall information and events with a negative bias, they also are likely
to report this information to therapists as though it is factual.
Clearly, this presents a dilemma for the clinician; although the patient
is not purposefully withholding information, it is possible that she
still is not presenting a complete picture due to the memory deficits
associated with her depression. In addition, clinicians should
understand that attentional biases are compounded by negative memory
biases. Depressed individuals are not only more

Cognitive Models of Depression

279

likely to orient toward negative stimuli in their environments but also
more likely to recall negative information than positive information.
Taken together, these data highlight three important clinical points:
(1) information presented in therapy may be distorted by impaired
attentional and memory processes; (2) the therapist will likely need to
inquire directly about positive experiences that may have occurred; and
(3) shifts in the proportion of positive to negative events that are
reported in therapy should be carefully tracked, as they may be
indicative of clinical progress.

Rumination According to response styles theory (RST; Nolen-Hoeksema,
1987), rumination involves self-focused attention accompanied by a
repetitive focus on negative emotional causes, symptoms, and
consequences (for a review, see Olatunji, Naragon-Gainey, &
Wolitzky-Taylor, 2013; Smith & Alloy, 2009). Depressed individuals who
ruminate will often report that they have difficulty disengaging from
thoughts about their symptoms (e.g., "I cry all the time and can't seem
to stop") or about possible causes of their depression (e.g., "If only
my marriage hadn't ended"). Individuals with ruminative response styles
also report focusing on potential consequences of their depression
(e.g., "If I continue to stay home in bed, I'm probably going to lose my
job"). They report feeling "stuck" with their depressive thoughts and
unable to focus their attention on anything else. After studying
students' reactions to the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in the San
Francisco Bay area, Nolen-Hoeksema and Morrow (1991) concluded that
rumination is more aptly classified as a response style rather than as a
symptom of depression. Indeed, even ruminating about daily struggles is
related to increased distress and sadness (Wood, Saltzberg, Neale,
Stone, & Rachmiel, 1990). Other investigators have shown that rumination
mediates both the relationship between risk factors for depression
(e.g., negative cognitive style, prior history of depression) and the
onset of a major depressive episode (Spasojevic & Alloy, 2001).
Rumination also mediates the relationship between impaired cognitive
control of emotional information (which facilitates negative
interpretation and memory biases) and depressive symptoms (Demeyer, De
Lissnyder, Koster, & De Raedt, 2012). Although ruminative thoughts are
similar in form and function to the automatic thoughts described by Beck
and colleagues (1979), they differ in style. Both automatic and
ruminative thoughts are often depressogenic; however, rumination is a
repetitive pattern of thinking that is characterized by a failure to
disengage attention from thought content. This repetitious style
differentiates rumination from automatic thoughts, which may have a
profound effect on mood but are often time-limited occurrences
(Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991). In addition, the grist for the
cognitive-behavioral mill lies in the distortions in depressive
thinking; that is, automatic thoughts include cognitive errors.
Ruminative thoughts, however, are often accurate reflections of reality
(Nolen-Hoeksema, Morrow, & Fredrickson, 1993).1 For example, there is
some truth to the thought, "If I continue to stay home from work because
I am so depressed, I will probably get fired." Note also that ruminative
individuals spend a considerable amount of time thinking about their
symptoms and possible 1 Some findings suggest that depressed individuals
have a more realistic appraisal of reality than nondepressed individuals

(i.e., depressive realism); however, empirical support for this theory
is equivocal (Moore & Fresco, 2007).

280

Depressive Disorders

consequences, leaving little opportunity for those individuals to be
distracted from their negative mood. Rumination is a passive rather than
active problem-solving strategy (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000) that exhausts
cognitive resources and interferes with problem-solving and
decision-making processes (Riso et al., 2003: van Randenborgh, de
Jong-Meyer, & Hüffmeier, 2010). The individual's thought content is
centered on the symptoms and consequences of depression rather than on
how to alleviate those symptoms. Several studies have shown that people
who endorse a ruminative thinking style are less likely than
nonruminators to engage in active problem solving (e.g., Donaldson &
Lam, 2004). The processes and outcomes of ruminative thought patterns
are similar to the previously discussed information processing problems.
Joormann and colleagues (2010) found that self-reported rumination was
associated with diminished abilities to shift attention from negative
stimuli and to identify neutral stimuli (indication of negative
attentional biases). Individuals who ruminate also show distortions of
memories, present-day interpretations of events, and projections about
their futures (see Lyubomirsky & Tkach, 2004). These progressive
distortions via rumination lead to an increased sense of hopelessness
and decreased problem-solving abilities (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2002). Since
the initial description of RST, a number of studies have shown that
rumination is a useful predictor of both the onset of depressive
episodes and the intensity of depressive symptoms (Olatunji et al.,
2013; Robinson & Alloy, 2003; Spasojevic & Alloy, 2001). Studies of the
neural circuitry of depressed individuals have found rumination to be
positively correlated with increased amygdala activation (Mandell,
Siegle, Shutt, Feldmiller, & Thase, 2014). This finding is in line with
similar findings that amygdala hyperactivity in response to negative
stimuli and amygdala hypoactivity in response to positive stimuli may be
hallmarks of depression (Young, Siegle, Bodurka, & Drevets, 2015).

Attentional Deficits It has been shown that mood is related to
attentional biases regarding emotional expression on human faces (Gotlib
et al., 2004; Fritzsche et al., 2010; Woody, Owens, Burkhouse, & Gibb,
2015). Depressed individuals have a stronger bias than nondepressed
individuals toward sad rather than angry, neutral, or happy faces. In
addition, Gotlib and colleagues (2004) found that symptom severity in
depression was related to a tendency to look away from happy faces. Some
evidence suggests that such attentional biases continue even when
depression has remitted (Fritzsche et al., 2010; Joormann & Gotlib,
2007; Timbremont & Braet, 2004). Similarly, data show that depressed
individuals are more strongly oriented toward unhappy faces in their
environment. Hence, a depressed patient may report that "it just seems
like everyone around me is sad---I probably make everyone else
miserable." Gotlib and colleagues (2004) demonstrated that it may be
that the depressed person in this example failed to notice all the
happy, neutral, or angry people around him and oriented instead to the
other sad people in his environment. Again, this individual is not
purposefully misrepresenting her experience in the world (i.e., "poor
me"); rather, she is experiencing a common cognitive pattern
characteristic of MDD. Neuroscience has recently begun to identify
patterns of neural dysregulation and connectivity associated with
attention and depression (Craske, 2014; Snyder, 2013). As with
rumination, further understanding of neural activity associated with
attentional biases may

Cognitive Models of Depression

281

inform the modification of current interventions or the development of
novel treatments for MDD.

Negative Cognitive Style All cognitive models of depression posit that
people who encounter negative life events and who go on to develop
depression are more likely to have a negative cognitive style than their
nondepressed counterparts. Alloy and Abramson (1999) spearheaded
research efforts regarding negative cognitive style and depression in
the Temple--Wisconsin Cognitive Vulnerabilities to Depression (CVD)
project. They have proposed that similar to Beck's theory, individuals
with negative cognitive styles, compared to individuals without negative
cognitive styles, are at greater risk for developing depression in the
face of negative life events. In the Temple--Wisconsin CVD project,
college freshmen with no history of Axis I pathology were screened for
the presence of negative cognitive styles. Those who showed evidence of
a negative cognitive style were considered to be at high risk (HR) for
depression, while those without a negative cognitive style were
considered to be at low risk (LR) for depression. Students with negative
cognitive styles were significantly more likely to have a lifetime
history of depressive episodes as well as greater prior recurrences of
depressive episodes (Alloy & Abramson, 1999; Alloy et al., 2000; Alloy,
Abramson, Whitehouse, et al., 2006; Alloy et al., 1999). Another
compelling finding showed that a negative cognitive style in previously
never depressed students predicted both first onset and recurrence of
MDD (Alloy, Abramson, Walshaw, & Neeren, 2006; Alloy, Abramson,
Whitehouse, et al., 2006). These findings lend critical support to the
hypothesis that negative cognitive style increases vulnerability to
depression. Other studies have shown that negative cognitive styles are
related to a greater number of depressive episodes, more intense
episodes, and more chronic depressive episodes than are experienced by
individuals without a negative cognitive style (Haeffel et al., 2003;
Iacoviello, Alloy, Abramson, Whitehouse, & Hogan, 2006; Perveen, 2015).2
In addition, negative cognitive style has been shown to be associated
with past depressive episodes even after controlling for current
depressive symptoms (Abela, Stolow, Zhang, & McWhinnie, 2012) and also
has been shown to predict increases in number of symptoms during current
episodes (Iacoviello et al., 2006), particularly in the face of high
stressors (Meyer, Gudgeon, Thomas, & Collerton, 2010). It should be
noted, however, that virtually all of these studies have excluded or
failed to assess Axis II symptomatology, which is significant because
when Axis II symptomatology and negative cognitive style are accounted
for simultaneously, most of the predictive power is attributable to the
Axis II symptoms rather than to cognitive style (Craighead, Sheets,
Craighead, & Madsen, 2011; Ilardi & Craighead, 1999). Gender may also
play an important role in the relationship between cognitive style and
depression. In a study of stress and depression in a youth sample, Rood,
Roelofs, Bögels, and Meesters (2012) found that negative cognitive style
in the areas of achievement and appearance was more strongly related to
depression in girls than in boys, whereas negative cognitive style in
the interpersonal sphere was related to depression in both genders.

2 See Gibb (2002) for a review of the etiology of negative cognitive
styles.

282

Depressive Disorders

Cognitive Deficits in Chronic Depression Given the central role of
cognitive theories in depression, there has been surprisingly little
research on the role of cognitive variables in chronic depression.
McCullough and colleagues (1994) found that a nonclinical sample with
chronic depression exhibited more stable and global attributions for
negative events and less stable attributions for positive events than
healthy controls. Similarly, Riso and colleagues (2003) reported that
patients with chronic depression exhibited more stable and global
attributions for negative events, a higher level of dysfunctional
attitudes, a more ruminative response style, and higher scores on a
measure of maladaptive schemas and core beliefs than did healthy
controls. In one of the few studies addressing the nature of the
relationship between cognitive variables and chronic depression, Arnow,
Spangler, Klein, and Burns (2004) modeled the associations among
rumination, distraction, and depressive symptomatology over the course
of 12 weeks in a large sample of patients with double depression
(simultaneous MDD and dysthymia) and chronic major depression. A model
positing that depression and rumination are both caused by the same
factors provided a better fit to the data than models positing that
rumination causes subsequent depression or that depression causes
subsequent rumination.

Biological Models of Depression Major depressive disorder is
characterized by complex genetics and diverse symptomatology suggestive
of the disruption of a variety of neural systems within the central
nervous system (CNS). The neural system disruptions participate in the
regulation of mood, sleep, motivation, energy balance, and cognition
(Krishnan & Nestler, 2010). In addition to disrupted functioning of the
CNS, other organ systems, including the endocrine and immune systems,
are dysregulated in patients with MDD; this also contributes to
depressive pathophysiology within the CNS. This portion of the chapter
provides a brief and selected overview of relevant genetic and other
biological research.

Genetics of Depression MDD, like other stress-related psychiatric
disorders, is in part a heritable disorder (for reviews, see Levinson,
2006; Dunn et al, 2014; Ressler & Smoller, 2016). Based on data from
twin studies, heritability estimates for MDD range from 40% to 50%.
Adoption studies also support the notion of a substantial genetic risk
for MDD; quantitatively, the relative risk ratio for major depression
probands is 2 to 3 times the population base rate. Risk for MDD is also
increased by exposure to detrimental environmental factors such as
childhood abuse and neglect or other forms of early-life stress that
promote depression vulnerability (Caspi et al., 2003; Nemeroff, 2016).
Like many disorders, MDD is a clinical syndrome that likely evolves from
the differential contribution of multiple, variably penetrant genes with
differing modes of inheritance. The expression of these genes is
multiply influenced by environmental exposures, epigenetic processes,
and architectural genomic changes such as chromosomal rearrangement or
copy number variation. Consequently, MDD is best termed

Biological Models of Depression

283

a complex genetic disorder. The term complex serves to differentiate the
pattern of genetic contribution in complex genetic disorders from that
observed in classic genetic diseases such as Huntington's disease or
phenylketonuria; the latter are often referred to as Mendelian3
disorders---disorders in which mutations of a single gene are completely
or largely responsible for the presence of the disease. Alternatively,
in the context of complex genetic disorders, additive and multiplicative
models of genetic risk are best used to estimate the genetic
contribution to depression. Genetic association methods have been used
extensively to evaluate a large number of candidate genes whose allelic
variants are thought to predict differences in risk for MDD or
depressive symptomatology, either as genetic main effects or in concert
with influences from the environment (reviewed in Heim & Binder, 2012;
Sharma, Powers, Bradley, & Ressler, 2016; Sun, Kennedy, & Nestler,
2013). In some cases, these variants are single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) that may have an identified function, such as alteration of
either gene expression or the structure of the protein for which the
gene codes. Some of the better-known genes that have been implicated in
depression include the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR), the
brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene (BDNF), the glucocorticoid
receptor chaperone protein gene (FKBP5), and the type 1
corticotrophin-releasing hormone receptor gene (CRHR1). Although solid
findings have emerged from well-designed candidate gene studies of
genetic effects on risk for MDD, there are also a large number of
genetic studies whose findings have failed replication and whose design
issues limit interpretation or comparison of the experimental findings
with other studies. Current efforts to identify depression-related genes
have moved from candidate gene association studies to genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). GWAS allow for the investigation of genetic
variation across the entire genome (Psychiatric GWAS Consortium
Coordinating Committee, 2009). In contrast to traditional association
studies, GWAS candidate genes are selected based on whether a gene
variant is associated with a phenotypic outcome, such as the presence or
absence of MDD or the severity of depressive symptoms. Very strict
significance levels are set to control for Type I statistical error
because a very large number of SNPs are generally being tested in GWAS.
Ideally, gene variants that achieve genome-wide significance will be
selected for hypothesis-driven follow-up studies designed to evaluate
the biological effects of that particular gene variant. An advantage of
the atheoretical GWAS approach is that selection of candidate genes is
not limited by the biological plausibility or implausibility of a
candidate gene; thus, the entire genome may be investigated. However,
results from extant studies have provided limited advances to the
understanding of the pathogenesis of MDD. Although a number of novel
candidate genes that may influence MDD have been identified, definitive
findings of large components of genetic variance associated with MDD
have not yet emerged. Other genetic studies are attempting to identify
larger gene variant--specific effects on MDD risk through the use of
"intermediate phenotypes" to investigate particular depression symptom
components, such as anhedonia or mood reactivity (Leuchter, Hunter,
Krantz, & Cook, 2014; Hornung & Heim, 2015). This approach holds promise
for illnesses such as MDD because it allows for the investigation of
specific phenotypes that are representative of a syndromal component of
an illness (e.g., anhedonia); such 3 Named in honor of the Augustinian
monk Gregor Johann Mendel (1822--1884).

284

Depressive Disorders

components are more likely to be affected by a particular gene variant
to a greater degree than is the overall MDD syndrome. Given the
extensive symptom overlap among depression, anxiety, and even psychotic
disorders, the use of intermediate phenotypes also enables
transdiagnostic genetic investigation of psychiatric symptoms such as
anhedonia (a core symptom of both MDD and schizophrenia) that may lead
to novel and unanticipated insights into the role of genes in the
etiology and treatment of psychiatric disorders.

Neurochemistry of Depression Since the 1950s, a large body of research
has investigated the role of monoamine neurotransmitter systems in the
pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders. These studies have provided the
intellectual foundation for later investigation into the psychobiology
of depressive symptomatology and MDD in particular. As originally
formulated, the monoamine hypothesis of depression posited that MDD was
caused by a deficiency in central nervous system concentration or
receptor function of the catecholamine neurotransmitter norepinephrine
(NE) or the indoleamine neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT). The monoamine
hypothesis was derived in part from pharmacological interventions and
clinical observations of their effects on mood. For example, reserpine,
initially used as an antihypertensive agent, was found to produce
depressive symptoms in many patients receiving it as part of their
treatment for hypertension. By extension, the depressogenic effects of
reserpine were hypothesized to be due to its capacity to deplete
monoamines from CNS neurons. Similarly, the mood-elevating action of
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), which prolong the actions of
monoamines within the synapse by preventing their catabolism by
monoamine oxidase, was discovered by the chance observation of the
antidepressant effects of the MAOI iproniazid. Although iproniazid was
originally developed to treat tuberculosis, it was observed to alleviate
symptoms of depression in patients with comorbid tuberculosis and MDD.
Collectively, these early research findings on the relationship between
monoamine activity in the CNS and mood stimulated further investigation
into the relationship between neurotransmitter activity within the
central nervous system and MDD. In the subsections that follow, key
findings related to 5-HT and NE in patients with MDD are selectively
reviewed as are more recent research findings with brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), all of which have informed the current view
of the relationship between neurochemistry and MDD.

Serotonin and Depression Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, or 5-HT) is an
indoleamine neurotransmitter synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan
in the neurons of the rostral and caudal raphe nuclei of the brain stem.
Neural fibers originating from the raphe are widespread and project
through a variety of forebrain structures, including the hypothalamus,
amygdala, basal ganglia, thalamus, hippocampus, cingulate cortex, and
prefrontal cortex (Azmitia & Gannon, 1986). Following release from
synaptic terminals, 5-HT is removed from extracellular fluid by the
serotonin transporter (SERT), located on cells' presynaptic terminal,
and is either repackaged into synaptic vesicles or degraded by monoamine
oxidase (MAO).

Biological Models of Depression

285

Several lines of evidence suggest that deficiencies in 5-HT signaling
play a role in depression and suicide (Owens & Nemeroff, 1994). Low
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of the principal 5-HT
metabolite, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), have been consistently
observed in patients with MDD and among individuals who complete
suicide, particularly by violent means. Consistent with the finding of
low CSF concentrations of 5-HIAA in patients with MDD, functional brain
imaging studies also have identified reduced levels of the serotonin
transporter in the raphe nuclei of patients with MDD. In addition,
imaging studies of MDD patients who have completed suicide show
increased density of 5-HT2 receptors on platelets and in the frontal
cortex. Although the association between indices of reduced 5-HT
turnover and impulsive violent suicide has been consistently replicated,
this finding does not appear to be specific to depressive disorders,
which suggests that low levels of CNS 5-HT may be a marker for a
nonspecific aversive motivational state rather than depression per se.
With regard to treatment response, reduction in platelet 5-HT2 receptor
binding is associated with clinical improvement among patients treated
with antidepressants (Biegon et al., 1987), and a large body of clinical
data supports the efficacy of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine, paroxetine, citalopram, sertraline, and
escitalopram) in the treatment of depression (Nemeroff, 2007). Finally,
the experimental depletion of tryptophan (the amino acid precursor from
which serotonin is synthesized) rapidly precipitates recurrence of
depression among patients whose MDD had previously remitted when treated
with SSRIs (Smith, Fairburn, & Cowen, 1997).

Norepinephrine and Depression Norepinephrine (NE) is a catecholamine
neurotransmitter synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine by neurons of
the locus coeruleus and, to a lesser extent, by neurons of the lateral
tegmental fields of the midbrain. Projections originating from the locus
coeruleus innervate a variety of forebrain structures, including the
cerebral cortex, thalamus, cerebellar cortex, hippocampus, hypothalamus,
and amygdala (Moore & Bloom, 1979). NE acts through activation of alpha
and beta adrenergic receptors. Following release, NE is taken up on the
presynaptic element by the norepinephrine transporter (NET) and is
either repackaged into synaptic vesicles or degraded by MAO. As with
5-HT, experimental findings related to NE (e.g., concentrations in the
CNS, experimental depletion, and antidepressant efficacy) collectively
implicate NE in the pathophysiology and treatment of depression (Ressler
& Nemeroff, 2001). Elevated CSF concentrations of the major NE
metabolite (3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol, or MHPG) have been
consistently observed for many years among depressed patients
(Schildkraut, 1965). In addition to studies that have identified CNS
pools of NE metabolites, it has also been found that NE and its
metabolites are increased in the plasma and urine of depressed patients
(Roy, Pickar, DeJong, Karoum, & Linnoila, 1988). Finally, SSRI treatment
of patients with depression results in decreased concentrations of CSF
MHPG (Sheline, Bardgett, & Csernansky, 1997), and treatment of depressed
patients with tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) results in decreased
plasma (Charney, Heninger, Sternberg, & Roth, 1981) and urinary
(Linnoila et al., 1986) metabolites of NE. Among depressed patients who
have had a therapeutic response to treatment with an antidepressant such
as desipramine (which works predominantly to increase NE within the
CNS), the experimental depletion of NE precipitates relapse of
depression

286

Depressive Disorders

(Charney, 1998). This suggests that a state of relative NE deficiency
may play a role in the production of depressive symptomatology. Taking
this approach a step further, the experimental depletion of
catecholamine neurotransmitters (which depletes NE as well as dopamine)
in euthymic, unmedicated patients with a history of depression has also
been shown to precipitate relapse of depressive symptoms (Berman et al.,
1999). Although not used as often as SSRIs, a large body of clinical
data supports the efficacy of NE reuptake inhibitors (e.g., reboxetine,
desipramine) in treating depression (Nemeroff, 2007).

Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor and Depression Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a neuropeptide neurotransmitter that plays
a substantial role in the regulation of neuronal survival,
differentiation, and function within the developing and adult central
nervous system. It also performs important regulatory roles in short-
and long-term synaptic plasticity, the cellular processes whereby
connections between neurons are altered. These effects appear to be
driven in part by activity of the tyrosine kinase B receptor (TrkB)
through which BDNF acts. Functionally, BDNF appears to be important in
episodic as well as emotion-related memory. Clinical research with
humans has identified a functional polymorphism (Val66Met) within the
BDNF gene that affects hippocampal function and episodic memory (Duncan,
Hutchison, Carey, & Craighead, 2009; Egan et al., 2003) as well as
function of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in depressed
patients (Schüle et al., 2006). The complex relationship that exists
between stress and mood disorders may be mediated in part by the
activity of BDNF and other neurotrophic factors (Duman & Monteggia,
2006; Schmidt & Duman, 2007; Sharma, da Costa e Silva, Soares, Carvalho,
Quevedo, 2016); this may provide an opportunity for the development of
novel antidepressants (Berton & Nestler, 2006; though also see Groves,
2007). Using rodent models, stress has been found to decrease BDNF
expression within the hippocampus, using a variety of paradigms
including restraint (Smith, Makino, Kvetnansky, & Post, 1995), maternal
deprivation (Roceri, Hendriks, Racagni, Ellenbroek, & Riva, 2002), and
social defeat (Tsankova et al., 2006). Increased hippocampal BDNF-like
immunoreactivity, an index of BDNF protein levels, has been observed in
depressed patients treated with antidepressants (Chen, Dowlatshahi,
MacQueen, Wang, & Young, 2001). Serum BDNF is also lower in depressed
patients (Shimizu et al., 2003), and it appears to normalize with
antidepressant treatment (Gonul et al., 2005).

Neuroendocrinology of Depression Complementing the literature on
neurochemical disturbances in patients with MDD is a large body of
research examining abnormal function of the endocrine system in
depressed patients. Excess secretion of cortisol (Carpenter & Bunney,
1971) and its metabolites (Sachar, Hellman, Fukushima, & Gallagher,
1970) was first observed nearly 50 years ago in depressed patients.

Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) Axis The prominence of depression
and anxiety in the clinical presentation of patients with
endocrinopathies affecting the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
(e.g., Cushing's disease; Dorn et al., 1997) in conjunction with the
observation of increased

Biological Models of Depression

287

secretion of cortisol in healthy patients exposed to stress contributed
to the development of a diathesis-stress model of depression. This model
hypothesizes that individual predisposition to excess reactivity of the
neural and endocrine stress response systems plays a central role in
susceptibility to depression. The presence of acute or prolonged stress
in vulnerable individuals plays a significant role in both the onset and
relapse of certain forms of depression (Brown, Varghese, & McEwen,
2004). This diathesis-stress model highlights the interaction of life
events, cognitive styles, and neurobiology in the etiology of MDD.

Functional Organization of the HPA Axis The discovery of
corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF; Vale, Spiess, Rivier, & Rivier,
1981) greatly accelerated research into the biology of stress, and it
helped clarify the organization of the HPA axis, a collection of neural
and endocrine structures that function collectively to facilitate the
adaptive response to stress. Parvocellular neurons of the
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) within the hypothalamus project to the
median eminence, where they secrete CRF into the primary plexus of blood
vessels that comprise the hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal system
(Swanson, Sawchenko, Rivier, & Vale, 1983). The secreted CRF is then
transported to the anterior pituitary gland, where it activates CRF
receptors on pituitary corticotrophs, resulting in increased secretion
of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH). The ACTH released from the
anterior pituitary into the systemic circulation subsequently stimulates
the production and release of cortisol from the adrenal cortex. As HPA
axis activity increases, cortisol levels increase and feedback
inhibition increases; this reduces activation of the HPA axis and limits
excess secretion of glucocorticoids, thereby effectively dampening the
stress response (Jacobson & Sapolsky, 1991). In addition to its
neuroendocrine role of regulating activity of the HPA axis, CRF also
functions as a neurotransmitter in coordinating the behavioral,
autonomic, endocrine, and immune responses to stress (Arborelius, Owens,
Plotsky, & Nemeroff, 1999). Behavioral changes (disturbed sleep,
diminished food intake, reduced grooming, decreased reproductive
behavior, and enhanced fear-conditioning) similar to those observed in
humans with depression occur following central administration of CRF in
rodents and primates (Owens & Nemeroff, 1991). Pretreatment with CRF
receptor antagonists reduces the experimental induction of these
physiological changes within behavioral stress paradigms (Gutman, Owens,
Skelton, Thrivikraman, & Nemeroff, 2003). Depression and Pathophysiology
of the HPA Axis The dexamethasone suppression test (DST), originally
designed to aid in the diagnosis of Cushing's disease, was one of the
first endocrine challenge tests studied in psychiatric patients.
Dexamethasone acts at the level of the anterior pituitary corticotrophs
to reduce the secretion of ACTH; this results in a decrease in the
synthesis and release of cortisol from the adrenal cortex. Failure to
suppress plasma cortisol concentrations after dexamethasone
administration suggests impaired feedback regulation and hyperactivity
of the HPA axis. The DST is useful as a clinical index of HPA axis
activity. It consists of the administration of a low dose (1 mg) of the
synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone at 11:00 ∼PM, followed by
measurement of plasma cortisol concentrations at two or three time
points the following day.

288

Depressive Disorders

A large percentage of drug-free patients with major depression fail to
suppress secretion of cortisol following administration of
dexamethasone, a finding known as dexamethasone nonsuppression (DST-NS;
Carroll, Martin, & Davies, 1968). This suggested that DST-NS might be a
biological marker for depression (Carroll, 1982). DST-NS status and
hypercortisolemia (i.e., high concentrations of cortisol in the
bloodstream) are both common in depression, although they are not
universal. Meta-analyses have revealed that DST-NS status is most
commonly found in patients with psychotic depression or mixed bipolar
states (Evans & Nemeroff, 1983). DST-NS status also generally predicts a
more severe course of MDD (Arana, Baldessarini, & Orsteen, 1985).
However, the greatest contribution of the DST was to serve as an impetus
for subsequent studies exploring the underlying pathophysiology of the
HPA axis in depression. Considerable data support the hypothesis that
the dysregulation of the HPA axis observed in depression is a state,
rather than a trait, phenomenon. In this context, state dependence
implies the presence of pathophysiological phenomena that are related to
a particular phase of depression rather than being constitutively
present (i.e., trait based). Among depressed patients who secrete
abnormally high amounts of cortisol into the bloodstream (i.e.,
hypercortisolemia), plasma cortisol levels (Sachar et al., 1970), DST-NS
status (Arana et al., 1985), blunting of the ACTH response to CRF
infusion (Amsterdam et al., 1988), hypersecretion of CRF (Nemeroff,
Bissette, Akil, & Fink, 1991), and adrenal hypertrophy (Rubin, Phillips,
Sadow, & McCracken, 1995) all normalize following resolution of clinical
symptoms. There appear to be a variety of ways in which the presence of
depression is reflected in altered functioning of the HPA axis. For
example, patients with psychotic depression demonstrate hyperactivity of
the HPA axis along with the highest rates of nonsuppression on the
dexamethasone suppression test (Schatzberg et al., 1983), whereas
depressed patients without psychosis may have either decreased or normal
activity of the HPA axis (Posener et al., 2000). Alternatively, patients
who have a history of childhood adversity show elevated secretion of
ACTH and cortisol in response to a laboratory stress test as well as
abnormal responses to neuroendocrine challenge tests, whereas those
without such history do not (for a review, see Gillespie & Nemeroff,
2007).

Psychoneuroimmunology of Depression Inflammation is another key
component of the adaptive response to stress. Stress stimulates the
body's inflammatory response so it may appropriately respond to injury
and contamination by infectious agents. The principal way that this
occurs is by the stress-induced secretion by white blood cells of small
peptides known as proinflammatory cytokines that stimulate the
development of inflammation (Glaser & Kiecolt-Glaser, 2005). The
relationship between the HPA axis and systemic inflammation may be
especially pertinent in view of the findings that patients with a
history of early-life stress have an impaired capacity to regulate the
HPA axis in the presence of psychosocial stress (Nemeroff, 2016); this
suggests that control of the inflammatory response (as a consequence of
HPA axis dysregulation) may be impaired as well. Research evidence
indicates that systemic inflammation may play a key role in the etiology
of some depressions (see Haroon, Raison, & Miller, 2012; Kiecolt-Glaser,
Derry, & Fagundes, 2015; Miller & Raison, 2016). This may be due in part
to the body's inability to

An Integrative Model of Depression

289

regulate short-term physiological reactions to stress (e.g.,
inflammation and HPA activation) following exposure to stressful
circumstances in susceptible individuals. Administration of
proinflammatory cytokines to laboratory animals results in a syndromal
pattern of behavioral and neurovegetative symptoms known as sickness
behavior that is similar to the pattern of signs of depression in human
patients and includes psychomotor slowing, fatigue, elevated pain
sensitivity, disrupted sleep, and anxiety (Remus & Dantzer, 2016).
Clinical research in humans has identified an array of proinflammatory
cytokines, including interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1, and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-α) and inflammatory markers such as CRP that are
associated with the presence of depression (Young, Bruno, & Pomara,
2014). Inflammatory cytokines appear to exert their effects on mood and
behavior through a variety of biological mechanisms (Pace & Miller,
2009; Miller, Haroon, Raison, & Felger, 2013). Inflammatory cytokines
influence the metabolism of monoamine neurotransmitters (especially
5-HT) and also are capable of dampening the activity of the HPA axis.
Cytokine-mediated alteration of monoamine metabolism and effects on HPA
axis function correlate significantly with the presence of depressive
symptoms. Inflammation may be particularly relevant to three populations
of depressed patients: individuals with treatment-resistant depression
(Strawbridge et al., 2015), chronic medical illness comorbid with
depression (Evans et al., 2005), and depression associated with
early-life stress (Nemeroff, 2016). In some patients, exposure to trauma
or stressful childhood experiences may be a variable connecting risk for
depression, chronic medical illness, and inflammation (Nusslock &
Miller, 2015). For example, patients with histories of childhood trauma
have an elevated risk for depression that is often chronic in course
(Nemeroff, 2016), and they also have elevated risk for a variety of
common, chronic, and progressive medical diseases, including coronary
artery disease (Goodwin & Stein, 2004).

An Integrative Model of Depression It is important to understand the
psychological and biological research within the context of an overall
interactive and developmental conceptual model of depression. In Figure
7.3, we present a schematic representation of a model that incorporates
the various aspects of depression outlined in this chapter. The reviewed
empirical data fit within this theoretical framework that also serves
heuristically to guide future research and clinical intervention. The
diathesis-stress model has been noted in several places in this chapter.
Within this integrative model, the diathesis may be biological (e.g.,
genetic or involving neural connectivity) or psychological (e.g.,
behavioral, cognitive, emotional). Importantly, the key concept is that
the diathesis is neither unidimensional nor singular in its etiological
role. Rather, it may include more than one variable in any of the
domains categorized as individual variables. The schematic
representation is best viewed as a snapshot or static description of
what, in fact, is a dynamic and interacting set of variables within and
across domains. In this model, the various depressive symptoms
categorized earlier in this chapter occur within an environmental
context. As children grow and develop, they are continually interacting
with their environment, which includes a multitude of dynamic, causative
factors that reciprocally influence the children across all individual
domains. As Bandura (1969)

290

Depressive Disorders Causes

Current Depression

Environmental variables

Environmental variables

Individual variables

Biological Genetic, neurochemical, neuroendocrine, immunology, neural
connectivity

Behavioral Activity, avoidance

Cognitive Distortions, schemas

Emotional Reactivity, regulation

FIGURE 7.3

Biological

Behavioral Cognitive Emotional

A Graphic View of an Integrative Model of Depression

articulated, the external environment influences the person, but it is a
two-way street in that the person has a reciprocal impact on the
environment. This process of transactional development affects those
variables both within and outside the individual. Furthermore, within
the individual there are interactive processes across the various
domains. For example, emotion regulation is an important variable in the
development of depression and other disorders. On the one hand,
emotional arousal and subsequent regulation may be a bottom-up process
in that it may originate in the limbic system. On the other hand,
research has shown that emotions may also be regulated via top-down
processing that originates in the frontal areas of the brain (see
Ochsner & Gross, 2007). Unraveling these processes and increasing
understanding of their interrelationships will be essential to enhance
the prevention and treatment of MDD. It is posited that each
environmental and individual variable is multidimensional and
transactional in its impact, both causing and ameliorating MDD. Hence,
antidepressant medications directly affect neurobiology and, by
extension, affect cognitions, emotions, and behaviors (i.e., bottom-up
processing). Conversely, CBT directly targets cognitions and behaviors
and indirectly affects neurobiological pathways associated with MDD
(i.e., top-down processing; McGrath et al., 2013; Yoshimura et al.,
2014). Thus, this model implies that a clinician may intervene in any of
the domains depicted in Figure 7.3 and expect to have an impact on most
or all other domains. The impact of the intervention may be most
directly observed within the same domain (e.g., a CBT therapist may see
the greatest and most immediate change in depressogenic cognitions such
as rumination), but each domain impacts the other domains. In contrast
to unidimensional causative models of MDD, this approach underscores
both the interactive and developmental aspects of all domains of human
functioning. Consequently, it is essential to study MDD from a
multidisciplinary approach in order to elucidate the significant
etiological and treatment pathways. It further underscores the
importance of identifying which types of interventions may be most
effective for which patterns of empirically determined subtypes of MDD.

Assessment of Depression

291

Assessment of Depression A variety of instruments have been developed to
diagnose major depressive disorder and to gauge the severity of
depressive symptoms. We review the interviews, self-report measures, and
clinical rating scales most commonly used in clinical practice and in
research studies of MDD.

Clinical Interviews The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5
Disorders, Clinician Version (SCID-5-CV; First, Williams, Karg, &
Spitzer, 2015) is a semistructured interview that helps clinicians and
researchers systematically inquire about possible disorder
symptomatology based on updated DSM-5 criteria. The interviewer asks a
series of questions and elicits examples that allow diagnostic
determinations to be made. This instrument allows the assessment of both
current and lifetime diagnoses. Up-to-date information about the
SCID-5-CV is available at www.scid5.org. The SCID is generally regarded
as the "gold standard" in assessing psychopathology (Shear et al.,
2000). Reliability for categorical constructs (such as diagnostic status
for MDD) is reported in terms of the kappa statistic, which assesses the
agreement between independent raters while correcting for chance
agreement. Kappa scores range from 0 (no agreement between two raters)
to 1.00 (perfect agreement); thus higher scores indicate a greater
degree of agreement. Viera and Garrett (2005) suggested that levels of
agreement may be slight (kappa ranges .21 to .40), fair (.41 to .60),
moderate (.61 to .80), or substantial (.81 to .99). Kappa ratings for
MDD across several studies have ranged from moderate (.61) to
substantial (.93), with typical kappa scores being about .80 (First &
Gibbon, 2004). Validity ratings for the SCID have been more difficult to
establish, owing to the fact that no other gold standard exists for
diagnosing DSM disorders. Using Spitzer's best-estimate diagnosis
technique, the SCID was superior to standard clinical intake interviews
in two studies (Basco et al., 2000; Kranzler et al., 1995). The
Longitudinal Interval Follow-up Evaluation (LIFE; Keller et al., 1987)
is a semistructured interview created to assess the longitudinal course
of DSM-IV (also applicable to DSM-5 criteria) disorders, including MDD.
Specific dates of onset, remission, relapse, and recurrence are
recorded, which makes the LIFE the most appropriate measure for
conducting longitudinal or treatment outcome studies of MDD. The LIFE
was designed to be administered every 6 months; if, however, a patient
or research participant misses an interview, information for the missing
period can be collected at the next scheduled interview. High interrater
reliability has been demonstrated for the interview (Keller et al.,
1987), which takes 30 to 60 minutes to administer.

Self-Report Measures The most widely used self-report measure is the
Beck Depression Inventory--II (BDI-II) (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996),
which can be administered to patients aged 13 to 80 years. The BDI-II is
a 21-item instrument that measures the intensity of both cognitive and

292

Depressive Disorders

somatic/affective symptoms of depression. The BDI-II demonstrates high
internal consistency across a wide variety of populations (average
coefficient α = .91). It also has high convergent validity,
demonstrating strong correlations with the Hamilton Rating Scale for
Depression (r = .71), with the Beck Hopelessness Scale (r = .68), and
with previous versions of the BDI (r = .93) (Dozois & Covin, 2004).
Another well-known self-report measure is the Center for Epidemiologic
Studies Depression Scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977). The CES-D is a 20-item
measure that was designed for use as a screening measure in the general
population; it was not designed as a diagnostic instrument, nor was it
intended as a way to measure the severity of depressive symptomology in
patients who meet criteria for MDD, although it is sometimes used for
that purpose. The CES-D has demonstrated high internal consistency in
the general population (α = .85) and in patient samples (α = .90)
(Radloff, 1977). The Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9; Kroenke,
Spitzer, & Williams, 2001) is a briefer self-report assessment measure
for depression. It is a 9-item scale originally designed to assess
depressive symptoms in primary care settings. The 9 items were adapted
from the DSM diagnostic criteria for depressive disorders (Kroenke &
Spitzer, 2002). The PHQ-9 has shown high internal consistency in primary
care settings (α = 0.83 and 0.92 at baseline and end of treatment,
respectively) (Cameron, Crawford, Lawton, & Reid, 2008).

Clinical Rating Scales of MDD Severity The Hamilton Rating Scale for
Depression (HAM-D; Hamilton, 1960) is a 17-item, clinician-administered
interview designed to measure intensity of MDD (i.e., it is not intended
to be a diagnostic instrument). There are various longer versions of the
HAM-D, but the 17-item version is the most frequently used. The HAM-D
demonstrates good internal consistency (average coefficient α = .78) as
well as interrater reliability (range = .70 to .96; Kovak, 2004).4 The
HAM-D correlates highly with the BDI-II as well as the Montgomery-Asberg
Depression Rating Scale (MADRS; Kovak, 2004). The HAM-D is especially
useful for detecting change in participants' levels of depression over
time, which makes it particularly attractive for research purposes. The
Quick Inventory of Depression Symptomatology (QIDS; Rush et al., 2003)
is available as both a clinician-administered scale (QIDS-C) and as a
self-report measure (QIDS-SR). The QIDS is a 16-item measure designed to
assess symptom severity across the nine DSM-5 symptom domains. The QIDS
has demonstrated high internal consistency (α = .87), and scores on the
QIDS-SR are highly correlated with scores on the HAM-D (r = .86) (Rush
et al., 2003).

Assessment of PDD PDD can be challenging to diagnose. It is easy to
overlook, as clinicians tend to focus on more acute periods of
depressive symptoms and miss milder periods of depression that may
precede or follow it. In addition, many patients experiencing PDD,
especially those with an early onset, consider dysphoria to be normal or
a part of their "usual self," so 4 It is important to note that these
ratings are affected by the interviewer's level of training, and the
numbers reported here include

studies that used raters who were not highly trained.

Treatment of Depression

293

they fail to report it to clinicians or to consider that it may be an
appropriate target for treatment (Akiskal, 1983). Residual depressive
symptoms are also overlooked as patients and clinicians focus on
improvement since the initiation of treatment. To assess and diagnose
PDD, clinicians must take a careful history of the patient's past course
of depression. If the patient has a history of nonchronic major
depressive episodes, it is critical to explore the presence of milder
depression before and after the MDD episodes. It is often helpful to
construct a life chart or time line, with the patient graphing his or
her level of depression over time (McCullough et al., 1996). It is also
critical to explain to the patient that depression can exist at varying
levels of severity, and that it is important to describe the milder as
well as the more severe periods. Unfortunately, these procedures have
not been incorporated into the standard versions of widely used
diagnostic instruments. Many structured diagnostic interviews assessed
dysthymic disorder (for DSM-III, III-R, and IV) only if currently
present, and failed to collect information on a past history of chronic
depression. Moreover, many of these instruments instructed interviewers
to skip the dysthymia section if the respondent had multiple or lengthy
major depressive episodes in the past 2 years. Thus, previous studies
likely underestimated the prevalence of both lifetime and current
chronic depression. Fortunately, this has been rectified in the DSM-5
SCID, which assesses both current and past PDD. Most widely used
depression rating scales and self-report inventories can be useful in
assessing symptom severity and monitoring treatment response in PDD.
However, they have some limitations when applied to chronic depressive
conditions. For example, the widely used 17- and 21-item versions of the
HAM-D do not assess many of the most common symptoms in PDD (e.g.,
cognitive symptoms; Keller et al., 1995). Thus, it is advisable to use
modified and longer versions of the HAM-D that include helplessness,
hopelessness, worthlessness, and reversed vegetative features to assess
persistent depression. In addition, the HAM-D assesses patients'
symptoms with reference to differences from their "normal" or "usual"
state. However, for many patients with early-onset chronic depressions,
their normal or usual state may be depressed. Consequently, symptoms may
be overlooked if questions are phrased in terms of change or worsening
from the usual state. To address these problems, Mason and colleagues
(1995) developed the Cornell Dysthymia Rating Scale, which has greater
content validity, a broader range of symptom severity, and greater
sensitivity to change than does the HAM-D (Hellerstein, Batchelder, Lee,
& Borisovskaya, 2002). The General Behavior Inventory (GBI; Depue,
Krauss, Spoont, & Arbisi, 1989) was explicitly developed to screen for
chronic depressive and bipolar mood disorders. It assesses symptoms on a
trait basis, rather than during a recent, discrete time period. The GBI
has good psychometric properties and exhibits relatively good
concordance with interview-based diagnoses in community and clinical
samples and in adolescents and adults (Danielson, Youngstrom, Findling,
& Calabrese, 2003; Depue et al., 1989; Klein, Dickstein, Taylor, &
Harding, 1989).

Treatment of Depression There are psychosocial and somatic treatments
for MDD and PDD. Several types of psychosocial interventions have been
employed in the treatment of depression; however, most

294

Depressive Disorders

clinical research has examined the effectiveness of behavioral,
cognitive behavioral, and interpersonal treatments. Although a thorough
review of these and other interventions for depression is beyond the
scope of this chapter, we review briefly the evidence for behavior
therapy (BT), cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), and interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT).5

Behavioral Treatments Historically, behavioral interventions for
depression focused on decreasing unpleasant events and increasing
pleasant activities, largely by teaching patients to increase behaviors
likely to generate positive reinforcement from the environment
(Craighead, Craighead, Ritschel, & Zagoloff, 2013). Multiple
interventions based on this principle have demonstrated empirical
success, beginning with Lewinsohn, Sullivan, and Grosscup's (1980)
12-session program (Lewinsohn & Gotlib, 1995). Lewinsohn's original
formulation has been augmented with the addition of social skills
training (Becker, Heimberg, & Bellack, 1987), self-monitoring and
self-reinforcement (Antonuccio, Ward, & Tearnan, 1991), and problem
solving (Nezu, Nezu, & Perri, 1989). From the 1980s through the late
1990s, behavioral treatments were overshadowed by increased research
regarding cognitive-behavioral interventions. However, Jacobson and
colleagues (1996) found that the behavioral components of CBT (i.e.,
activity scheduling, reducing avoidance, increasing positive events)
produced outcomes equal to the full package of CBT (i.e., behavioral
principles plus cognitive restructuring and schema modification). More
recently, Dimidjian and colleagues (2006) presented a manualized version
of this intervention called behavioral activation (BA). BA builds on the
principles of the older behavior therapies by emphasizing the link
between avoidance and depression. Behavioral activation aims to augment
an individual's behavioral repertoire to increase opportunities for
environmental positive reinforcement. In one study, BA was equal to
antidepressant medication and superior to CBT in the treatment of
severely depressed patients (Dimidjian et al., 2006). Although more
research is needed, preliminary findings are encouraging. Multiple
meta-analyses have found support for behavioral treatments for MDD
(Cuijpers, van Straten, & Warmerdam, 2007; Ekers, Richards, & Gilbody,
2008; Mazzucchelli, Kane, & Rees, 2009; Chartier & Provencher, 2013).
These findings suggest that (a) behavioral symptoms of depression can
and should be evaluated and targeted in the course of treatment, (b)
alleviating behavioral deficits in depressed individuals has an impact
on overall mood, and (c) further research is needed to determine which
treatments work for which patients. BA has also shown recent promise as
an effective treatment for depressed adolescents (Dimidjian & McCauley,
2016). An RCT by McCauley and colleagues (2015), comparing a 14-session
BA protocol modified for use with adolescents to "evidence-based
practice for depression" (a condition meant to replicate standard care
offered at academically affiliated clinic settings, which included CBT
and IPT), found BA to be both an effective and a feasible treatment for
depressed adolescents. Positive treatment effects were recently reported
in a within subjects study in which over half of the depressed sample
were fully remitted by the end of 19 weeks of BA treatment (Ritschel,
Ramirez, Cooley, & Craighead, 2016). 5 For thorough reviews regarding
the effectiveness of psychological interventions for depression, see
Craighead, Johnson,

Carey, and Dunlop (2015), pp. 331--408.

Treatment of Depression

295

Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT) CBT (Beck et al., 1979) is a short-term
(16 to 20 sessions over 12 to 16 weeks) structured treatment that aims
to teach patients to identify their automatic self-thoughts and their
relationship to feelings, recognize and correct cognitive errors, and
change underlying core beliefs about themselves. In the final sessions
of CBT, the focus of therapy shifts to consolidating gains to help
prevent future depressive episodes. CBT has been empirically subjected
to more than 80 controlled clinical trials (Cuijpers et al., 2013), and
numerous studies have documented its effectiveness in treating
depression (see Hollon et al., 2014; Craighead, Johnson, Carey, &
Dunlop, 2015). Results comparing CBT to antidepressant medications,
however, have been equivocal. Several studies have found that CBT and
medications are equally efficacious in the treatment of depression (for
a review, see Craighead et al., 2015). The most notable exception to
this finding is the National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of
Depression Collaborative Research Project (TDCRP), which found
medications to be superior to CBT in the treatment of depressed
outpatients (Elkin et al., 1989). Concerns about the TDCRP have been
noted, and additional studies have since been conducted comparing
medications to CBT; these studies have failed to find differences
between the two interventions (DeRubeis et al., 2005; also see Vittengl,
Clark, Dunn, & Jarrett, 2007).

Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) IPT is a short-term (12--16 weeks),
weekly treatment (Klerman, Weissman, Rounsaville, & Chevron, 1984) that
emphasizes the reciprocity between the biological and psychological
underpinnings of depression. It is rooted in the idea that interpersonal
relationships play a large role in the onset and maintenance of
depression and focuses on identifying and amending lapses in
interpersonal functioning that actively contribute to depression
(Craighead et al., 2015). IPT has been tested as a treatment for
depression in more than 60 studies, including more than 30 RCTs. IPT has
been widely found to be an effective treatment for depression versus
control conditions (Cuijpers, Donker, Weissman, Ravitz, & Cristea,
2016). Although the results of the TDCRP study (previously noted in this
chapter) are equivocal, secondary analysis found IPT and medication with
clinical management to be comparably effective in treating severely
depressed patients. More recently, IPT has shown promise when integrated
into nontraditional approaches, and with treating patients with
pathology outside of MDD (Donker et al., 2013; Elkin et al., 1995;
Elkins, Gibbons, Shea, & Shaw, 1996; Markowitz, Lipsitz, & Milrod,
2014). Recent studies have found IPT to be effective in reducing
depressive symptoms when implemented via a self-guided format on an
internet platform (Donker et al., 2013).

Somatic Treatments The observation that the induction of seizure
activity was useful in the treatment of psychiatric illness was first
noted among asylum patients treated with convulsion-inducing chemical
agents such as camphor and then later with metrazole and insulin (Fink,
2001). The subsequent development of electrical methods of seizure
induction and technical

296

Depressive Disorders

refinements to its application (Loo, Schweitzer, & Pratt, 2006) led to
modern electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Since that time, clinical
options for the biological treatment of depression have grown
extensively. The serendipitous discovery of the first antidepressants,
the monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), during the course of drug
treatment for tuberculosis, led over time to the development of
additional empirically validated antidepressant medications (Slattery,
Hudson, & Nutt, 2004). In parallel, other somatic treatments for
depression have been developed. These include newer brain stimulation
paradigms such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (Camprodon, 2016;
Rotenberg, Horvath, & Pascual-Leone, 2014) and deep brain stimulation
(Riva-Posse, Holtzheimer, Garlow, & Mayberg, 2013). At present,
antidepressant medications are the most common somatic treatment
employed for depression (for a review, see Rocha, Fuzikawa, Riera, &
Hara, 2012). Several classes of antidepressant medications exist for the
treatment of MDD (PrendesAlvarez, Schatzberg, & Nemeroff, 2015). With
respect to class, these medications include the monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs; e.g., phenelzine, tranylcypromine, selegiline);
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs; e.g., imipramine, desipramine,
clomipramine, amitriptyline); selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, citalopram,
escitalopram, fluvoxamine); dual serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs; e.g., venlafaxine and duloxetine); and the other
types of antidepressants (e.g., trazodone, bupropion, nefazodone,
mirtazapine, vilazodone, and vortioxetine). In addition, a wide variety
of additional medications may be used in conjunction with
antidepressants as augmentation strategies to optimize antidepressant
response (Fava & Rush, 2006). Examples of augmenting medications include
lithium carbonate, valproic acid, lamotrigine, atypical antipsychotic
medications (e.g., ziprasidone, risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole,
quetiapine, and brexpiprazole), thyroid agents (e.g., triiodothyronine),
psychostimulants (e.g., dextroamphetamine, lisdexamfetamine, and
methylphenidate), and anxiolytic medications (e.g., buspirone). The
common thread linking the various classes of currently available
antidepressants is activity directed toward alteration of monoamine
neurotransmitter activity, primarily serotonin and norepinephrine
(Slattery et al., 2004). Most antidepressants were presumed to work by
altering synaptic concentrations of monoamines, and although they do
that, it is now believed that the mechanism of action is more complex.
The key advances that have been made with respect to antidepressant
pharmacology have been substantial improvement in safety and
tolerability (Prendes-Alvarez et al., 2015). For example, the use of
MAOIs requires particular dietary restrictions that, if disregarded, may
result in a potentially life-threatening elevation of blood pressure
known as a hypertensive crisis; TCAs, as a drug class, and lithium
carbonate are both potentially lethal in overdose; and particular TCAs
as well as lithium carbonate sometimes have burdensome dose-dependent
side-effect profiles as well. Despite these issues, MAOIs, TCAs, and
lithium (in the case of bipolar depression) may produce remission of
depressive symptoms in instances when many other medications do not;
thus, they remain core elements of the antidepressant armamentarium. A
major current focus of clinical trials research in depression is the
derivation of treatment algorithms to guide effective implementation of
antidepressant therapy, such as with the Sequenced Treatment
Alternatives to Relieve Depression (STAR\*D)

Treatment of Depression

297

trial (Rush et al., 2006; Thase et al., 2007) and the integration of
psychological and pharmacological treatments for depression (Craighead &
Dunlop, 2014). In addition, the discovery of biological predictors of
treatment response (Binder et al., 2004; Ising et al., 2007),
differential treatment moderators identifying who will respond to CBT as
opposed to antidepressants (McGrath et al., 2013), and
treatment-emergent symptoms such as suicidal ideation (Laje et al.,
2007) and adverse effect burden (Hu et al., 2007) are additional major
areas of investigation.

Treatment of PDD There are few direct comparisons of treatment response
between chronic and nonchronic depressions, and the results are
inconsistent (Gilmer et al., 2008; Sung et al., 2012; Thase et al.,
1994). However, indirect evidence suggests that PDD may require somewhat
different approaches to treatment. For example PDD may require a longer
duration of pharmacotherapy (Koran et al., 2001) and may be more likely
than nonchronic MDD to benefit from combined pharmacotherapy and
psychotherapy (Keller et al., 2000). This is in line with recent
findings that patients with chronic depression show lower response and
remission rates as well as prolonged courses of treatment as compared to
MDD patients (Köhler et al., 2015).

Acute-Phase Treatment Recent meta-analyses (Cuijpers et al., 2010;
Kriston, von Wolff, Westphal, Hölzel, & Härter, 2014; Levkovitz,
Tedeschini, & Papakostas, 2011; von Wolff, Hölzel, Westphal, Härter, &
Kriston, 2013) suggest that antidepressant medication is superior to
placebo in the treatment of chronic depression. The major classes of
antidepressants appear to be equivalent, although dropout rates are
higher for TCAs than for SSRIs (von Wolff et al., 2013). As the placebo
response rate is lower in chronic than nonchronic depressions,
individuals with chronic depression experience greater specific benefits
from active treatment (Levkovitz et al., 2011). In Cuijpers and
colleagues' (2010) meta-analysis, psychotherapy was significantly more
efficacious than control conditions (e.g., placebo, treatment as usual,
nonspecific treatment, wait list), although the effect size was small.
However, pharmacotherapy was significantly more efficacious than
psychotherapy, although this difference was derived entirely from
studies focusing on dysthymic disorder; there was no difference for more
severe forms of chronic depression. Examination of length of treatment
indicated that a minimum of 18 sessions of psychotherapy is needed for
optimal effects. The two best-studied approaches to psychotherapy in
chronic depression are the cognitive behavioral analysis system of
psychotherapy (CBASP; McCullough, 2000), and IPT (Markowitz, 1998).
CBASP, which was specifically designed for chronic depression, uses
behavioral, cognitive, and interpersonal techniques to help patients
become more effective in their social environments and develop better
social problem-solving skills. CBASP is showing increasing promise in
yielding high rates of remission as both an outpatient and inpatient
treatment option for chronic depression (Swan et al., 2014; Brakemeier
et al.,

298

Depressive Disorders

2015). IPT is a short-term, psychodynamically inspired therapy that
focuses on current interpersonal problems such as interpersonal
conflicts, change in an important social role, grief, and social
isolation/skills deficits. In one of the few head-to-head comparisons of
different psychotherapy approaches for chronic depression, Schramm et
al. (2011) found that CBASP produced a significantly higher remission
rate than IPT, although the two treatments did not differ on change in
HAM-D or effects 1 year posttreatment. Finally, the combination of
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy appears to be significantly more
efficacious than either monotherapy, particularly for double depression
and chronic MDD (Cuijpers et al., 2010). This contrasts with studies of
MDD in general, where combination treatment is generally not more
effective than psychotherapy or medication alone (Craighead & Dunlop,
2014), though the combination may be more effective for severe and
perhaps for severe-chronic MDD (Hollon et al., 2014). Common factors
that cut across specific forms of therapy, such as the therapeutic
alliance, also play a significant role in fostering change with
chronically depressed patients (Klein et al., 2003; Arnow et al., 2013).
Similarities in both therapists' and patients' reports of the alliance
have been associated with more reductions in some depressed symptoms in
chronically depressed patients (Laws et al., 2016). In a comparison of
the effects of common and specific factors in CBASP, Santiago and
colleagues (2005) reported that they had additive effects in predicting
outcome, with common factors accounting for somewhat more variance than
specific factors. On balance, it appears that antidepressant medication
may be somewhat more efficacious than psychotherapy in treating PDD.
However, some forms of psychotherapy, or psychotherapy administered with
sufficient intensity, may be as effective as pharmacotherapy. Given the
broad range of treatment options available, an important question is
whether there are predictors of differential treatment response to help
guide treatment selection. Unfortunately, few predictors of differential
response to different medications or to pharmacotherapy versus
psychotherapy have been identified. However, Nemeroff et al. (2003)
found that CBASP produced a significantly higher rate of remission than
pharmacotherapy in the subgroup of chronically depressed patients with a
history of childhood adversity. Several studies have reported that
patients' preferences for psychotherapy versus pharmacotherapy had a
significant impact on their outcomes (Kocsis et al., 2009; Steidtmann et
al., 2013). Moreover, Steidtmann and colleagues (2013) found that
patients who had not shown improvement with psychotherapy during the
first 8 weeks of treatment were unlikely to remit with continued
therapy.

Continuation and Maintenance Treatment Due to the high risk of relapse
and recurrence (Klein et al., 2006), continuation and maintenance
pharmacotherapy is an important consideration for patients with chronic
depression. The continuation phase consists of the first 4 to 6 months
of treatment after recovery; the maintenance phase consists of treatment
after that point. Several double-blind, placebo-discontinuation studies
have demonstrated that continuation treatment (Koran et al., 2001) and
maintenance treatment (Keller et al., 1998; Kocsis et al., 1996) of
patients who have recovered from chronic depression are associated with
a significantly lower risk of relapse or recurrence than placebo. There
are fewer studies of

Summary and Future Directions

299

the efficacy of psychotherapy in preventing relapse and recurrence in
chronic depression. However, Klein, Santiago, and colleagues (2004)
reported that psychotherapy can be an effective maintenance phase
treatment. Chronically depressed patients who responded to acute and
continuation treatment were randomly assigned to continue to receive
either one session of CBASP per month or assessment only for 12 months.
Patients who received maintenance CBASP had a significantly lower risk
of recurrence than patients who were assigned to the assessment-only
condition.

Treatment Summary BA, CBT, and IPT as well as antidepressant medications
attenuate the symptoms for many sufferers of MDD, and CBASP, IPT, and
medications are effective in the treatment of PDD. Many empirical
questions remain, however. How should treatments be selected---can we
determine which treatments work best for which patients? Which
treatments produce the most enduring effects? What are the mechanisms of
action of the psychosocial and pharmacological interventions? When are
combination therapies (i.e., psychotherapy plus medication) indicated?
These and other questions are under investigation, and results from
these studies will inform a new generation of research and treatment.

Summary and Future Directions Depression is a prevalent and debilitating
disorder resulting in suffering at the individual, family, and societal
levels. It can be reliably diagnosed, even though it is a heterogeneous
disorder with multiple etiological pathways. In this chapter, we have
described the psychological, genetic, and neurobiological
characteristics and possible etiologies of depression, and how the
extant effective treatments have been derived and implemented. It is now
widely recognized that depressive disorders often exhibit a chronic
course. Indeed, chronic depressions account for at least one third of
the cases of mood disorders in clinical settings, and this prevalence
has been reflected with the re-categorization of chronic depression
under the single PDD diagnosis in the DSM-5 (APA, 2013a). Despite this
important acknowledgment, much more research is needed in the realm of
PDD. Now that research has made it clear that chronic depression differs
from nonchronic depression in a number of important respects, more
systematic studies need to be done to elucidate the etiopathogenetic and
neurobiological factors underlying chronic depression, as well as to
create and assess more efficacious treatment regimes and PDD-specific
assessment measures. Clearly, great advances have been made in the
evolution of clinical science research regarding depression. It seems
that the most significant future questions need to address how the
multiple pathways of the etiology of the disorder interact in the
development of MDD. Though efficacious treatments have been developed,
results still indicate that only about 30% to 35% of depressed patients
completely remit from their episode when treated; work is needed to
better understand the disorder so a greater percentage of the patients
suffering from depression will be successfully treated. Clinical
scientific development has reached the point where we can ask which
patients respond best to which

300

Depressive Disorders

treatment (see McGrath et al., 2013); this should provide badly needed
evidence to guide clinical intervention. The dissemination of
efficacious treatments to a wider range of the population is essential;
dissemination will most likely advance by the development of more
sophisticated and more easily used contemporary technologies, such as
those used by the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies initiative
in the United Kingdom (Clark, 2011). Finally, it is extremely important
to extend programs designed to prevent the initial episode of major
depression.

References Abela, J. R. Z., Stolow, D., Zhang, M., & McWhinnie, C. M.
(2012). Negative cognitive style and past history of major depressive
episodes in university students. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 36,
219--227. doi: 10.1007/s10608-010-9334-y Abraham, K. (1911). Notes on
the psychoanalytic investigation and treatment of manic-depressive
insanity and allied conditions. In D. Bryan & A. Strachey (Eds.),
Selected papers on psychoanalysis (pp. 137-- 156). New York, NY: Basic
Books. Abramson, L. Y., Alloy, L. B., Hankin, B. L., Haeffel, G. J.,
MacCoon, D. G., & Gibb, B. E. (2002). Cognitive vulnerability-stress
models of depression in a self-regulatory and psychobiological context.
In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression
(pp. 268--294). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky,
G. I., & Alloy, L. B. (1989). Hopelessness depression: A theory-based
subtype of depression. Psychological Review, 96, 358--372. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.96.2.358 Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., &
Teasdale, J. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans: Critique and
reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 49--74. doi:
10.1037/0021-843X.87.1.49 Akiskal, H. S. (1983). Dysthymic disorder:
Psychopathology of proposed chronic depressive subtypes. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 140(1), 11--20. Alderete, E., Vega, W. A.,
Kolody, B., & AguilarGaxiola, S. (1999). Depressive symptomatology:
Prevalence and psychosocial risk factors among Mexican migrant
farmworkers in California. Journal of Community Psychology, 27(4),
457--471. Alegría, M., Mulvaney-Day, N., Torres, M., Polo, A., Cao, Z.,
& Canino, G. (2007). Prevalence of psychiatric disorders across Latino
subgroups in the United States. American Journal of Public Health,
97(1), 68--75. Alloy, L. B., & Abramson, L. Y. (1999). The Temple--
Wisconsin Cognitive Vulnerability to Depression (CVD) Project:
Conceptual background, design, and methods. Journal of Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 13, 227--262. Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., Hogan, M.
E., Whitehouse, W. G., Rose, D. T., Robinson, M. S., ... Lapkin, J. B.
(2000). The Temple--Wisconsin Cognitive Vulnerability to Depression
Project: Lifetime

history of Axis I psychopathology in individuals at high and low
cognitive risk for depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109(3),
403--418. Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., Walshaw, P. D., & Neeren, A. M.
(2006). Cognitive vulnerability to unipolar and bipolar mood disorders.
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 25, 726--754. doi:
10.1521/jscp.2006.25.7.726 Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., Whitehouse, W.
G., Hogan, M. E., Panzarella, C., & Rose, D. T. (2006). Prospective
incidence of first onsets and recurrences of depression in individuals
at high and low cognitive risk for depression. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 115, 145--156. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.115.1.145 Alloy, L.
B., Abramson, L. Y., Whitehouse, W. G., Hogan, M. E., Tashman, N. A.,
Steinberg, D. L., ... Donovan, P. (1999). Depressogenic cognitive
styles: Predictive validity, information processing and personality
characteristics, and developmental origins. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 37, 503--531. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7967(98)00157-0 American
Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (3rd ed., rev.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (4th ed.) Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (2013a). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (2013b). Highlights of changes from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5.
Washington, DC: Author. Amsterdam, J. D., Maislin, G., Winokur, A.,
Berwish, N., Kling, M., & Gold, P. (1988). The oCRH stimulation test
before and after clinical recovery from depression. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 14, 213--222. doi: 10.1016/0165-0327(88)90037-7 Antonuccio,
D. O., Ward, C. H., & Tearnan, B. H. (1991). The behavioral treatment of
unipolar depression in adult outpatients. In M. Hersen, R. M. Eisler, &
P. M. Miller (Eds.), Progress in behavior modification (Vol. 24,
pp. 152--191). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

301

302

Depressive Disorders

Arana, G. W., Baldessarini, R. J., & Orsteen, M. (1985). The
dexamethasone suppression test for diagnosis and prognosis in
psychiatry: Commentary and review. Archives of General Psychiatry, 42,
1193--1204. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1985.01790350067012 Arborelius, L.,
Owens, M. J., Plotsky, P. M., & Nemeroff, C. B. (1999). The role of
corticotropinreleasing factor in depression and anxiety disorders.
Journal of Endocrinology, 160, 1--12. doi: 0022 --0795/99/0160--0001
Arnow, B. A., Steidtmann, D., Blasey, C., Manber, R., Constantino, M.
J., Klein, D. N., ... Kocsis, J. H. (2013). The relationship between the
therapeutic alliance and treatment outcome in two distinct
psychotherapies for chronic depression. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 81(4), 627--638. Arnow, B. A., Spangler, D., Klein,
D. N., & Burns, D. D. (2004). Rumination and distraction among chronic
depressives in treatment: A structural equation analysis. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 28, 67--83. Austin, M. P., Mitchell, P., &
Goodwin, G. M. (2001). Cognitive deficits in depression. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 178(3), 200--206. Azmitia, E. C., & Gannon, P. J. (1986).
Anatomy of the serotonergic system in the primate and sub-primate brain.
Advances in Neurology, 43, 407--468. Bandura, A. (1969). Principles of
behavior modification. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Bandura,
A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological Review, 84, 191--215. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.84.2.191
Barnhofer, T., Brennan, K., Crane, C., Duggan, D., & Williams, J. M. G.
(2014). A comparison of vulnerability factors in patients with
persistent and remitting lifetime symptom course of depression. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 152, 155--161. Basco, M. R., Bostic, J. Q.,
Davies, D., Rush, A. J., Witte, B., Hendrickse, W. A., & Barnett, V.
(2000). Methods to improve diagnostic accuracy in a community mental
health setting. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1599--1605. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp .157.10.1599 Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Clinical,
experimental, and theoretical aspects. New York, NY: Harper & Row. Beck,
A. T. (1968). Depression: Causes and treatment. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press. Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the
emotional disorders. New York, NY: International Universities Press.

Beck, A. T. (1987). Cognitive models of depression. Journal of Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 1, 5--37. Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics
and beyond. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J.,
Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K.
(1996). Beck Depression Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation. Becker, R. E., Heimberg, R. G., & Bellack, A.
S. (1987). Social skills training treatment for depression. Elmsford,
NY: Pergamon Press. Berman, R. M., Narasimhan, M., Miller, H. L., Anand,
A., Cappiello, A., Oren, D. A., ... Charney, D. S. (1999). Transient
depressive relapse induced by catecholamine depletion: Potential
phenotypic vulnerability marker? Archives of General Psychiatry, 56,
395--403. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.56.5.395 Berton, O., & Nestler, E. J.
(2006). New approaches to antidepressant drug discovery: Beyond
monoamines. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7, 137--151. doi:
10.1038/nrn1846 Biegon, A., Weizman, A., Karp, L., Ram, A., Tiano, S., &
Wolff, M. (1987). Serotonin 5--HT2 receptor binding on blood
platelets---a peripheral marker for depression? Life Science, 41,
2485--2492. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(87)90675-8 Bijttebier, P., Beck, I.,
Claes, L., & Vandereycken, W. (2009). Gray's Reinforcement Sensitivity
Theory as a framework for research on personality-- psychopathology
associations. Clinical Psychology Review, 29(5), 421--430. Binder, E.
B., Salyakina, D., Lichtner, P., Wochnik, G. M., Ising, M., Putz, B.,
... Muller-Myhsok, B. (2004). Polymorphisms in FKBP5 are associated with
increased recurrence of depressive episodes and rapid response to
antidepressant treatment. Nature Genetics, 36, 1319--1325. doi:
10.1038/ng1479 Blackburn, I. M., Jones, S., & Lewin, R. J. P. (2011).
Cognitive style in depression. British Journal of Clinical Psychology,
25, 241--251. doi: 10.1111/ j.2044-8260.1986.tb00704.x Blanco, C.,
Okuda, M., Markowitz, J. C., Liu, S. M., Grant, B. F., & Hasin, D. S.
(2010). The epidemiology of chronic major depressive disorder and
dysthymic disorder: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71(12),
1645--1656.

References Bourke, C., Douglas, K., & Porter, R. (2010). Processing of
facial emotion expression in major depression: A review. Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 44(8), 681--696. Brakemeier, E. L.,
Radtke, M., Engel, V., Zimmermann, J., Tuschen-Caffier, B., Hautzinger,
M., ... Normann, C. (2015). Overcoming treatment resistance in chronic
depression: A pilot study on outcome and feasibility of the cognitive
behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy as an inpatient treatment
program. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 84(1), 51--56. Brown, E. S.,
Varghese, F. P., & McEwen, B. S. (2004). Association of depression with
medical illness: Does cortisol play a role? Biological Psychiatry, 55,
1--9. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(03)00473-6 Brown, T. A. (2007). Temporal
course and structural relationships among dimensions of temperament and
DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorder constructs. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 116(2), 313. Bruffaerts, R., Vilagut, G., Demyttenaere, K.,
Alonso, J., AlHamzawi, A., Andrade, L. H., ... Kessler, R. C. (2012).
Role of common mental and physical disorders in partial disability
around the world. British Journal of Psychiatry, 200(6), 454--461.
Butler, G., & Mathews, A. (1983). Cognitive processes in anxiety.
Advances in Behaviour Research and Therapy, 5(1), 51--62. Cameron, I.
M., Crawford, J. R., Lawton, K., & Reid, I. C. (2008). Psychometric
comparison of PHQ-9 and HADS for measuring depression severity in
primary care. British Journal of General Practice, 58(546), 32--36.
Camprodon, J. A. (2016). Transcranial magnetic stimulation. In
Psychiatric Neurotherapeutics (pp. 165--186). New York, NY: Springer.
Carpenter, W. T., & Bunney, W. E. (1971). Adrenal cortical activity in
depressive illness. American Journal of Psychiatry, 128, 31--40.
Carroll, B. J. (1982). Use of the dexamethasone suppression test in
depression. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 43, 44--50. Carroll, B. J.,
Martin, F. I., & Davies, B. (1968). Pituitary-adrenal function in
depression. Lancet, 1, 1373--1374. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(68)92072-2
Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W.,
Harrington, H., ... Poulton, R. (2003). Influence of life stress on
depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science,
301(5631), 386--389.

303

Charney, D. S. (1998). Monoamine dysfunction and the pathophysiology and
treatment of depression. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59(Suppl. 14),
11--14. Charney, D. S., Heninger, G. R., Sternberg, D. E., & Roth, R. H.
(1981). Plasma MHPG in depression: Effects of acute and chronic
desipramine treatment. Psychiatry Research, 5, 217--229. Chartier, I.
S., & Provencher, M. D. (2013). Behavioural activation for depression:
Efficacy, effectiveness and dissemination. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 145(3), 292--299. Chen, B., Dowlatshahi, D., MacQueen, G. M.,
Wang, J. F., & Young, L. T. (2001). Increased hippocampal BDNF
immunoreactivity in subjects treated with antidepressant medication.
Biological Psychiatry, 50, 260--265. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(01)01083-6
Clark, D. M. (2011). Implementing NICE guidelines for the psychological
treatment of depression and anxiety disorders: The IAPT experience.
International Review of Psychiatry, 23(4), 318--327. Costello, E. J.,
Erkanli, A., & Angold, A. (2006). Is there an epidemic of child or
adolescent depression? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47,
1263--1271. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2006.01682.x Craighead, W. E.,
Craighead, L. W., Ritschel, L. A., & Zagoloff, A. (2013). Behavior
therapy and cognitivebehavioral therapy. In I. B. Weiner, G. Stricker, &
T. A. Widiger (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: Vol. 8. Clinical
psychology (2nd ed., pp. 291--319). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Craighead, W.
E., & Dunlop, B. W. (2014). Combination psychotherapy and antidepressant
medication treatment for depression: For whom, when, and how. Annual
Review of Psychology, 65, 267--300. Craighead, W. E., Johnson, B. N.,
Carey, S., & Dunlop, B. W. (2015). Psychosocial treatments for major
depressive disorder. In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to
treatments that work (pp. 381--408). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press. Craighead, W. E., Sheets, E. S., Craighead, L. W., & Madsen, J.
W. (2011). Recurrence of MDD: A prospective study of personality
pathology and cognitive distortions. Personality Disorders: Theory,
Research, and Treatment, 2(2), 83. Craske, M. G. (2014). Introduction to
special issue: How does neuroscience inform psychological treatment?
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 62, 1--2. Cuijpers, P., Berking, M.,
Andersson, G., Quigley, L., Kleiboer, A., & Dobson, K. S. (2013). A
metaanalysis of cognitive-behavioural therapy for adult

304

Depressive Disorders

depression, alone and in comparison with other treatments. Canadian
Journal of Psychiatry, 58(7), 376. Cuijpers, P., Donker, T., Weissman,
M. M., Ravitz, P., & Cristea, I. A. (2016). Interpersonal psychotherapy
for mental health problems: A comprehensive metaanalysis. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 173(7), 680--687. Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A.,
Schuurmans, J., van Oppen, P., Hollon, S. D., & Andersson, G. (2010).
Psychotherapy for chronic major depression and dysthymia: A
meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 51--62. doi:
10.1016/j.cpr.2009.09.003 Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., & Warmerdam, L.
(2007). Behavioral activation treatments of depression: A meta-analysis.
Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 318--326. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2006.11.001
Dalili, M. N., Penton-Voak, I. S., Harmer, C. J., & Munafò, M. R.
(2015). Meta-analysis of emotion recognition deficits in major
depressive disorder. Psychological Medicine, 45(6), 1135--1144.
Danielson, C. K., Youngstrom, E. A., Findling, R. L., & Calabrese, J. R.
(2003). Discriminative validity of the General Behavior Inventory using
youth report. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 31, 29--39. doi:
10.1023/A:1021717231272 Davidson, R. J. (1992). Anterior cerebral
symmetry and the nature of emotion. Brain and Cognition, 20, 125--151.
Davidson, R. J. (1998). Affective style and affective disorders:
Perspectives from affective neuroscience. Cognition and Emotion, 12,
307--330. doi: 10.1080/ 026999398379628 Decker, H. S. (2004). The
psychiatric works of Emil Kraepelin: A many-faceted story of modern
medicine. Journal of the History of Neuroscience, 13, 248--276. Demeyer,
I., De Lissnyder, E., Koster, E. H., & De Raedt, R. (2012). Rumination
mediates the relationship between impaired cognitive control for
emotional information and depressive symptoms: A prospective study in
remitted depressed adults. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50(5),
292--297. Depue, R. A., Krauss, S., Spoont, M. R., & Arbisi, P. (1989).
General Behavior Inventory identification of unipolar and bipolar
affective conditions in a nonclinical university population. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 98, 117--126. doi: 10.1037/0021843X.98.2.117
DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, R. C., Young,
P. R., Salomon, R. M., ... Gallop, R. (2005). Cognitive therapy
vs. medications in the treatment of moderate to severe depression.

Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 409--416. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.62.4.409 Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S.,
Schmaling, K. B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Addis, M. E., ... Jacobson, N. S.
(2006). Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy,
and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults with
major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74,
658--670. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X .74.4.658 Dimidjian, S., Martell, C.
R., Addis, M. E., & HermanDunn, R. (2008). Behavioral activation for
depression. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Clinical handbook of psychological
disorders: A step-by-step treatment manual (4th ed., pp. 328--364). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Dimidjian, S., & McCauley, E. (2016). Modular,
scalable, and personalized: Priorities for behavioral interventions for
adolescent depression. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 23(1),
58--61. Donaldson, C., & Lam, D. (2004). Rumination, mood and social
problem-solving in major depression. Psychological Medicine, 34,
1309--1318. doi: 10.1017/ S0033291704001904 Donker, T., Batterham, P.
J., Warmerdam, L., Bennett, K., Bennett, A., Cuijpers, P., ...
Christensen, H. (2013). Predictors and moderators of response to
internet-delivered interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitive behavior
therapy for depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 151(1),
343--351. Dorn, L. D., Burgess, E. S., Friedman, T. C., Dubbert, B.,
Gold, P. W., & Chrousos, G. P. (1997). The longitudinal course of
psychopathology in Cushing's syndrome after correction of
hypercortisolism. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 82,
912--919. doi: 10.1210/jc.82.3.912 Dozois, D. J. A., & Covin, R. (2004).
The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II), Beck Hopelessness Scale (BHS),
and Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation (BSS). In M. J. Hilsenroth & D. L.
Segal (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook of psychological assessment (pp.
50--69). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Duman, R. S., & Monteggia, L. M. (2006). A
neurotrophic model for stress-related mood disorders. Biological
Psychiatry, 59, 1116--1127. doi: 10.1016/ j.biopsych.2006.02.013 Dunn,
E. C., Brown, R. C., Dai, Y., Rosand, J., Nugent, N. R., Amstadter, A.
B., & Smoller, J. W. (2014). Genetic determinants of depression: Recent
findings and future directions. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 23(1),
1--18.

References Duncan, L. E., Hutchison, K. E., Carey, G., & Craighead, W.
E. (2009). Variation in brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene is
associated with symptoms of depression. Journal of Affective Disorders,
115, 215--219. Duque, A., & Vázquez, C. (2015). Double attention bias
for positive and negative emotional faces in clinical depression:
Evidence from an eye-tracking study. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 46, 107--114. Egan, M. F., Kokima, M.,
Callicott, J. H., Goldberg, T. E., Kolachana, B. S., Bertolino, A., ...
Weinberger, D. R. (2003). The BDNF val66met polymorphism affects
activity dependent secretion of BDNF and human memory and hippocampal
function. Cell, 112, 257--269. Ekers, D., Richards, D., & Gilbody, S.
(2008). A metaanalysis of randomized trials of behavioural treatment of
depression. Psychological Medicine, 38(05), 611--623. Elkin, I.,
Gibbons, R. D., Shea, M. T., & Shaw, B. F. (1996). Science is not a
trial (but it can sometimes be a tribulation). Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 64, 92--103. Elkin, I., Gibbons, R. D., Shea, M.
T., Sotsky, S. M., Watkins, J. T., Pilkonis, P. A., & Hedeker, D.
(1995). Initial severity and differential treatment outcome in the
National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression
Collaborative Research Program. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 63(5), 841. Elkin, I., Shea, M. T., Watkins, J. T., Imber,
S. D., Sotsky, S. M., Collins, J. F., ... Parloff, M. B. (1989).
National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression
Collaborative Research Program: General effectiveness of treatments.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 971--982. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.1989.01810110013002 Engel, R. A., & DeRubeis, R. J.
(1993). The role of cognition in depression. In K. S. Dobson & P. C.
Kendall (Eds.), Psychopathology and cognition (pp. 83--119). San Diego,
CA: Academic Press. Evans, D. L., Charney, D. S., Lewis, L., Golden, R.
N., Gorman, J. M., Krishnan, K. R., ... Valvo, W. J. (2005). Mood
disorders in the medically ill: Scientific review and recommendations.
Biological Psychiatry, 58, 175--189. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005
.05.001 Evans, D. L., & Nemeroff, C. B. (1983). The dexamethasone
suppression test in mixed bipolar disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 140, 615--617.

305

Fava, M., & Rush, A. J. (2006). Current status of augmentation and
combination treatments for major depressive disorder: A literature
review and a proposal for a novel approach to improve practice.
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 75, 139--153. doi: 10.1159/000091771
Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, J., Ridder, E. M., & Beautrais, A. L. (2005).
Subthreshold depression in adolescence and mental health outcomes in
adulthood. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 66--72. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.62.1.66 Ferster, C. B. (1965). Classification of
behavioral pathology. In L. Krasner & L. P. Ullmann (Eds.), Research in
behavior modification (pp. 6--26). New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston. Ferster, C. B. (1966). Animal behavior and mental illness.
Psychological Record, 16, 345--356. Ferster, C. B. (1973). A functional
analysis of depression. American Psychologist, 28, 857--870. doi:
10.1037/h0035605 Fink, M. (2001). Convulsive therapy: A review of the
first 55 years. Journal of Affective Disorders, 63, 1--15. doi:
10.1016/S0165-0327(00)00367-0 First, M. B., & Gibbon, M. (2004). The
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-I) and
the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Disorders
(SCID-II). In M. J. Hilsenroth & D. L. Segal (Eds.), Comprehensive
handbook of psychological assessment (pp. 134--143). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015).
User's guide for the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders,
Research Version (SCID-5-RV). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association. Fisher, H. L., Cohen-Woods, S., Hosang, G. M., Korszun, A.,
Owen, M., Craddock, N., ... Uher, R. (2013). Interaction between
specific forms of childhood maltreatment and the serotonin transporter
gene (5-HTT) in recurrent depressive disorder. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 145(1), 136--141. Foland-Ross, L. C., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012).
Cognitive and neural aspects of information processing in major
depressive disorder: An integrative perspective. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3, 489. Freud, S. (1950). Mourning and melancholia. In
Collected papers (Vol. 4.). London, England: Hogarth Press. (Original
work published 1917) Fritzsche, A., Dahme, B., Gotlib, I. H., Joormann,
J., Magnussen, H., Watz, H., ... von Leupoldt, A. (2010). Specificity of
cognitive biases in patients with

306

Depressive Disorders

current depression and remitted depression and in patients with asthma.
Psychological Medicine, 40(5), 815--826. Garvey, M. J., Tollefson, G.
D., & Tuason, V. B. (1986). Is chronic primary major depression a
distinct depression subtype? Comprehensive Psychiatry, 27, 446--448.
doi: 10.1016/0010-440X(86)90032-5 Gibb, B. E. (2002). Childhood
maltreatment and negative cognitive styles: A quantitative and
qualitative review. Clinical Psychology Review, 22(2), 223--246.
Gillespie, C. F., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2007). Corticotropin-releasing
factor and the psychobiology of early life stress. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 16, 85--89. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8721
.2007.00481.x Gilmer, W. S., Gollan, J. K., Wisniewski, S. R., Howland,
R. H., Trivedi, M. H., Miyahara, S., ... Rush, A. J. (2008). Does the
duration of index episode affect the treatment outcome of major
depressive disorder? A STAR\*D report. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
69, 1246--1256. Gilmer, W. S., Trivedi, M. H., Rush, A. J., Wisniewski,
S. R., Luther, J., Howland, R. H., ... Alpert, J. (2005). Factors
associated with chronic depressive episodes: A preliminary report from
the STAR-D project. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 112, 425--433. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0447.2005.00633.x Glaser, R., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K.
(2005). Stressinduced immune dysfunction: Implications for health.
National Review of Immunology, 5, 243--251. doi: 10.1038/nri1571 Gollan,
J. K., Pane, H. T., McCloskey, M. S., & Coccaro, E. F. (2008).
Identifying differences in biased affective information processing in
major depression. Psychiatry Research, 159(1), 18--24. Gonul, A. S.,
Akdeniz, F., Taneli, F., Donat, O., Eker, C., & Vahip, S. (2005). Effect
of treatment on serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels in
depressed patients. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 255, 381--386. doi: 10.1007/s00406-005-0578-6 Goodwin, R.
D., & Stein, M. B. (2004). Association between childhood trauma and
physical disorders among adults in the United States. Psychological
Medicine, 34, 509--520. doi: 10.1017/S0033291703 00134X Gotlib, I. H.,
Kasch, K. L., Traill, S., Joormann, J., Arnow, B. A., & Johnson, S. L.
(2004). Coherence and specificity of information-processing biases in
depression and social phobia. Journal of Abnormal

Psychology, 113, 386--398. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X .113.3.386 Gray, J. A.
(1987). The psychology of fear and stress (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press. Greenberg, P. E., Fournier, A. A., Sisitsky,
T., Pike, C. T., & Kessler, R. C. (2015). The economic burden of adults
with major depressive disorder in the United States (2005 and 2010).
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 76(2), 155--162. Groves, J. O. (2007).
Is it time to reassess the BDNF hypothesis of depression? Molecular
Psychiatry, 12, 1079--1088. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4002075 Gureje, O.
(2011). Dysthymia in a cross-cultural perspective. Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 24, 67--71. Gutman, D. A., Owens, M. J., Skelton, K. H.,
Thrivikraman, K. V., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2003). The
corticotropin-releasing factor1 receptor antagonist R121919 attenuates
the behavioral and endocrine responses to stress. Journal of
Pharmacological and Experimental Therapy, 304, 874--880. doi: 10.1124/
jpet.102.042788 Haeffel, G. J., Abramson, L. Y., Voelz, Z. R., Metalsky,
G. I., Halberstadt, L., Dykman, B. M., ... Alloy, L. B. (2003).
Cognitive vulnerability to depression and lifetime history of Axis I
psychopathology: A comparison of negative cognitive styles (CSQ) and
dysfunctional attitudes (DAS). Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 17,
3--22. doi: 10.1891/jcop.17 .1.3.58269 Hamilton, J. P., & Gotlib, I. H.
(2008). Neural substrates of increased memory sensitivity for negative
stimuli in major depression. Biological Psychiatry, 63(12), 1155--1162.
Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 23(1), 56. Hankin, B. L.,
Abramson, L. Y., Moffitt, T. E., Silva, P. A., McGee, R., & Angell, K.
E. (1998). Development of depression from preadolescence to young
adulthood: Emerging gender differences in a 10-year longitudinal study.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107(1), 128. Haroon, E., Raison, C. L.,
& Miller, A. H. (2012). Psychoneuroimmunology meets
neuropsychopharmacology: Translational implications of the impact of
inflammation on behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37(1), 137--162.
Hasin, D. S., Goodwin, R. D., Stinson, F. S., & Grant, B. F. (2005).
Epidemiology of major depressive

References disorder: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcoholism and Related Conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry,
62(10), 1097--1106. Heim, C., & Binder, E. B. (2012). Current research
trends in early life stress and depression: Review of human studies on
sensitive periods, gene-- environment interactions, and epigenetics.
Experimental Neurology, 233(1), 102--111. Hellerstein, D. J., Agosti,
V., Bosi, M., & Black, S. R. (2010). Impairment in psychosocial
functioning associated with dysthymic disorder in the NESARC study.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 127, 84--88. doi:
10.1016/j.jad.2010.04.013 Hellerstein, D. J., Batchelder, S. T., Lee,
A., & Borisovskaya, M. (2002). Rating dysthymia: An assessment of the
construct and content validity of the Cornell Dysthymia Rating Scale.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 71(1), 85--96. Hertel, P. T., &
Brozovich, F. (2010). Cognitive habits and memory distortions in anxiety
and depression. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19(3),
155--160. Hidaka, B. H. (2012). Depression as a disease of modernity:
Explanations for increasing prevalence. Journal of Affective Disorders,
140, 205--214. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.12.036 Hirschfeld, R. M. A.,
Klerman, G. L., Andreasen, N. C., Clayton, P. J., & Keller, M. B.
(1986). Psychosocial predictors of chronicity in depressed patients.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 648--654. doi: 10.1192/bjp.148.6.648
Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Fawcett, J., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton,
R. C., Zajecka, J., ... Gallop, R. (2014). Effect of cognitive therapy
with antidepressant medications vs antidepressants alone on the rate of
recovery in major depressive disorder: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Psychiatry, 71(10), 1157--1164. Holm-Denoma, J. M., Berlim, M. T.,
Fleck, M. P. A., & Joiner, T. E. (2006). Double depression in adult
psychiatric outpatients in Brazil: Distinct from major depression?
Psychiatry Research, 144, 191--196. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2005.06.011
Hornung, O. P., & Heim, C. M. (2015, February 17). Gene--environment
interactions and intermediate phenotypes: Early trauma and depression.
Frontiers in Endocrinology. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00014 Hu, X. Z.,
Rush, A. J., Charney, D., Wilson, A. F., Sorant, A. J., Papanicolaous,
G. J., ... Lipsky, R. H. (2007). Association between a functional
serotonin

307

transporter promoter polymorphism and citalopram treatment in adult
outpatients with major depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64,
783--792. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.7.783 Iacoviello, B. M., Alloy, L.
B., Abramson, L. Y., Whitehouse, W. G., & Hogan, M. E. (2006). The
course of depression in individuals at high and low cognitive risk for
depression: A prospective study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 93,
61--69. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2006.02.012 Ilardi, S. S., & Craighead, W. E.
(1999). The relationship between personality pathology and dysfunctional
cognitions in previously depressed adults. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 108, 51--57. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.108.1.51 Ingram, R. E.,
Miranda, J., & Segal, Z. V. (1998). Cognitive vulnerability to
depression. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Ising, M., Horstmann, S.,
Kloiber, S., Lucae, S., Binder, E. B., Kern, N., ... Holsboer, F.
(2007). Combined dexamethasone/corticotropin releasing hormone test
predicts treatment response in major depression---a potential biomarker?
Biological Psychiatry, 62, 47--54. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.07.039
Jacobson, L., & Sapolsky, R. (1991). The role of the hippocampus in
feedback regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis.
Endocrine Reviews, 12, 118--134. doi: 10.1210/edrv -12-2-118 Jacobson,
N. S., Dobson, K. S., Truax, P. A., Addis, M. E., Koerner, K., Gollan,
J. K., ... Prince, S. E. (1996). A component analysis of
cognitive-behavioral treatment for depression. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 64, 295--304. doi: 10.1037/0022 -006X.64.2.295
Joormann, J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2007). Selective attention to emotional
faces following recovery from depression. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 116(1), 80. Joormann, J., & Quinn, M. E. (2014). Cognitive
processes and emotion regulation in depression. Depression and Anxiety,
31(4), 308--315. Joormann, J., Teachman, B. A., & Gotlib, I. H. (2009).
Sadder and less accurate? False memory for negative material in
depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118(2), 412. Joormann, J.,
Yoon, K. L., & Siemer, M. (2010). Cognition and emotion regulation. In
A. M. Kring & D. M. Sloan (Eds.), Emotion regulation and
psychopathology: A transdiagnostic approach to etiology and treatment
(pp. 174--203). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

308

Depressive Disorders

Kasch, K. L., Rottenberg, J., Arnow, B. A., & Gotlib, I. H. (2002).
Behavioral activation and inhibition systems and the severity and course
of depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111(4), 589. Keller, M.
B., Klein, D. N., Hirschfeld, R. M. A., Kocsis, J. H., McCullough, J.
P., Miller, I., ... Shea, T. (1995). Results of the DSM-IV mood
disorders field trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 843--849.
Keller, M. B., Kocsis, J. H., Thase, M. E., Gelenberg, A. J., Rush, A.
J., Koran, L., ... Harrison, W. (1998). Maintenance phase efficacy of
sertraline for chronic depression: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA,
280, 1665--1672. doi: 10.1001/jama.280 .19.1665 Keller, M. B., Lavori,
P. W., Friedman, B., Nielsen, E., Endicott, J., McDonald-Scott, P., &
Andreasen, N. C. (1987). The Longitudinal Interval Follow-up Evaluation:
A comprehensive method for assessing outcome in prospective longitudinal
studies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 540--548. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.1987.01800180050009 Keller, M. B., McCullough, J. P., Klein, D.
N., Arnow, B., Dunner, D. L., Gelenberg, A. J., ... Zajacka, J. (2000).
A comparison of nefazodone, the cognitive behavioral-analysis system of
psychotherapy, and their combination for the treatment of chronic
depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 342, 1462--1470. doi:
10.1056/NEJM200005183422001 Kennedy, R., & Craighead, W. E. (1988).
Differential effects of depression and anxiety on recall of feedback in
a learning task. Behavior Therapy, 19, 437--454. doi:
10.1016/S0005-7894(88)80015-7 Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O.,
Jin, R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age of onset
distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Study
Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593--602. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.62.6.593 Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E.
E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV
disorders in the National Cormorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 62, 617--627. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc .62.6.617
Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A., Zhao, S., Nelson, C. B., Hughes, M.,
Eshleman, S., ... Kendler, K. S. (1994). Lifetime and 12-month
prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States:
Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 51(1), 8--19.

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Derry, H. M., & Fagundes, C. P. (2015).
Inflammation: Depression fans the flames and feasts on the heat.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 172(11), 1075--1091. Kircanski, K.,
Joormann, J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012). Cognitive aspects of depression.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 3(3), 301--313.
Kleiman, E. M., Liu, R. T., Riskind, J. H., & Hamilton, J. L. (2015).
Depression as a mediator of negative cognitive style and hopelessness in
stress generation. British Journal of Psychology, 106(1), 68--83. Klein,
D. N., Dickstein, S., Taylor, E. B., & Harding, K. (1989). Identifying
chronic affective disorders in outpatients: Validation of the General
Behavior Inventory. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57,
106--111. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.57.1.106 Klein, D. N., & Kotov, R.
(2016). Persistence of depression in a 10-year prospective study:
Evidence for a qualitatively distinct subtype. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 125, 337--348. Klein, D. N., Riso, L. P., Donaldson, S. K.,
Schwartz, J. E., Anderson, R. L., Ouimette, P. C., ... Aronson, T. A.
(1995). Family study of early-onset dysthymia: Mood and personality
disorders in relatives of outpatients with dysthymia and episodic major
depression and normal controls. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52,
487--496. Klein, D. N., Santiago, N. J., Vivian, D., Arnow, B. A.,
Blalock, J. A., Dunner, D. L., ... Keller, M. B. (2004).
Cognitive-behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy as a maintenance
treatment for chronic depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 72, 681--688. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.72.4.681 Klein, D. N.,
Schwartz, J. E., Santiago, N. J., Vivian, D., Vocisano, C., Castonguay,
L. G., ... Keller, M. B. (2003). Therapeutic alliance in depression
treatment: Controlling for prior change and patient characteristics.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71(6), 997--1006. Klein,
D. N., Shankman, S. A., Lewinsohn, P. M., Rohde, P., & Seeley, J. R.
(2004). Family study of chronic depression in a community sample of
young adults. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 646--653. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.161.4.646 Klein, D. N., Shankman, S. A., & Rose, S.
(2006). Ten-year prospective follow-up study of the naturalistic course
of dysthymic disorder and double depression. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 163, 872--880. Klein, D. N., Taylor, E. B., Dickstein, S., &
Harding, K. (1988). Primary early-onset dysthymia: Comparison

References with primary non-bipolar, non-chronic major depression on
demographic, clinical, familial, personality, and socioenvironmental
characteristics and short-term outcome. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
97, 387--398. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.97.4.387 Klerman, G. L., Weissman,
M. M., Rounsaville, B. J., & Chevron, E. S. (1984). Interpersonal
psychotherapy of depression. New York, NY: Basic Books. Kocsis, J. H.,
Friedman, R. A., Markowitz, J. C., Leon, A. C., Miller, N. L., Gniwesch,
L., ... Parides, M. (1996). Maintenance therapy for chronic depression:
A controlled clinical trial of desipramine. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 53, 769--774. doi: 10.1001/ archpsyc.1996.01830090013002
Kocsis, J. H., Leon, A. C., Markowitz, J. C., Manber, R., Arnow, B.,
Klein, D. N., & Thase, M. E. (2009). Patient preference as a moderator
of outcome for chronic depression treated with nefazodone, cognitive
behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy, or their combination.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 70, 354--361. doi: 10.4088/JCP.08m04371
Köhler, S., Wiethoff, K., Ricken, R., Stamm, T., Baghai, T. C., Fisher,
R., ... Adli, M. (2015). Characteristics and differences in treatment
outcome of inpatients with chronic vs. episodic major depressive
disorders. Journal of Affective Disorders, 173, 126--133. Koran, L. M.,
Gelenberg, A. J., Kornstein, S. G., Howland, R. H., Friedman, R. A.,
DeBattista, C., ... Keller, M. B. (2001). Sertraline versus imipramine
to prevent relapse in chronic depression. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 65, 27--36. doi: 10.1016/S0165 -0327(00)00272-X Koster, E.
H., De Raedt, R., Leyman, L., & De Lissnyder, E. (2010). Mood-congruent
attention and memory bias in dysphoria: Exploring the coherence among
information-processing biases. Behaviour research and therapy, 48(3),
219--225. Kovak, K. A. (2004). The Hamilton Depression Rating Scale
(HAMD). In M. J. Hilsenroth & D. L. Segal (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook
of psychological assessment (pp. 87--98). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Kraepelin,
E. (1899). Psychiatrie: Ein Lehrbuch (6th ed.). Leipzig, Germany: Barth.
Kranzler, H. R., Kadden, R., Burleson, J., Babor, T. F., Apter, A., &
Rounsaville, B. J. (1995). Validity of psychiatric diagnoses in patients
with substance use disorders---is the interview more important than the
interviewer? Comprehensive Psychiatry, 36, 278--288. doi:
10.1016/S0010-440X(95) 90073-X

309

Krishnan, V., & Nestler, E. J. (2010). Linking molecules to mood: New
insight into the biology of depression. American Journal of Psychiatry,
167(11), 1305--1320. Kriston, L., von Wolff, A., Westphal, A., Hölzel,
L. P., & Härter, M. (2014). Efficacy and acceptability of acute
treatments for persistent depressive disorder: A network meta-analysis.
Depression and Anxiety, 31(8), 621--630. Kroenke, K., & Spitzer, R. L.
(2002). The PHQ-9: A new depression diagnostic and severity measure.
Psychiatric Annals, 32(9), 509--515. Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., &
Williams, J. B. (2001). The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression
severity measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 16(9), 606--613.
Laje, G., Paddock, S., Manji, H., Rush, A. J., Wilson, A. F., Charney,
D., & McMahon, F. J. (2007). Genetic markers of suicidal ideation
emerging during citalopram treatment of major depression. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 109, 6444--6450. doi: 10.1176/
appi.ajp.2007.06122018 Laws, H. B., Constantino, M. J., Sayer, A. G.,
Klein, D. N., Kocsis, J. H., Manber, R., ... Arnow, B. A. (2016).
Convergence in patient-therapist therapeutic alliance ratings and its
relation to outcome in chronic depression treatment. Psychotherapy
Research. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1080/10503307
.2015.1114687 Leader, J. B., & Klein, D. N. (1996). Social adjustment in
dysthymia, double depression, and episodic major depression. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 37, 91--101. doi: 10.1016/0165-0327(95)00076-3
Leppänen, J. M., Milders, M., Bell, J. S., Terriere, E., & Hietanen, J.
K. (2004). Depression biases the recognition of emotionally neutral
faces. Psychiatry Research, 128(2), 123--133. Leuchter, A. F., Hunter,
A. M., Krantz, D. E., & Cook, I. A. (2014). Intermediate phenotypes and
biomarkers of treatment outcome in major depressive disorder. Dialogues
in Clinical Neuroscience, 16(4), 525. Levinson, D. F. (2006). The
genetics of depression: A review. Biological Psychiatry, 60(2), 84--92.
Levkovitz, Y., Tedeschini, E., & Papakostas, G. I. (2011). Efficacy of
antidepressants for dysthymia: A meta-analysis of placebo-controlled
randomized trials. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 509--514. doi:
10.4088/JCP.09m05949blu Lewinsohn, P. M. (1974). A behavioral approach
to depression. In R. J. Friedman & M. Katz (Eds.),

310

Depressive Disorders

The psychology of depression: Contemporary theory and research
(pp. 157--178). Oxford, England: Wiley. Lewinsohn, P. M., & Gotlib, I.
H. (1995). Behavioral therapy and treatment of depression. In E. E.
Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed.,
pp. 352--375). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Lewinsohn, P. M., Sullivan,
J. M., & Grosscup, S. J. (1980). Changing reinforcing events: An
approach to the treatment of depression. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, & Practice, 17, 322--334. doi: 10.1037/ h0085929 Lewinsohn, P.
M., Youngren, M. A., & Grosscup, S. J. (1979). Reinforcement and
depression. In R. A. Dupue (Ed.), The psychobiology of depressive
disorders: Implications for the effects of stress (pp. 291--316). New
York, NY: Academic Press. Linnoila, M., Guthrie, S., Lane, E. A.,
Karoum, F., Rudorfer, M., & Potter, W. Z. (1986). Clinical
norepinephrine metabolism: How to interpret the numbers. Psychiatry
Research, 17, 229--239. doi: 10.1016/0165-1781(86)90051-X Liu, R. T.,
Kleiman, E. M., Nestor, B. A., & Cheek, S. M. (2015). The Hopelessness
Theory of Depression: A quarter-century in review. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 22(4), 345--365. Lizardi, H., Klein, D. N.,
Ouimette, P. C., Riso, L. P., Anderson, R. L., & Donaldson, S. K.
(1995). Reports of the childhood home environment in early-onset
dysthymia and major depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104,
132--139. doi: 10.1037/0021 -843X.104.1.132 Loo, C. K., Schweitzer, I.,
& Pratt, C. (2006). Recent advances in optimizing electroconvulsive
therapy. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 40, 632--638.
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1614 .2006.01862.x Lyubomirsky, S., & Tkach, C.
(2004). The consequences of dysphoric rumination. In C. Papageorgiou &
A. Wells (Eds.), Depressive rumination: Nature, theory, and treatment
(pp. 21--42). Chichester, England: Wiley. Mandell, D., Siegle, G. J.,
Shutt, L., Feldmiller, J., & Thase, M. E. (2014). Neural substrates of
trait ruminations in depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 123(1),
35. Manos, R. C., Kanter, J. W., & Busch, A. M. (2010). A critical
review of assessment strategies to measure the behavioral activation
model of depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(5), 547--561.

Marcus, S. C., & Olfson, M. (2010). National trends in the treatment for
depression from 1998 to 2007. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67(12),
1265--1273. Markowitz, J. C. (1998). Interpersonal psychotherapy for
dysthymic disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Markowitz, J. C., Lipsitz, J., & Milrod, B. L. (2014). Critical review
of outcome research on interpersonal psychotherapy for anxiety
disorders. Depression and Anxiety, 31(4), 316--325. Martell, C. R.,
Addis, M. E., & Jacobson, N. S. (2001). Depression in context:
Strategies for guided action. New York, NY: W. W. Norton. Mason, B. J.,
Kocsis, J. H., Leon, A. C., Thompson, S., Frances, A. J., Morgan, R. O.,
& Parides, M. K. (1995). Assessment of symptoms and change in dysthymic
disorder. In J. H. Kocsis & D. N. Klein (Eds.), Diagnosis and treatment
of chronic depression (pp. 73--88). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Mathews, A., & MacLeod, C. (2005). Cognitive vulnerability to emotional
disorders. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 167--195.
Mazzucchelli, T., Kane, R., & Rees, C. (2009). Behavioral activation
treatments for depression in adults: A meta-analysis and review.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 16(4), 383--411. McCauley,
E., Gudmundsen, G., Schloredt, K., Martell, C., Rhew, I., Hubley, S., &
Dimidjian, S. (2015). The Adolescent Behavioral Activation Program:
Adapting behavioral activation as a treatment for depression in
adolescence. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 45(3),
1--14. McCullough, J. P. (2000). Treatment for chronic depression:
Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy. New York, NY:
Guilford Press. McCullough, J. P., Klein, D. N., Keller, M. B., Holzer,
C. E., Davis, S. M., Kornstein, S. G., ... Harrison, W. M. (2000).
Comparison of DSM-III-R chronic major depression and major depression
superimposed on dysthymia (double depression): A study of the validity
and value of differential diagnosis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
109, 419--427. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.109.3.419 McCullough J. P., Jr.,
Klein, D. N., Borian, F. E., Howland, R. H., Riso, L. P., Keller, M. B.,
& Banks, P. L. (2003). Group comparisons of DSM-IV subtypes of chronic
depression: Validity of the distinctions, part 2. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 112(4), 614. McCullough, J. P., Kornstein, S. G.,
McCullough, J. P., Belyea-Caldwell, S., Kaye, A. L., Roberts, W. C., ...

References Kruus, L. K. (1996). Differential diagnosis of chronic
depressive disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 19(1),
55--71. McCullough, J. M., McCune, K. J., Kaye, A. L., Braith, J. A.,
Friend, R., Roberts, W. C., ... Hampton, C. (1994). One-year prospective
replication study of an untreated sample of community dysthymia
subjects. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 182, 396--401. doi:
10.1097/00005053-199407000 -00005 McDermott, L. M., & Ebmeier, K. P.
(2009). A metaanalysis of depression severity and cognitive function.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 119(1), 1--8. McFarland, B. R.,
Shankman, S. A., Tenke, C. E., Bruder, G. E., & Klein, D. N. (2006).
Behavioral activation system deficits predict the six-month course of
depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 91, 229--234. doi:
10.1016/j.jad.2006.01.012 McGrath, C., Kelley, M. E., Holtzheimer, P.
E., Dunlop, B. W., Craighead, W. E., Franco, A. R., ... Mayberg, H. S.
(2013). Toward a neuroimaging treatment selection biomarker for major
depressive disorder. JAMA Psychiatry, 70(8), 821--829. doi: 10.1001/
jamapsychiatry.2013.143 Meyer, T. D., Gudgeon, E., Thomas, A. J., &
Collerton, D. (2010). Cognitive style and depressive symptoms in elderly
people: Extending the empirical evidence for the cognitive
vulnerability--stress hypothesis. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
48(10), 1053--1057. Miller, A. H., Haroon, E., Raison, C. L., & Felger,
J. C. (2013). Cytokine targets in the brain: Impact on neurotransmitters
and neurocircuits. Depression and Anxiety, 30(4), 297--306. Miller, A.
H., & Raison, C. L. (2016). The role of inflammation in depression: From
evolutionary imperative to modern treatment target. Nature Reviews
Immunology, 16(1), 22--34. Mogg, K., Bradbury, K. E., & Bradley, B. P.
(2006). Interpretation of ambiguous information in clinical depression.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44(10), 1411--1419. Mogg, K., Bradley,
B. P., Williams, R., & Mathews, A. (1993). Subliminal processing of
emotional information in anxiety and depression. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 102(2), 304. Mondimore, F. M., Zandi, P. P., MacKinnon, D.
F., McInnis, M. G., Miller, E. B., Crowe, R. P., ... Potash, J. B.
(2006). Familial aggregation of illness chronicity in recurrent,
early-onset major depression

311

pedigrees. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(9), 1554--1560. Moore, R.
Y., & Bloom, F. E. (1979). Central catecholamine neuron systems: Anatomy
and physiology of the norepinephrine and epinephrine systems. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 2, 113--168. doi:
10.1146/annurev.ne.02.030179.000553 Moore, M. T., & Fresco, D. M.
(2007). Depressive realism and attributional style: Implications for
individuals at risk for depression. Behavior Therapy, 38(2), 144--154.
Mor, N., & Winquist, J. (2002). Self-focused attention and negative
affect: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 638--662. doi:
10.1037/0033-2909 .128.4.638 Mościcki, E. K. (2001). Epidemiology of
completed and attempted suicide: Toward a framework for prevention.
Clinical Neuroscience Research, 1, 310--323. doi:
10.1016/S1566-2772(01)00032-9 Mueller, T. I., Leon, A. C., Keller, M.
B., Solomon, D. A., Endicott, J., Coryell, W., ... Maser, J. D. (1999).
Recurrence after recovery from major depressive disorder during 15 years
of observational follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156,
1000--1006. Murphy, J. A., & Byrne, G. J. (2012). Prevalence and
correlates of the proposed DSM-5 diagnosis of chronic depressive
disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 139(2), 172--180. Nelson, R.
E., & Craighead, W. E. (1977). Selective recall of positive and negative
feedback, self-control behaviors, and depression. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 86, 379--388. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X .86.4.379 Nemeroff, C.
B. (2007). The burden of severe depression: A review of diagnostic
challenges and treatment alternatives. Journal of Psychiatric Research,
41, 189--206. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2006.05.008 Nemeroff, C. B.
(2016). Paradise lost: The neurobiological and clinical consequences of
child abuse and neglect. Neuron, 89(5), 892--909. Nemeroff, C. B.,
Bissette, G., Akil, H., & Fink, M. (1991). Neuropeptide concentrations
in the cerebrospinal fluid of depressed patients treated with
electroconvulsive therapy: Corticotrophin-releasing factor,
beta-endorphin, and somatostatin. British Journal of Psychiatry, 158,
59--63. doi: 10.1192/bjp .158.1.59 Nemeroff, C. G., Heim, C. M., Thase,
M. E., Klein, D. N., Rush, A. J., Schatzberg, A. F., ... Keller, M. B.

312

Depressive Disorders

(2003). Differential responses to psychotherapy versus pharmacotherapy
in the treatment for patients with chronic forms of major depression and
childhood trauma. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100,
14293--14296. doi: 10.1073/pnas .2336126100 Nezu, A. M., Nezu, C. M., &
Perri, M. G. (1989). Problem-solving therapy for depression: Theory,
research, and clinical guidelines. New York, NY: Wiley. Nolen-Hoeksema,
S. (1987). Sex differences in unipolar depression: Evidence and theory.
Psychological Bulletin, 101, 259--282. doi: 10.1037/0033 -2909.101.2.259
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991). Responses to depression and their effects on
the duration of the depressive episode. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
100, 569--582. Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2000). The role of rumination in
depressive disorders and mixed anxiety/depressive symptoms. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 109, 504--511. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.109.3.504
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2002). Gender differences in depression. In I. H.
Gotlib & C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 492--510). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. doi: 10.1111/1467-8721.00142 Nolen-Hoeksema,
S., & Morrow, J. (1991). A prospective study of depression and
posttraumatic stress symptoms after a natural disaster: The 1989 Loma
Prieta earthquake. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(1),
115--121. Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Morrow, J., & Fredrickson, B. L. (1993).
Response styles and the duration of episodes of depressed mood. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 20--28. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.102.1.20
Nunn, J. D., Mathews, A., & Trower, P. (1997). Selective processing of
concern-related information in depression. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 36(4), 489--503. Nusslock, R., & Miller, G. E. (2015).
Early-life adversity and physical and emotional health across the
lifespan: A neuroimmune network hypothesis. Biological Psychiatry,
80(1), 23--32. Ochsner, K. N., & Gross, J. J. (2007). The neural
architecture of emotion regulation. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of
emotion regulation (pp. 87--109). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Olatunji, B. O., Naragon-Gainey, K., & WolitzkyTaylor, K. B. (2013).
Specificity of rumination in anxiety and depression: A multimodal
meta-analysis.

Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 20(3), 225--257. Owens, M.
J., & Nemeroff, C. B. (1991). Physiology and pharmacology of
corticotropin-releasing factor. Pharmacological Review, 43, 425--473.
Owens, M. J., & Nemeroff, C. B. (1994). Role of serotonin in the
pathophysiology of depression: Focus on the serotonin transporter.
Clinical Chemistry, 40, 288--295. Pace, T. W., & Miller, A. H. (2009).
Cytokines and glucocorticoid receptor signaling; Relevance to major
depression. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1179(1),
86--105. Pepper, C. M., Klein, D. N., Anderson, R. L., Riso, L. P.,
Ouimette, P. C., & Lizardi, H. (1995). Axis II comorbidity in dysthymia
and major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 239--247.
Perveen, S. (2015). Relationship between negative cognitive style and
depression among university students. Online Journal of New Horizons in
Education, 5(4), 74--83. Peterson, C., Maier, S. F., & Seligman, M. E.
P. (1993). Learned helplessness: A theory for the age of personal
control. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. doi:
10.1002/9780470479216.corpsy0500 Posener, J. A., DeBattista, C.,
Williams, G. H., ChmuraKraemer, H., Kalehzan, B. M., & Schatzberg, A. F.
(2000). 24-Hour monitoring of cortisol and corticotropin secretion in
psychotic and nonpsychotic major depression. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 44, 434--440. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.57.8.755
Prendes-Alvarez, S., Schatzberg, A. F., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2015).
Pharmacological treatments for unipolar depression. In P. E. Nathan & J.
M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (pp. 327--354). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press. Psychiatric GWAS Consortium
Coordinating Committee. (2009). Genomewide association studies: History,
rationale, and prospects for psychiatric disorders. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 166(5), 540--556. Pyszcynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987).
Self-regulatory perseveration and the depressive self-focusing style: A
self-awareness theory of reactive depression. Psychological Bulletin,
102, 122--138. doi: 10.1037/ 0033-2909.102.1.122 Radloff, L. S. (1977).
The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the
general population. Applied Psychology Measurement, 1, 385--401. doi:
10.1177/014662167700100306

References Raes, F., Hermans, D., Williams, J. M. G., Demyttenaere, K.,
Sabbe, B., Pieters, G., & Eelen, P. (2005). Reduced specificity of
autobiographical memory: A mediator between rumination and ineffective
social problem-solving in major depression? Journal of Affective
Disorders, 87(2), 331--335. Remus, J. L., & Dantzer, R. (2016, April).
Inflammation models of depression in rodents: Relevance to psychotropic
drug discovery. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/ pyw028 Ressler, K. J., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2001). Role of
norepinephrine in the pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders. CNS
Spectrums, 6, 663--666, 670. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(99)00127-4 Ressler,
K. J., & Smoller, J. W. (2016). Impact of stress on the brain:
Pathology, treatment and prevention. Neuropsychopharmacology, 41(1), 1.
Rhebergen, D., Beekman, A. T. F., de Graaf, R., Nolen, W. A., Spijker,
J., Hoogendijk, W. J., & Penninx, B. W. J. H. (2009). The three-year
naturalistic course of major depressive disorder, dysthymic disorder and
double depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 115, 450--459. doi:
10.1016/j.jad .2008.10.018 Ridout, N., Astell, A., Reid, I., Glen, T., &
O'Carroll, R. (2003). Memory bias for emotional facial expressions in
major depression. Cognition & Emotion, 17(1), 101--122. Riolo, S. A.,
Nguyen, T. A., Greden, J. F., & King, C. A. (2005). Prevalence of
depression by race/ethnicity: Findings from the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey III. American Journal of Public Health, 95,
998--1000. Riso, L. P., du Toit, P. L., Blandino, J. A., Penna, S.,
Darcy, S., Duin, J. S., ... Ulmer, C. S. (2003). Cognitive aspects of
chronic depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112, 72--80. doi:
10.1037/ 0021-843X.112.1.72 Ritschel, L. A., Ramirez, C. L., Cooley, J.
L., & Edward Craighead, W. (2016). Behavioral activation for major
depression in adolescents: Results from a pilot study. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 23(1), 39--57. doi: 10.1111/cpsp.12140
Riva-Posse, P., Holtzheimer, P. E., Garlow, S. J., & Mayberg, H. S.
(2013). Practical considerations in the development and refinement of
subcallosal cingulate white matter deep brain stimulation for
treatmentresistant depression. World Neurosurgery, 80(3--4), e25--e34.

313

Robinson, M. S., & Alloy, L. B. (2003). Negative cognitive styles and
stress-reactive rumination interact to predict depression: A prospective
study. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27, 275--292. doi: 10.1023/
A:1023914416469 Roceri, M., Hendriks, W., Racagni, G., Ellenbroek, B.
A., & Riva, M. A. (2002). Early maternal deprivation reduces the
expression of BDNF and NMDA receptor subunits in rat hippocampus.
Molecular Psychiatry, 7, 606--616. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001036 Rocha, F.,
Fuzikawa, C., Riera, R., & Hara, C. (2012). Combination of
antidepressants in the treatment of major depressive disorder: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 32, 278--281. doi: 10.1097/JCP .0b013e318248581b
Rohde, P., Lewinsohn, P. M., Klein, D. N., Seeley, J. R., & Gau, J. M.
(2012). Key characteristics of major depressive disorder occurring in
childhood, adolescence, emerging adulthood, and adulthood. Clinical
Psychological Science, 1, 1--12. doi: 10.1177/ 2167702612457599 Rood,
L., Roelofs, J., Bögels, S. M., & Meesters, C. (2012). Stress-reactive
rumination, negative cognitive style, and stressors in relationship to
depressive symptoms in non-clinical youth. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 41(4), 414--425. Rotenberg, A., Horvath, J. C., &
Pascual-Leone, A. (2014). The transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
device and foundational techniques. In A. Rotenberg, J. C. Horvath, & A.
Pascual-Leone (Eds.), Transcranial magnetic stimulation (pp. 3--13). New
York, NY: Humana Press. Roy, A., Pickar, D., DeJong, J., Karoum, F., &
Linnoila, M. (1988). Norepinephrine and its metabolites in cerebrospinal
fluid, plasma, and urine: Relationship to hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis function in depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45,
849--857. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1988 .01800330081010 Rubin, R. T.,
Phillips, J. J., Sadow, T. F., & McCracken, J. T. (1995). Adrenal gland
volume in major depression: Increase during depressive episode and
decrease with successful treatment. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52,
213--218. doi: 10.1001/ archpsyc.1995.03950150045009 Rush, A. J.,
Bernstein, I. H., Trivedi, M. H., Carmody, T. J., Wisniewski, S., Mundt,
J. C., ... Fava, M. (2006). An evaluation of the Quick Inventory of
Depressive Symptomatology and the Hamilton

314

Depressive Disorders

Rating Scale for Depression: A sequenced treatment alternatives to
relieve depression trial report. Biological Psychiatry, 59, 493--501.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych .2005.08.022 Rush, A. J., Trivedi, M. H.,
Ibrahim, H. M., Carmody, T. J., Arnow, B., Klein D. N., ... Keller, M.
B. (2003). The 16-item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology,
clinician rating, and self-report: A psychometric evaluation in patients
with chronic major depression. Biological Psychiatry, 54, 573--583. doi:
10.1016/S0006-3223(02)01866-8 Sacco, W. P., & Beck, A. T. (1995).
Cognitive theory and therapy. In E. E. Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.),
Handbook of depression (pp. 329--351). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Sachar, E. J., Hellman, L., Fukushima, D. K., & Gallagher, T. F. (1970).
Cortisol production in depressive illness: A clinical and biochemical
clarification. Archives of General Psychiatry, 23, 289--298. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.1970.01750040001001 Sang, W., Li, Y., Su, L., Yang, F.,
Wu, W., Shang, X., ... Li, K. (2011). A comparison of the clinical
characteristics of Chinese patients with recurrent major depressive
disorder with and without dysthymia. Journal of Affective Disorders,
135, 106--110. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.06.051 Santiago, N. J., Klein, D.
N., Vivian, D., Arnow, B. A., Blalock, J. A., Kocsis, J. H., ... Keller,
M. B. (2005). The therapeutic alliance and CBASP-specific skill
acquisition in the treatment of chronic depression. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 29, 803--817. doi: 10.1007/s10608-005-9638-5 Schatzberg,
A. F., Rothschild, A. J., Stahl, J. B., Bond, T. C., Rosenbaum, A. H.,
Lofgren, S. B., ... Cole, J. O. (1983). The dexamethasone suppression
test: Identification of subtypes of depression. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 140, 88--91. Schildkraut, J. J. (1965). The catecholamine
hypothesis of affective disorders: A review of supporting evidence.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 122, 509--522. Schmidt, H. D., & Duman,
R. S. (2007). The role of neurotrophic factors in adult hippocampal
neurogenesis, antidepressant treatments and animal models of
depressive-like behavior. Behavioural Pharmacology, 18, 391--418. doi:
10.1097/FBP.0b013e3282 ee2aa8 Schramm, E., Zobel, I., Dykierek, P.,
Kech, S., Brakemeier, E. L., Külz, A., & Berger, M. (2011). Cognitive
behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy

versus interpersonal psychotherapy for earlyonset chronic depression: A
randomized pilot study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 129, 109--116.
doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2010.08.003 Schüle, C., Zill, P., Baghai, T. C.,
Eser, D., Zwanzger, P., Wenig, N., ... Bondy, B. (2006). Brainderived
neurotrophic factor Val66Met polymorphism and dexamethasone/CRH test
results in depressed patients. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 31, 1019--1025.
doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2006.06.002 Seligman, M. E. P. (1975).
Helplessness: On depression, development, and death. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass. Seligman, M. E. P., Abramson, L. Y., Semmel, A., & von
Baeyer, C. (1979). Depressive attributional style. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 88, 242--247. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.93.2.235 Sharma, A. N.,
da Costa e Silva, B. F. B., Soares, J. C., Carvalho, A. F., & Quevedo,
J. (2016). Role of trophic factors GDNF, IGF-1 and VEGF in major
depressive disorder: A comprehensive review of human studies. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 197, 9--20. Sharma, S., Powers, A., Bradley, B., &
Ressler, K. J. (2016). Gene × environment determinants of stressand
anxiety-related disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 67, 239--261.
Shear, M. K., Greeno, C., Kang, J., Ludewig, D., Frank, E., Swartz, H.
A., & Hanekamp, M. (2000). Diagnosis of nonpsychotic patients in
community clinics. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 581--587.
Sheline, Y. I., Bardgett, M. E., & Csernansky, J. G. (1997). Correlated
reductions in cerebrospinal fluid 5--HIAA and MHPG concentrations after
treatment with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Journal of
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 17, 11--14. Shimizu, E., Hashimoto, K.,
Okamura, N., Koike, K., Komatsu, N., Kumakiri, C., ... Iyo, M. (2003).
Alterations of serum levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
in depressed patients with or without antidepressants. Biological
Psychiatry, 54, 70--75. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(03)00181-1 Skinner, B.
F. (1953). Science and human behavior. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Slattery, D. A., Hudson, A. L., & Nutt, D. J. (2004). The evolution of
antidepressant mechanisms. Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology, 18,
1--21. doi: 10.1111/j.1472-8206.2004.00195.x Smith, J. M., & Alloy, L.
B. (2009). A roadmap to rumination: A review of the definition,
assessment,

References and conceptualization of this multifaceted construct.
Clinical Psychology Review, 29(2), 116--128. Smith, K. A., Fairburn, C.
G., & Cowen, P. J. (1997). Relapse of depression after rapid depletion
of tryptophan. Lancet, 349, 915--919. doi: 10.1016/S0140
-6736(96)07044-4 Smith, M. A., Makino, S., Kvetnansky, R., & Post, R. M.
(1995). Stress and glucocorticoids affect the expression of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin-3 mRNAs in the
hippocampus. Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 1768--1777. Snyder, H. R.
(2013). Major depressive disorder is associated with broad impairments
on neuropsychological measures of executive function: A meta-analysis
and review. Psychological Bulletin, 139(1), 81. Spasojevic, J., & Alloy,
L. B. (2001). Rumination as a common mechanism relating depressive risk
factors to depression. Emotion, 1, 25--37. doi: 10.1037/1528
-3542.1.1.25 Steidtmann, D., Manber, R., Blasey, C., Markowitz, J. C.,
Klein, D. N., Rothbaum, B. O., ... Arnow, B. A. (2013). Detecting
critical decision points in psychotherapy and psychotherapy + medication
for chronic depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
81, 783--792. Strawbridge, R., Arnone, D., Danese, A., Papadopoulos, A.,
Vives, A. H., & Cleare, A. J. (2015). Inflammation and clinical response
to treatment in depression: A meta-analysis. European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 25(10), 1532--1543. Sun, H., Kennedy, P. J., &
Nestler, E. J. (2013). Epigenetics of the depressed brain: Role of
histone acetylation and methylation. Neuropsychopharmacology, 38(1),
124--137. Sung, S. C., Haley, C. L., Wisniewski, S. R., Fava, M.,
Nierenberg, A. A., Warden, D., ... Rush, A. J. (2012). The impact of
chronic depression on acute and longterm outcomes in a randomized trial
comparing selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor monotherapy versus each
of 2 different antidepressant medication combinations. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 73, 967--976. doi: 10.4088/JCP.11m07043 Swan, J.
S., MacVicar, R., Christmas, D., Durham, R., Rauchhaus, P., McCullough,
J. P., & Matthews, K. (2014). Cognitive Behavioural Analysis System of
Psychotherapy (CBASP) for chronic depression: Clinical characteristics
and six month clinical outcomes in an open case series. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 152, 268--276.

315

Swanson, L. W., Sawchenko, P. E., Rivier, J., & Vale, W. W. (1983).
Organization of ovine corticotropinreleasing factor immunoreactive cells
and fibers in the rat brain: An immunohistochemical study.
Neuroendocrinology, 36, 165--186. doi: 10.1159/ 000123454 Teachman, B.
A., Joormann, J., Steinman, S. A., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012). Automaticity
in anxiety disorders and major depressive disorder. Clinical Psychology
Review, 32(6), 575--603. Thase, M. E., Friedman, E. S., Biggs, M. M.,
Wisniewski, S. R., Trivedi, M. H., Luther, J. F., ... Rush, A. J.
(2007). Cognitive therapy versus medication in augmentation and switch
strategies as second-step treatments: A STAR\*D report. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 164, 739--752. doi: 10.1176/ appi.ajp.164.5.739 Thase, M.
E., Reynolds, C. F., Frank, E., Simons, A. D., Garamoni, G. D., McGeary,
J., ... Cahalane, J. F. (1994). Response to cognitive-behavioral therapy
in chronic depression. Journal of Psychotherapy Practice and Research,
3, 204--214. Timbremont, B., & Braet, C. (2004). Cognitive vulnerability
in remitted depressed children and adolescents. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 42, 423--437. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7967(03)00151-7 Trew, J. L.
(2011). Exploring the roles of approach and avoidance in depression: An
integrative model. Clinical Psychology Review, 31(7), 1156--1168.
Tsankova, N. M., Berton, O., Renthal, W., Kumar, A., Neve, R. L., &
Nestler, E. J. (2006). Sustained hippocampal chromatin regulation in a
mouse model of depression and antidepressant action. Nature
Neuroscience, 9, 519--525. doi: 10.1038/nn1659 Twenge, J. M. (2015).
Time period and birth cohort differences in depressive symptoms in the
US, 1982-- 2013. Social Indicators Research, 121(2), 437--454. Twenge,
J. M., Gentile, B., DeWall, C., Ma, D., Lacefield, K., & Schurtz, D. R.
(2010). Birth cohort increases in psychopathology among young Americans,
1938--2007: A cross-temporal meta-analysis of the MMPI. Clinical
Psychology Review, 30, 145--154. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2009.10.005 Vale,
W., Spiess, J., Rivier, C., & Rivier, J. (1981). Characterization of
41--residue ovine hypothalamic peptide that stimulates secretion of
corticotropin and beta-endorphin. Science, 213, 1394--1397. doi:
10.1126/science.6267699 van Randenborgh, A., de Jong-Meyer, R., &
Hüffmeier, J. (2010). Decision making in depression:

316

Depressive Disorders

Differences in decisional conflict between healthy and depressed
individuals. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 17(4), 285--298.
Viera, A. J., & Garrett, J. M. (2005). Understanding interobserver
agreement: The kappa statistic. Family Medicine, 37, 360--363. Vittengl,
J. R., Clark, L. A., Dunn, T. W., & Jarrett, R. B. (2007). Reducing
relapse and recurrence in unipolar depression: A comparative
meta-analysis of cognitive therapy's effects. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 75, 475--488. doi: 10.1037/ 0022-006X.75.3.475
Voncken, M. J., Bögels, S. M., & Peeters, F. (2007). Specificity of
interpretation and judgemental biases in social phobia versus
depression. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice,
80(3), 443--453. von Wolff, A., Hölzel, L. P., Westphal, A., Härter, M.,
& Kriston, L. (2013). Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and
tricyclic antidepressants in the acute treatment of chronic depression
and dysthymia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 144, 7--15. Watkins, E., & Teasdale, J. D. (2001).
Rumination and overgeneral memory in depression: Effects of selffocus
and analytic thinking. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110(2), 353.
Watkins, E., & Teasdale, J. D. (2004). Adaptive and maladaptive
self-focus in depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 82(1), 1--8.
Weissman, M. M., Wickramaratne, P., Nomura, Y., Warner, V., Pilowsky,
D., & Verdeli, H. (2006). Offspring of depressed parents: 20 years
later. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(6), 1001--1008. Wiersma, J.
E., van Oppen, P., van Schaik, D. J., van der Does, A. J., Beekman, A.
T., & Penninx, B. W. (2011). Psychological characteristics of chronic
depression: A longitudinal cohort study. Journal of

Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 288--294. doi: 10.4088/JCP .09m05735blu
Williams. J. M. G., Barnhofer, T., Crane, C., Hermans, D., Raes, F.,
Watkins, E., & Dalgleish, T. (2007). Autobiographical memory specificity
and emotional disorder. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 122--148. doi:
10.1037/0033-2909.133.1.122 Wood, J. V., Saltzberg, J. A., Neale, J. M.,
Stone, A. A., & Rachmiel, T. B. (1990). Self-focused attention, coping
responses, and distressed mood in everyday life. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 58, 1027--1036. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.58.6.1027
Woody, M. L., Owens, M., Burkhouse, K. L., & Gibb, B. E. (2015).
Selective attention toward angry faces and risk for major depressive
disorder in women: Converging evidence from retrospective and
prospective analyses. Clinical Psychological Science, 4(2), 206--215.
doi: 10.1177/2167702615581580 World Health Organization. (2016). Suicide
attempt surveillance. http://www.who.int/mental_health/
suicide-prevention/en Yoshimura, S., Okamoto, Y., Onoda, K., Matsunaga,
M., Okada, G., Kunisato, Y., ... Yamawaki, S. (2014). Cognitive
behavioral therapy for depression changes medial prefrontal and ventral
anterior cingulate cortex activity associated with self-referential
processing. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 9(4), 487--493.
Young, J. J., Bruno, D., & Pomara, N. (2014). A review of the
relationship between proinflammatory cytokines and major depressive
disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 169, 15--20. Young, K. D.,
Siegle, G. J., Bodurka, J., & Drevets, W. C. (2015). Amygdala activity
during autobiographical memory recall in depressed and vulnerable
individuals: Association with symptom severity and autobiographical
overgenerality. American Journal of Psychiatry. Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.15010119

Chapter 8 Bipolar Disorder David J. Miklowitz and Sheri L. Johnson

The endless questioning finally ended. My psychiatrist looked at me,
there was no uncertainty in his voice. "Manic-depressive illness." I
admired his bluntness. I wished him locusts on his lands and a pox upon
his house. Silent, unbelievable rage. I smiled pleasantly. He smiled
back. The war had just begun. ---Kay Redfield Jamison, An Unquiet Mind
(1995)

B

ipolar disorder (BD) is a highly debilitating psychiatric illness that
may affect as many as 1 in every 25 persons (Merikangas et al., 2007,
2011). People with the disorder have highly disruptive episodes,
frequent recurrences, and severe psychosocial impairments, even when not
symptomatic. The illness typically has its onset in adolescence, and
even late childhood in some people---much earlier than was once thought.
BD represents a conundrum on many fronts: how to reliably diagnose it
and distinguish it from "near-neighbor" disorders; to what extent the
timing of recurrences can be reliably predicted; what the relative
contributions of genetic, biological, and psychosocial factors are at
various phases of development; and what the roles of medications and
psychotherapy are in acute and maintenance treatment of BD. Nonetheless,
the outlook for people with BD is more optimistic than ever before
because of notable advances in research on its diagnosis, etiology,
prognosis, and treatment. This chapter discusses current research
findings in BD. Relative to similar chapters that might appear in
medical texts, this chapter emphasizes the role of psychosocial
variables as predictors of recurrence, and psychosocial interventions as
adjunctive to pharmacotherapy. Special emphasis is placed on knowledge
gained from research on psychosocial stressors and randomized trials of
psychotherapy, which have proliferated in the past decade. We conclude
with recommendations for the next generation of research on this
disorder.

317

318

Bipolar Disorder

Description of the Disorder Bipolar disorder has been recognized as a
psychiatric condition since at least 400 b.c., when described by
Hippocrates in his medical texts. Although formal diagnostic systems did
not come into wide use until the 1950s, our current operational
definitions of the depressed and manic phases of this illness bear a
striking similarity to Hippocrates' original descriptions of melancholia
and mania. This section describes the current requirements for a bipolar
diagnosis and its various subtypes, and presents a case example.

Symptoms and DSM Criteria Bipolar disorder is characterized by severe
changes in mood, thinking, and behavior, from extreme highs to lows. In
its most classic presentation, mania and depression alternate in
distinctive episodes that can last anywhere from a few days to a year or
more. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association
\[APA\], 2013), people in manic episodes experience elated, expansive,
or irritable mood (Criterion A) plus increased goal-directed activity.
At least three of the following Criterion B symptoms must also be
present (four if the mood is only irritable): inflated self-esteem
(grandiosity), decreased need for sleep, racing thoughts or flight of
ideas, rapid or pressured speech, reckless and impulsive behavior (e.g.,
indiscreet sexual liaisons, spending sprees, reckless driving),
increased energy, and distractibility. Manic episodes are defined by
symptoms lasting at least 1 week; evidence of functional impairment
(deterioration in family, work, or social functioning); or, if lasting
less than 1 week, the need for hospitalization or emergency treatment.
Although most of these criteria are virtually identical to those in
DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000), a significant change is that increased
goal-directed activity is now given Criterion A status, along with
elevated or irritable mood. This change may increase the identification
of persons who have difficulty describing changes in their mood states
but can give examples of changes in their behavior (see www.dsm5.org).
Hypomanic episodes are defined by symptoms of shorter duration (i.e., 4
or more days) and noticeable changes in behavior that do not meet the
DSM definition of functional impairment. The changes in behavior, mood,
or energy must be noticeable to others, but the symptoms do not cause
undue financial, emotional, or practical damage (e.g., precipitate
divorce). In practice, this distinction between salience and functional
impairment can be hard to make and may contribute to low reliabilities
of the mania-hypomania distinction. Depressive phases are defined by the
criteria used for major depressive disorder: intense sadness and/or loss
of interests (anhedonia), with the following associated symptoms:
insomnia or hypersomnia, psychomotor agitation or retardation, changes
in weight or appetite, loss of energy, difficulty concentrating or
making decisions, feelings of worthlessness or guilt, hopelessness,
worry, and suicidal ideation or behavior. To qualify for the diagnosis,
individuals must have at least five of these symptoms for at least 2
weeks. DSM-IV required a separate designation of "mixed" episodes, in
which fully syndromal manic and depressive episodes occur simultaneously
(i.e., severely irritable mood along with racing thoughts, decreased
need for sleep, suicidal thoughts, feelings of worthlessness, and
insomnia for a minimum of 1 week). Mixed states are associated with a
more

Description of the Disorder

319

debilitating course of illness, with earlier onset and greater levels of
comorbidity with anxiety and substance use disorders (Swann et al.,
2012). Many clinicians reported that the DSM-IV mixed episode criteria
were too strict; in practice, they reported seeing patients who have
fully syndromal presentations of one pole and subsyndromal presentations
of the other. In an analysis of 1,044 medication visits among patients
who were in a hypomanic episode, "mixed hypomania" was present in 57% of
visits and was particularly common among women. DSM-5 no longer has a
category called mixed episodes. Mixed is now a broad course specifier,
to be applied when three or more subthreshold symptoms from the opposite
pole occur during a manic, depressive, or hypomanic episode (First,
2010). It remains to be seen whether this revision of mixed episodes
improves clinical utility.

Bipolar Subtypes Individuals with BD who have at least one manic episode
are diagnosed with bipolar I disorder, and those with recurrent major
depression and at least one hypomanic episode are diagnosed with bipolar
II disorder. Persons need not have had a depressive episode to have
bipolar I disorder. Unipolar mania is commonly reported within community
studies of mania, affecting 25% to 33% of those diagnosed with bipolar I
disorder (Miklowitz & Johnson, 2006). Indeed, in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R), 1.7% of U.S. adolescents had
experienced a manic episode without depression (Merikangas et al.,
2012). Nonetheless, most patient samples are characterized by high rates
of depression, perhaps because depression is related to more aggressive
help-seeking (Calabrese, Hirschfeld, Frye, & Reed, 2004). Interestingly,
in a 20-year follow-up of patients who had been treated for unipolar
mania, the majority (20/27, or 74%) had at least one episode of
depression during follow-up (Solomon et al., 2003). Thus, there is
controversy concerning whether unipolar mania is stable over the life
course or whether most bipolar I patients, if followed long enough,
eventually develop a depressive episode. There are important
distinctions in the naturalistic courses of bipolar I and bipolar II
disorders. In a study involving a 10-year follow-up, only about 1 in 10
patients with bipolar II disorder eventually developed a full manic or
mixed episode and could then be diagnosed with bipolar I (Coryell et
al., 1995). Because bipolar II disorder is defined by recurrent
depressive episodes (whereas bipolar I disorder does not have a
depression-related criterion), patients with bipolar II disorder spend
the majority of their weeks ill in depressive rather than hypomanic
states (with a ratio of 37 weeks to 1), whereas the ratio of depressed
versus manic weeks in bipolar I disorder is about 3:1 (Judd et al.,
2002). Patients with bipolar II disorder are also more likely to be
"rapid cyclers" (i.e., to have four or more illness episodes in a single
year) than are patients with bipolar I disorder (Schneck et al., 2004).
This difference may reflect that the diagnostic criteria for bipolar II
disorder require the occurrence of at least two distinct episodes (major
depression and hypomania), whereas bipolar I disorder can be diagnosed
from a single manic episode. DSM-5 provides criteria for at least two
broader bipolar spectrum diagnoses. Cyclothymia is characterized by 2 or
more years of switching between hypomanic and depressive symptoms that
do not meet the full criteria for a hypomanic or a major depressive
episode. Cyclothymic disorder appears to have a younger age at onset
than major depressive disorder or bipolar II disorder (Van Meter,
Youngstrom, Demeter, & Findling, 2013). DSM-5 also includes the
diagnosis of "bipolar disorder not elsewhere

320

Bipolar Disorder

classified" (formerly called "bipolar disorder not otherwise specified"
\[NOS\]), or simply "unclassified bipolar disorder," for people with
brief and recurrent manic or hypomanic phases that fall short of the
duration criteria for manic or hypomanic episodes. The multisite Course
and Outcome of Bipolar Youth (COBY) study offered the following
definition of bipolar disorder NOS: a distinct period of abnormally
elevated, expansive, or irritable mood plus two (three if irritable mood
only) DSM-IV symptoms of mania that caused a change in functioning,
lasted for at least 1 day, and was present for a total of at least 4
days in a person's lifetime (Axelson et al., 2011; Birmaher et al.,
2009). The COBY study found that 54% of childhood/adolescent patients
who began with a bipolar NOS diagnosis and who had a family history of
mania in at least one first- or second-degree relative "converted" to
bipolar I or II disorder within a 4- to 5-year time frame. In some
cases, conversion simply meant developing manic or hypomanic episodes
that lasted a few days longer than previously, but crossed the threshold
into syndromal bipolar I or II disorder.

Phenomenology of the Manic Syndrome In DSM-5, the cardinal symptoms of
mania are still euphoria and/or irritability, although increased
activity is now a cardinal symptom as well. Other common "B" symptoms of
mania include accelerated thought processes, pressured speech, inflated
self-esteem, and decreased need for sleep. A meta-analysis of seven
studies examining the characteristics of mania among youth (ages 5--18)
(Kowatch, Youngstrom, Danielyan, & Findling, 2005) revealed that the
most common symptoms were increased energy, distractibility, and
pressured speech. Approximately 80% of youth showed irritability and
grandiosity, whereas 70% had elated mood, decreased need for sleep, or
racing thoughts. Less frequent symptoms included hypersexuality and
psychotic symptoms. Thus, most children with mania have symptoms that
also characterize adults with mania.

Case Example Mania is not necessarily experienced as a pleasurable state
in either children or adults. It can be experienced as an angry,
depressed, unfocused, "tired but wired," and suicidal state. Robert, age
45, managed a landscape architecture firm. According to his girlfriend,
Jessie, his most recent manic episode began when, over a weeklong
period, he became increasingly "expressive," impulsive, and loud, and
"took on a physical dominance stance." For example, he screamed
inappropriately at the coach while watching his daughter's basketball
game, and "barked" orders at the waitress in a restaurant. He agreed
that he was being "hyper" but also believed that he was seeing things
more clearly than ever before. Things deteriorated when Robert, angry
that his 21-year-old son, Brian, had not returned his phone calls,
confronted Brian at the art supply store where he worked. A shouting
match laden with obscenities ensued, and Brian's boss almost fired him.
In the next couple of days, Robert became frenetic. He became highly
irritable and fixated on ideas about a musical career, even though he
had only recently begun taking

Description of the Disorder

321

guitar lessons. He slept less and less. Toward the end of the week he
impulsively moved out of the house he shared with Jessie and into his
office. One night, he called her in a state of panic, saying that either
he was dying or he might kill himself---he was unsure which. Jessie
called the police, who found him lying on the floor of his office and
staring at the ceiling. He was admitted to the hospital and stayed for 2
weeks (from Miklowitz, 2008).

Epidemiology The World Health Organization's World Mental Health Survey
Initiative, a study of 61,392 adults in 11 countries, found that an
estimated 0.6% of the general population meet lifetime DSM-IV criteria
for bipolar I disorder, 0.4% meet criteria for bipolar II disorder, and
1.4% meet criteria for subthreshold bipolar disorder. According to this
study, the United States had the highest rates of BD, with prevalence
estimates of 1.0% for bipolar I disorder, 1.1% for bipolar II disorder,
and 2.4% for subthreshold BD (Merikangas et al., 2011). In the
Netherlands, a lifetime history of cyclothymia (a form of subthreshold
BD) characterized 4.2% of the population (Regeer et al., 2004). By
contrast, major depressive disorder is at least 4 times more prevalent
than BD or cyclothymia (17.5% lifetime prevalence in the United States;
Kessler, Berglund, Demler, Jin, & Walters, 2005). Data are becoming
increasingly available on the prevalence of BD in youth. In a U.S.
community sample of 10,123 adolescents (ages 13--18), 2.5% met lifetime
DSM-IV criteria for bipolar I or II disorders, with double the
prevalence in older adolescents (ages 15--18) compared to younger
adolescents (Merikangas et al., 2012). The rate may be as high as 6% in
treatment-seeking samples of children (Youngstrom, Findling, Youngstrom,
& Calabrese, 2005). In a meta-analysis of 12 studies of youth ages 7 to
21 across the world (N = 16,222), the rate of bipolar spectrum disorder
was 1.8%, and did not differ significantly across countries (Van Meter,
Moreira, & Youngstrom, 2011). Data were not presented on the separate
cross-national rates of threshold versus subthreshold BD, however.

Age at Onset There is considerable variability in age at onset from
study to study, depending on whether onset is defined as the first
syndromal manic episode, the first depressive episode, or the first
onset of any mood symptoms. In the World Health Organization study, the
mean age at onset of bipolar I disorder (defined as the first
manic/hypomanic or depressive episode) was 18.4 years; for bipolar II it
was 20.0 years, and for subthreshold bipolar disorder, 21.9 years
(Merikangas et al., 2011). Another large-scale study found that between
50% and 67% of bipolar I and II patients reported onset before age 18,
and between 15% and 28% before age 13 (Perlis et al., 2004). Earlier age
at onset (i.e., prior to age 17) is associated with rapid cycling and
other negative illness course features in adulthood (Coryell et al.,
2003; Schneck et al., 2004; Suppes et al., 2001). The age of onset of
mood disorders is getting younger in successive birth cohorts. In the
NCS-R, Kessler et al. (2005) reported that the lifetime risk of bipolar
I or II disorders in 18- to 29-year-olds was 22 times higher than in
persons over 60. It is likely that more

322

Bipolar Disorder

recent birth cohorts place a greater value on self-expression and
disclosure than previous generations did, and they may be
correspondingly more likely to report mood disorder symptoms. The
decreasing age of onset of BD may also in part reflect the less
distinctive boundary between pre-illness and illness states in our
current nomenclature. In the Pittsburgh Bipolar Offspring Study (BIOS),
children of bipolar parents (N = 391) and children of healthy parents (N
= 248) were evaluated at an average age of 11.9 years and followed
prospectively over 7 years (Axelson et al., 2015). Overall, bipolar I or
II disorder developed in 8.4% of the offspring of bipolar parents and
0.8% of the offspring of healthy parents, but high-risk offspring also
had an increased risk for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) (30.7% compared with 18.2%), anxiety disorders (39.9% vs. 21.8%),
and substance misuse disorders (20.0% vs. 10.1%). The age at onset of
the first manic or hypomanic episode in BIOS was much younger than in
earlier studies (mean = 13.4 years vs. 17--19 years). The strongest
predictor of a bipolar I manic onset in offspring followed over 7 years
was the presence of a subthreshold manic episode in childhood (i.e.,
prior to age 12).

Suicidality In studies that follow patients who have been hospitalized
for bipolar disorder, rates of completed suicide are up to 15 times
greater than in the general population (Harris & Barraclough, 1997;
Jamison & Baldessarini, 1999) and 4 times greater than among patients
with major depressive disorder (Brown, Beck, Steer, & Grisham, 2000). In
a 40to 44-year follow-up of 406 mood disorder inpatients (unipolar,
bipolar I, and bipolar II), Angst, Angst, Gerber-Werder, and Gamma
(2005) found that 11% had died by suicide. It is less clear how frequent
suicide is in people with BD who have never been hospitalized. Risk
factors for completed suicide include younger age, recent illness onset,
male gender, prior suicide attempts, a family history of suicide,
comorbid alcohol or substance abuse, rapid cycling course, social
isolation, anxious mood, and "impulsive aggression" (Angst et al., 2005;
Bridge, Goldstein, & Brent, 2006; Fawcett, Golden, & Rosenfeld, 2000;
Jamison, 2000; Marangell et al., 2006). Adolescents with BD are at
particularly high risk for suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and
nonsuicidal self-injury. A study of 413 youth with BD (mean age 12.6)
found that 18% had made at least one attempt in the prior 5 years; of
these attempters, 41% had made multiple attempts (Goldstein et al.,
2012). Not surprisingly, patients with recent severe depression were
more likely to think about or attempt suicide than were those who were
clinically stable. Little is known about how to treat suicidality in
bipolar disorder. Angst et al. (2005) found that patients who were
treated with lithium, antipsychotics, or antidepressants--- particularly
in combination regimens---had a lower suicide rate than those who were
not. In a sample of 20,638 health plan members (aged 14 years or older)
who had BD, lithium was more effective than divalproex sodium (Depakote)
in reducing suicide attempts and completions (Goodwin et al., 2003). A
meta-analysis of 48 randomized trials of lithium in both bipolar and
major depressive patients revealed that lithium was more effective than
placebo in reducing the overall number of suicides, but did not affect
rates of deliberate self-injury. The mechanisms by which lithium reduces
suicide risk are unknown,

Description of the Disorder

323

although reductions in recurrence rates, impulsiveness, and aggression
are possible candidates (Cipriani, Hawton, Stockton, & Geddes, 2013).

Comorbid Disorders More than 95% of persons diagnosed with bipolar
disorder have a lifetime history of other psychiatric disorders. In the
NCS-R, the highest 1-year associations were observed between
mania/hypomania and anxiety disorders (62.9%), behavior disorders (ADHD
and oppositional defiant disorder, 44.8%), and substance use disorders
(36.8%) (Merikangas et al., 2007). Children and adult BD patients with
comorbid disorders have poorer long-term prognoses than do those without
comorbid disorders (e.g., Masi et al., 2004; Otto et al., 2006).
Adolescents and young adults with bipolar disorder and comorbid ADHD
have a threefold greater risk (3.0% versus 1.1%) of making a suicide
attempt than those without this comorbidity (Lan et al., 2015). The
comorbidity of bipolar disorder and ADHD in children is between 60% and
90%, even when overlapping symptoms are not included (Kim & Miklowitz,
2002). Differentiation of the two disorders usually requires a careful
diagnostic evaluation, information from multiple informants (e.g.,
parents, teachers), and longitudinal observation of the course of
illness. Risk for substance use disorders is 5 times greater in bipolar
adolescents than in healthy adolescents (Wilens et al., 2004). Anxiety
disorders, which occur in approximately 44% of children with bipolar
disorder, are often diagnosed before the onset of a mood disorder in
children of parents with bipolar disorder (Masi et al., 2004; Sala et
al., 2010).

Impairment in Psychosocial Functioning The majority of patients with BD
experience significant impairment in work, social, and family
functioning after illness episodes (Altshuler et al., 2006; Fagiolini et
al., 2005; Gitlin, Mintz, Sokolski, Hammen, & Altshuler, 2011). In a
Stanley Foundation Bipolar Network study of 253 adult patients with
bipolar disorder, only about one in three worked full-time outside of
the home. More than half (57%) were unable to work or worked only in
sheltered settings (Suppes et al., 2001). In a community sample, people
with bipolar disorder were approximately 4 times more likely to
experience disability compared to the general population, and were at
greater risk for divorce than those diagnosed with unipolar depression
(Mitchell, Slade, & Andrews, 2004). A remarkable feature of bipolar
spectrum disorders is the wide range of functioning, with some
individuals doing quite well and others struggling with core domains of
life such as employment and relationships. A variety of variables are
associated with life functioning, including subsyndromal depressive
symptoms following a manic episode (Gitlin et al., 2011) and cognitive
dysfunction (Altshuler, Bearden, Green, van Gorp, & Mintz, 2008). In one
study, the presence of a supportive relationship was the best predictor
of successful employment (Hammen, Gitlin, & Altshuler, 2000). The
relationship between functional impairment and symptoms appears to be
bidirectional. Even low levels of post-episode residual symptoms are
associated with delays in functional recovery (e.g., Gitlin et al.,
2011). Equally important, failure to recover one's

324

Bipolar Disorder

premorbid functioning after an episode is associated with earlier
symptomatic recurrences over 1 year (Weinstock & Miller, 2010).

Mania and Creativity Mania has been described as a highly productive,
creative state of exuberance (Jamison, 2005). Many historical figures in
the arts, literature, and politics are believed to have had bipolar
disorder---Vincent Van Gogh, Ernest Hemingway, and Winston Churchill are
examples (Jamison, 1993). The unaffected first-degree relatives of those
with bipolar disorder demonstrate higher creativity than do the affected
relatives, and persons with bipolar II disorder achieve higher levels of
creativity than do those with bipolar I disorder (Johnson, Murray, et
al., 2012; Richards, Kinney, Lunde, Benet, & Merzel, 1988). Children
diagnosed with bipolar disorder and children who are the offspring of
bipolar parents score higher on a measure related to creativity than
healthy control children (Simeonova, Chang, Strong, & Ketter, 2005).
Creativity, along with other positive aspects of BD, has been proposed
as an outcome variable that is particularly meaningful to patients
(Michalak et al., 2016). This profile of findings suggests that fully
syndromal manic episodes are not the cause of elevated creativity.
Bipolar disorder and risk for mania have been related to several traits
that could promote increased creativity, including positive affective
traits (e.g., optimism), impulsivity, and increased ambition (Johnson,
Murray, et al., 2012). Some research suggests that heightened ambition
may promote greater creative accomplishment in patients with BD (Johnson
et al., 2015; Ruiter & Johnson, 2015). More research is needed on the
mechanisms linking bipolar disorder to creativity.

Etiology, Risk Factors, and Protective Factors: The Biopsychosocial
Perspective Modern perspectives view the expression of bipolar symptoms
as the result of a continuous interaction between genetic vulnerability,
neurobiological dysregulation, and environmental events. Evidence for
the main effects of genetic and biological factors on bipolar onset or
course, along with evidence for the psychological and environmental
factors that appear to interact with them, is presented here.

Genetic Studies Bipolar disorder is among the most heritable of
disorders. Heritability estimates from twin studies are as high as .85
to .93 (Kieseppa, Partonen, Haukka, Kaprio, & Lonnquist, 2004; McGuffin
et al., 2003). At least a dozen studies have examined the risk of
bipolar disorder among first-degree relatives of those with bipolar
disorder, with estimates ranging from 5% to 12%, and between 20% and 25%
when all forms of mood disorder in first-degree relatives are considered
(Smoller & Finn, 2003). A meta-analysis of 17 studies suggested that
children of BD parents are at a fourfold increased risk of affective
disorders compared to children of parents without a psychiatric
diagnosis (Lapalme, Hodgins, & LaRoche, 1997).

Etiology, Risk Factors, and Protective Factors

325

Molecular genetic studies have indicated multiple loci as relevant to
bipolar disorder, but relatively few of these have been replicated.
CACNA1C, ODZ4, and NCAN have been replicated in large-scale studies
(Craddock & Sklar, 2013; Sullivan, Daly, & O'Donovan, 2012). In the
single largest genetic study of psychiatric disorders (Cross Disorder
Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2013), which contained
33,332 patients with a variety of disorders (6,990 with bipolar
disorder) and 27,888 controls, there was moderate evidence for genes
that had been previously identified as associated with schizophrenia or
bipolar disorder: a locus near MIR137; TCF4, the MHC region on
chromosome 6; and SYNE1. There was also a role for calcium channel
signaling genes in all five disorders under examination (autism spectrum
disorders, ADHD, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and
schizophrenia). The overall evidence suggests an aggregated small effect
of a large number of genes (risk variants), with weak differences among
diagnoses. Modern genetic studies are identifying quantitative
phenotypes in the neurocognitive, neuroanatomical, or behavioral domains
that may be associated with bipolar disorder (Fears et al., 2014). In
this methodology one examines, for example, the genetic correlates of
activation in specific neural circuits or in the volume or thickness of
brain structures thought to be relevant to mood regulation. Identifying
genetically correlated brain changes, however, raises considerable
challenges related to sample size. One innovative method for studying
quantitative phenotypes is to examine extended pedigrees in cultures in
which family members tend to stay in the same general location. One
multinational study examined two genetically isolated populations---in
the Central Valley of Costa Rica and the Antioquia region of
Colombia---and included 738 individuals, 181 of whom had bipolar I
disorder. The authors examined 169 phenotypes (e.g., structural changes
in prefrontal cortex) and determined that 31% of these phenotypes were
genetically linked to bipolar disorder. Certain phenotypes (e.g.,
cortical thickness in prefrontal and temporal regions) were promising
candidate traits for genetic mapping in bipolar disorder based on degree
of heritability. Quantitative trait methods may eventually identify
genetic loci related to the disease (Fears et al., 2014). Another line
of genetic investigation has examined the offspring of parents with BD
who do and do not respond well to lithium. Grof, Duffy, Alda, and Hajek
(2009) posited that children of lithium responders develop the illness
in a predictable series of stages, starting with nonspecific sleep
disturbance and anxiety in childhood, followed by major depression
during the postpubescent period, and finally fully syndromal mania.
These predictions do not appear to be consistent with those of the
Pittsburgh Bipolar Offspring Study that found that children of bipolar
parents often develop subthreshold mania before depression, with an
average age of onset of 12 (Axelson et al., 2015). Nonetheless, we are
now in a better position than in the past to consider familial drug
responses as moderators of genetic susceptibility in children, given the
fact that the current generation of parents developed BD after lithium
and other mood stabilizers became available.

Genetic Vulnerabilities of Bipolar Disorder Shared With Depression and
Schizophrenia Among the first-degree relatives of BD probands, there is
an increased risk of major depressive disorders (Smoller & Finn, 2003)
as well as schizophrenia. A key question is the extent of overlap in the
phenotypes and genotypes for these disorders. One twin study

326

Bipolar Disorder

found that the heritabilities for unipolar depression and mania were
modestly correlated, but 71% of the genetic liability to mania was
distinct from that of depression (McGuffin et al., 2003). A polymorphism
in the serotonin transporter promotor region (5-HTTLPR) has been
documented across at least some studies of BD (Levinson, 2006), and it
has been documented as a risk factor for unipolar depression in the
context of childhood adversity and life events (Caspi et al., 2003;
Kendler, Kuhn, Vittum, Prescott, & Riley, 2005; Taylor et al., 2005). In
a meta-analysis of 54 studies, the effect of 5-HTTLPR as a moderator in
the stress-depression relationship was stronger for childhood
maltreatment than for life events (Karg, Burmeister, Shedden, & Sen,
2011). In parallel, researchers have begun to examine overlap in the
genetic risk of schizophrenia and BD. In regard to schizophrenia, the
monozygotic twins of persons with schizophrenic disorder are at an
increased risk for mania (8.2%) as well as schizophrenia (40.8%).
Likewise, the monozygotic twins of manic patients are at an increased
risk for schizophrenia (13.6%) and mania (36.4%) (Cardno, Rijsdijk,
Sham, Murray, & McGuffin, 2002). Of the genetic regions hypothesized to
be involved in BD, several appear to overlap with those proposed to
increase risk for schizophrenia (Sullivan et al., 2012; Cross Disorder
Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2013). Greater overlap in
gene loci may be found for forms of bipolar disorder that show certain
psychotic features. For example, a genome-wide association study found
overlap in gene variants among persons with bipolar disorder who had
mood-incongruent psychotic delusions or hallucinations (i.e., with no
clear content related to sadness or elation) and persons with
schizophrenia (Goes et al., 2012). Eventually, genetic research may
identify regions that increase vulnerability to both bipolar disorder
and schizophrenia; that risk will not be defined only on the basis of
symptom profiles or pathological behaviors. However, the methods for
translating information about gene loci into preventive interventions
have not been clarified.

Neurotransmitter Dysregulation Over the past decade, models of
neurotransmitter disturbance in BD have shifted from a focus on absolute
levels of neurotransmitters to an emphasis on the overall functioning of
cellular systems. Bipolar disorder may involve impairments in the
plasticity of synapses and receptors and disturbances in intracellular
signaling cascades (the functioning of molecules inside neurons that
mediate signal transduction) rather than the amount of dopamine or
serotonin (Manji, 2009). Increasingly sophisticated technologies
facilitate examining facets of the system that contribute to overall
functioning, such as the binding of neurotransmitters to receptors or
individual differences in sensitivity to pharmacological challenges.
Although we focus on dopamine, serotonin, and glutamate dysfunctions,
these likely interact with deficits in other neurotransmitter systems,
such as 𝛾-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and substance P, to produce symptoms
of mood disorders (e.g., Stockmeier, 2003). We do not focus on
norepinephrine here---although norepinephrine levels have been found to
be increased during mania and diminished during depression, it is less
clear whether changes in norepinephrine levels are a product or a cause
of mood symptoms (Thase, Jindal, & Howland, 2002).

Etiology, Risk Factors, and Protective Factors

327

Dopamine Theories of BD have long placed emphasis on the dopaminergic
pathways involved in reward sensitivity (Depue, Collins, & Luciana,
1996; Hestenes, 1992), including the nucleus accumbens and the ventral
tegmentum (Naranjo, Tremblay, & Busto, 2001). In this model, mania is a
highly reward-driven state. Current theory suggests that dopamine
function is enhanced during mania and diminished during depression
(Cousins, Butts, & Young, 2009). Among people without BD, dopaminergic
agonists have been found to trigger manic symptoms such as increased
mood, energy, and talkativeness (Sax & Strakowski, 2001; Willner, 1995).
Manic symptoms in response to amphetamine are more pronounced among
people with BD than among people without BD, probably because
amphetamine increases the bioavailability of dopamine as well as other
catecholamines (Anand et al., 2000). People diagnosed with BD
demonstrate increased behavioral response (as measured with symptoms on
mania rating scales) to amphetamines compared to those diagnosed with
schizophrenia (Anand et al., 2000). In a phenomenon known as behavioral
sensitization, most individuals demonstrate a rapid increase in motor
activity from the first to the second exposure to amphetamines. Persons
with first-episode psychosis and BD fail to show this shift from first
to second exposure, perhaps indicating that dopaminergic receptors have
already developed increased sensitivity (Strakowski, Sax, Setters, &
Keck, 1996; Strakowski, Sax, Setters, Stanton, & Keck, 1997). This is
consistent with the hypothesis (discussed below under "Goal
Dysregulation") that BD is characterized by greater sensitivity to
reward, as mediated by changes in the regulation of dopaminergic reward
pathways. People with euthymic bipolar disorder show larger shifts in
reward-seeking behavior than those with no bipolar disorder when
administered a dopamine agonist (Burdick, Braga, Gopin, & Malhotra,
2014). Serotonin Substantial evidence suggests that BD is related to
diminished function of the serotonin system. As serotonin constrains
other neurotransmitter systems, deficits in the function of the
serotonin system are believed to allow greater variability in the
function of dopamine. Neuroimaging studies indicate that mood disorders
are generally associated with decreased sensitivity of the serotonin
receptors (Stockmeier, 2003). Research has examined how people respond
to fluctuations in serotonin, induced by either depleting or augmenting
of tryptophan, the precursor to serotonin. Persons with a positive
family history of BD display more cognitive deficits after
serotonin-depletion and serotonin-augmentation procedures than persons
without a positive family history of BD do (Sobcazk, Honig, Schmitt, &
Riedel, 2003; Sobczak et al., 2002). The psychomimetic effects of drugs
like LSD that stimulate the action of serotonin receptors may also
suggest a role for serotonergic dysregulation in BD. Glutamate Glutamate
is well established as a major excitatory neurotransmitter that plays a
key role in the plasticity of dendrites, axons, and synapses (Chen,
Henter, & Manji, 2010). Across paradigms, researchers have found
evidence for changes in glutamate function within bipolar disorder. In
postmortem tissue samples, elevated levels of glutamate have been found
in prefrontal cortical regions of patients with BD (Hashimoto, Sawa, &
Iyo, 2007).

328

Bipolar Disorder

In a single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) study, there was
evidence for glutamate receptor dysfunction although no changes in
absolute glutamate levels (Sanacora, Zarate, Krystal, & Manji, 2008).

Inflammatory Cytokines It is well established that cytokines and
cytokine inducers lead to behaviors associated with depression,
including changes in sleep, anhedonia, and decreased activity. Patients
with MDD can be distinguished from healthy volunteers by higher levels
of proinflammatory cytokines (Miller, Maletic, & Raison, 2009). Persons
diagnosed with bipolar disorder appear to have irregularities in
immunological processes as well. A meta-analysis of 30 studies concluded
that adults with BD could be distinguished from healthy volunteers on
concentrations of interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-10, soluble IL-2 and IL-6
receptors, recombinant tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), soluble TNF
receptor 1 (sTNFR1), and an IL-1 receptor antagonist (Modabbernia,
Taslimi, Brietzke, & Ashrafi, 2013). These differences, however, were
less consistent when comparing euthymic (rather than acutely
symptomatic) patients to controls. For example, Brietzke et al. (2009)
found that the proinflammatory cytokines IL-2, IL-4, and IL-6 were
increased among symptomatic bipolar adults compared to control subjects,
but only increased levels of IL-4 distinguished euthymic patients with
BD from controls. Less is known about whether increased levels of
inflammatory activity normalize with medication treatments. Kim et
al. (2004) found that at the time of hospital admission, medication-free
patients with mania could be distinguished from healthy controls on
elevated levels of interferon gamma (IFN-y, a cytokine that is central
to immune reactions to viral and bacterial infections) and IL-4, and
lower levels of transforming growth factor--beta 1 (TGF-β1, a protein
that controls cell growth and proliferation). Interestingly, TGF-β1
levels increased significantly from admission to a reassessment after 8
weeks of mood stabilizer treatment. Lithium treatment was associated
with normalization of inflammatory markers in one small open trial
(Boufidou, Nikkolaou, Alevizios, Liappas, & Christodoulou, 2004). Thus,
mood state and medication status may account for a proportion of the
variance in inflammatory states among patients with BD.

Neural Correlates of Bipolar Disorder A growing body of research has
mapped the brain regions involved in emotional reactivity and regulation
among healthy individuals (Phillips, Drevets, Rauch, & Lane, 2003;
Strakowski et al., 2012). For example, the amygdala is involved in
identifying the significance of emotionally relevant stimuli of both
negative and positive valence (Aggleton, 2000). Signals from the
amygdala activate relevant structures involved in emotion processing and
planning, such as the hippocampus, which is hypothesized to facilitate
encoding and retrieval of emotion-relevant memories, and the prefrontal
cortex (PFC), which appears to be involved in the regulation of emotion
(Ochsner & Gross, 2005). Not surprisingly, these same regions have been
implicated in the pathophysiology of BD. Bipolar I disorder is
associated with hyperactivity in the amygdala in positronemission
tomography (PET) studies (Kruger, Seminowicz, Goldapple, Kennedy, &
Mayberg, 2003), as well as in functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies of activity during cognitive or emotional tasks (for a
review, see Phillips & Swartz, 2014).

Psychosocial Variables as Predictors of the Course of Bipolar Disorder

329

Several investigators (Altshuler & Townsend, 2012; Keener & Phillips,
2007) have described bipolar disorder as involving impairments in the
cortical and subcortical structures and circuits that subserve emotional
salience and response inhibition, collectively known as an emotional
control circuit. In a review of studies, Altshuler and colleagues (e.g.,
Townsend & Altshuler, 2012) showed that the amygdala is hyperactivated
in manic states, shows variable activity in depression, and is normally
activated during euthymic mood. Also relevant to this circuit is the
anterior cingulate cortex, which is less activated during mania compared
to euthymia. Several studies also indicate that those with BD show
increased striatal activation in response to emotion stimuli as compared
to controls. Reduced ventrolateral PFC activity is also shown across
manic, depressed, and euthymic states, and may be a traitlike
characteristic of bipolar disorder. Several studies indicate that BD is
characterized by reduced resting state connectivity of the amygdala and
prefrontal regions (Strakowski et al., 2012). For example, functional
connectivity between the perigenual anterior cingulate cortex and
amygdala is compromised in BD during remission (Wang et al., 2009). One
model posits that chronic ventrolateral PFC hypoactivation may lead to
abnormal modulatory control of the limbic structures, which may
partially explain why patients with BD have mood instability and
hyperreactivity to events even when in relative remission (Townsend &
Altshuler, 2012). Diminished activity of the PFC and related cortical
regions might interfere with the ability to inhibit emotions and to
conduct effective planning and goal pursuit in the context of emotion. A
recent meta-analysis of functional MRI studies indicated that
hyperactivation of the basal ganglia is common among BD patients (Chen,
Suckling, Lennox, Ooi, & Bullmore, 2011). Although early studies
suggested that this activation was related to manic symptoms (Blumberg
et al., 1999; Caligiuri et al., 2003), the body of evidence suggests
that hyperactivation is observed across manic, euthymic, and depressive
states (Chen et al., 2011). Hence, bipolar disorder may be associated
with abnormal activity of a neural circuit involving (a) elevated
sensitivity of regions relevant to emotionality (e.g., the amygdala) and
reward sensitivity (e.g., the basal ganglia) and (b) diminished activity
in regions relevant for emotion regulation (e.g., regions such as the
ventrolateral PFC). Future neuroimaging studies may clarify whether
abnormal activity in these circuits distinguishes BD from unipolar
depression, and whether these circuits are impaired before the onset of
the disorder. A novel strategy for addressing the latter question comes
from studies of youth at risk for BD (i.e., those with a family history
of mania who show subthreshold mania or hypomania from a young age;
e.g., Axelson et al., 2015). Youth with BD and youth at risk for BD show
decreased dorsolateral PFC activity and increased amygdala or posterior
cingulate activity when viewing fearful faces (Chang et al., 2004;
Garrett et al., 2014; Olsavsky et al., 2012).

Psychosocial Variables as Predictors of the Course of Bipolar Disorder
By the end of the 1980s, it was relatively well established that genetic
models of BD did not explain the enormous heterogeneity in the course of
the illness over time (Prien & Potter, 1990). Several studies
established that psychosocial stress variables were

330

Bipolar Disorder

robust predictors of the course of the disorder. For example, Ellicott,
Hammen, Gitlin, Brown, and Jamison (1990) found that BD patients with
high levels of life events were at 4.5 times greater risk for relapse
within 2 years than were patients with medium or low levels of life
events, even when the focus of the analyses was on life events that were
not caused by the person. Intriguingly, life events have also been found
to predict the onset of mood disorders among the adolescent children of
parents with BD (Hillegers et al., 2004; Wals et al., 2005).
Psychosocial stressors can include chronic environmental adversities,
such as high levels of expressed emotion (EE: such as criticism,
hostility, or emotional overinvolvement) attitudes in parents of
symptomatic offspring. Miklowitz, Goldstein, Nuechterlein, Snyder, and
Mintz (1988) found that young adult inpatients with mania discharged to
parents who were rated high on EE or who showed high levels of affective
negativity during parent-to-patient interactions were at 94% risk for
relapse within 9 months. This figure compares to a 17% risk of relapse
among patients discharged to parents who were low on both EE attitudes
and affective negativity during interactions. Although these early
studies established the predictive value of psychosocial variables, they
did not address key issues such as the effects of stress on manic versus
depressive symptoms. Recent research has systematically examined how
psychosocial variables--- childhood adversity, sleep/schedule
disruption, and life events---influence the onset or course of
depression and mania within BD.

Childhood Adversity A significant amount of research has examined early
adversity experiences (i.e., sexual, physical, or emotional abuse) in
bipolar disorder. On the whole, rates of early adversity appear to be
extremely high among persons with BD. In addition, there is substantive
evidence that early adversity relates to a worse course of disorder. In
one review of 19 studies, childhood abuse---and particularly, physical
abuse---was related to early illness onset, substance abuse, and
suicidality in BD (Daruy-Filho, Brietzke, Lafer, & Grassi-Oliveira,
2011). In longitudinal research, traumatic events have been found to
increase the risk of chronic stress within BD, which in turn increases
the risk of depressive symptoms (Gershon, Johnson, & Miller, 2013). One
cross-sectional study (Dienes, Hammen, Henry, Cohen, & Daley, 2006)
found that patients who reported severe early adversity (i.e., parental
neglect or sexual/physical abuse) reported less stress prior to illness
recurrences and an earlier age at onset of BD than patients who reported
no early adversity. In a reanalysis of data from the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions relating to 811
individuals with a lifetime history of mania, childhood adversity
(physical and sexual maltreatment) was associated with a higher risk of
first-onset mania and a higher risk of recurrent manic episodes in
adulthood. Moreover, stressful events that occurred in the year before
the study's baseline assessment (e.g., financial hardships) were more
closely associated with onsets or recurrences of mania among genetically
at-risk individuals with a history of childhood adversity than they were
among those without childhood adversity. This pattern suggests that
childhood adversity may potentiate the effects of stressful events on
manic onset or recurrence (Gilman et al., 2015).

Psychosocial Variables as Predictors of the Course of Bipolar Disorder

331

In considering the meaning of interactions between family history,
childhood adversity, and stress, we need to rule out competing
explanations, such as that individuals from more genetically prone
families are more likely to be exposed to childhood adversity; stressful
events in the year prior to an illness episode may partially reflect the
person's prodromal behavior in the progression to mania (e.g.,
increasingly manic overspending leads to financial ruin); and the degree
to which memories of parental affective disorder can be distinguished
from memories of childhood adversity. While these issues have been well
considered in the life events field, this type of issue is generally
less well addressed in the available studies of early adversity.

Sleep and Schedule Disruption Much has been learned in the past 25 years
about the role of sleep in cognitive and emotional functioning in
healthy individuals, and much of this knowledge is relevant to bipolar
disorder. For example, sleep deprivation has been found to interfere
with recalibrating the sensitivity of dopamine receptors (Ebert,
Feistel, Barocks, Kaschka, & Pirner, 1994), diminish functional
activation of the prefrontal cortex to emotionally relevant cues
(Walker, 2011), and heighten reactivity to negative stimuli (Gujar,
McDonald, Nishida, & Walker, 2011) and reward stimuli (Gujar, Yoo, Hu, &
Walker, 2010). Wehr, Sack, and Rosenthal (1987) hypothesized that sleep
deprivation might mediate the effects of life events on episodes of BD,
noting that life events often interfere with the ability to sleep (e.g.,
transmeridian flights, childbirth, etc.). This theory was expanded to a
fuller conceptualization of circadian rhythm disruptions by Ehlers and
colleagues (Ehlers, Frank, & Kupfer, 1988; Ehlers, Kupfer, Frank, &
Monk, 1993). In the elaborated model, environmental and interpersonal
influences serve the role of timekeepers ("social zeitgebers"), whereas
other social influences ("social zeitstorers") disrupt the ability of
the BD person to maintain daily rhythms (e.g., a job with shifting work
hours). Ehlers and colleagues also suggested that social rhythm
disruptions (e.g., to daily routines, social plans, and sleep-wake
cycles) might predict symptoms above and beyond the role of disruptions
specific to sleep. In an early study of the social rhythm stability
hypothesis in BD, Malkoff-Schwartz et al. (1998) conducted interviews
with patients to assess life events before their most recent illness
episode. Patients reported more life events that disrupted social
rhythms in the 8 weeks before mania recurrences than in the 8 weeks
before depressive recurrences. These results remained consistent in a
replication with an enlarged sample (Malkoff-Schwartz et al., 2000).
Such findings provide one more potential mechanism for understanding how
life events affect the onset of mania. Patients with BD show greater
variability in their circadian patterns of activity, as measured using
actigraphy, than do controls, even during interepisode periods (Harvey,
Schmidt, Scarna, Semler, & Goodwin, 2005; Jones, Hare, & Evershed, 2005;
McKenna, Drummond, & Eyler, 2014). Similar profiles have been observed
in a study of parents with bipolar disorder and their children with
early-onset mood disorders (Jones, Tai, Evershed, Knowles, & Bentall,
2006). Self-ratings of instability in social rhythms also were found to
predict the onset of mood episodes among undergraduates with high scores
on measures of subsyndromal depressive and manic symptoms (Shen, Alloy,
Abramson, & Sylvia, 2008).

332

Bipolar Disorder

In a recent meta-analysis of nine studies (412 participants) using
actigraphy to assess sleep patterns in BD, people with remitted BD
showed longer sleep duration and lower sleep efficiency than controls
(Geoffroy et al., 2015). Daily fluctuations in sleep quality may trigger
more negative mood among those with BD than among those with no mood
disorder (Gershon et al., 2012). Once manic states are present, many
people with BD show diminished sleep at night, as assessed using
actigraphy (Gonzalez, Tamminga, Tohen, & Suppes, 2014; Salvatore et al.,
2008; Wehr, Sack, & Rosenthal, 1987). Empirical research has shown that
sleep deprivation is also a potent predictor of manic symptoms (Barbini
et al., 1998; Murray & Harvey, 2010). In an 18-month naturalistic study
of more modest sleep changes, diminished time sleeping predicted
next-day increases in manic symptoms (Leibenluft, Albert, Rosenthal, &
Wehr, 1996). Intriguingly, exposure to bright light, which can change
circadian rhythms, has been shown to trigger manic symptoms (Benedetti,
Barbini, Colombo, & Smeraldi, 2007). Taken together, the evidence is
growing that BD may be characterized by a vulnerability of the sleep and
circadian rhythm system, such that even at baseline, people show less
distinct and regular routines. As people become manic, profound
reductions in sleep and circadian rhythms may occur. Bidirectional
effects appear likely, in that (a) sleep deprivation can trigger manic
symptoms, (b) life events involving schedule disruption are common
before manic episodes, and (c) manic symptoms can foster a more chaotic
lifestyle and sleep-wake pattern. It is less clear how depression is
tied to problems with this system. Later in this chapter, we describe an
intervention geared toward addressing sleep-wake cycle disruptions
(interpersonal and social rhythm therapy \[IPSRT\]).

Negative Life Events and Depression Within Bipolar Disorder The
symptomatology and neurobiology of unipolar and of BD depression have
many strong parallels (Cuellar, Johnson, & Winters, 2005). Thus, it is
not surprising that many of the psychosocial predictors of unipolar
depression also predict the course of BD depression. Predictors of
bipolar depressive recurrences or symptoms include low self-ratings of
perceived social support (Johnson, Winett, Meyer, Greenhouse, & Miller,
1999); high ratings of parental EE from clinical interviews (Kim &
Miklowitz, 2004; Miklowitz, Biuckians, & Richards, 2006; Yan, Hammen,
Cohen, Daley, & Henry, 2004); and high scores on self-ratings of
neuroticism (Heerlein, Richter, Gonzalez, & Santander, 1998; Lozano &
Johnson, 2001). In considering the role of life events in bipolar
disorder, it is important for investigators to use interview-based
methods that exclude life events caused by symptoms (Johnson, 2005a).
Three cross-sectional studies that used interview-based methods found
that negative life events were equally common before episodes of either
bipolar or unipolar depression (Malkoff-Schwartz et al., 2000; Pardoen
et al., 1996; Perris, 1984). Prospective interview-based studies suggest
that stressful life events lengthen the time to recovery from a
depressive episode and predict increases in bipolar depression over
several months (Johnson, 2005a). A small number of studies have
considered specific forms of life stressors. Life events involving
danger and loss have been found to predict increases in depression over
time (Hosang, Uher, Maughan, McGuffin, & Farmer, 2012). Kim, Miklowitz,
Biuckians, and

Psychosocial Variables as Predictors of the Course of Bipolar Disorder

333

Mullen (2007) followed 38 adolescents with BD who were enrolled in a
randomized treatment trial. Adolescents who experienced more chronic
stress in family and romantic relationships during follow-up also
experienced more sustained depressive symptoms over time. Negative life
events have not been found to predict increases in manic symptoms, but
they do predict the depressive symptoms within mixed (depressive and
manic) episodes. One study examined whether life events predicted the
onset of bipolar disorder among offspring of parents with BD. A
cumulative count of the number of severe life events over the past 5
years was related to risk of bipolar onset (Hillegers et al., 2004).
Events occurring within the previous 14 months were also associated with
a greater risk of bipolar disorder onset within this sample (Wals et
al., 2005). Few studies have examined the mechanisms by which negative
life events are associated with bipolar depression. In traditional
cognitive theories of depression, the effects of stress on depression
are magnified by negative cognitive biases (Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery,
1987). Negative cognitive styles have been documented in BD as well,
particularly among persons with more severe depressive symptoms (Cuellar
et al., 2005). That is, cognitions appear to be more negative during
depressive periods compared with well periods (Knowles, Tai,
Christensen, & Bentall, 2005; Thomas & Bentall, 2002), and among those
with more severe depressive histories (Alloy, Reilly-Harrington, Fresco,
Whitehouse, & Zechmeister, 1999). Negative cognitive styles and low
self-esteem predict increases in depression over time (Johnson &
Fingerhut, 2004; Johnson, Meyer, Winett, & Small, 2000). However, we do
not have data from clinical samples indicating that negative events are
more potent in eliciting depression in the presence of negative
cognitive biases in BD. Theories of "kindling" (Post & Weiss, 1998)
postulate a significant role for stress in the early phases of BD. In
these models, later episodes of illness are generated autonomously, with
one episode begetting the next. However, studies have not consistently
found that life events are more potent in provoking initial episodes
than later episodes of BD (Bender & Alloy, 2011; Hammen & Gitlin, 1997;
Hlastala et al., 2000).

Goal Dysregulation and Mania Two major models have clarified the
behavioral and neural mechanisms underlying recurrences of mania: goal
dysregulation (emphasizing reward sensitivity) and sleep or schedule
disruption. As described earlier, it has long been hypothesized that BD
relates to dysregulation in reward pathways. People diagnosed with BD
have been shown to have greater activation of the nucleus accumbens
(thought to play a role in reward and pleasure) during reward
anticipation than do those with no mood disorder (Nusslock et al.,
2012). As a consequence, people with BD may be more reactive to rewards
and successes in their environment (Johnson, 2005b). Across more than a
dozen studies, people with a history of mania and students vulnerable to
mania describe themselves as more reward sensitive, or more likely to be
strongly motivated by reward cues (Johnson, Edge, Holmes, & Carver,
2012; Meyer, Johnson, & Carver, 1999). Elevated reward sensitivity has
been found to predict a more severe course of mania among those
diagnosed with bipolar I disorder (Meyer, Johnson, & Winters, 2001;
Salavert et al., 2007). Reward sensitivity predicted the conversion to
threshold bipolar I or II disorder among college students with
subthreshold hypomanic traits (Alloy, Urošević, et al., 2012). In a
longitudinal study of adolescents at risk for BD, EEG indices suggestive

334

Bipolar Disorder

of heightened reward sensitivity predicted conversion from bipolar
spectrum disorder to bipolar I disorder (Nusslock et al., 2012).
Johnson, Sandrow, et al. (2010) hypothesized that excess reward
sensitivity may heighten reactivity to success, such that manic symptoms
would be more likely after life events involving goal attainment. In a
longitudinal study of bipolar I patients, goalattainment life events
predicted increases in manic but not depressive symptoms, even after
controlling for baseline manic symptoms and excluding life events that
could have been caused by these symptoms. These findings were replicated
in another bipolar I sample (Johnson et al., 2008) and a sample of
college students with subthreshold BD (Nusslock, Abramson, Harmon-Jones,
Alloy, & Hogan, 2007). A key focus for future research involves
identifying which components of reward processing are most related to
the course of BD (Johnson, Edge, et al., 2012). To date, critical
components of reward sensitivity include highly ambitious goal setting
and increases in confidence and energy after receipt of rewards.
Regarding the first domain, people with BD endorse highly ambitious life
goals, and ambitious goal setting is associated with a more severe
course of mania (Johnson, Eisner, & Carver, 2009; Johnson, Fulford, &
Carver, 2012). Highly ambitious goal setting also predicts the onset of
BD in vulnerable adolescents (Alloy, Bender, et al., 2012). Other
studies have elucidated cognitive processes that shift in response to
reward. These include tendencies to attend to and process information in
a more positive manner (Eich, Macaulay, & Lam, 1997; Lembke & Ketter,
2002; Murphy et al., 1999) and an increase in confidence (Johnson, Edge,
et al., 2012). There are also distinct behavioral shifts after success
that are more pronounced for those with BD than for those without the
disorder; for example, more active goal pursuit after making initial
progress toward a goal (Fulford, Johnson, Llabre, & Carver, 2012).
Although one might expect that increases in positive thinking,
confidence, and goal pursuit after an initial success would be adaptive,
longitudinal evidence suggests that increases in goal engagement
(setting new goals and spending time pursuing goals) predict increases
in manic symptoms in bipolar I disorder over several months (Lozano &
Johnson, 2001). In sum, goal attainments and successes appear to inspire
bursts of confidence, which then fuel increased goal engagement in BD.
Excessive goal engagement may accelerate the development of manic
symptoms (Johnson, 2005b). Intervening to encourage self-regulation when
patients with BD experience successes may be a key self-management tool
to prevent the escalation of mania following a goal attainment life
event.

Diagnostic Assessment Bipolar disorder is diagnosed using clinical
interviews. There are no biological or genetic tests that consistently
distinguish patients with BD from patients with other psychiatric
disorders. In this section, we review research on interview and
questionnaire methods used to diagnose or chart the symptomatic course
of BD.

Structured Interviews Most clinicians rely directly on the history
offered by the patient or family members in structured or semistructured
diagnostic interviews. Some clinicians are reluctant to

Diagnostic Assessment

335

diagnose BD unless they actually see the patient in a manic or hypomanic
state. Other clinicians eschew use of structured interviews, believing
them to be stilted or overly formalized. The most prominent diagnostic
interview in the United States is the Structured Diagnostic Interview
for DSM, now in its fifth edition (SCID-5; First, Williams, Karg, &
Spitzer, 2016). The Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia
(SADS) is also a commonly used interview. Both the SCID and the SADS
have achieved excellent interrater reliability and validity for the
diagnosis of bipolar I disorder (Rogers, Jackson, & Cashel, 2001;
Williams et al., 1992). Both are time-consuming, however, and some
researchers are now using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric
Interview (Sheehan et al., 1998), which simply requires patients to
respond with "yes" or "no" to various questions about current and
previous symptom states. The chance for false negative responses,
however, increases in a yes/no format. For patients under the age of 18,
either the "Kiddie" Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia,
Present and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL; Chambers et al., 1985; Kaufman
et al., 1997) or the Washington University K-SADS (Geller et al., 2002)
is preferred. In childhood samples, parent report is generally more
reliable than child report, but most studies obtained K-SADS data from
both parent and child (Youngstrom, Findling, & Calabrese, 2004;
Youngstrom, Findling, Calabrese, Gracious, et al., 2004). Even with
structured interviews, the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder or
cyclothymic disorder can be quite difficult. When interviewers rate the
same tapes, reliability estimates for bipolar II disorder are inadequate
for the SADS in some studies (Keller et al., 1981; Kessler et al.,
2006), but not all studies (e.g., Simpson et al., 2002). Disagreements
between rater pairs often occur because the second rater diagnoses the
person with another form of bipolar spectrum disorder, such as bipolar I
disorder or bipolar disorder NOS (e.g., Kessler et al., 2006). In the
field trials leading up to the publication of DSM-5, test-retest
reliability was "fair" for bipolar I disorder in adults, averaging 0.52
across sites. It was also 0.52 at the one site that examined
child/adolescent bipolar I and bipolar II patients, although the
separate coefficient for bipolar II disorder was only .40 (Regier et
al., 2013). Overdiagnosis of BD is particularly common when
distinguishing between BD and borderline personality disorder (Zimmerman
et al., 2010). To gain a thorough assessment of the disorder and its
subsyndromal forms, structured diagnostic assessments like the SCID
should be supplemented by self-report questionnaires, family history
interviews, and life charting (time line records of the frequency,
severity, and timing of prior episodes; e.g., Leverich & Post, 1998).
However, any of these self-report measures can yield questionable
information when patients are highly symptomatic. It is critical to
gather additional input from family members or other caregivers.

Questionnaire Measures of Risk for Bipolar Disorder As described
earlier, structured clinical interviews do not fare well in identifying
the milder forms of BD. Subsyndromal or spectrum forms of bipolar
disorder---notably cyclothymia or hyperthymia---may precede the onset of
fully syndromal bipolar disorder (Akiskal et al., 2005). Several
investigators have attempted to capture these spectrum conditions with
self-report questionnaires measuring tendencies toward highly positive
mood states or excessive mood variability.

336

Bipolar Disorder

The Temperament Evaluation of Memphis, Pisa, Paris, and San Diego---
Autoquestionnaire Version (TEMPS-A) yields five factors with high
internal consistency: cyclothymic (0.91), depressive (0.81), irritable
(0.77), hyperthymic (0.76), and anxious (0.67) (Akiskal et al., 2005).
Moreover, in a prospective study using a questionnaire measure adapted
from the TEMPS-A cyclothymic scale for children, baseline
cyclothymic-hypersensitive TEMPS-A scores predicted the onset of bipolar
disorder in a 2-year follow-up of clinically depressed youth (Kochman et
al., 2005). The Hypomanic Personality Scale (HPS), a self-report
instrument for measuring hypomanic temperaments among college students,
predicted the onset of bipolar spectrum disorders over 13 years in one
study (Kwapil et al., 2000). Among high scorers on the HPS, 77.5%
reported a history of hypomanic episodes (Eckblad & Chapman, 1986). A
recent study of the HPS validated these findings. In a 3-year follow-up
of 112 college students who had taken the HPS, 13 developed new bipolar
spectrum disorders. In total, 58% of participants scoring in the upper
quartile of the HPS had bipolar spectrum disorders at follow-up.
However, the HPS also predicted domains that are not specific to bipolar
disorder, such as impulsivity, substance use disorders, psychosocial
impairment, and borderline traits (Walsh, DeGeorge, Barrantes-Vidal, &
Kwapil, 2015). The 79-item General Behavior Inventory (GBI; Depue,
Kleinman, Davis, Hutchinson, & Krauss, 1985) measures hyperthymia,
dysthymia, or biphasic/cyclothymic temperaments, reflecting difficulty
with mood and energy regulation. High GBI scores were associated with
psychosocial impairment in a 19-month follow-up of adolescents (Klein &
Depue, 1984). Among teens with depression, higher scores on the
depression subscale of the GBI were associated with bipolar disorder at
5-year follow-up (Reichart et al., 2005). A 10-item parent-rated version
of the GBI had strong discriminant validity for identifying bipolar and
unipolar disorders in children (Youngstrom, Frazier, Demeter, Calabrese,
& Finding, 2008). There has been a considerable amount of interest in
the Mood Disorders Questionnaire (MDQ) as a potential epidemiological
screening instrument (Hirschfeld et al., 2000). The MDQ is a brief
true/false questionnaire regarding lifetime manic episodes. Significant
questions have been raised about false positive diagnoses with the MDQ.
In a study of 534 psychiatric outpatients assessed using the SCID,
borderline personality disorder was diagnosed 4 times as often in an MDQ
positive group as in an MDQ negative group. Of the 98 patients who
scored positively on the MDQ, 24% had bipolar disorder and 28% had
borderline personality disorder (Zimmerman et al., 2010). Thus, it seems
unlikely that the MDQ has enough diagnostic specificity to justify its
use in epidemiological studies, although it may help to identify
patients who should receive a more in-depth evaluation.

Assessment of Longitudinal Outcome Studies focused on recovery or
recurrence often use the Longitudinal Interval Follow-up Evaluation
(LIFE; Keller et al., 1987). The LIFE is a semistructured interview
given to the patient at 3- to 6-month intervals. The 1 to 6 ratings of
psychiatric status are given for each week of follow-up and cover the
severity of mania, hypomania, major depression, delusions,
hallucinations, and comorbid disorders (e.g., anxiety, ADHD). From these
ratings, the timing, duration, and frequency of recoveries and
recurrences can be tabulated.

Treatment: Pharmacotherapy

337

An adolescent version (A-LIFE) of the LIFE was used in the Course and
Outcome of Bipolar Youth study (Birmaher et al., 2009), with interrater
reliabilities (intraclass correlations) of ≥.80 for mood disorder
ratings. Moreover, among youth with subthreshold bipolar disorder,
weekly ratings on the A-LIFE enabled investigators to clarify the
progression to fully syndromal bipolar I or II disorder over a 5-year
period (Axelson et al., 2011). Instruments like the A-LIFE are quite
time intensive for both patient and research staff, and require that
patients (and often their caregivers) travel to a clinic and invest 1 to
2 hours, incurring travel expenses in the process. Unless the
investigator or clinician has funds to cover travel expenses and
compensation, these costs can be unwieldy. An alternative is an
electronic short-messaging service, such as the Oxford University True
Colours self-rating system, which cues patients every week to fill out
self-rating scales of mania and depression (Bopp et al., 2010).
Collecting data on mood over several months may capture some of the more
subtle forms of mood variation that are forgotten when patients attempt
to recall mood episodes for the LIFE. The True Colours system provided
the primary outcome in a study of psychoeducation for bipolar disorder
(Bilderbeck et al., in press). This method is not without its bugs, but
it is possible that similar methods will gradually replace face-to-face
interviews for capturing mood fluctuations and relapses of BD.

Treatment: Pharmacotherapy Considerable strides have been made in the
drug treatment of bipolar disorder within the past 2 decades. Drug
treatment serves at least three purposes: (1) to stabilize an acute
manic, depressed, or mixed/cycling episode; (2) to prevent relapse
(maintenance pharmacotherapy); and (3) to reduce the severity of
symptoms and to improve functioning between episodes. For detailed
discussion of drug treatment of bipolar depression and mania in adults
and children, the reader is referred to comprehensive reviews (Delbello
& Kowatch, 2006; Goldberg, 2004; Kowatch, Fristad, et al., 2005;
Miklowitz & Gitlin, 2015). During the past decade, the most significant
change in pharmacological treatment for bipolar disorder has been the
increasing use of anticonvulsant and antipsychotic medications. Although
lithium and divalproex sodium continue to be the mainstays of treatment,
psychiatrists increasingly are using lamotrigine (an anticonvulsant) or
atypical antipsychotics (olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine,
ziprasidone, aripiprazole, asenapine, lurasidone, or paliperidone) to
control acute manic or mixed episodes, alleviate depressive symptoms,
and prevent recurrences. The increased popularity of anticonvulsants and
atypical antipsychotics is generally attributed to their more tolerable
side effect profiles. In fact, these agents have side effect profiles
different from lithium, as elaborated next.

Treatment of Acute Mania and Long-Term Prophylaxis Approximately 60% to
70% of patients with bipolar disorder improve on lithium during a manic
episode, although not all responders fully remit (Goldberg, 2004).
Lithium can be difficult to tolerate; patients experience sedation,
weight gain, tremors of the hands, stomach irritation, thirst, and
kidney clearance problems. Divalproex sodium is a second

338

Bipolar Disorder

mood stabilizer often used to control manic episodes, but it generally
has more benign side effects (Bowden et al., 1994; Kowatch et al.,
2000). The side effects of divalproex can include stomach pain, nausea,
weight gain, elevated liver enzymes, and lowering of blood platelet
counts. A large-scale randomized community effectiveness trial, the
Oxford University BALANCE study, raises questions about the long-term
prophylaxis afforded by divalproex. In a study of 330 outpatients
randomly assigned to lithium, divalproex, or the combination, the
combination approach and lithium alone were both more effective in
relapse prevention than divalproex alone. These findings suggest that
lithium has an advantage over divalproex in delaying recurrences
(BALANCE investigator and collaborators, 2010). Olanzapine, an atypical
antipsychotic medication, appears to have strong antimanic properties
and may be particularly useful for mixed episodes or rapid cycling
(Frazier et al., 2001; Gonzalez-Pinto et al., 2002; Tohen et al., 2000).
Its prophylaxis against recurrences of mania or mixed episodes is as
good as or better than lithium or divalproex (Tohen et al., 2003; Tohen,
Greil, et al., 2005; Tohen, Kryzhanovskaya, et al., 2005). However,
concerns about olanzapine side effects, including weight gain and the
metabolic syndrome (abdominal obesity, elevated blood pressure, abnormal
blood lipids, glucose intolerance), have made physicians favor other
antipsychotics for treating mania, especially if the medication is going
to be used in maintenance treatment. Quetiapine and risperidone
(second-generation antipsychotics) appear to be associated with
intermediate risk of weight gain and metabolic dysfunction, whereas
aripiprazole and ziprasidone are of lowest risk (Newcomer, 2007).
Quetiapine is increasingly used to control manic symptoms in
adolescents, either alone or in combination with divalproex (Delbello et
al., 2006; Delbello, Schwiers, Rosenberg, & Strakowski, 2002).

Treatment of Depression Although many clinicians use antidepressants in
combination with mood stabilizers to control bipolar depressive
episodes, it is not clear that they are effective (Ghaemi, Lenox, &
Baldessarini, 2001). The multisite randomized Systematic Treatment
Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD) trial (Sachs et al.,
2007) found that patients receiving mood stabilizers plus bupropion or
paroxetine did not stabilize any faster than patients receiving mood
stabilizers plus placebo, nor were they any more likely to have
treatment-emergent affective switches. In contrast, findings of a
multisite naturalistic study found that bipolar depressed patients who
were stabilized on mood stabilizers in combination with selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) were less likely to relapse into
depression and no more likely to develop mania or rapid cycling if they
continued antidepressants for 6 months after remission, when compared to
patients who discontinued antidepressants (Altshuler et al., 2003). One
trial found that combining lithium and divalproex is as effective in
treating bipolar depression as combining mood stabilizers with an SSRI,
raising the question of whether antidepressants are worth the risk of
more frequent mood cycles (Young et al., 2000). However, in one small
study of 17 depressed patients with bipolar II disorder who had
previously failed lithium therapy, patients could be stabilized with
antidepressants alone without significant increases in manic symptoms
(Amsterdam, Wang, & Shults, 2010).

Treatment: Pharmacotherapy

339

Current treatment guidelines for bipolar depression recommend adding
antidepressants to mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotics when
other agents have failed (e.g., Kowatch, Fristad, et al., 2005; Yatham
et al., 2005; Goodwin & Consensus Group of the British Association for
Psychopharmacology, 2009). Other options for bipolar depression, mania,
and rapid cycling include quetiapine (Delbello & Kowatch, 2006) and
lamotrigine (Malhi, Adams, & Berk, 2009). Quetiapine appears to be more
effective than lithium as an antidepressant but not as an antimanic
agent (Goodwin et al., 2004). Quetiapine can cause dizziness and
sleepiness as well as weight gain. Lamotrigine was more effective than
inositol or risperidone for patients with bipolar depression who had
failed at least two prior antidepressant trials (Nierenberg et al.,
2006). In a meta-analysis of lamotrigine trials, Geddes, Calabrese, and
Goodwin (2009) found that effect sizes relative to placebo or other
treatments were consistently higher when patients were in the upper 50%
of the depressive severity continuum. Concerns about a serious skin rash
that in a small number of patients can progress into Stevens-Johnson
syndrome---a potentially fatal dermatological condition---has made
clinicians cautious about the use of lamotrigine. Lurasidone (Latuda), a
second generation antipsychotic, appears to be effective as monotherapy
in alleviating bipolar depressive symptoms when compared to placebo
(Loebel et al., 2014). There have been no trials yet to determine
whether lurasidone should be a first-line treatment for bipolar
depression or an adjunctive when clinical response is incomplete. The
side effects for lurasidone---nausea, restlessness, and sedation---are
somewhat less disturbing than those of other second generation
antipsychotics. Finally, the combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine
(Prozac)---usually called OFC or Symbyax---has a strong record of
stabilizing both mania and depression (Tohen et al., 2003). However, OFC
has not come into wide use. Physicians are usually reluctant to
prescribe medicines that contain two compounds, because it is difficult
to change the dosage of one agent without also changing the other.

Medication Nonadherence Perhaps the biggest limitation to mood
stabilizers is the high rate of nonadherence among patients who are
expected to take them continuously. Between 40% and 60% of patients are
fully or partially nonadherent with mood stabilizer regimens in the year
after a manic episode (Colom et al., 2000; Keck, McElroy, Strakowski,
Bourne, & West, 1997; Strakowski et al., 1998). Rates of noncompliance
in community mental health clinics are especially high; one study
estimated that patients took lithium for an average of only 2 to 3
months (Johnson & McFarland, 1996). Rates of nonadherence among
adolescents with BD are similar to those observed in adults: 65%
reported inconsistency with medications during the first year of
treatment after a manic episode (Delbello, Hanseman, Adler, Fleck, &
Strakowski, 2007). Rapid discontinuation of lithium places patients at
considerably higher risk for recurrence and suicide (Suppes,
Baldessarini, Faedda, Tondo, & Tohen, 1993; Tondo & Baldessarini, 2000).
Nonadherence is due, at least in part, to a desire to re-create high
periods and to resentment of having one's moods controlled by
medications (Jamison, Gerner, & Goodwin, 1979). Difficulties with
accepting the disorder and high rates of denial of the disorder also
contribute to medication inconsistency or discontinuation (Greenhouse,

340

Bipolar Disorder

Meyer, & Johnson, 2000). Other studies have emphasized the contributory
role of side effects, comorbid personality disorders, substance or
alcohol abuse disorders, and more severe, recurrent forms of the illness
(Colom et al., 2000).

Treatment: Psychotherapy Given the high rates of recurrence among
bipolar patients, even when maintained on optimal pharmacotherapy,
investigators are increasingly looking to combine pharmacotherapy with
psychotherapy. Early trials of cognitive-behavioral therapy (Cochran,
1984) and family therapy (Clarkin et al., 1990) had shown positive
benefits in enhancing medication compliance, reducing recurrences, and
improving functioning among bipolar patients. More recently, treatments
have become manual-based and disorder-specific. Four forms of
psychotherapy have emerged as effective in the long-term maintenance of
bipolar disorder. Each of these treatments includes a significant focus
on psychoeducation, although the length and format vary considerably.
Recent studies on these modalities are reviewed here (for a
comprehensive review, see Geddes & Miklowitz, 2013).

Psychoeducational Approaches A study conducted at the University of
Barcelona, Spain (Colom et al., 2003), assessed the efficacy of
psychoeducational and support groups among 120 adult patients with
bipolar I disorder who had been in remission for at least 6 months. All
patients received mood-stabilizing medications. One group received 21
weekly sessions of structured group psychoeducation and the other
received 21 unstructured, nondidactic group sessions. At the end of 2
years, fewer of the group psychoeducation patients (67%) than of the
control patients (92%) had relapsed, and fewer had been hospitalized.
Patients in group psychoeducational treatment were also more likely to
maintain lithium levels within the therapeutic range (Colom et al.,
2005). The results remained significant at a 5-year follow-up (Colom et
al., 2009). Bauer and colleagues (2006) tested a collaborative care
management (CCM) program for bipolar patients (N = 306) treated at 11
participating U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs sites. The
intervention centered on a group psychoeducational treatment to improve
patients' self-management skills, but also included enhanced access to
care through a nurse coordinator and medication practice guidelines for
the treating psychiatrist. Patients were followed over 3 years. Those
patients in the collaborative care management program spent fewer weeks
in manic episodes than patients who received continued care as usual.
They also showed greater improvements in social functioning, quality of
life, and treatment satisfaction. The CCM treatment did not have an
effect on mean levels of manic and depressive symptoms over the 3-year
period. Dismantling studies will be necessary to determine the unique
contribution of the group psychoeducation to the effectiveness of the
full CCM program. Extending this work to a group health network, Simon,
Ludman, Bauer, Unutzer, and Operskalski (2006) randomly assigned 441
patients who were part of a prepaid group health plan to a 2-year
multicomponent care management intervention or to treatment as usual
(TAU). Patients were in various clinical states. Care management
consisted of pharmacotherapy, telephone-based monitoring,
interdisciplinary care planning, relapse

Treatment: Psychotherapy

341

prevention planning, and group psychoeducational treatment. Over 2
years, patients in the program had significantly lower mania scores and
spent less time in manic or hypomanic episodes than those in the TAU
group, but there were no effects on depressive symptoms. The results
were strongest for patients who were symptomatic at baseline. Perry,
Tarrier, Morriss, McCarthy, and Limb (1999) examined a 7- to 12-session
individual psychoeducational treatment and medication in comparison with
routine care and medication. Psychoeducational sessions instructed
patients how to identify early warning signs of recurrence and obtain
emergency medical intervention. The investigators observed a 30%
reduction in manic relapses, a longer time before manic relapse, and
enhanced social functioning in the relapse prevention condition. The
intervention was not associated with time to depressive relapse. Thus, a
brief relapse prevention intervention may be a cost-effective way of
delaying manic recurrences. There have been recent attempts to test the
effects of psychoeducationally oriented clinics on the relapse/remission
course of BD. Kessing et al. (2014) randomly assigned 158 patients to
treatment in a specialized outpatient mood disorder clinic that
integrated pharmacotherapy with group psychoeducation, or to a standard
care outpatient clinic. There was an interaction between treatment and
age: those patients who were between 18 and 25 years old benefited more
than those over the age of 26 from the integrated intervention than from
standard treatment in terms of likelihood of rehospitalization. The
younger patients also took more mood stabilizers and antipsychotics than
the older group. This study may indicate that younger, more recent-onset
patients may benefit more from psychoeducation than older and highly
recurrent patients, and may be more likely to commit to a
pharmacological regimen when treated in a specialty setting. Studies
that examine treatments at the clinic level rather than the individual
patient level may be quite informative for community dissemination.
Ideally, in replication studies, investigators should stratify
participants on age before randomly assigning to clinics.

Family Intervention Approaches Miklowitz and Goldstein (1990, 1997;
Miklowitz, 2008) designed a family-focused treatment (FFT) for recently
ill patients with BD. This approach is based on the idea that improving
knowledge about bipolar disorder, reducing high EE attitudes, and
enhancing communication will reduce relapse rates. It also involved the
first use of a relapse prevention drill---a well-known technique in the
substance dependence literature (e.g., Marlatt, 1985)---for bipolar
disorder. The treatment involves three stages: psychoeducation for the
patient and family members about BD (e.g., identifying and learning to
intervene early with prodromal symptoms of relapse),
communication-enhancement training, and problem-solving skills training.
In a randomized trial, the Colorado Treatment Outcome study, FFT was
combined with standard pharmacotherapy and compared with a brief
psychoeducation control (two sessions of family psychoeducation plus
crisis intervention sessions as needed over 9 months) (Miklowitz,
George, Richards, Simoneau, & Suddath, 2003). Patients had bipolar I
disorder (N = 101) and were recruited during or shortly after a manic,
mixed, or depressive episode. Over a 2-year follow-up, patients in FFT
were 3 times more likely to complete the study without relapsing (52%
versus 17%) and had longer periods of stability without relapse (73.5
weeks versus 53.2 weeks). They also had greater improvements over time

342

Bipolar Disorder

in depression, lower mania symptoms, and better adherence to medications
than patients in the comparison group. Patients in FFT demonstrated more
improved communication with their relatives than patients in the control
treatment did. Moreover, improved communication was associated with
alleviation of mood symptoms over 1 year (Simoneau, Miklowitz, Richards,
Saleem, & George, 1999). Rea and colleagues (2003) compared FFT plus
pharmacotherapy to an equally intensive (21-session) individually
focused patient treatment plus pharmacotherapy for bipolar I patients
after hospitalization for a manic episode (N = 53). In the first study
year, no treatment differences were observed in relapse or
rehospitalization rates. Over a 1- to 2-year posttreatment follow-up,
however, patients in FFT had much lower rates of rehospitalization (12%)
and symptomatic relapse (28%) than patients in individual therapy (60%
rehospitalization and 60% relapse). There were no differences between
the groups in medication regimens or adherence over 2 years. In a
two-site randomized controlled trial (RCT), Miklowitz et al. (2008)
assigned 58 adolescent bipolar patients to either a developmentally
appropriate version of FFT (FFT-A) plus pharmacotherapy or a
three-session "enhanced care" (EC) psychoeducational treatment plus
pharmacotherapy. Adolescent patients met DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for
bipolar I, bipolar II, or BD not otherwise specified. Over 2 years,
adolescents in FFT-A had more rapid time to recovery from initial
depressive symptoms, less time in depressive states, and greater
stabilization of depressive symptoms than adolescents in EC. A secondary
analysis of this trial revealed that adolescents in high expressed
emotion families showed greater reductions in both mania and depression
if they received FFT-A than if they received EC. Thus, when choosing
candidates for FFT-A in community settings, adolescents with higher
parent-offspring criticism and conflict may show the biggest
treatment-associated improvements (Miklowitz et al., 2009). A second
trial involving three study sites and 145 adolescents with BD I or II
(Miklowitz et al., 2014), however, did not replicate the first.
Adolescents in FFT-A and the 3-session EC comparator did not differ in
time to recovery from their index episode of mania or depression, or in
time to recurrence over 2 years. The presence of a comorbid anxiety
disorder was the strongest predictor of recurrences in this study. A
secondary analysis revealed a strong effect of stage of treatment:
during the 1-year posttreatment phase, adolescents in FFT-A had
significantly lower mania symptom scores than those in EC. These results
are similar to those of the Rea et al. (2003) study of young adult
patients with BD, which indicated a greater protective effect of FFT-A
in the year following the 9-month FFT program than the 9-month
individual therapy program displayed in the year after. Possibly,
families need time to absorb the communication, problem-solving, and
relapse prevention skills before implementation of these skills exerts a
protective influence on the course of the disorder. FFT has been
manualized for children at risk for bipolar disorder as well: those with
a family history of mania who present with major depression, bipolar
disorder not elsewhere classified, or cyclothymic disorder. In a 1-year
RCT, 40 high-risk children (ages 9--17) with MDD or bipolar disorder NOS
were randomly assigned to either 12 sessions of FFT high-risk version
(FFT-HR) or a 1- or 2-session education control (Miklowitz et al.,
2013). About 60% of the children were taking psychotropic medications as
well. All participants had at least one first-degree relative with
bipolar I or II disorder, as revealed by direct interview. The
participants in FFT-HR demonstrated more rapid recovery from their
initial

Treatment: Psychotherapy

343

mood symptoms, more weeks in remission from mood symptoms, and more
improvement in hypomania symptoms over 1 year than participants in the
education control. Once again, the largest treatment effect sizes were
among children in high expressed emotion families FFT is only one
approach to family intervention. Other investigators have examined
treatment protocols that are more suited to younger bipolar patients.
Multiple family groups (Fristad, Verducci, Walters, & Young, 2009) and a
12-session integrated program of individual CBT and FFT sessions known
as RAINBOW (West et al., 2014) were both found to be effective in
randomized trials for children with bipolar spectrum disorders (age 12
or under). Considerable work has been published on the factors that
moderate or mediate these interventions (e.g., Fristad & MacPherson,
2014).

Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Several major trials of
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) have been conducted. It is worth
noting, as background, that several CBT manuals have been developed and
published, and these manuals vary in their content. Lam and colleagues
(2003; Lam, Hayward, Watkins, Wright, & Sham, 2005) compared 6 months of
CBT (12 to 18 sessions, plus two booster sessions after 6 months) with
pharmacotherapy to treatment as usual with pharmacotherapy for 103
bipolar patients who had been in remission for at least 6 months. At 1
year, relapse rates were 44% in the CBT condition and 75% in the usual
care condition. Patients in CBT also spent fewer days in illness
episodes. One year to 30 months after treatment, CBT no longer prevented
relapse relative to usual care but did continue to show a positive
influence on mood and days spent in episodes. The effects of CBT were
stronger on depression than on mania. A UK multicenter trial conducted
across five sites (N = 253) (Scott et al., 2006) compared 22 sessions of
CBT plus medication to treatment as usual plus medication. The goal of
this study was to examine the effectiveness of CBT when administered
across a broader range of treatment settings. The patients had been in
various clinical states before entry into the trial. A total of 60% of
the patients had a recurrence during the 18-month follow-up, but no
effects of CBT versus treatment as usual on time to recurrence were
found. A post hoc analysis revealed that patients with fewer than 12
prior episodes had fewer recurrences if treated with CBT than with
treatment as usual, whereas the opposite pattern was apparent among
patients with 12 or more prior episodes. It is not clear whether
patients with fewer than 12 episodes were less ill/episodic, younger, or
had been ill for fewer years than patients with 12 or more episodes.
Moreover, a meta-analysis of randomized trials (prior to 2009) did not
find a moderating effect of number of prior episodes on treatment
response (Lam, Burbeck, Wright, & Pilling, 2009). In a four-site
Canadian trial (Parikh et al., 2012), 204 patients were randomly
assigned to 20 weekly sessions of CBT or to six group psychoeducation
sessions with pharmacotherapy. Results showed no group differences in
relapse or symptom severity over 72 weeks. Given that the six group
psychoeducation sessions cost an average of \$180 per patient whereas
the 20 sessions of CBT cost \$1,200 per patient, group treatment was the
more cost-effective alternative in this study. Meyer and Hautzinger
(2012) examined 76 patients in a variety of clinical states who were
randomly assigned to CBT plus pharmacotherapy (20 therapy sessions over
9 months) or a comparably intensive individual supportive therapy plus
pharmacotherapy.

344

Bipolar Disorder

Thus, the design was similar to the study by Rea et al. (2003) for FFT.
Over 33 months, there were no differences between the groups in relapse
or time to relapse. In sum, findings regarding CBT have been mixed, with
not all trials demonstrating effects above other active treatments or
usual care across participants. CBT does appear to be more effective for
bipolar patients who have had fewer episodes and is unlikely to produce
positive clinical outcomes among patients who have experienced 12 or
more episodes. It is difficult to evaluate whether the stronger effects
of CBT in the Lam et al. (2005) study were due to differences in patient
characteristics, treatment manuals, or the nature of the comparison
condition (treatment as usual).

Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy As discussed previously, one
model suggests that BD symptoms are triggered by disruptions in daily
routines and sleep-wake cycles. Frank (2005) developed the interpersonal
and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT) as a means to alter this pathway to
recurrence. IPSRT begins during or shortly following an acute illness
episode and includes techniques to stabilize social rhythms and resolve
interpersonal problems that preceded the episode. Patients learn to
track their daily routines and sleep-wake cycles and to identify events
(e.g., job changes, transatlantic travel) that may provoke changes in
these routines. In the Pittsburgh Maintenance Therapies study (Frank et
al., 2005), acutely ill patients (N = 175) were randomly assigned to one
of two weekly psychosocial treatments in combination with medication
management: IPSRT or individual clinical management. Clinical management
was focused on symptom control and medication adherence. Once patients
were stabilized, they were randomly reassigned to IPSRT or individual
clinical management (ICM) for a 2-year maintenance phase. Thus, four
treatment strategies were formed. The 2-year recurrence rates were as
follows: 41% for IPSRT followed by IPSRT, 41% for IPSRT followed by ICM,
28% for ICM followed by ICM, and 63% for ICM followed by IPSRT,
suggesting that switching treatments was less effective for patients
than simply continuing with the treatment assigned at their first
randomization. However, IPSRT in the acute phase was associated with
longer time before recurrence in the maintenance phase than was ICM.
Moreover, IPSRT was most effective in delaying recurrences in the
maintenance phase when patients succeeded in stabilizing their daily
routines and sleep-wake cycles during the acute phase, suggesting that
regularity of social and circadian rhythms may mediate the clinical
effects of this treatment. IPSRT during the maintenance phase, however,
was not superior to ICM in delaying recurrences. In a small-scale acute
treatment trial, 25 unmedicated patients with bipolar II depression were
randomly assigned to a regimen of quetiapine or IPSRT (without
medicines) (Swartz, Frank, & Cheng, 2012). Response rates, reductions in
mean depression scores, and dropout rates were equal in the two
treatments over 12 weeks. It is difficult to determine whether the lack
of differences in time to stabilization indicates equal effectiveness,
but it does raise the question of whether some bipolar II depressed
patients can be treated with psychotherapy alone. A study of IPSRT in
New Zealand (Inder et al., 2015) examined 100 adolescent to young adult
patients (ages 15--36), who were randomly assigned to 26 to 78 weeks of
IPSRT treatment or to standard "specialty supportive care" (SSC), both
given with medications. Over the interval, both groups improved in
depressive symptoms, manic symptoms, and social

Summary and New Directions

345

functioning. However, there were no group differences. Thus, it is
unclear whether the degree of change was attributable to nonspecific
elements of the two treatments, the effects of pharmacotherapy, or
different causal processes that led to the same overall outcome.

The STEP-BD Study In the early 2000s, little was known about what forms
of psychotherapy were most effective for BD. Only single trials existed
on the major forms of treatment. One study compared the effectiveness of
psychotherapies found to be effective in single-site trials. The
Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD)
(Miklowitz, Otto, Frank, Reilly-Harrington, Wisniewski, et al., 2007)
examined the effectiveness of IPSRT, FFT, and CBT (30 sessions over 9
months) compared to a threesession psychoeducational control
intervention (collaborative care, or CC). (The study did not test group
psychoeducation as an additional modality, which in retrospect seems
unfortunate.) BD I and II patients (N = 293), who began in a major
depressive episode, were treated at 15 STEP-BD sites. All patients
received pharmacotherapy with at least one mood stabilizer and often
adjunctive atypical antipsychotics, antidepressants, or anxiolytics.
Over 1 year, patients in the intensive therapy conditions were more
likely to recover from depression (64%) and recovered more rapidly (mean
169 days) than patients in CC (52%, 279 days, respectively). One-year
rates of recovery, which did not statistically differ across the
intensive therapy groups, were 77% for FFT, 65% for IPSRT, and 60% for
CBT. Patients in the intensive therapies were also more likely to remain
well in any given month of the 12-month study than patients in CC
(Miklowitz, Otto, Frank, Reilly-Harrington, Wisniewski, et al., 2007).
Additionally, patients in intensive therapy had better overall
functioning, relationship functioning, and life satisfaction over time
than patients in CC over 1 year (Miklowitz, Otto, Frank,
Reilly-Harrington, Kogan, et al., 2007). The effects of intensive
therapy on recovery were strongest among patients with comorbid anxiety
disorders (Deckersbach et al., 2014). The STEP-BD program suggests that
intensive psychotherapy is a vital part of the effort to stabilize
episodes of depression and enhance functioning in bipolar disorder.
Possibly, the emphasis on pharmacological maneuvering to combat mood
dysregulation has obscured the potential role of psychotherapy in
addressing life stressors associated with depression. Given that bipolar
patients often spend up to one third of their lives in states of
depression (Judd et al., 2002) and that mood-stabilizing medications are
generally more effective in controlling mania than depression (Keck,
McElroy, Richtand, & Tohen, 2002), the integration of pharmacological
and psychosocial treatments seems increasingly important.

Summary and New Directions Patients with bipolar disorders experience a
highly recurrent course of illness with substantial psychosocial
impairment. Although considerable advances have been made in
understanding the diagnostic boundaries, etiology, prognostic factors,
and pharmacological and psychosocial treatment of the illness, much
remains to be learned.

346

Bipolar Disorder

Genetic and Neurobiological Markers of Risk A family history of BD
clearly puts people at risk for the illness, but genetic markers with
disease specificity have not been identified. Certain genetic loci
appear promising as candidates for identifying persons at risk. Ongoing
efforts are directed at (a) identifying genes that overlap between
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, and (b) identifying quantitative
traits relevant to genetic risk that distinguish those with bipolar
disorder from comparison groups. Changes in the regulation of
dopaminergic reward pathways and a decreased sensitivity of serotonin
receptors have been implicated in bipolar mood symptoms, with newer work
implicating glutamate and inflammatory cytokines as well. Serotonin
deficits may contribute to a general dysregulation of emotion systems
that increases vulnerability to a wide range of disorders (Carver,
Johnson, & Joormann, 2009). Further research will be necessary to
determine the exact nature and diagnostic specificity of these
neurotransmitter system dysfunctions, and the degree to which such
dysfunctions are evident during euthymic as well as symptomatic states.

Psychosocial Predictors of Symptoms Similar to recurrent major
depressive disorder, bipolar disorder is characterized by pathology in
the brain systems involved in emotion regulation. Early adversity may
lead to greater disruption of brain regions involved in regulating
emotions (Hanson et al., 2013), and for the person already vulnerable to
BD, may intensify the risk of a range of negative outcomes and course
parameters. The psychosocial variables that trigger unipolar depression,
such as negative life events and high EE in caregivers, exert a major
influence on the depressive course of bipolar disorder. But what are the
unique predictors of mania? Patients whose bipolar disorder is in
remission have high sensitivity to reward and ambitious goal setting;
once they begin to experience successes, they may develop cognitions
that contain overly optimistic biases (Johnson, 2005b). Relatedly,
excess goal engagement appears to predict increases in mania. Sleep
deprivation has also been found to predict manic symptoms. Life events
that disrupt social rhythms are more common before manic recurrences
than before depressive recurrences. Nonetheless, a growing body of
research suggests that sleep and circadian rhythms are disrupted during
remission, and may be relevant for understanding depression as well
(e.g. Cardoso et al., 2015).

Optimal Treatment Regimens for Bipolar Patients Pharmacotherapy trials
have become more sophisticated, and increasing evidence points to the
utility of anticonvulsants and atypical antipsychotics in stabilizing
depression and mania. Few of these trials have considered long-term
maintenance, however. We do not know, for example, whether bipolar
patients are best maintained on combination therapy or on monotherapy.
Changes have occurred in the thinking about bipolar II disorder. For
example, some patients with bipolar II may be treatable with
antidepressants alone (Amsterdam et al., 2010). Bipolar II patients in a
depressive episode may stabilize just

Summary and New Directions

347

as rapidly with psychotherapy alone as with atypical antipsychotics
alone (Swartz et al., 2012). The idea of treating certain forms of
bipolar disorder without medication runs against the grain of current
psychiatric practice, but the clinical trial data do not justify
long-term medication maintenance in every case. Randomized controlled
trials indicate that adding psychotherapy onto medication helps
stabilize the disorder and prevent recurrences. It is not clear whether
the effect sizes for adjunctive psychotherapy are the same for manic as
for depressive symptoms, whether the polarity of the episode at entry
into treatment is an important determinant of treatment outcomes, or
what the role of comorbid anxiety disorders is in determining response
to psychosocial treatments. The next generation of psychosocial research
should examine treatment moderators to determine the conditions under
which psychotherapies are more and less successful. In the mental health
literature, investigators are increasingly using practical trial designs
in which treatment regimens are not set in stone and clinicians have the
flexibility to change strategies when patients do not respond
adequately. A recent example is the STAR\*D trial that tested algorithms
for using SSRIs and/or cognitive therapy for depression (Rush, 2007).
Studies have only begun to study the effectiveness of algorithms for the
drug treatment of bipolar disorder. Likewise, investigators could
propose treatment-staging strategies that combine psychopharmacology
with psychotherapy, such as treating bipolar depressed patients to
remission with mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics and then
determining whether adding a psychosocial intervention enables quicker
discontinuation of the adjunctive agent.

Prevention of Onset The potential application of psychosocial
interventions to the prevention of the onset of bipolar disorder has
considerable promise. Bipolar disorder can be conceptualized within a
developmental psychopathology framework: how do bipolar symptoms emerge
over time as a function of risk and protective processes within the
genetic, biological, social, familial, and cultural domains, and how
might one intervene in these developmental pathways to maximize
protection and minimize risk (Miklowitz & Cicchetti, 2006)? These
interventions may be both psychosocial and pharmacological. Prevention
of the onset of the first manic episode may mean fewer or less severe
mood symptoms over time, less risk of suicide, and enhanced psychosocial
functioning. Chang, Howe, Gallelli, and Miklowitz (2006) have offered
the following hypothesis regarding how early intervention might stave
off the onset of full bipolar disorder. Areas of the prefrontal cortex,
along with other structures in the limbic system, suffer
neurodegeneration after repeated episodes of bipolar illness. The stress
of repeated episodes may interfere with prefrontal mood regulation,
which may lead to increased cycling and increasing resistance to
pharmacological interventions. Pharmacological or psychosocial
preventive interventions (i.e., those administered before the first full
manic episode) that interfere with neurodegeneration and successfully
restore healthy prefrontal neural circuitry and neuronal integrity
would, theoretically, reduce the vulnerable person's chances of having a
full onset of BD. One study has shown that early intervention with FFT
may reduce symptom severity in symptomatic children who have a
first-degree relative with bipolar I disorder (Miklowitz et al., 2013).
Future studies may establish whether early

348

Bipolar Disorder

interventions that help ameliorate current symptoms have downstream
effects that contribute to the prevention of the full bipolar syndrome.

Prevention of Suicide Finally, few psychosocial interventions have
addressed the prevention of suicide in BD, despite the fact that it is
an exceptionally high-risk illness. Given that some psychosocial
interventions have greater effects on depression than on mania and can
enhance life satisfaction, it follows that they may also reduce suicidal
risk. One small trial (N = 20) found that, in adolescents with bipolar
spectrum disorders, dialectical behavior therapy was associated with
greater improvements in suicidal thinking and lower levels of depressive
symptoms than an active therapy control over 1 year (Goldstein et al.,
2014). These questions have not been addressed in studies that are
adequately powered by sample sizes or lengths of follow-up. Thus,
suicide prevention is a key area for investigation in the next
generation of psychosocial research on bipolar disorder.

References Aggleton, J. P. (2000). The amygdala: A functional analysis
(2nd ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. Akiskal, H. S.,
Mendlowicz, M. V., Jean-Louis, G., Rapaport, M. H., Kelsoe, J. R.,
Gillin, J. C., & Smith, T. L. (2005). TEMPS-A: Validation of a short
version of a self-rated instrument designed to measure variations in
temperament. Journal of Affective Disorders, 85(1--2), 45--52. Alloy, L.
B., Bender, R. E., Whitehouse, W. G., Wagner, C. A., Liu, R. T., Grant,
D. A., ... Abramson, L. Y. (2012). High behavioral approach system (BAS)
sensitivity, reward responsiveness, and goal-striving predict first
onset of bipolar spectrum disorders: A prospective behavioral high-risk
design. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121(2), 339--351. Alloy, L. B.,
Reilly-Harrington, N., Fresco, D. M., Whitehouse, W. G., & Zechmeister,
J. S. (1999). Cognitive styles and life events in subsyndromal unipolar
and bipolar disorders: Stability and prospective prediction of
depressive and hypomanic mood swings. Journal of Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 13, 21--40. Alloy, L. B., Urošević, S., Abramson, L. Y.,
Jager-Hyman, S., Nusslock, R., Whitehouse, W. G., & Hogan, M. E. (2012).
Progression along the bipolar spectrum: A longitudinal study of
predictors of conversion from bipolar spectrum conditions to bipolar I
and II disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121(1), 16--27.
Altshuler, L. L., Bearden, C., Green, M., van Gorp, W., & Mintz, J.
(2008). A relationship between neurocognitive impairment and functional
impairment: A pilot study. Psychiatry Research, 157, 289--293.
Altshuler, L. L., Post, R. M., Black, D. O., Keck, P. E. Jr., Nolen, W.
A., Frye, M. A., ... Mintz, J. (2006). Subsyndromal depressive symptoms
are associated with functional impairment in patients with bipolar
disorder: Results of a large, multisite study. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 67(10), 1551--1560. Altshuler, L., Suppes, T., Black, D.,
Nolen, W. A., Keck, P. E., Jr., Frye, M. A., ... Post, R. M. (2003).
Impact of antidepressant discontinuation after acute bipolar depression
remission on rates of depressive relapse at 1-year follow-up. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1252--1262.

Altshuler, L. L., & Townsend, J. D. (2012). Functional brain imaging in
bipolar disorder. In S. M. Strakowski (Ed.), The bipolar brain:
Integrating neuroimaging and genetics (pp. 53--77). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press. American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (2013).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. Amsterdam, J. D., Wang, G., & Shults, J. (2010).
Venlafaxine monotherapy in bipolar type II depressed patients
unresponsive to prior lithium monotherapy. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 121(3), 201--208. Anand, A., Verhoeff, P., Seneca, N.,
Zoghbi, S. S., Seibyl, J. P., Charney, D. S., & Innis, R. B. (2000).
Brain SPECT imaging of amphetamine-induced dopamine release in euthymic
bipolar disorder patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157,
1109--1114. Angst, J., Angst, F., Gerber-Werder, R., & Gamma, A. (2005).
Suicide in 406 mood-disordered patients with and without long-term
medication: A 40 to 44 years' follow-up. Archives of Suicide Research,
9(3), 279--300. Axelson, D. A., Birmaher, B., Strober, M. A., Goldstein,
B. I., Ha, W., Gill, M. K., ... Keller, M. B. (2011). Course of
subthreshold bipolar disorder in youth: Diagnostic progression from
bipolar disorder not otherwise specified. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 50(10), 1001--1016. Axelson,
D. A., Goldstein, B., Goldstein, T., Monk, K., Yu, H., Hickey, M. B.,
... Birmaher, B. (2015). Diagnostic precursors to bipolar disorder among
offspring of parents with bipolar disorder: A longitudinal study.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 172(7), 638--646. BALANCE investigators
and collaborators, Geddes, J. R., Goodwin, G. M., Rendell, J., Azorin,
J. M., Cipriani, A., Ostacher, M. J., ... Juszczak, E. (2010). Lithium
plus valproate combination therapy versus monotherapy for relapse
prevention in bipolar I disorder (BALANCE): A randomised open-label
trial. Lancet, 375(9712), 385--395.

349

350

Bipolar Disorder

Barbini, B., Colombo, C., Benedetti, F., Campori, E., Bellodi, L., &
Smeraldi, E. (1998). The unipolarbipolar dichotomy and the response to
sleep deprivation. Psychiatry Research, 79, 43--50. Bauer, M. S.,
McBride, L., Williford, W. O., Glick, H., Kinosian, B., Altshuler, L.,
... Cooperative Studies Program 430 Study Team. (2006). Collaborative
care for bipolar disorder: Part II. Impact on clinical outcome,
function, and costs. Psychiatric Services, 57, 937--945. Beck, A. T.,
Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1987). Cognitive therapy of
depression. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Bender, R. E., & Alloy, L. B.
(2011). Life stress and kindling in bipolar disorder: Review of the
evidence and integration with emerging biopsychosocial theories.
Clinical Psychology Review, 31(3), 383--398. Benedetti, F., Barbini, B.,
Colombo, C., & Smeraldi, E. (2007). Chronotherapeutics in a psychiatric
ward. Sleep Medicine Review, 11, 509--522. Bilderbeck, A. C., Atkinson,
L. Z., McMahon, H. C., Voysey, M., Simon, J., Price, J., ... Goodwin, G.
M. (In press). Psychoeducation and online mood tracking for patients
with bipolar disorder: A randomised controlled trial. Journal of
Affective Disorders. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2016.06.064 Birmaher, B.,
Axelson, D., Goldstein, B., Strober, M., Gill, M. K., Hunt, J., ...
Keller, M. B. (2009). Fouryear longitudinal course of children and
adolescents with bipolar spectrum disorders: The Course and Outcome of
Bipolar Youth (COBY) study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(7),
795--804. Blumberg, H. P., Stern, E., Ricketts, S., Martinez, D., de
Asis, J., White, T., ... Silbersweigh, D. A. (1999). Rostral and orbital
prefrontal cortex dysfunction in the manic state of bipolar disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1986--1988. Bopp, J. M., Miklowitz,
D. J., Goodwin, G. M., Stevens, W., Rendell, J. M., & Geddes, J. R.
(2010). The longitudinal course of bipolar disorder as revealed through
weekly text-messaging. Bipolar Disorders, 12(3), 327--334. Boufidou, F.,
Nikkolaou, C., Alevizios, B., Liappas, I. A., & Christodoulou, G. N.
(2004). Cytokine production in bipolar affective disorder patients under
lithium treatment. Journal of Affective Disorders, 82, 309--313. Bowden,
C. L., Brugger, A. M., Swann, A. C., Calabrese, J. R., Janicak, P. G.,
Petty, F., ... The

Depakote Mania Study Group. (1994). Efficacy of divalproex vs lithium
and placebo in the treatment of mania: The Depakote Mania Study Group.
JAMA, 271, 918--924. Bridge, J. A., Goldstein, T. R., & Brent, D. A.
(2006). Adolescent suicide and suicidal behavior. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 47(3--4), 372--394. Brietzke, E., Stertz, L.,
Fernandes, B. S., KauerSant'anna, M., Mascarenhas, M., Escosteguy, V.
A., ... Kapczinski, F. (2009). Comparison of cytokine levels in
depressed, manic and euthymic patients with bipolar disorder. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 116(3), 214--217. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2008.12.001
Brown, G. K., Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Grisham, J. R. (2000). Risk
factors for suicide in psychiatric outpatients: A 20-year prospective
study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(3), 371--377.
Burdick, K. E., Braga, R. J., Gopin, C. B., & Malhotra, A. K. (2014).
Dopaminergic influences on emotional decision making in euthymic bipolar
patients. Neuropsychopharmacology, 39, 274--282. Calabrese, J. R.,
Hirschfeld, R.M.A., Frye, M. A., & Reed, M. L. (2004). Impact of
depressive symptoms compared with manic symptoms in bipolar disorder:
Results of a U.S. community-based sample. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 65, 1499--1504. Caligiuri, M. P., Brown, G. G., Meloy, M.
J., Eberson, S. C., Kindermann, S. S., Frank, L. R., ... Lohr, J. B.
(2003). An fMRI study of affective state and medication on cortical and
subcortial regions during motor performance in bipolar disorder.
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 123, 171--182. Cardno, A. G.,
Rijsdijk, F. V., Sham, P. C., Murray, R. M., & McGuffin, P. (2002). A
twin study of genetic relationships between psychotic symptoms. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 539--545. Cardoso, T. A., Campos, M. T.,
Reyes, A. N., Zeni, C. P., Souza, L. D., da Silva, R. A., & Jansen, K.
(2015). Biological rhythm and bipolar disorder: Twelvemonth follow-up of
a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
203(10), 792--797. Carver, C. S., Johnson, S. L., & Joormann, J. (2009).
Two-mode models of self-regulation as a tool for conceptualizing effects
of the serotonin system in normal behavior and diverse disorders.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18(4), 195--199. Caspi, A.,
Sugden, K., Moffitt, T., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W., Harrington, H., ...
Poulton, R. (2003). Influence

References of life stress on depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in
the 5-HTT gene. Science, 301, 386--390. Chambers, W. J., Puig-Antich,
J., Hirsch, M., Paez, P., Ambrosini, P. J., Tabrizi, M. A., ... Davies,
M. (1985). The assessment of affective disorders in children and
adolescents by semi-structured interview: Test-retest reliability of the
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age
Children, Present Episode Version. Archives of General Psychiatry, 42,
696--702. Chang, K., Adleman, N. E., Dienes, K., Simeonova, D. J.,
Menon, V., & Reiss, A. (2004). Anomalous prefrontal-subcortical
activation in familial pediatric bipolar disorder: A functional magnetic
resonance imaging investigation. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61(8),
781--792. Chang, K., Howe, M., Gallelli, K., & Miklowitz, D. (2006).
Prevention of pediatric bipolar disorder: Integration of neurobiological
and psychosocial processes. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
1094, 235--247. Chen, C.-H., Suckling, J., Lennox, B. R., Ooi, C., &
Bullmore, E. T. (2011). A quantitative meta-analysis of fMRI studies in
bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 13, 1--15. Chen, G., Henter, I. D.,
& Manji, H. K. (2010). Presynaptic glutamatergic dysfunction in bipolar
disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 67(11), 1007--1009. Cipriani, A.,
Hawton, K., Stockton, S., & Geddes, J. R. (2013). Lithium in the
prevention of suicide in mood disorders: Updated systematic review and
meta-analysis. British Medical Journal, 346. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f3646
Clarkin, J. F., Glick, I. D., Haas, G. L., Spencer, J. H., Lewis, A. B.,
Peyser, J., ... Lestelle, V. (1990). A randomized clinical trial of
inpatient family intervention: V. Results for affective disorders.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 18, 17--28. Cochran, S. D. (1984).
Preventing medical noncompliance in the outpatient treatment of bipolar
affective disorders. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52,
873--878. Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martínez-Arán, A., Reinares, M.,
Benabarre, A., & Gastó, C. (2000). Clinical factors associated with
treatment noncompliance in euthymic bipolar patients. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 61, 549--555. Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martínez-Arán,
A., Reinares, M., Goikolea, J. M., Benabarre, A., ... Corominas, J.

351

(2003). A randomized trial on the efficacy of group psychoeducation in
the prophylaxis of recurrences in bipolar patients whose disease is in
remission. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 402--407. Colom, F.,
Vieta, E., Sánchez-Moreno, J., Martínez-Arán, A., Reinares, M.,
Goikolea, J. M., & Scott, J. (2005). Stabilizing the stabilizer: Group
psychoeducation enhances the stability of serum lithium levels. Bipolar
Disorders, 7(Suppl. 5), 32--36. Colom, F., Vieta, E., Sánchez-Moreno,
J., PalominoOtiniano, R., Reinares, M., Goikolea, J. M., ...
Martínez-Arán, A. (2009). Group psychoeducation for stabilised bipolar
disorders: 5-year outcome of a randomised clinical trial. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 194(3), 260--265. Coryell, W., Endicott, J.,
Maser, J. D., Keller, M. B., Leon, A. C., & Akiskal, H. S. (1995).
Long-term stability of polarity distinctions in the affective disorders.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 385--390. Coryell, W., Solomon, D.,
Turvey, C., Keller, M., Leon, A. C., Endicott, J., ... Mueller, T.
(2003). The long-term course of rapid-cycling bipolar disorder. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 60, 914--920. Cousins, D. A., Butts, K., & Young,
A. H. (2009). The role of dopamine in bipolar disorder. Bipolar
Disorders, 11(8), 787--806. Craddock, N., & Sklar, P. (2013). Genetics
of bipolar disorder. Lancet, 381(9878), 1654--1662. Cross Disorder Group
of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. (2013). Identification of risk
loci with shared effects on five major psychiatric disorders: A
genome-wide analysis. Lancet, 381(9875), 1371--1379. Cuellar, A.,
Johnson, S. L., & Winters, R. (2005). Distinctions between bipolar and
unipolar depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 307--339.
Daruy-Filho, L., Brietzke, E., Lafer, B., & GrassiOliveira, R. (2011).
Childhood maltreatment and clinical outcomes of bipolar disorder. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 124(6), 427--434. doi: 10.1111/
j.1600-0447.2011.01756.x Deckersbach, T., Peters, A., Sylvia, L.,
Urdahl, A., Magalhães, P.V.S., Otto, M. W., ... Nierenberg, A. (2014).
Do comorbid anxiety disorders moderate the effects of psychotherapy for
bipolar disorder? Results from STEP-BD. American Journal of Psychiatry,
171(2), 178--186. Delbello, M. P., Hanseman, D., Adler, C. M., Fleck, D.
E., & Strakowski, S. M. (2007). Twelve-month

352

Bipolar Disorder

outcome of adolescents with bipolar disorder following
first-hospitalization for a manic or mixed episode. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 164(4), 582--590. Delbello, M. P., & Kowatch, R. (2006).
Pharmacological interventions for bipolar youth: Developmental
considerations. Development and Psychopathology, 18(4), 1231--1246.
Delbello, M. P., Kowatch, R. A., Adler, C. M., Stanford, K. E., Welge,
J. A., Barzman, D. H., ... Strakowski, S. M. (2006). A double-blind
randomized pilot study comparing quetiapine and divalproex for
adolescent mania. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 45(3), 305--313. Delbello, M. P., Schwiers, M. L.,
Rosenberg, H. L., & Strakowski, S. M. (2002). A double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled study of quetiapine as adjunctive
treatment for adolescent mania. Journal of the American Academy of Child
& Adolescent Psychiatry, 41, 1216--1223. Depue, R. A., Collins, P. F., &
Luciana, M. (1996). A model of neurobiology--environment interaction in
developmental psychopathology. In M. F. Lenzenweger & J. J. Haugaard
(Eds.), Frontiers of developmental psychopathology (pp. 44--77). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press. Depue, R. A., Kleinman, R. M., Davis,
P., Hutchinson, M., & Krauss, S. P. (1985). The behavioral high-risk
paradigm and bipolar affective disorder: VII. Serum free cortisol in
nonpatient cyclothymic subjects selected by the General Behavior
Inventory. American Journal of Psychiatry, 142, 175--181. Dienes, K. A.,
Hammen, C., Henry, R. M., Cohen, A. N., & Daley, S. E. (2006). The
stress sensitization hypothesis: Understanding the course of bipolar
disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 95(1--3), 43--49. Ebert, D.,
Feistel, H., Barocks, A., Kaschka, W. P., & Pirner, A. (1994). SPECT
assessment of cerebral dopamine D2 receptor blockade in depression
before and after sleep deprivation. Biological Psychiatry, 35, 880--885.
Eckblad, M., & Chapman, L. J. (1986). Development and validation of a
scale for hypomanic personality. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95,
214--222. Ehlers, C. L., Frank, E., & Kupfer, D. J. (1988). Social
zeitgebers and biological rhythms: A unified approach to understanding
the etiology of depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45,
948--952. Ehlers, C. L., Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., & Monk, T. H. (1993).
Biological rhythms and depression: The role of zeitgebers and
zeitstorers. Depression, 1, 285--293.

Eich, E., Macaulay, D., & Lam, R. W. (1997). Mania, depression, and mood
dependent memory. Cognition and Emotion, 11, 607--618. Ellicott, A.,
Hammen, C., Gitlin, M., Brown, G., & Jamison, K. (1990). Life events and
the course of bipolar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147,
1194--1198. Fagiolini, A., Kupfer, D. J., Masalehdan, A., Scott, J. A.,
Houck, P. R., & Frank, E. (2005). Functional impairment in the remission
phase of bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 7, 281--285. Fawcett, J.,
Golden, B., & Rosenfeld, N. (2000). New hope for people with bipolar
disorder. Roseville, CA: Prima Health. Fears, S. C., Service, S. K.,
Kremeyer, B., Araya, C., Araya, X., Bejarano, J., ... Bearden, C. E.
(2014). Multisystem component phenotypes of bipolar disorder for genetic
investigations of extended pedigrees. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(4), 375--387.
First, M. B. (2010). DSM-5 proposals for mood disorders: A cost-benefit
analysis. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 24(1), 1--9. First, M. B.,
Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., &, Spitzer, R. L. (2016). Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders--Clinician Version (SCID-5-CV).
New York, NY: Biometrics Research Department, New York State Psychiatric
Institute. Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician's
guide to interpersonal and social rhythm therapy. New York, NY: Guilford
Press. Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Thase, M. E., Mallinger, A. G., Swartz,
H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., ... Monk, T. (2005). Two-year outcomes for
interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in individuals with bipolar I
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(9), 996--1004. Frazier, J.
A., Biederman, J., Tohen, M., Feldman, P. D., Jacobs, T. G., Toma, V.,
... Nowlin, Z. M. (2001). A prospective open-label treatment trial of
olanzapine monotherapy in children and adolescents with bipolar
disorder. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 11,
239--250. Fristad, M. A., & MacPherson, H. A. (2014). Evidencebased
psychosocial treatments for child and adolescent bipolar spectrum
disorders. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychology, 43(3), 339--355.
doi: 10.1080/15374416.2013.822309 Fristad, M. A., Verducci, J. S.,
Walters, K., & Young, M. E. (2009). Impact of multifamily
psychoeducational psychotherapy in treating children aged 8 to 12 years
with mood disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(9), 1013--1021.

References Fulford, D., Johnson, S. L., Llabre, M. M., & Carver, C. S.
(2012). Pushing and coasting in dynamic goal pursuit: Coasting is
attenuated in bipolar disorder. Psychological Sciences, 21(7),
1021--1027. Garrett, A. S., Miklowitz, D. J., Howe, M. E., Singh, M. K.,
Acquaye, T. K., Hawkey, C. G., ... Chang, K. D. (2015). Changes in brain
activation following psychotherapy for youth with mood dysregulation at
familial risk for bipolar disorder. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology
& Biological Psychiatry, 56, 215--220. Geddes, J. R., Calabrese, J. R.,
& Goodwin, G. M. (2009). Lamotrigine for treatment of bipolar
depression: Independent meta-analysis and meta-regression of individual
patient data from five randomised trials. British Journal of Psychiatry,
194(1), 4--9. Geddes, J. R., & Miklowitz, D. J. (2013). Treatment of
bipolar disorder. Lancet, 381(9878), 1672--1682. Geller, B., Zimerman,
B., Williams, M., DelBello, M. P., Bolhofner, K., Craney, J. L., ...
Nickelsburg, M. J. (2002). DSM-IV mania symptoms in a prepubertal and
early adolescent bipolar disorder phenotype compared to attention
deficit hyperactive and normal controls. Journal of Child and Adolescent
Psychopharmacology, 12, 11--25. Geoffroy, P. A., Scott, J., Boudebesse,
C., Lajnef, M., Henry, C., Leboyer, M., ... Etain, B. (2015). Sleep in
patients with remitted bipolar disorders: A meta-analysis of actigraphy
studies. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 131(2), 89--99. doi: 10.1111/
acps.12367 Gershon, A., Johnson, S. L., & Miller, I. (2013). Chronic
stressors and trauma: Prospective influences on the course of bipolar
disorder. Psychological Medicine, 43(12), 2583--2592. doi: 10.1017/
S0033291713000147 Gershon, A., Thompson, W. K., Eidelman, P.,
McGlinchey, E. L., Kaplan, K. A., & Harvey, A. G. (2012). Restless
pillow, ruffled mind: Sleep and affect coupling in interepisode bipolar
disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121(4), 863--873. doi:
10.1037/a0028233 Ghaemi, S. N., Lenox, M. S., & Baldessarini, R. J.
(2001). Effectiveness and safety of long-term antidepressant treatment
in bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 565--569.
Gilman, S. E., Ni, M. Y., Dunn, E. C., Breslau, J., McLaughlin, K. A.,
Smoller, J. W., & Perlis, R. H. (2015). Contributions of the social
environment to first-onset and recurrent mania. Molecular Psychiatry,
20(3), 329--336.

353

Gitlin, M. J., Mintz, J., Sokolski, K., Hammen, C., & Altshuler, L. L.
(2011). Subsyndromal depressive symptoms after symptomatic recovery from
mania are associated with delayed functional recovery. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 72(5), 692--697. Goes, F. S., Hamshere, M. L.,
Seifuddin, F., Pirooznia, M., Belmonte-Mahon, P., Breuer, R., ...
Potash, J. B. (2012, October). Genome-wide association of
mood-incongruent psychotic bipolar disorder. Translational Psychiatry,
2. Goldberg, J. F. (2004). The changing landscape of psychopharmacology.
In S. L. Johnson & R. L. Leahy (Eds.), Psychological treatment of
bipolar disorder (pp. 109--138). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Goldstein, T. R., Fersch-Podrat, R. K., Rivera, M., Axelson, D. A.,
Merranko, J., Yu, H., ... Birmaher, B. (2014). Dialectical behavior
therapy (DBT) for adolescents with bipolar disorder: Results from a
pilot randomized trial. Journal of Child and Adolescent
Psychopharmacology. Advance online publication. doi:
10.1089/cap.2013.0145 Goldstein, T. R., Ha, W., Axelson, D. A.,
Goldstein, B. I., Liao, F., Gill, M. K., ... Birmaher, B. (2012).
Predictors of prospectively examined suicide attempts among youth with
bipolar disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69(11), 1113--1122.
Gonzalez, R., Tamming, C. A., Tohen, M., & Suppes, T. (2014). The
relationship between affective state and the rhythmicity of activity in
bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 75(4), e317--322.
Gonzalez-Pinto, A., Tohen, M., Lalaguna, B., Pérez-Heredia, J. L.,
Fernandez-Corres, B., Gutierrez, M., ... Micó, J. A. (2002). Treatment
of bipolar I rapid cycling patients during dysphoric mania with
olanzapine. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 22, 450--454.
Goodwin, F. K., Fireman, B., Simon, G. E., Hunkeler, E. M., Lee, J., &
Revicki, D. (2003). Suicide risk in bipolar disorder during treatment
with lithium and divalproex. JAMA, 290, 1467--1473. Goodwin, G. M.,
Bowden, C. L., Calabrese, J. R., Grunze, H., Kasper, S., White, R., ...
Leadbetter, R. (2004). A pooled analysis of 2 placebo-controlled
18-month trials of lamotrigine and lithium maintenance in bipolar I
disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 432--441. Goodwin, G. M.,
& Consensus Group of the British Association for Psychopharmacology.
(2009). Evidence-based guidelines for treating bipolar disorder: Revised
second edition---recommendations from

354

Bipolar Disorder

the British Association for Psychopharmacology. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 23(4), 346--388. Greenhouse, W. J., Meyer, B., &
Johnson, S. L. (2000). Coping and medication adherence in bipolar
disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 59(3), 237--241. Grof, P.,
Duffy, A., Alda, M., & Hajek, T. (2009). Lithium response across
generations. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 120(5), 378--385. Gujar,
N., McDonald, S. A., Nishida, M., & Walker, M. P. (2011). A role for REM
sleep in recalibrating the sensitivity of the human brain to specific
emotions. Cerebral Cortex, 21(1), 115--123. Gujar, N., Yoo, S. S., Hu,
P., & Walker, M. P. (2010). The unrested resting brain: Sleep
deprivation alters activity within the default-mode network. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(8), 1637--1648. Hammen, C., & Gitlin, M. J.
(1997). Stress reactivity in bipolar patients and its relation to prior
history of the disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 856--857.
Hammen, C., Gitlin, M., & Altshuler, L. (2000). Predictors of work
adjustment in bipolar I patients: A naturalistic longitudinal follow-up.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 220--225. Hanson, J.
L., Adluru, N., Chung, M. K., Alexander, A. L., Davidson, R. J., &
Pollak, S. D. (2013). Early neglect is associated with alterations in
white matter integrity and cognitive functioning. Child Development,
84(5), 1566--1578. Harris, E. C., & Barraclough, B. (1997). Suicide as
an outcome for mental disorders: A meta-analysis. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 170, 205--208. Harvey, A. G., Schmidt, D. A., Scarna, A.,
Semler, C. N., & Goodwin, G. M. (2005). Sleep-related functioning in
euthymic patients with bipolar disorder, patients with insomnia, and
subjects without sleep problems. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162,
50--57. Hashimoto, K., Sawa, A., & Iyo, M. (2007). Increased levels of
glutamate in brains from patients with mood disorders. Biological
Psychiatry, 62(11), 1310--1316. Heerlein, A., Richter, P., Gonzalez, M.,
& Santander, J. (1998). Personality patterns and outcome in depressive
and bipolar disorders. Psychopathology, 31, 15--22. Hestenes, D. (1992).
A neural network theory of manic-depressive illness. In D. S. Levine &
S. J. Leven (Eds.), Motivation, emotion, and goal direction in neural
networks (pp. 209--257). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Hillegers, M. H., Burger, H., Wals, M., Reichart, C. G., Verhulst, F.
C., Nolen, W. A., & Ormel, J. (2004). Impact of stressful life events,
familial loading and their interaction on the onset of mood disorders.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 185, 97--101. Hirschfeld, R. M.,
Williams, J. B., Spitzer, R. L., Calabrese, J. R., Flynn, L., Keck, P.
E., Jr., & Zajecka, J. (2000). Development and validation of a screening
instrument for bipolar spectrum disorder: The Mood Disorder
Questionnaire. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1873--1875.
Hlastala, S. A., Frank, E., Kowalski, J., Sherrill, J. T., Tu, X. M.,
Anderson, B., & Kupfer, D. J. (2000). Stressful life events, bipolar
disorder, and the "kindling model." Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109,
777--786. Hosang, G. M., Uher, R., Maughan, B., McGuffin, P., & Farmer,
A. E. (2012). The role of loss and danger events in symptom exacerbation
in bipolar disorder. Journal of Psychiatry Research, 46(12), 1584--1589.
Inder, M. L., Crowe, M. T., Luty, S. E., Carter, J. D., Moor, S.,
Frampton, C. M., & Joyce, P. R. (2015). Randomized, controlled trial of
Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy for young people with bipolar
disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 17(2), 128--138. Jamison, K. R. (1993).
Touched with fire: Manicdepressive illness and the artistic temperament.
New York, NY: Maxwell Macmillan International. Jamison, K. R. (1995). An
unquiet mind. New York, NY: Knopf. Jamison, K. R. (2000). Suicide and
bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61(Suppl. 9), 47--56.
Jamison, K. R. (2005). Exuberance: The passion for life. New York, NY:
Vintage. Jamison, K. R., & Baldessarini, R. J. (1999). Effects of
medical interventions on suicidal behavior. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 60(Suppl. 2), 4--6. Jamison, K. R., Gerner, R. H., &
Goodwin, F. K. (1979). Patient and physician attitudes toward lithium:
Relationship to compliance. Archives of General Psychiatry, 36,
866--869. Johnson, R. E., & McFarland, B. H. (1996). Lithium use and
discontinuation in a health maintenance organization. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 153, 993--1000. Johnson, S. L. (2005a). Life events in
bipolar disorder: Towards more specific models. Clinical Psychology
Review, 25(8), 1008--1027. Johnson, S. L. (2005b). Mania and
dysregulation in goal pursuit. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 241--262.

References Johnson, S. L., Cuellar, A., Ruggero, C., Perlman, C.,
Goodnick, P., White, R., & Miller, I. (2008). Life events as predictors
of mania and depression in bipolar I disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 117, 268--277. Johnson, S. L., Edge, M. D., Holmes, M. K., &
Carver, C. S. (2012). The behavioral activation system and mania. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 143--167. Johnson, S. L., Eisner, L.,
& Carver, C. S. (2009). Elevated expectancies among persons diagnosed
with bipolar disorders. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 48,
217--222. Johnson, S. L., & Fingerhut, R. (2004). Negative cognitions
predict the course of bipolar depression, not mania. Journal of
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 18, 149--162. Johnson, S. L., Fulford, D., &
Carver, C. S. (2012). The double-edged sword of goal engagement:
Consequences of goal pursuit in bipolar disorder. Clinical Psychology
and Psychotherapy, 19(4), 352--362. Johnson, S. L., Meyer, B., Winett,
C., & Small, J. (2000). Social support and self-esteem predict changes
in bipolar depression but not mania. Journal of Affective Disorders, 58,
79--86. Johnson, S. L., Murray, G., Fredrickson, B., Youngstrom, E. A.,
Hinshaw, S., Bass, J. M., ... Salloum, I. (2012). Creativity and bipolar
disorder: Touched by fire or burning with questions? Clinical Psychology
Review, 32(1), 1--12. Johnson, S. L., Murray, G., Hou, S., Staudenmaier,
P. J., Freeman, M. A., Michalak, E. E., & CREST-BD. (2015). Creativity
is linked to ambition across the bipolar spectrum. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 178, 160--164. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.02.021 Johnson, S. L.,
Sandrow, D., Meyer, B., Winters, R., Miller, I., Solomon, D., & Keitner,
G. (2000). Increases in manic symptoms following life events involving
goal attainment. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 721--727. Johnson,
S. L., Winett, C. A., Meyer, B., Greenhouse, W. J., & Miller, I. (1999).
Social support and the course of bipolar disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 108, 558--566. Jones, S. H., Hare, D. J., & Evershed, K.
(2005). Actigraphic assessment of circadian activity and sleep patterns
in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 7, 176--186.

355

Jones, S. H., Tai, S., Evershed, K., Knowles, R., & Bentall, R. (2006).
Early detection of bipolar disorder: A pilot familial high-risk study of
parents with bipolar disorder and their adolescent children. Bipolar
Disorders, 8, 362--372. Judd, L. L., Akiskal, H. S., Schettler, P. J.,
Endicott, J., Maser, J., Solomon, D. A., ... Keller, M. B. (2002). The
long-term natural history of the weekly symptomatic status of bipolar I
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 530--537. Karg, K.,
Burmeister, M., Shedden, K., & Sen, S. (2011). The serotonin transporter
promoter variant (5-HTTLPR), stress, and depression meta-analysis
revisited: Evidence of genetic moderation. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 5, 444--454. Kaufman, J., Birmaher, B., Brent, D., Rao, U.,
Flynn, C., Moreci, P., ... Ryan, N. (1997). Schedule for affective
disorders and schizophrenia for school-age children-present and lifetime
version (K-SADS-PL): Initial reliability and validity data. Journal of
the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 980--988.
Keck, P. E., Jr., McElroy, S. L., Richtand, N., & Tohen, M. (2002). What
makes a drug a primary mood stabilizer? Molecular Psychiatry, 7(Suppl.
1), S8--S14. Keck, P. E., Jr., McElroy, S. L., Strakowski, S. M.,
Bourne, M. L., & West, S. A. (1997). Compliance with maintenance
treatment in bipolar disorder. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 33, 87--91.
Keener, M. T., & Phillips, M. L. (2007). Neuroimaging in bipolar
disorder: A critical review of current findings. Current Psychiatry
Reports, 9(6), 512--520. Keller, M. B., Lavori, P. W., Friedman, B.,
Nielsen, E., Endicott, J., McDonald-Scott, P., & Andreasen, N. C.
(1987). The Longitudinal Interval Follow-up Evaluation: A comprehensive
method for assessing outcome in prospective longitudinal studies.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 540--548. Keller, M. B., Lavori, P.
W., McDonald-Scott, P., Scheftner, W. A., Andreasen, N. C., Shapiro, R.
W., & Croughan, J. (1981). Reliability of lifetime diagnoses and
symptoms in patients with current psychiatric disorder. Journal of
Psychiatry Research, 16, 229--240. Kendler, K. S., Kuhn, J. W., Vittum,
J., Prescott, C. A., & Riley, B. (2005). The interaction of stressful
life events and a serotonin transporter polymorphism in the prediction
of episodes of major depression: A replication. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62(5), 529--535.

356

Bipolar Disorder

Kessing, L. V., Hansen, H. V., Christensen, E. M., Dam, H., Gluud, C.,
Wetterslev, J., & The Early Intervention Affective Disorders (EIA) Trial
Group. (2014). Do young adults with bipolar disorder benefit from early
intervention? Journal of Affective Disorders, 152--154, 403--408. doi:
10.1016/j.jad.2013.10.001 Kessler, R. C., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J.,
Guyer, M. H., Hirschfeld, R. M., Merikangas, K. R., & Stang, P. E.
(2006). Validity of the assessment of bipolar spectrum disorders in the
WHO CIDI 3.0. Journal of Affective Disorders, 96(3), 259--269. Kessler,
R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., & Walters, E. E. (2005).
Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders
in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62, 593--602. Kieseppa, T., Partonen, T., Haukka, J.,
Kaprio, J., & Lonnquist, J. (2004). High concordance of bipolar I
disorder in a nationwide sample of twins. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 161, 1814--1821. Kim, E. Y., & Miklowitz, D. J. (2002).
Childhood mania, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and conduct
disorder: A critical review of diagnostic dilemmas. Bipolar Disorders,
4, 215--225. Kim, E. Y., & Miklowitz, D. J. (2004). Expressed emotion as
a predictor of outcome among bipolar patients undergoing family therapy.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 82, 343--352. Kim, E. Y., Miklowitz, D.
J., Biuckians, A., & Mullen, K. (2007). Life stress and the course of
early-onset bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 99(1),
37--44. Kim, Y. K., Myint, A. M., Lee, B. H., Han, C. S., Lee, S. W.,
Leonard, B. E., & Steinbusch, H. W. (2004). T-helper types 1, 2, and 3
cytokine interactions in symptomatic manic patients. Psychiatry
Research, 129(3), 267--272. Klein, D. N., & Depue, R. A. (1984).
Continued impairment in persons at risk for bipolar disorder: Results of
a 19-month follow-up. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 93, 345--347.
Knowles, R., Tai, S., Christensen, I., & Bentall, R. (2005). Coping with
depression and vulnerability to mania: A factor analytic study of the
Nolen-Hoeksema (1991) Response Styles Questionnaire. British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 44, 99--112. Kochman, F. J., Hantouche, E. G.,
Ferrari, P., Lancrenon, S., Bayart, D., & Akiskal, H. S. (2005).
Cyclothymic temperament as a prospective predictor

of bipolarity and suicidality in children and adolescents with major
depressive disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 85(1--2), 181--189.
Kowatch, R. A., Fristad, M., Birmaher, B., Wagner, K. D., Findling, R.
L., Hellander, M., & Child Psychiatric Workgroup on Bipolar Disorder.
(2005). Treatment guidelines for children and adolescents with bipolar
disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 44(3), 213--235. Kowatch, R. A., Suppes, T., Carmody, T. J.,
Bucci, J. P., Hume, J. H., Kromelis, M., ... Rush, A. J. (2000). Effect
size of lithium, divalproex sodium, and carbamazepine in children and
adolescents with bipolar disorder. Journal of the American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 713--720. Kowatch, R. A., Youngstrom,
E. A., Danielyan, A., & Findling, R. L. (2005). Review and meta-analysis
of the phenomenology and clinical characteristics of mania in children
and adolescents. Bipolar Disorders, 7(6), 483--496. Kruger, S.,
Seminowicz, S., Goldapple, K., Kennedy, S. H., & Mayberg, H. S. (2003).
State and trait influences on mood regulation in bipolar disorder: Blood
flow differences with an acute mood challenge. Biological Psychiatry,
54, 1274--1283. Kwapil, T. R., Miller, M. B., Zinser, M. C., Chapman, L.
J., Chapman, J., & Eckblad, M. (2000). A longitudinal study of high
scorers on the hypomanic personality scale. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 109, 222--226. Lam, D. H., Burbeck, R., Wright, K., &
Pilling, S. (2009). Psychological therapies in bipolar disorder: The
effect of illness history on relapse prevention--- a systematic review.
Bipolar Disorders, 11(5), 474--482. Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E.
R., Wright, K., & Sham, P. (2005). Relapse prevention in patients with
bipolar disorder: Cognitive therapy outcome after 2 years. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 324--329. Lam, D. H., Watkins, E. R.,
Hayward, P., Bright, J., Wright, K., Kerr, N., ... Sham, P. (2003). A
randomized controlled study of cognitive therapy of relapse prevention
for bipolar affective disorder: Outcome of the first year. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 60, 145--152. Lan, W. H., Bai, Y. M., Hsu, J. W.,
Huang, K. L., Su, T. P., Li, C. T., ... Chen, M. H. (2015). Comorbidity
of ADHD and suicide attempts among adolescents and young adults with
bipolar disorder: A nationwide

References longitudinal study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 176,
171--175. Lapalme, M., Hodgins, S., & LaRoche, C. (1997). Children of
parents with bipolar disorder: A metaanalysis of risk for mental
disorders. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 42, 623--631. Leibenluft, E.,
Albert, P. S., Rosenthal, N. E., & Wehr, T. A. (1996). Relationship
between sleep and mood in patients with rapid-cycling bipolar disorder.
Psychiatry Research, 63, 161--168. Lembke, A., & Ketter, T. (2002).
Impaired recognition of facial emotion in mania. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 159, 302--304. Leverich, G. S., & Post, R. M. (1998). Life
charting of affective disorders. CNS Spectrums, 3, 21--37. Levinson, D.
F. (2006). The genetics of depression: A review. Biological Psychiatry,
60, 84--92. Loebel, A., Cucchiaro, J., Silva, R., Kroger, H., Hsu, J.,
Sarma, K., & Sachs, G. (2014). Lurasidone monotherapy in the treatment
of bipolar I depression: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171(2), 160--168. Lozano, B. L.,
& Johnson, S. L. (2001). Can personality traits predict increases in
manic and depressive symptoms? Journal of Affective Disorders, 63,
103--111. Malhi, G. S., Adams, D., & Berk, M. (2009). Medicating mood
with maintenance in mind: Bipolar depression pharmacotherapy. Bipolar
Disorders, 11(Suppl. 2), 55--76. Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E.,
Anderson, B. P., Hlastala, S. A., Luther, J. F., Sherrill, J. T., ...
Kupfer, D. J. (2000). Social rhythm disruption and stressful life events
in the onset of bipolar and unipolar episodes. Psychological Medicine,
30, 1005--1016. Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B., Sherrill,
J. T., Siegel, L., Patterson, D., ... Kupfer, D. J. (1998). Stressful
life events and social rhythm disruption in the onset of manic and
depressive bipolar episodes: A preliminary investigation. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 55, 702--707. Manji, H. (2009). The role of synaptic
and cellular plasticity cascades in the pathophysiology and treatment of
mood and psychotic disorders. Bipolar Disorders, 11(Suppl. 1), 2--3.
Marangell, L. B., Bauer, M., Dennehy, E. B., Wisniewski, S. R., Allen,
M., Miklowitz, D. J., ... Thase, M. E. (2006). Prospective predictors of
suicide and suicide attempts in 2000 patients with bipolar disorders
followed for 2 years. Bipolar Disorders, 8(5, Pt. 2), 566--575.

357

Marlatt, G. A. (1985). Relapse prevention. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Masi, G., Perugi, G., Toni, C., Millepiedi, S., Mucci, M., Bertini, N.,
& Akiskal, H. S. (2004). Obsessivecompulsive bipolar comorbidity: Focus
on children and adolescents. Journal of Affective Disorders, 78,
175--183. McGuffin, P., Rijsdijk, F., Andrew, M., Sham, P., Katz, R., &
Cardno, A. (2003). The heritability of bipolar affective disorder and
the genetic relationship to unipolar depression. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 60, 497--502. McKenna, B. S., Drummond, S. P., & Eyler, L.
T. (2014). Associations between circadian activity rhythms and
functional brain abnormalities among euthymic bipolar patients: A
preliminary study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 164, 101--106.
Merikangas, K. R., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J., Greenberg, P. E.,
Hirschfeld, R.M.A., Petukhova, M., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). Lifetime and
12-month prevalence of bipolar spectrum disorder in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(5),
543--552. Merikangas, K. R., Cui, L., Kattan, G., Carlson, G. A.,
Youngstrom, E. A., & Angst, J. (2012). Mania with and without depression
in a community sample of US adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry,
69(9), 943--951. Merikangas, K. R., Jin, R., He, J. P., Kessler, R. C.,
Lee, S., Sampson, N. A., ... Zarkov, Z. (2011). Prevalence and
correlates of bipolar spectrum disorder in the World Mental Health
Survey Initiative. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(3), 241--251.
Meyer, B., Johnson, S. L., & Carver, C. S. (1999). Exploring behavioral
activation and inhibition sensitivities among college students at-risk
for bipolar-spectrum symptomatology. Journal of Psychopathology and
Behavioral Assessment, 21, 275--292. Meyer, B., Johnson, S. L., &
Winters, R. (2001). Responsiveness to threat and incentive in bipolar
disorder: Relations of the BIS/BAS scales with symptoms. Journal of
Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 23, 133--143. Meyer, T. D., &
Hautzinger, M. (2012). Cognitive behaviour therapy and supportive
therapy for bipolar disorders: Relapse rates for treatment period and
2-year follow-up. Psychological Medicine, 42(7), 1429--1439.

358

Bipolar Disorder

Michalak, E. E., Jones, S., Lobban, F., Algorta, G. P., Barnes, S. J.,
Berk, L., ... CREST-BD. (2016). Harnessing the potential of
community-based participatory research approaches in bipolar disorder.
International Journal of Bipolar Disorders, 4(1), 4. Miklowitz, D. J.
(2008). Bipolar disorder: A family-focused treatment approach (2nd ed.).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Miklowitz, D. J., Axelson, D. A.,
Birmaher, B., George, E. L., Taylor, D. O., Schneck, C. D., ... Brent,
D. A. (2008). Family-focused treatment for adolescents with bipolar
disorder: Results of a 2-year randomized trial. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 65(9), 1053--1061. Miklowitz, D. J., Axelson, D. A., George,
E. L., Taylor, D. O., Schneck, C. D., Sullivan, A. E., ... Birmaher, B.
(2009). Expressed emotion moderates the effects of family-focused
treatment for bipolar adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 48, 643--651. Miklowitz, D. J.,
Biuckians, A., & Richards, J. A. (2006). Early-onset bipolar disorder: A
family treatment perspective. Development and Psychopathology, 18(4),
1247--1265. Miklowitz, D. J., & Cicchetti, D. (2006). Toward a lifespan
developmental psychopathology perspective on bipolar disorder.
Development and Psychopathology, 18(4), 935--938. Miklowitz, D. J.,
George, E. L., Richards, J. A., Simoneau, T. L., & Suddath, R. L.
(2003). A randomized study of family-focused psychoeducation and
pharmacotherapy in the outpatient management of bipolar disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 904--912. Miklowitz, D. J. & Gitlin,
M. J. (2015). Clinician's guide to bipolar disorder: Integrating
psychopharmacology with psychotherapy. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Miklowitz, D. J., & Goldstein, M. J. (1990). Behavioral family treatment
for patients with bipolar affective disorder. Behavior Modification, 14,
457--489. Miklowitz, D. J., & Goldstein, M. J. (1997). Bipolar disorder:
A family-focused treatment approach. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. J., Nuechterlein, K. H., Snyder, K. S.,
& Mintz, J. (1988). Family factors and the course of bipolar affective
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45, 225--231. Miklowitz, D.
J., & Johnson, S. L. (2006). The psychopathology and treatment of
bipolar disorder. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2, 199--235.

Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E., ReillyHarrington, N. A.,
Kogan, J. N., Sachs, G. S., ... Wisniewski, S. R. (2007). Intensive
psychosocial intervention enhances functioning in patients with bipolar
depression: Results from a 9-month randomized controlled trial. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 164(9), 1--8. Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W.,
Frank, E., ReillyHarrington, N. A., Wisniewski, S. R., Kogan, J. N., ...
Sachs, G. S. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for bipolar depression: A
1-year randomized trial from the Systematic Treatment Enhancement
Program. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 419--427. Miklowitz, D. J.,
Schneck, C. D., George, E. L., Taylor, D. O., Sugar, C. A., Birmaher,
B., ... Axelson, D. A. (2014). Pharmacotherapy and family-focused
treatment for adolescents with bipolar I and II disorders: A 2-year
randomized trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171(6), 658--667.
Miklowitz, D. J., Schneck, C. D., Singh, M. K., Taylor, D. O., George,
E. L., Cosgrove, V. E., ... Chang, K. D. (2013). Early intervention for
symptomatic youth at risk for bipolar disorder: A randomized trial of
family-focused therapy. Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry, 52(2), 121--131. Miller, A. H., Maletic, V., &
Raison, C. L. (2009). Inflammation and its discontents: The role of
cytokines in the pathophysiology of major depression. Biological
Psychiatry, 65, 732--741. Mitchell, P. B., Slade, T., & Andrews, G.
(2004). Twelve-month prevalence and disability of DSM-IV bipolar
disorder in an Australian general population survey. Psychological
Medicine, 34(5), 777--785. Modabbernia, A., Taslimi, S., Brietzke, E., &
Ashrafi, M. (2013). Cytokine alterations in bipolar disorder: A
meta-analysis of 30 studies. Biological Psychiatry, 74(1), 15--25. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.01.007 Murphy, F. C., Sahakian, B. J.,
Rubinsztein, J. S., Michael, A., Rogers, R. D., Robbins, T. W., &
Paykel, E. S. (1999). Emotional bias and inhibitory control processes in
mania and depression. Psychological Medicine, 29, 1307--1321. Murray,
G., & Harvey, A. (2010). Circadian rhythms and sleep in bipolar
disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 12, 459--472. Naranjo, C. A., Tremblay, L.
K., & Busto, U. E. (2001). The role of the brain reward system in
depression. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological
Psychiatry, 25, 781--823.

References Newcomer, J. W. (2007). Metabolic considerations in the use
of antipsychotic medications: A review of recent evidence. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 68(Suppl. 1), 20--27. Nierenberg, A. A., Ostacher,
M. J., Calabrese, J. R., Ketter, T. A., Marangell, L. B., Miklowitz, D.
J., ... Sachs, G. S. (2006). Treatment-resistant bipolar depression: A
STEP-BD equipoise randomized effectiveness trial of antidepressant
augmentation with lamotrigine, inositol, or risperidone. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 163(2), 210--216. Nusslock, R., Abramson, L. Y.,
Harmon-Jones, E., Alloy, L. B., & Hogan, M. E. (2007). A goal-striving
life event and the onset of hypomanic and depressive episodes and
symptoms: Perspective from the behavioral approach system (BAS)
dysregulation theory. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116(1), 105--115.
Nusslock, R., Harmon-Jones, E., Alloy, L. B., Urosevic, S., Goldstein,
K. E., & Abramson, L. Y. (2012). Elevated left-frontal cortical
prospectively predicts conversion to bipolar I disorder. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 121(3), 592--601. Ochsner, K. N., & Gross, J. J.
(2005). The cognitive control of emotion. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
9, 242--249. Olsavsky, A. K., Brotman, M. A., Rutenberg, J. G., Muhrer,
E. J., Deveney, C. M., Fromm, S. J., ... Leibenluft, E. (2012). Amygdala
hyperactivation during face emotion processing in unaffected youth at
risk for bipolar disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry, 51(3), 294--303. Otto, M. W., Simon, N. M.,
Wisniewski, S. R., Miklowitz, D. J., Kogan, J., Reilly-Harrington, N.
A., ... Pollack, M. H. (2006). Prospective 12-month course of bipolar
disorder in outpatients with and without comorbid anxiety disorders.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 20--25. Pardoen, D., Bauewens, F.,
Dramaix, M., Tracy, A., Genevrois, C., Staner, L., & Mendlewicz, J.
(1996). Life events and primary affective disorders: A oneyear
prospective study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 160--166. Parikh,
S. V., Zaretsky, A., Beaulieu, S., Yatham, L. N., Young, L. T.,
Patelis-Siotis, I., ... Streiner, D. L. (2012). A randomized controlled
trial of psychoeducation or cognitive-behavioral therapy in bipolar
disorder: A Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 73(6), 803--810.

359

Perlis, R. H., Miyahara, S., Marangell, L. B., Wisniewski, S. R.,
Ostacher, M., Delbello, M. P., ... STEP-BD Investigators. (2004).
Long-term implications of early onset in bipolar disorder: Data from the
first 1000 participants in the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program
for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD). Biological Psychiatry, 55, 875--881.
Perris, H. (1984). Life events and depression: Part 2. Results in
diagnostic subgroups and in relation to the recurrence of depression.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 7, 25--36. Perry, A., Tarrier, N.,
Morriss, R., McCarthy, E., & Limb, K. (1999). Randomised controlled
trial of efficacy of teaching patients with bipolar disorder to identify
early symptoms of relapse and obtain treatment. British Medical Journal,
16, 149--153. Phillips, M. L., Drevets, W. C., Rauch, S. L., & Lane, R.
(2003). Neurobiology of emotion perception II: Implications for major
psychiatric disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 54, 515--528. Phillips, M.
L., & Swartz, H. A. (2014). A critical appraisal of neuroimaging studies
of bipolar disorder: Toward a new conceptualization of underlying neural
circuitry and a road map for future research. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 171(8), 829--843. Post, R. M., & Weiss, S.R.B. (1998).
Sensitization and kindling phenomena in mood, anxiety, and
obsessivecompulsive disorders: The role of serotonergic mechanisms in
illness progression. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 193--206. Prien, R. F.,
& Potter, W. Z. (1990). NIMH Workshop report on treatment of bipolar
disorder. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 26, 409--427. Rea, M. M.,
Tompson, M., Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. J., Hwang, S., & Mintz, J.
(2003). Family focused treatment vs. individual treatment for bipolar
disorder: Results of a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 71, 482--492. Regeer, E. J., ten Have, M.,
Rosso, M. L., Hakkaart-van Roijen, L., Vollebergh, W., & Nolen, W. A.
(2004). Prevalence of bipolar disorder in the general population: A
reappraisal study of the Netherlands Mental Health Survey and Incidence
Study. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 110, 374--382. Regier, D. A.,
Narrow, W. E., Clarke, D. E., Kraemer, H. C., Kuramoto, J., Kuhl, E. A.,
& Kupfer, D. J. (2013). DSM-5 field trials in the United States and
Canada: Part II. Test-retest reliability of selected categorical
diagnoses. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170(1), 59--70.

360

Bipolar Disorder

Reichart, C. G., van der Ende, J., Wals, M., Hillegers, M. H., Nolen, W.
A., Ormel, J., & Verhulst, F. C. (2005). The use of the GBI as predictor
of bipolar disorder in a population of adolescent offspring of parents
with a bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 89(1--3),
147--155. Richards, R., Kinney, D. K., Lunde, I., Benet, M., & Merzel,
A. P. (1988). Creativity in manicdepressives, cyclothymes, their normal
relatives, and control subjects. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97,
281--288. Rogers, R., Jackson, R. L., & Cashel, M. (2001). The Schedule
for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia (SADS). In R. Rogers (Ed.),
Handbook of diagnostic and structural interviewing (pp. 84--102). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Ruiter, M., & Johnson, S. L. (2015). Mania
risk and creativity: A multi-method study of the role of motivation.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 170, 52--58. doi:
10.1016/j.jad.2014.08.049 Rush, A. J. (2007). STAR\*D: What have we
learned? American Journal of Psychiatry, 164(2), 201--204. Sachs, G. S.,
Nierenberg, A. A., Calabrese, J. R., Marangell, L. B., Wisniewski, S.
R., Gyulai, L., ... Thase, M. E. (2007). Effectiveness of adjunctive
antidepressant treatment for bipolar depression. New England Journal of
Medicine, 356(17), 1711--1722. Sala, R., Axelson, D. A.,
Castro-Fornieles, J., Goldstein, T. R., Ha, W., Liao, F., ... Birmaher,
B. (2010). Comorbid anxiety in children and adolescents with bipolar
spectrum disorders: Prevalence and clinical correlates. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 71(10), 1344--1350. Salavert, J., Caseras, X.,
Torrubia, R., Furest, S., Arranz, B., Duenas, R., & San, L. (2007). The
functioning of the behavioral activation and inhibition systems in
bipolar I euthymic patients and its influence in subsequent episodes
over an eighteen-month period. Personality and Individual Differences,
42(7), 1323--1331. Salvatore, P., Ghidini, S., Zita, G., De Panfilis,
C., Lambertino, S., Maggini, C., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2008). Circadian
activity rhythm abnormalities in ill and recovered bipolar I disorder
patients. Bipolar Disorders, 10(2), 256--265. Sanacora, G., Zarate, C.
A., Krystal, J., & Manji, H. K. (2008). Targeting the glutamatergic
system to develop novel improved therapeutics for mood disorders. Nature
Reviews and Drug Discovery, 7(5), 426--437.

Sax, K. W., & Strakowski, S. M. (2001). Behavioral sensitization in
humans. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 20, 55--65. Schneck, C. D.,
Miklowitz, D. J., Calabrese, J. R., Allen, M. H., Thomas, M. R.,
Wisniewski, S. R., ... Sachs, G. S. (2004). Phenomenology of rapid
cycling bipolar disorder: Data from the first 500 participants in the
Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 1902--1908. Scott, J., Paykel, E., Morriss,
R., Bentall, R., Kinderman, P., Johnson, T., ... Hayhurst, H. (2006).
Cognitive behaviour therapy for severe and recurrent bipolar disorders:
A randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188,
313--320. Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P.,
Janavs, J., Weiller, E., ... Dunbar, G. C. (1998). The
Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): The
development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric
interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
59(Suppl. 20), 22--33. Shen, G. H., Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., &
Sylvia, L. G. (2008). Social rhythm regularity and the onset of
affective episodes in bipolar spectrum individuals. Bipolar Disorders,
10(4), 520--529. Simeonova, D. I., Chang, K. D., Strong, C., & Ketter,
T. A. (2005). Creativity in familial bipolar disorder. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 39(6), 623--631. Simon, G. E., Ludman, E. J.,
Bauer, M. S., Unutzer, J., & Operskalski, B. (2006). Long-term
effectiveness and cost of a systematic care program for bipolar
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(5), 500--508. Simoneau, T.
L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Saleem, R., & George, E. L.
(1999). Bipolar disorder and family communication: Effects of a
psychoeducational treatment program. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
108, 588--597. Simpson, S. G., McMahon, F. J., McInnis, M. G.,
MacKinnon, D. F., Edwin, D., Folstein, S. E., & DePaulo, J. R. (2002).
Diagnostic reliability of bipolar II disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 59, 746--750. Smoller, J. W., & Finn, C. T. (2003). Family,
twin, and adoption studies of bipolar disorder. American Journal of
Medical Genetics: Part C. Seminars in Medical Genetics, 123(1), 48--58.
Sobcazk, S., Honig, A., Schmitt, J.A.J., & Riedel, W. J. (2003).
Pronounced cognitive deficits following an

References intravenous L-tryptophan challenge in first-degree relatives
of bipolar patients compared to healthy controls.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 711--719. Sobczak, S., Riedel, W. J.,
Booij, L., aan het Rot, M., Deutz, N.E.P., & Honig, A. (2002). Cognition
following acute tryptophan depletion: Difference between first-degree
relatives of bipolar disorder patients and matched healthy control
volunteers. Psychological Medicine, 32, 503--515. Solomon, D. A., Leon,
A. C., Endicott, J., Coryell, W. H., Mueller, T. I., Posternak, M. A., &
Keller, M. B. (2003). Unipolar mania over the course of a 20-year
follow-up study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 2049--2051.
Stockmeier, C. A. (2003). Involvement of serotonin in depression:
Evidence from postmortem and imaging studies of serotonin receptors and
the serotonin transporter. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 37,
357--373. Strakowski, S. M., Adler, C. M., Almeida, J., Altshuler, L.
L., Blumberg, H. P., Chang, K. D., ... Townsend, J. D. (2012). The
functional neuroanatomy of bipolar disorder: A consensus model. Bipolar
Disorders, 14(4), 313--325. Strakowski, S. M., Keck, P. E., Jr.,
McElroy, S. L., West, S. A., Sax, K. W., Hawkins, J. M., ... Bourne, M.
L. (1998). Twelve-month outcome after a first hospitalization for
affective psychosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 49--55.
Strakowski, S. M., Sax, K. W., Setters, M. J., & Keck, P. E.,
Jr. (1996). Enhanced response to repeated d-amphetamine challenge:
Evidence for behavioral sensitization in humans. Biological Psychiatry,
40, 827--880. Strakowski, S. M., Sax, K. W., Setters, M. J., Stanton, S.
P., & Keck, P. E., Jr. (1997). Lack of enhanced behavioral response to
repeated d-amphetamine challenge in first-episode psychosis:
Implications for a sensitization model of psychosis in humans.
Biological Psychiatry, 42, 749--755. Sullivan, P. F., Daly, M. J., &
O'Donovan, M. (2012). Genetic architectures of psychiatric disorders:
The emerging picture and its implications. Nature Reviews Genetics, 13,
537--551. doi: 10.1038/ nrg3240 Suppes, T., Baldessarini, R. J., Faedda,
G. L., Tondo, L., & Tohen, M. (1993, September--October).
Discontinuation of maintenance treatment in bipolar disorder: Risks and
implications. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 1, 131--144.

361

Suppes, T., Leverich, G. S., Keck, P. E., Nolen, W. A., Denicoff, K. D.,
Altshuler, L. L., ... Post, R. M. (2001). The Stanley Foundation Bipolar
Treatment Outcome Network: II. Demographics and illness characteristics
of the first 261 patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 67, 45--59.
Swann, A. C., Lafer, B., Perugi, G., Frye, M. A., Bauer, M., Bahk, W.
M., ... Suppes, T. (2012). Bipolar mixed states: An International
Society for Bipolar Disorders task force report of symptom structure,
course of illness, and diagnosis. American Journal of Psychiatry,
170(1), 31--42. Swartz, H. A., Frank, E., & Cheng, Y. (2012). A
randomized pilot study of psychotherapy and quetiapine for the acute
treatment of bipolar II depression. Bipolar Disorders, 14(2), 211--216.
Taylor, W. D., Steffens, D. C., Payne, M. E., MacFall, J. R., Marchuk,
D. A., Svenson, I. K., & Krishnan, K. R. (2005). Influence of serotonin
transporter promoter region polymorphisms on hippocampal volumes in
late-life depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(5), 537--544.
Thase, M. E., Jindal, R., & Howland, R. H. (2002). Biological aspects of
depression. In C. L. Hammen & I. H. Gotlib (Eds.), Handbook of
depression (pp. 192--218). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Thomas, J., &
Bentall, R. (2002). Hypomanic traits and response styles to depression.
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 41, 309--314. Tohen, M., Greil,
W., Calabrese, J. R., Sachs, G. S., Yatham, L. N., Oerlinghausen, B. M.,
... Bowden, C. L. (2005). Olanzapine versus lithium in the maintenance
treatment of bipolar disorder: A 12-month, randomized, double-blind,
controlled clinical trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162,
1281--1290. Tohen, M., Jacobs, T. G., Grundy, S. L., McElroy, S. L.,
Banov, M. C., Janicak, P. G., ... Breier, A. (2000). Efficacy of
olanzapine in acute bipolar mania: A double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. The Olanzapine HGGW Study Group. Archives of General Psychiatry,
57, 841--849. Tohen, M., Kryzhanovskaya, L., Carlson, G., Delbello, M.
P., Wozniak, J., Kowatch, R., ... Biederman, J. (2005). Olanzapine in
the treatment of acute mania in adolescents with bipolar I disorder: A
3-week randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 30(Suppl. 1), 176. Tohen, M., Vieta, E.,
Calabrese, J., Ketter, T. A., Sachs, G., Bowden, C., ... Breier, A.
(2003). Efficacy of olanzapine and olanzapine-fluoxetine combination

362

Bipolar Disorder

in the treatment of bipolar I depression. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 60, 1079--1088. Tondo, L., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2000).
Reduced suicide risk during lithium maintenance treatment. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 61(Suppl. 9), 97--104. Townsend, J., & Altshuler,
L. L. (2012). Emotion processing and regulation in bipolar disorder: A
review. Bipolar Disorders, 14(4), 326--339. Van Meter, A. R., Moreira,
A. L., & Youngstrom, E. A. (2011, May 31). Meta-analysis of
epidemiologic studies of pediatric bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry. Advance online publication. doi: 10.4088/JCP.10m06290 Van
Meter, A., Youngstrom, E. A., Demeter, C., & Findling, R. L. (2013).
Examining the validity of cyclothymic disorder in a youth sample:
Replication and extension. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 41(3),
367--378. Walker, M. P. (2011). The role of sleep in cognition and
emotion. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1156, 168--197.
Wals, M., Hillegers, M.H.J., Reichart, C. G., Verhulst, F. C., Nolen, W.
A., & Ormel, J. (2005). Stressful life events and onset of mood
disorders in children of bipolar parents during 14-month follow-up.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 87, 253--263. Walsh, M. A., DeGeorge, D.
P., Barrantes-Vidal, N., & Kwapil, T. R. (2015). A 3-year longitudinal
study of risk for bipolar spectrum psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 124(3), 486--497. Wang, F., Kalmar, J. H., He, Y.,
Jackowski, M., Chepenik, L. G., Edmiston, E. E., ... Blumberg, H. P.
(2009). Functional and structural connectivity between the perigenual
anterior cingulate and amygdala in bipolar disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 66(5), 516--521. Wehr, T. A., Sack, D. A., & Rosenthal, N.
E. (1987). Sleep reduction as a final common pathway in the genesis of
mania. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 210--214. Weinstock, L. M.,
& Miller, I. W. (2010). Psychosocial predictors of mood symptoms 1 year
after acute phase treatment of bipolar I disorder. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 51(5), 497--503. West, A. E., Weinstein, S. M., Peters, A.
T., Katz, A. C., Henry, D. B., Cruz, R. A., & Pavuluri, M. N. (2014).
Child- and family-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy for pediatric
bipolar disorder: A randomized

clinical trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 53(11), 1168--1178. Willner, P. (1995). Sensitization of
dopamine D-sub-2or D-sub-3-type receptors as a final common pathway in
antidepressant drug action. Clinical Neuropharmacology, 18 (Suppl. 1),
S49--S56. Wilens, T. E., Biederman, J., Kwon, A., Ditterline, J.,
Forkner, P., Moore, H., ... Faraone, S. V. (2004). Risk of substance use
disorders in adolescents with bipolar disorder. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 43(11), 1380--1386. Williams,
J.B.W., Gibbon, M., First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Davies, M., Borus, J.,
... Wittchen, H.-U. (1992). The Structured Clinical Interview for the
DSM-III-R (SCID): II. Multisite test-retest reliability. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 49, 630--636. Willner, P. (1995). Sensitization of
dopamine D-sub-2or D-sub-3-type receptors as a final common pathway in
antidepressant drug action. Clinical Neuropharmacology, 18(Suppl. 1),
S49--S56. Yan, L. J., Hammen, C., Cohen, A. N., Daley, S. E., & Henry,
R. M. (2004). Expressed emotion versus relationship quality variables in
the prediction of recurrence in bipolar patients. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 83, 199--206. Yatham, L. N., Kennedy, S. H., O'Donovan, C.,
Parikh, S., MacQueen, G., McIntyre, R., ... Canadian Network for Mood
and Anxiety Treatments. (2005). Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety
Treatments (CANMAT) guidelines for the management of patients with
bipolar disorder: Consensus and controversies. Bipolar Disorders,
7(Suppl. 3), 5--69. Young, L. T., Joffe, R. T., Robb, J. C., MacQueen,
G. M., Marriott, M., & Patelis-Siotis, I. (2000). Double-blind
comparison of addition of a second mood stabilizer versus an
antidepressant to an initial mood stabilizer for treatment of patients
with bipolar depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 124--126.
Youngstrom, E. A., Findling, R. L., & Calabrese, J. R. (2004). Effects
of adolescent manic symptoms on agreement between youth, parent, and
teacher ratings of behavior problems. Journal of Affective Disorders,
82(Suppl. 1), S5--S16. Youngstrom, E. A., Findling, R. L., Calabrese, J.
R., Gracious, B. L., Demeter, C., DelPorto-Bedoya, D., & Price, M.
(2004). Comparing the diagnostic accuracy of six potential screening
instruments for bipolar

References disorder in youths age 5 to 17 years. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 847--858. Youngstrom, E.
A., Findling, R. L., Youngstrom, J. K., & Calabrese, J. R. (2005).
Towards an evidencebased assessment of pediatric bipolar disorder.
Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 34(3), 433--448.
Youngstrom, E. A., Frazier, T. W., Demeter, C., Calabrese, J. R., &
Findling, R. L. (2008). Developing

363

a 10-item mania scale from the Parent General Behavior Inventory for
children and adolescents. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69(5),
831--839. Zimmerman, M., Galione, J. N., Ruggero, C. J., Chelminski, I.,
Young, D., Dalrymple, K., & McGlinchey, J. B. (2010). Screening for
bipolar disorder and finding borderline personality disorder. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 71(9), 1212--1217.

Chapter 9 Sleep-Wake Disorders Lu Dong, Jennifer C. Kanady, and Allison
G. Harvey

W

e spend approximately one third of our lives sleeping. Although the
study of human sleep is a relatively young science and many fascinating
mysteries remain to be solved, there have been great advances in
knowledge about the function of sleep. For example, it is increasingly
evident that sleep has a critical role in many domains of health (Zee &
Turek, 2006) and psychological functioning (Walker & Stickgold, 2006).
Great advances in knowledge have also been made relating to the nature
and treatment of sleep disorders. Moreover, sleep disturbance is a
characteristic of psychiatric disorders and, as we discuss below, can
play a critical role in the maintenance of several disorders (Harvey,
2008a). In this chapter we focus on insomnia, as it is the most common
sleep disorder. Insomnia is a chronic difficulty that involves a
predominant complaint of dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality,
accompanied by problems in getting to sleep, maintaining sleep, or early
awakening with an inability to return to sleep (American Psychiatric
Association \[APA\], 2013). It is a prevalent problem, reported by
approximately 10% of the population (Ohayon & Reynolds, 2009; Roth et
al., 2011). The consequences are severe and may include impairments in
the quality of life (Léger et al., 2012), poor cognitive performance in
such areas as concentration and memory (Fortier-Brochu,
Beaulieu-Bonneau, Ivers, & Morin, 2012), higher rates of work
absenteeism, decreased job performance, increased rates of work-related
accidents, and increased use of medical services (Léger, Guilleminault,
Bader, Lévy, & Paillard, 2002). Sleep deprivation has detrimental
effects on many domains of health (Zee & Turek, 2006), including the
immune system, the neuroendocrine system, and the cardiovascular system
(Dinges, Rogers, & Baynard, 2005). Given the prevalence and associated
impairments, the cost of sleep disorders to society is enormous (Martin,
Aikens, & Chervin, 2004).

Sleep Basics Human sleep can be divided into (a) nonrapid eye movement
(NREM) sleep that can be subdivided into three stages (N1 or sleep
onset, N2, and N3 or slow-wave sleep) through which sleep progressively
deepens; and (b) rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. In adult humans, sleep
begins in NREM and progresses through the NREM stages. The first REM
occurs approximately 80 to 100 minutes later. Thereafter, each NREM-REM
cycle spans

364

Description of the Disorder

365

approximately 90 minutes. Stage N3 dominates early in the night and N2
and REM sleep lengthen during the latter half of the night (Carskadon &
Dement, 2011). NREM sleep is thought to be important for conservation of
energy and restoration and is associated with the most rapid cell
division in some tissues as well as with increased protein synthesis
(Kryger, Roth, & Dement, 2011). The functions of REM sleep are
understood to include a role in learning, unlearning of irrelevant
information, memory consolidation, emotional memory and information
processing, and emotion regulation (Walker, 2011).

Sleep Across Development From a developmental perspective, total sleep
time varies substantially across the age range. In newborns, average
total sleep time is approximately 16 to 18 hours, organized into 3- to
4-hour sleep periods across the 24-hour cycle. The average amount of
sleep obtained by a 5-year-old is 11.1 hours and in a 9-year-old is 10.2
hours (Hoban, 2004). In adolescence, nighttime sleep reduces from an
average of 9 hours at age 13 to 7.9 hours in 16-year-olds (Hoban, 2004).
In young adults, average nighttime sleep varies between 7 and 9 hours
and in the middle adult years between 6 and 8 hours. There are also
alterations in sleep architecture over the course of development.
Newborn infants are thought to start sleep with REM and then to move
into NREM, with each REM-NREM cycle lasting about 50 minutes (Carskadon
& Dement, 2011). In newborns, REM and NREM phases are called active and
quiet sleep, respectively, because of the difficulty in differentiating
sleep stages at this age. Whereas at birth approximately 50% of sleep is
spent in active sleep, once a child is 2 years of age this percentage
has reduced to 20% to 30% of total sleep time. Between the ages of 6 and
11, the amount of N3 sleep reduces and N2 sleep increases (Hoban, 2004).
Across the adolescent years, the "adult" sleep cycle length becomes
established, with N3 further decreasing in length, accompanied by
increases in N2 sleep (Carskadon & Dement, 2011). During the adolescent
years, there is a delay in circadian phase and a corresponding delay in
sleep onset, often shifting past midnight to the early morning hours
(Carskadon, 2002; Tate, Richardson, & Carskadon, 2002). This has been
attributed to a number of influences, which include a tendency toward
increasing autonomy in deciding what time to go to bed, which coincides
with both a natural biological delay in the circadian cycle plus
irregularity in the sleep schedule associated with psychosocial stress
and social activities (Carskadon, 2002; Hoban, 2004).

Description of the Disorder We begin this section by describing the
symptoms of insomnia. Then, we discuss several insomnia case examples,
the history of insomnia, and the epidemiology of insomnia.

Description of Symptoms and Criteria There are three main classification
systems for sleep disorders: the third edition of the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD-3; American Academy of Sleep

366

Sleep-Wake Disorders

Medicine, 2014), the Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC) (Edinger et al.,
2004), and the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5; APA, 2013). In keeping with the other chapters
in this book, we focus on the DSM-5 criteria; however, readers are
encouraged to consult the ICSD-3 manual and the RDC criteria for further
information about the other two nosologies commonly used in clinical and
research settings. In the DSM-5, there are several differences in the
classifications of sleep disorders compared to the fourth edition of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR; APA,
2000). These differences include the elimination of the diagnosis of
"primary insomnia" and the use of the diagnosis of "insomnia disorder"
instead (Reynolds & Redline, 2010). Because insomnia can be associated
with a wide range of medical illnesses and psychiatric disorders, the
DSM-5 distinguishes between insomnia disorder with and without mental
health, physical health, and sleep disorder comorbidities. Using the
DSM-5, a diagnosis of insomnia may be given when there is a predominant
complaint of dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality, including
trouble with falling asleep, staying asleep, or early-morning awakening
with an inability to return to sleep. These sleep difficulties must be
present for at least 3 nights per week for more than 3 months and be
associated with daytime impairment. These sleep difficulties must not be
attributable to substance use or better explained by another sleep-wake
disorder or co-existing medical or psychiatric conditions. Quantitative
criteria have been used to supplement the diagnostic criteria. The
quantitative criteria for insomnia require that self-reported sleep
onset latency (SOL) and/or wakefulness after sleep onset (WASO) must be
equal to or longer than 30 minutes for at least 3 nights per week over a
period of at least 6 months (Lichstein, Durrence, Taylor, Bush, &
Riedel, 2003). Readers are also referred to Buysse, Ancoli-Israel,
Edinger, Lichstein, and Morin (2006), who offer additional quantitative
criteria for insomnia.

Case Examples Insomnia Without Comorbidity Susan had never been a sound
sleeper, but over the past 5 years insomnia had caused her significant
distress and difficulty coping during the day, so much so that she took
early retirement from her job as a preschool teacher. Susan could never
predict whether she would sleep poorly. When she did sleep poorly, she
suffered from a combination of difficulty getting to sleep at the
beginning of the night (on a bad night taking between 40 minutes and 2
hours to get to sleep) and experiencing six or more awakenings over the
course of the night, each varying from 10 minutes to 2 hours in
duration. Following a night of poor sleep, Susan would spend much of the
next day sleeping or resting. Insomnia That Is Comorbid With Another
Psychiatric Disorder Jerry had just dropped out of his third year as an
undergraduate at university because of episodes of mania and depression.
He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. He experienced insomnia between
episodes, and it worsened approximately 2 weeks prior to a relapse.
Jerry was aware of the damage each episode caused in his life, and knew
that

Description of the Disorder

367

sleep disturbance was an early warning signal of an impending episode,
so he had come to fear and worry about poor sleep. He no longer had a
social life in the evening owing to his attempts to ensure a good night
of sleep. He would nap during the day to try to guarantee getting enough
sleep. Some days he would not get out of bed at all. Jerry concluded
that he should get more than 10 hours of sleep per night to avoid
episodes of mania and depression, and if he did not get 10 hours he
would become worried and preoccupied with his sleep.

Insomnia That Is Comorbid With a Medical Problem Gemma's sleep
difficulties led her to resign her job as a bank manager 3 months prior
to coming for treatment. Gemma thought that her sleep difficulties were
due to a urinary tract disorder (which she had been told was called
"irritable bladder"). This problem caused her to get up between five and
eight times each night to go to the bathroom. After getting back into
bed, she found it hard to get to sleep and would worry about the
consequences of the disturbed sleep on her health and her ability to
cope the next day. She had had two surgeries in an attempt to correct
the bladder problem. These had not helped. Although Gemma felt that this
medical problem was the major contributor to her insomnia, she came for
treatment primarily because of her worry about her sleep. Interestingly,
a treatment focused on Gemma's anxiety about sleep, with a special focus
on monitoring the need to urinate, substantially reduced the number of
bathroom visits during the night.

Brief History of Insomnia Jacobson's presentation of progressive muscle
relaxation treatment in 1934 was the first approach to treating
insomnia. The primary rationale for this treatment, and for many others
that followed, was that heightened arousal disturbed sleep and
predisposed individuals to a host of medical problems (Jacobson, 1934).
Progressive muscle relaxation, as well as some of the treatments
developed subsequently, was couched in the prevailing notion that
insomnia was always secondary to other medical or psychiatric illnesses,
a view that was prevalent through the 1960s. During the rise of
behaviorist thinking in the 1960s and 1970s, sleep disturbance came to
be seen as a result of conditioning, where the bedroom environment and
heightened arousal became associated with insomnia, leading to a learned
sleep disturbance (e.g., Bootzin, 1979). As a correlate to this
theoretical shift, empirical work began to focus more specifically on
primary, rather than secondary, insomnia. In the 1980s, biofeedback,
which requires patients to learn to monitor their electromyography or
sensory-motor rhythm levels, became a popular treatment for insomnia. In
a review of nonpharmacological treatments of sleep disturbance published
in the 1990s, Chesson and colleagues (1999) listed biofeedback as an
efficacious treatment option. However, the growing popularity of
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) as well as the time-consuming nature
of biofeedback has rendered the latter significantly less popular as a
contemporary intervention. Currently, cognitive behavioral theoretical
and treatment approaches are the most commonly accepted and practiced
modalities (Chesson et al., 1999; Morin, Bootzin, et al., 2006; Morin,
Hauri, et al., 1999). These approaches are discussed in greater detail
later.

368

Sleep-Wake Disorders

Epidemiology Insomnia is one of the most common health complaints in the
general population (Ohayon & Reynolds, 2009). It is estimated that
approximately one third of the general population worldwide reports
significant symptoms of insomnia. Depending on the diagnostic criteria
used, the prevalence estimates of insomnia range from 3.9% to 22.1% with
about 10% meeting criteria for DSM-IV criteria (Ohayon & Reynolds, 2009;
Roth et al., 2011). The 1-year incidence estimates of insomnia range
from 7% to 15% (LeBlanc et al., 2009; Morphy, Dunn, Lewis, Boardman, &
Croft, 2007). The course of insomnia is often chronic, with a median
duration of 3 years (Pillai, Roth, & Drake, 2015). Longitudinal
epidemiological studies of insomnia suggest that about 60% to 74% of
patients with insomnia had been suffering for at least 1 year (Morin et
al., 2009; Morphy et al., 2007; Pillai et al., 2015) and about half
still had insomnia 3 years later (Morin et al., 2009). Insomnia is also
common and chronic among adolescents, with an estimated prevalence of
10.7% for DSM-IV insomnia and a median age of onset of 11 years
(Johnson, Roth, Schultz, & Breslau, 2006). Age and sex are among the
important factors influencing the prevalence of insomnia. Although
insomnia symptoms, particularly sleep fragmentation, are more common in
older adults (Ohayon, Carskadon, Guilleminault, & Vitiello, 2004), the
prevalence of insomnia symptoms decreases with age, with older adults
reporting less daytime impairment or distress than younger adults
(Ohayon et al., 2004; Roth et al., 2011). Age also appears to influence
insomnia phenotypes, such that sleep onset insomnia (i.e., trouble
falling asleep) is more common among younger adults, whereas sleep
maintenance problems (i.e., trouble staying asleep) are more common in
middle-aged and older adults (Pillai et al., 2015). Moreover, insomnia
is more prevalent in women than in men. Gonadal steroid effects are
thought to be a potential reason for the sex difference that begins at
puberty (Johnson et al., 2006) and becomes more apparent around and
after menopause (Zhang & Wing, 2006). For older adults, insomnia is
often accompanied by medical illnesses, which may complicate issues of
assessment and treatment, further compounding burden and cost (Morin,
LeBlanc, Daley, Gregoire, & Mérette, 2006). In a large epidemiological
study, Ford and Kamerow (1989) found that an approximately 50%
comorbidity rate between insomnia and other psychiatric or medical
illnesses. Other studies have yielded a rate as high as 75% (Lichstein,
2000). In cases of comorbid insomnia, additional empirical and clinical
attention may be especially important as there is a cyclical influence
of sleep disturbance on medical or psychiatric illnesses, with worsening
sleep problems leading to a decline in general health, and the
maintenance of daytime health problems and distress worsening sleep
problems (Harvey, 2008a; Smith, Huang, & Manber, 2005). Genetic
epidemiological studies suggest the importance of genetic influences on
insomnia. Family studies indicate that insomnia aggregates in families
(Drake, Scofield, & Roth, 2008), with 30% to more than 70% of
individuals with insomnia reporting a positive family history
(Dauvilliers et al., 2005; Harvey, Gehrman, & Espie, 2014). Twin studies
suggest insomnia is moderately heritable, with heritability estimates
between 30% and 60% (Heath, Kendler, Eaves, & Martin, 1990; Watson,
Goldberg, Arguelles, & Buchwald, 2006). Specific molecular genetic risk
factors contributing to insomnia remain unclear. There is some evidence
from candidate gene studies suggesting a potential link between

Models of Insomnia

369

individual differences in sleep-wake regulation and a common variant in
the period circadian clock 3 (PER3) among healthy humans (Viola et al.,
2007). In the literature on the role of serotonin in sleep regulation,
another candidate gene study found a link between primary insomnia and a
common variant on the 5-HT transporter (5-HTT) gene (SLC6A4) (Deuschle
et al., 2010). Replications of these findings are needed.

Models of Insomnia We begin this section by discussing an influential
overarching framework, the Spielman model. We then move on to describe a
sample of the behavioral, cognitive, hyperarousal, neurocognitive, and
hybrid models of insomnia.

Three-Factor Model The three-factor model, also called the three-P
model, is a diathesis-stress model. According to Spielman, Caruso, &
Glovinsky (1987), acute, or short-term, insomnia occurs as a result of
predisposing factors (e.g., traits) and precipitating factors (e.g.,
life stressors). This acute form can then develop into a chronic or
longer-term disorder as a result of perpetuating factors (e.g., poor
coping strategies such as unhelpful beliefs/thoughts and behavior).
Predisposing factors (such as a tendency to worry) constitute a
vulnerability for insomnia, and this vulnerability remains across the
life of the disorder. Precipitating factors trigger acute insomnia, but
their influence tends to wane over time. In contrast, perpetuating
factors take hold and serve to maintain insomnia; these include
behaviors (e.g., extending time spent in bed trying to sleep more,
taking naps) and/or thoughts (e.g., fear of sleeplessness, excessive
worries about daytime consequences) developed to cope with insomnia.

Behavioral Stimulus Control Model An important behavioral model is the
stimulus control model (Bootzin, 1972). It is based on the conditioning
principle that insomnia occurs when the bed or bedroom ceases to be
paired specifically with sleep and instead becomes paired with many
possible responses (e.g., being awake and anxious about not sleeping).
As is described later in this chapter, this theory has led to the
development of an intervention with strong efficacy (Morin, Bootzin, et
al., 2006).

Cognitive Model One cognitive model of insomnia aims to specify the
cognitive processes that serve to perpetuate insomnia (Harvey, 2002).
According to this conceptualization, insomnia is maintained by a cascade
of cognitive processes that operate at night and during the day. The
equal emphasis on the nighttime and daytime processes is an important
feature of this model. The key cognitive processes that comprise the
cascade are (a) worry and rumination, (b) selective attention and
monitoring, (c) misperception of sleep and daytime

370

Sleep-Wake Disorders

deficits, (d) dysfunctional beliefs about sleep (based on Morin, 1993),
and (e) counterproductive safety behaviors that serve to maintain
beliefs. Many of the specific predictions generated by this model have
been empirically tested, leading to refinement of the model (Harvey,
2005) and a new cognitive therapy treatment approach that has support
from an open trial (Harvey, Sharpley, Ree, Stinson, & Clark, 2007) and a
comparative efficacy RCT of cognitive therapy, behavior therapy, and
cognitive-behavioral therapy (A. G. Harvey et al., 2014).

Hyperarousal Models The hypothesis that physiological hyperarousal
serves to perpetuate insomnia has attracted interest for several
decades, since the classic work of Monroe (1967), in which significantly
increased physiological activation (increased rectal temperature, heart
rate, basal skin resistance, and aphasic vasoconstrictions) was found 30
minutes before and during sleep in persons with insomnia as compared to
good sleepers. Additionally, in a series of elegant studies, Bonnet and
Arand (1992) experimentally induced a chronic physiological activation
via caffeine intake in good sleepers. The caffeine resulted in decreased
sleep efficiency and increased daytime fatigue. In addition, Bonnet and
Arand (1995) measured whole body VO2 , which was conceptualized as an
index of hyperarousal, at intervals across the day and during sleep. VO2
was consistently elevated at all measurement points in insomnia patients
relative to the good sleepers. The authors concluded that the 24-hour
increase in metabolic rate observed may be an important factor that
maintains insomnia.

Neurocognitive Model The neurocognitive model (Perlis, Giles, Mendelson,
Bootzin, & Wyatt, 1997; Perlis, Merica, Smith, & Giles, 2001) extends
the behavioral model by explicitly allowing for the possibility that
conditioned arousal may act as a perpetuating factor. The concept of
arousal is expressed in terms of somatic, cognitive, and cortical
arousal. Somatic arousal corresponds to measures of metabolic rate,
cognitive arousal typically refers to mental constructs like worry and
rumination, and cortical arousal refers to the level of cortical
activation (but may also include all CNS arousal). Cortical arousal, it
is hypothesized, occurs as a result of classical conditioning and allows
abnormal levels of sensory and information processing and also long-term
memory formation. These phenomena, in turn, are directly linked to sleep
continuity disturbance and/or sleep state misperception. Specifically,
enhanced sensory processing (detection of a stimulus and potentially the
emission of a startle and/or orienting response) around sleep onset and
during NREM sleep is thought to make the individual particularly
vulnerable to perturbation by environmental stimuli (e.g., a noise
outside on the street), which interferes with sleep initiation and/or
maintenance. Enhanced information processing (detection of, and
discrimination between, stimuli and the formation of a short-term memory
of the stimulating event) during NREM sleep may blur the
phenomenological distinction between sleep and wakefulness. That is, one
cue for "knowing" that one is asleep is the lack of awareness for events
occurring during sleep. Enhanced information processing may therefore
account

Models of Insomnia

371

for insomnia patients' tendency to misperceive sleep indexed by
polysomnography (PSG) as wakefulness. Finally, enhanced long-term memory
(detection of, and discrimination between, stimuli and recollection of a
stimulating event hours after its occurrence) around sleep onset and
during NREM sleep may interfere with the subjective experience of sleep
initiation and duration. Normally, individuals cannot recall information
from periods immediately prior to sleep, during sleep, or during brief
arousals from sleep. An enhanced ability to encode and retrieve
information in insomnia would be expected to influence judgments about
sleep latency, wakefulness after sleep onset, and sleep duration.

Homeostatic and Circadian Influences The two-process model of sleep
regulation (Borbély, 1982) proposes that sleep and wakefulness are
dependent on a homeostatic process and a sleep-wake independent
circadian process (Achermann & Borbély, 2011). Sleep homeostasis
influences sleep propensity; that is, sleep homeostasis results in an
increased tendency to sleep when a person has been sleep deprived, and a
decreased tendency to sleep after having had a substantial amount of
sleep. The circadian rhythm is an internal biological clock that is
responsible for oscillations of melatonin, cortisol, temperature, and
other biological functions, with one complete oscillation of about 24
hours (Lack & Bootzin, 2003). Some, but not all, studies have found
impaired sleep homeostasis in persons with insomnia (e.g., Besset,
Villemin, Tafti, & Billiard, 1998; Stepanski, Zorick, Roehrs, & Roth,
2000). There is a similar lack of consensus in the research about
whether circadian rhythm abnormalities play a role in insomnia.
Environmentally induced phase shifts, such as those occurring as a
result of shift work or jet lag, can cause acute insomnia, which in some
cases can lead to chronic insomnia, per the earlier-discussed Spielman
model (Perlis, Smith, & Pigeon, 2005). There is also evidence that the
earlier-discussed hyperarousal may not be a 24-hour issue for some but
rather may fluctuate according to circadian influences (Perlis et al.,
2005).

Hybrid Models At least three models have been proposed that incorporate
a range of levels of explanation (e.g., behavioral, physiological) and
across various points of the disorder (e.g., precipitating factors,
perpetuating factors). These will now be described. Morin's (1993)
cognitive behavioral model of insomnia incorporates cognitive, temporal,
and environmental variables as both precipitating and perpetuating
factors. Morin places hyperarousal as the key precipitating factor of
insomnia. The hyperarousal can be cognitive-affective, behavioral, or
physiological. Stimulus conditioning can then exacerbate this arousal.
For example, a person may associate temporal (e.g., bedtime routines)
and environmental (e.g., the bedroom setting) stimuli with fear of being
unable to sleep. Worry and rumination may then result. Additional
perpetuating factors may ensue, including, as in the cognitive model,
daytime fatigue, worry and emotional distress about sleep loss, and
maladaptive habits (e.g., excessive time in bed). Thus, hyperarousal may
serve

372

Sleep-Wake Disorders

as a trigger, but a multitude of factors perpetuate the negative cycle,
including sleeplessness itself. Lundh's (1998) cognitive behavioral
model of insomnia also considers cognitive and physiological arousal, as
well as stressful life events, as factors. However, Lundh's model
proposes sleep-interpreting processes as additional factors.
Sleep-interpreting processes are thoughts about sleep, including
perceptions about sleep onset latency, total sleep time, and sleep
quality; thoughts about sleep quantity requirements and the consequences
of not meeting these requirements; the ways in which variations in sleep
quality are explained; and the degree to which negative aspects of daily
functioning are attributed to poor sleep. Thus, a central tenet of this
model is that individuals' cognitions and perceptions about their poor
sleep and their consequent daytime functioning play key roles in
maintaining insomnia. Morin's and Lundh's cognitive behavioral models of
insomnia add to the cognitive model of insomnia by also taking into
account problematic behaviors associated with sleep problems, in
addition to maladaptive thought processes. Espie's (2002)
psychobiological inhibition model posits that insomnia is a disorder of
the automaticity of homeostatic and circadian processes. That is, in
good sleepers, these two processes naturally default to good sleep and
can adjust to some variability, but in persons with insomnia, the
central problem is with inhibition of de-arousal processes critical to
good sleep. The attention-intention-effort pathway (Espie, Broomfield,
MacMahon, Macphee, & Taylor, 2006) extends this model by providing an
explanation of how insomnia develops and what critical factors maintain
it. More specifically, this pathway suggests that sleep-wake
automaticity is inhibited by selectively attending to sleep, by
explicitly intending to sleep, and by introducing effort into the sleep
engagement process.

The Role of Emotion Though there is currently limited empirical research
on the role of emotion in insomnia, it is intuitive that an individual's
emotion regulation ability is likely to play a role in whether he or she
can cognitively and physiologically down-regulate in order to sleep. One
study that is consistent with this hypothesis has been reported by
Morin, Rodrigue, and Ivers (2003), who found that persons with insomnia
rate the impact of daily minor stressors and the intensity of major
negative life events higher than good sleepers. Also, persons with
insomnia were found to use more emotion-oriented coping strategies and
have greater pre-sleep arousal than good sleepers. A path model showed
that emotion-focused coping negatively affected sleep by increasing both
the impact of stress and the pre-sleep arousal. Hence, this study
suggests a detrimental impact of emotional arousal on sleep. It seems
likely that emotion regulation and sleep are bidirectionally related
(Harvey, 2008a). The previous paragraph made the case that emotion
regulation difficulty makes it difficult to get to sleep, and there is
evidence that sleep quality impacts emotion and mood the next day. For
example, in a meta-analysis of 19 studies of sleep deprivation (Pilcher
& Huffcutt, 1996), mood was more negatively affected than either
cognitive performance or motor performance. Also, Dinges et al. (1997)
restricted the sleep of healthy participants to 5 hours per night for 1
week and found that mood disturbance progressively increased throughout
the week. Two studies examined the sleep-and-mood cycle in bipolar
disorder, whose main feature is difficulty in emotion regulation. One
study found that mood regulation impairment,

Assessment of Disorder

373

especially in regulating positive emotional stimuli, may contribute to
disturbance in sleep onset latency (Talbot, Hairston, Eidelman, Gruber,
& Harvey, 2009). In another study, compared to healthy controls,
individuals with interepisode bipolar disorder and insomnia experienced
both elevated sleep disturbance and more negative mood. Further, sleep
disturbance was associated with daytime negative mood, whereas evening
negative mood was associated with subsequent sleep disturbance and
positive mood was associated with better sleep (Talbot et al., 2012).
These results indeed support the bidirectional relationship between the
dysfunctions in mood and sleep.

Environmental Factors The relation between environment and insomnia is
another understudied area. One aspect of the environment, the
interpersonal context of sleep, may be an important contributor to
insomnia. In fact, for many couples, sleep problems and relationship
problems co-occur, and the association between sleep and relationships
is likely to be bidirectional and reciprocal (Troxel, Robles, Hall, &
Buysse, 2007). There is evidence that sleeping arrangement (e.g.,
sleeping with a partner) has significant effects on sleep measures:
attachment insecurity in couples was associated with poor subjective
sleep quality; while marital harmony was prospectively linked with fewer
self-reported sleep problems (for a review, see Troxel et al., 2007).
Interestingly, there is also evidence suggesting that sleep disturbance
and sleep disorders have a negative impact on the functioning of a
couple's relationship (Troxel et al., 2007) and on the degree, nature,
and resolution of relationship conflict (Gordon & Chen, 2013).
Additionally, increased technology and busier schedules may have an
effect on insomnia. These effects may be particularly profound in
adolescence. A study of sleep habits in 7th through 12th graders found
that 45% of adolescents report getting insufficient sleep on school
nights and 28% complain they often feel "irritable and cranky" as a
result of getting too little sleep (Carskadon, Mindell, & Drake, 2006).
Technology options (TV, movies, video games, the Internet, music, cell
phones, and text messaging) and busier schedules (increased homework,
part-time employment, and increased time spent on sports and other
extracurricular activities) contribute to delays in bedtimes in
adolescents. Yet, it is known that during the adolescent years the need
for sleep increases. A meta-analysis of risk factors for sleep
disturbance in adolescents found that video gaming; phone, computer, and
internet use; and evening light were related to delayed bedtimes in
teens (Bartel, Gradisar, & Williamson, 2015).

Assessment of Disorder The assessment of insomnia varies depending on
whether it is being done in a clinical or research context. This next
section focuses on the assessment of insomnia for clinical purposes. The
clinical assessment of insomnia typically includes a clinical interview
and self-report measures of insomnia symptoms and sleep diaries.
Objective measures, such as polysomnography and actigraphy, may be
included as part of the assessment to rule out other sleep disorders but
are not routinely recommended (Littner et al., 2003; Morgenthaler et
al., 2007). Subjective and objective measures of sleep are described
below.

374

Sleep-Wake Disorders

The clinical interview to assess insomnia often includes the following
domains (Morin et al., 2015): (a) insomnia symptoms, including age of
onset, current symptoms, frequency and course of symptoms, and perceived
daytime consequences; (b) factors influencing insomnia symptoms,
including history of insomnia treatment and its efficacy, factors that
improve insomnia, factors that exacerbate insomnia (e.g., stress), and
factors that maintain insomnia (e.g., sleep incompatible
thoughts/behaviors); (c) health, including comorbid medical or
psychiatric illnesses, other sleep disorders, pain, and pharmacological
considerations (e.g., medications that have sedating/activating
effects); and (d) family, social, and work concerns, including
sleep-incompatible behaviors that are work- or family-related, family
history of insomnia, and stressful life events. It is crucial not only
to thoroughly assess nighttime symptoms but also to focus on the 24-hour
impact of insomnia (e.g., daytime consequences). Conceptual models
(reviewed above) may be used to guide the clinical assessment and inform
the case conceptualization and treatment planning. Buysse et al. (2006)
made additional important recommendations for the assessment of insomnia
(e.g., definition, diagnosis, and measures of sleep and insomnia). These
recommendations are particularly important to consider when evaluating
insomnia in a research study (Buysse et al., 2006).

Assessment of Subjectively Perceived Sleep As is evident from the DSM-5
criteria, insomnia is defined subjectively. Thus, three levels of
self-reported sleep data are collected from patients during an
assessment for insomnia. First, a clinical sleep history is taken to
assess the individual for the diagnostic criteria and the presence of
comorbid problems. Information gathered includes the duration,
frequency, and severity of nighttime sleep disturbances, including
estimates of the key sleep parameters: sleep onset latency (SOL), number
of awakenings after sleep onset (NWAKE), total amount of time awake
after sleep onset (WASO), total sleep time (TST), and an estimate of
sleep quality (SQ). Information about the onset and duration of the
insomnia and the type of symptoms (i.e., sleep onset, sleep maintenance,
or early morning awakening problems, or combinations of these) is
collected. A description of the daytime correlates and consequences of
insomnia is key. In addition, obtaining information about medications
(prescription and over-the-counter) and screening for the presence of
comorbid psychiatric disorder and medical problems (including other
sleep disorders) are also important. Second, one or more validated
questionnaire measures can be used to index the presence and severity of
sleep disturbance (e.g., Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index; Buysse,
Reynolds, Monk, Berman, & Kupfer, 1989), insomnia (e.g., Insomnia
Severity Index; Bastien, Vallieres, & Morin, 2001), and daytime
sleepiness (e.g., Stanford Sleepiness Scale; Hoddes, Zarcone, Smythe,
Phillips, & Dement, 1973). Third, asking the patient to complete a sleep
diary each morning as soon as possible after waking for 2 weeks provides
prospective estimates of sleep. Many clinicians think of the sleep diary
as their best friend. A sleep diary provides a wealth of information,
including night-to-night variability in sleeping difficulty and
sleep-wake patterns, and can be used to determine the presence of
circadian rhythm problems, such as a delayed sleep phase or an advanced
sleep phase. Also, sleep diaries reduce several problems associated with
retrospective reporting, such as answering on the basis of saliency
(i.e., the worst night) or recency

375

Assessment of Disorder

(i.e., last night) (Smith, Nowakowski, Soeffing, Orff, & Perlis, 2003).
Interestingly, the "enhanced awareness" of sleep patterns facilitated by
diary keeping can reduce anxiety over sleep loss and thus contribute to
better sleep (Morin, 1993, p. 71). There are many sleep diary versions.
Carney et al. (2012) developed a consensus sleep diary based on expert
agreement and qualitative patient input. These authors proposed that all
sleep diary versions should contain "core" sleep questions in order to
adequately address the sleep problem. As shown in Figure 9.1, core sleep
questions that should be addressed by a sleep diary include the
following: (a) What time did you get into bed? (b) What time did you try
to go to sleep? (c) How long did it take you to fall asleep? (d) How
many times did you wake up, not counting your final awakening? (e) In
total, how long did these awakenings last? (f) What time was your final
awakening? (g) What time did you get out of bed for the day? (h) How
would you rate the quality of your sleep (on a scale from "poor" to
"very good")? and (i) Do you have any additional comments pertaining to
your sleep? (Carney et al., 2012). These core questions align nicely
with previous suggestions about recommended sleep diary parameters
(Buysse et al., 2006).

Consensus Sleep Diary-Core

ID/Name:

Sample Today's date

4/5/11

9/13/13

9/14/13

9/15/13

9/16/13

9/17/13

9/18/13

9/19/13

1.  What time did you get into bed?

10:15 p.m.

11 p.m.

11 p.m.

11 p.m.

11 p.m.

11 p.m.

1 a.m.

2:30 a.m.

2.  What time did you try to go to sleep?

11:30 p.m.

12:30 a.m.

1:30 a.m.

12 a.m.

12:30 a.m.

11 p.m.

1 a.m.

2:30 a.m.

3.  How long did it take you to fall asleep?

55 min.

5 min.

10 min.

15 min.

10 min.

10 min.

5 min.

1 min.

4.  How many times did you wake up, not counting your final awakening?

3 times

1 time

2 times

1 time

0 times

0 times

0 times

0 times

3 min.

12 min.

10 min.

0 min.

0 min.

0 min.

0 min.

5.  In total, how long did these awakenings last?

1 hour 10 min.

6.  What time was your final awakening?

6:35 a.m.

10:15 a.m.

5:15 a.m.

8:30 a.m.

5:15 a.m.

9:15 a.m.

10:00 a.m.

10:30 a.m.

7.  What time did you get out of bed for the day?

7:20 a.m.

10:30 a.m.

5:15 a.m.

8:30 a.m.

5:20 a.m.

9:30 a.m.

10:15 a.m.

11:00 a.m.

8.  How would you rate the quality of your sleep?

Very poor Poor Fair Good Very good

Very poor Poor Fair Good Very good

Very poor Poor Fair Good Very good

Very poor Poor Fair Good Very good

Very poor Poor Fair Good Very good

Very poor Poor Fair Good Very good

Very poor Poor Fair Good Very good

Very poor Poor Fair Good Very good

9.  Comments (if applicable)

FIGURE 9.1

I have a cold

I have a morning class

I have a morning class

Sleep Diary Instructions: Core Questions (from Carney et al., 2012,
fig. 1) with Sample Responses

376

Sleep-Wake Disorders

Additional sleep diary questions can also be included. For example,
questions pertaining to alcohol and caffeine use, medication use,
napping and/or exercise might be helpful in further analyzing the sleep
problem. Last, some sleep patients prefer different sleep diary formats
(e.g., clock diagram on which the participants indicate their bedtime
and rise time); therefore, a practitioner can tailor the sleep diary to
adhere to the patient's preference (Carney et al., 2012).

Objective Estimates The gold standard measure of sleep is
polysomnography (PSG). PSG is used to classify sleep into the
aforementioned stages. It involves placing surface electrodes on the
scalp and face to measure electrical brain activity
(electroencephalogram, EEG), eye movement (electro-oculogram, EOG), and
muscle tone (electromyogram, EMG). The data obtained are used to
classify each epoch of data by sleep stage and by sleep cycles (NREM and
REM). Disadvantages associated with PSG include its expense, discomfort
for participants, and labor-intensive nature. According to the Standards
of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine
guidelines, PSG is not needed for the routine assessment of insomnia
(Littner et al., 2003). However, PSG is useful for diagnostic
clarification in instances of treatment failure or when a patient is
suspected of having a sleep-related breathing disorder or periodic limb
movement disorder (Littner et al., 2003). Actigraphy is an alternative
means of providing an objective estimate of sleep. Actigraphs are small
wrist-worn devices that contain a sensor, a processor, and memory
storage. The sensor samples physical motion, and the processor
translates it into numerical digital data, summarizing the frequency of
motions into epochs of specified time duration and storing the summary
in memory. These data are then downloaded to a computer and analyzed to
generate various sleep parameters. Because the body becomes more
quiescent during sleep, actigraphy can be used to differentiate between
periods of wakefulness and periods of sleep, but not different stages of
sleep. According to the Standards of Practice Committee guidelines,
actigraphy yields acceptably accurate estimates of sleep patterns in
healthy adults and patients with sleep disorders (Morgenthaler et al.,
2007). Although not required for the assessment of insomnia, actigraphy
is indicated as a method for measuring circadian rhythm patterns or
sleep disturbance in individuals with insomnia, including those with
comorbid depression. Actigraphy is also a useful tool for evaluating the
response to treatment in insomnia patients (Morgenthaler et al., 2007).

Interventions In this section, we introduce both nonpharmacological and
pharmacological interventions for treating adult insomnia, as well as
comparisons between these two types of intervention. We also briefly
discuss treatment adherence and treatment for comorbid insomnia.

CBT-I A number of treatments are available to address insomnia in
adults. Most of the research to date has focused on cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBT-I)

Interventions

377

and psychopharmacological interventions, each of which is described in
the following pages. Four to 10 weekly sessions of CBT-I are typically
needed to administer its various components (described in this section).
The primary goal of CBT-I is to address the cognitive and behavioral
maintaining mechanisms involved in perpetuating sleep disturbance. A
second important goal is to teach coping techniques that patients can
use in instances of residual sleep difficulty. CBT-I is currently
considered the treatment of choice for insomnia. It is a multicomponent
treatment that is typically comprised of one or more of the following
components: stimulus control; sleep restriction; sleep hygiene
education; paradoxical intention; relaxation therapy, including imagery
training; and cognitive restructuring for unhelpful beliefs about sleep.
Each of these components is now described.

Stimulus Control The rationale for stimulus control therapy lies in the
notion that insomnia is a result of conditioning that occurs when the
bed becomes associated with inability to sleep. As described by Bootzin,
Epstein, and Wood (1991), stimulus control requires patients to (a) set
a regular sleep schedule, with a consistent waking time and no daytime
naps; (b) go to bed and stay in bed only when sleepy and when sleep is
imminent (this requires individuals to leave the bed if they are not
falling asleep and to return to bed only when they are feeling very
sleepy); and (c) eliminate from the bedroom all sleep-incompatible
activities (like upsetting conversations, problem solving, and watching
TV). Sleep Restriction Sleep restriction therapy, as developed by
Spielman and colleagues (Spielman, Saskin, & Thorpy, 1987), rests on the
general premise that time in bed should be limited in order to maximize
the sleep drive and so that the association between the bed and sleeping
is strengthened. This behavioral treatment begins with a reduction of
time spent in bed so that time in bed is equivalent to the time the
patient estimates he or she spends sleeping. For instance, if an
individual thinks he or she gets approximately 6 hours of sleep per
night, but usually spends about 2 additional hours trying to get to
sleep, the sleep restriction therapy would begin by limiting his or her
time spent in bed to 6 hours. This initial reduction in time spent in
bed is intended to heighten a person's homeostatic sleep drive (Perlis &
Lichstein, 2003). Following this restriction, sleep gradually becomes
more efficient, at which point time spent in bed is gradually increased
to reach an optimal sleep efficiency. Sleep efficiency is defined as the
total sleep time divided by time in bed multiplied by 100. The goal is
to increase sleep efficiency to more than 85% to 90%. Sleep Hygiene
Education Information about sleep and sleep-incompatible behaviors, and
the daytime consequences of sleep disturbance, is often given to inform
patients of basic steps to improve their sleep. Interventions focused on
sleep hygiene are behavioral in nature and target sleep-incompatible
routines. Factors typically addressed in sleep hygiene interventions
include alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine use; diet; exercise; and the
bedroom environment (Morin & Espie, 2003). Although sleep hygiene
education is typically included as one component of CBT-I, its use as
the sole intervention in treating insomnia has not been empirically
supported (Morin, Bootzin, et al., 2006).

378

Sleep-Wake Disorders

Paradoxical Intention In paradoxical intention therapy, patients are
instructed to stay awake for as long as possible. The aim is to reduce
performance anxiety related to sleep (e.g., Espie & Lindsay, 1985).
Paradoxical intention therapy aims to replace the tendency to actively
try to get to sleep, a strategy that is often employed by individuals
struggling with insomnia. Because employing an active focus and strategy
to induce sleep is actually sleep incompatible (Espie, 2002),
paradoxical intention places patients in the role of passive observer,
thereby decreasing anxiety and increasing the likelihood of sleep onset
(Ascher & Efran, 1978). Relaxation Therapy Patients are taught to
implement a variety of exercises while in the relaxation therapy
session. They are then encouraged to practice these exercises as much as
they can between sessions, but the emphasis is on practice during the
day (as opposed to using them only at night in an effort to get to
sleep). Practice is essential and is often aided by a tape of the
relaxation instructions that the patient can use at home. Morin and
Espie (2003) make a number of recommendations to maximize the
effectiveness of relaxation therapy. Specifically, in choosing among the
available relaxation techniques, they suggest a focus on imagery
training, breathing exercises, and the release of muscle tension.
Additionally, they note that while patients are generally receptive to
relaxation therapy, it is important for them to understand that
relaxation serves to set a context in which sleep is more likely to
occur, and is not supposed to automatically induce sleep, as a sleep
medication does. Cognitive Therapy The formal cognitive therapy
component of CBT-I, traditionally administered in one session, involves
altering faulty beliefs about sleep by education and discussion about
sleep requirements, the biological clock, and the effects of sleep loss
on sleep-wake functions (e.g., Edinger, Wohlgemuth, Radtke, Marsh, &
Quillian, 2001). More recently, a different approach has been developed.
Derived from the cognitive theory of insomnia described earlier (Harvey,
2002), this approach aims to reverse cognitive maintaining processes
such as worry and rumination about sleep (e.g., Harvey, 2005).
Importantly, in a recent study, interventions targeting the cognitive
maintaining processes were integrated into CBT-I. This study compared
the efficacy of CBT-I to behavior therapy (BT) and to (the enhanced
version of) cognitive therapy (CT) components alone (A. G. Harvey et
al., 2014). Details of this study are discussed in the next section.

Evidence for CBT-I Components A number of randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) have compared one or more components of CBT-I to each other
and/or to placebo. In a recent review of CBT-I, the Standards of
Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine found CBT-I
to be highly effective and to have sustainable gains over long-term
follow-up for 24 months in adult and older adult samples (Morin,
Bootzin, et al., 2006). This review used the American Psychological
Association criteria for well-supported empirically based treatments
(Chambless & Hollon, 1998) and concluded that these criteria are met by
stimulus control, paradoxical intention, relaxation, and sleep
restriction approaches, and the administration of multiple components in
the form of CBT-I. The sleep hygiene education intervention alone was
not found to be effective as a treatment for insomnia.

Interventions

379

Cognitive therapy for insomnia is a promising new approach, but RCTs are
still needed for it to meet APA criteria for an empirically supported
treatment. Since the publication of the Standards of Practice Committee
guidelines, an RCT has compared the efficacy of eight-session,
individual behavior therapy (BT), cognitive therapy (CT), and full
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for chronic insomnia (A. G. Harvey et
al., 2014). BT includes a combination of stimulus control and sleep
restriction strategies. CT targets a broad range of cognitive
maintaining mechanisms, such as sleep-related worries, unhelpful
beliefs, and attentional processes (based on Harvey, 2002; Harvey et
al., 2007), and is considered an enhanced version of the CT
traditionally included in CBT-I. Full CBT consists of a combination of
BT and the enhanced version of CT. Results suggest that full CBT was
associated with greatest and sustained improvement. Both BT and CT were
effective, with a rapid but less sustained effect for BT and a delayed
but sustained effect for CT. Hence, full (i.e., enhanced) CBT is the
treatment of choice, although it should be noted that full CBT had more
session time (approximately 75 minutes each session) relative to CT and
BT (approximately 45--60 minutes each session). Perhaps BT is easier to
implement but needs the help of a therapist for "coaching," while
changes to cognitive processes in CT may be initially harder to achieve
but once achieved are similar to forming habits. These different
trajectories of change raise the interesting possibility of distinct
mechanisms of change through behavioral versus cognitive processes (A.
G. Harvey et al., 2014).

Treatment Adherence This chapter has described powerful, successful
interventions for treating insomnia. However, to make sure these
interventions have the greatest possible impact on people's lives, we
need to make sure that the patient engages in the treatment process. In
a study of treatment adherence in patients with chronic insomnia
(Hebert, Vincent, Lewycky, & Walsh, 2010), the strongest predictors of
treatment adherence were perceived behavioral control, social support,
and intention to complete the program. There are multiple ways in which
a clinician can enhance treatment adherence. To be successful, an
intervention needs to include the following three components: (1) the
clinician needs to adequately explain the treatment process, (2) the
patient needs to understand the treatment process, and (3) the patient
needs to implement what he or she learns during treatment (Lichstein &
Riedel, 1994). First, patients may be discouraged from previous
unsuccessful treatment attempts. The practitioner should take the time
to motivate the patient to try again (Morin, 1993). Second, it is
important to schedule activities during the newly created wake time of
the sleep restriction component. This helps to motivate the patient to
stay out of bed (Morin, 1993). Third, concrete examples and written
instructions aid the patient in remembering what was discussed during
sessions (Chambers & Alexander, 1992). Fourth, it is important to
explain the rationale for the treatment components and to coach the
patient in their implementation (Sloan et al., 1993).

Treatment of Comorbid Insomnia In the past, it had often been assumed
that insomnia that is comorbid with another psychiatric or medical
disorder could not be successfully treated if the primary condition with
which it was associated was not treated first. Although it is certainly
true that cases of

380

Sleep-Wake Disorders

comorbid insomnia present additional challenges, the evidence suggests
that such insomnia does respond to treatment when it is treated with
CBT-I, even if the psychiatric or medical disorder is not under control.
For example, in an RCT comparing CBT-I to an active control condition
(in this case, stress management) in older adults suffering from a range
of chronic illnesses (such as osteoarthritis and pulmonary disease),
CBT-I was associated with a significant improvement in 8 out of 10 sleep
measures compared to the control condition (Rybarczyk, Lopez, Schelble,
& Stepanski, 2005; for similar examples across a range of psychiatric
and medical conditions, see Smith et al., 2005). Notably, Smith et
al. (2005) concluded that treatment effects are generally moderate to
large for CBT-I when given to patients with medical and psychiatric
illnesses. These effects are comparable to treatment effects for primary
insomnia. Two recent pilot RCTs provided further evidence that CBT-I can
be highly effective for improving sleep in patients with severe
psychiatric illnesses. Freeman et al. (2015) reported a pilot RCT that
compared the eight-session CBT-I plus standard care (i.e., medication
and contact with the clinical team) to standard care alone to treat
sleep problems in patients with persistent delusions and hallucinations.
Compared to standard care alone, the CBT-I plus standard care group led
to a reduction in insomnia with large effect sizes at posttreatment,
providing support for the use of CBT-I in treating sleep problems in
patients with psychotic experiences. The treatment effect was equivocal
for psychotic symptoms (Freeman et al., 2015). Another recent pilot RCT
provided support for treating insomnia using an eight-session, bipolar
disorder--specific modification of CBT-I (CBTI-BP) in interepisode
bipolar disorder I patients (Harvey et al., 2015). Compared with
psychoeducation (PE; providing information without facilitating behavior
change), the CBTI-BP was associated with greater sleep improvement, with
small to medium effect sizes at posttreatment, including reduced
insomnia severity ratings and higher rates of insomnia remission. Both
CBTI-BP and PE led to improved sleep, although sleep improved more in
CBTI-BP than in PE. Importantly, compared to PE, CBTI-BP was associated
with a significantly lower relapse rate for hypomania/mania and fewer
days in an episode through 6-month follow-up. These studies add to the
emerging literature suggesting that CBT-I improves not only sleep
outcome but also the symptoms of comorbid psychiatric illnesses (Harvey
et al., 2015).

Pharmacological Interventions Several different classes of medications
may be used to treat insomnia, including benzodiazepines,
nonbenzodiazepines, antihistamines, melatonin receptor agonists, and
antidepressants (for reviews, see Krystal, 2011; Morin et al., 2015;
Walsh & Roth, 2011). The term hypnotics is used to refer to medications
whose primary purpose is to induce sleep. Among the hypnotics,
benzodiazepine receptor agonists (BzRAs) are currently the only
pharmacological interventions with adequate scientific support (National
Institutes of Health \[NIH\], 2005), and they are generally recommended
as first-line hypnotics for treating chronic insomnia (Walsh & Roth,
2011). Although not all BzRAs have a chemical structure similar to that
of benzodiazepines, the primary action mechanism involves the inhibition
of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) through the occupation of
benzodiazepine receptors.

Interventions

381

All benzodiazepines have been shown to improve sleep, compared to
placebo, in controlled clinical trials (Holbrook, Crowther, Lotter,
Cheng, & King, 2000; Kupfer & Reynolds, 1997). Additionally, all BzRAs
at appropriate doses lead to a decrease in sleep onset latency, and all
BzRAs, with the exception of zaleplon, have also been shown to increase
total sleep time (Nowell et al., 1997; Walsh & Roth, 2011). Although the
bulk of these studies were conducted over a short period of time
(typically no longer than 35 days), two trials raise the possibility
that longer-term treatment may also be effective for some individuals
with insomnia (Krystal et al., 2003; Perlis, McCall, Krystal, & Walsh,
2004). However, neither of these studies included a follow-up to
evaluate whether the benefits to sleep were sustained after treatment
ceased. Although there is little risk of overdose or severe adverse
effects, pharmacological interventions for insomnia do carry some risk
of daytime residual effects (such as memory disturbance or anterograde
amnesia), as well as risks of tolerance and dependence (Krystal, 2009).
When used on a regular and prolonged basis, rebound insomnia is a common
problem associated with discontinuation. Even short-term use can result
in several days of rebound insomnia following discontinuation. However,
discontinuation from the newer hypnotic medications (e.g., zolpidem and
eszopiclone) is associated with fewer withdrawal symptoms (Morin &
Espie, 2003). A number of antidepressants, most commonly trazodone,
amitriptyline, mirtazapine, and doxepin, have been used off label to
treat insomnia, although they are used at lower doses than for treatment
of depression (Krystal, 2009; Morin et al., 2015). The mechanisms of
action, safety profiles, and efficacy for hypnotics are known. In
contrast, there are minimal data on the risk-benefit ratio of
antidepressants in the treatment of insomnia. In sum, BzRAs have the
most extensive efficacy and safety data in the treatment of insomnia.
Adequate evidence for using other medications (such as antidepressants)
is not currently available (Walsh & Roth, 2011).

Psychological Versus Pharmacological Interventions It is important for
clinicians to conduct a thorough efficacy and cost-benefit analysis for
the different available treatment options in order to determine the best
course of action in addressing insomnia. Primarily, a choice of CBT-I,
pharmacology, or a combination of the two must be made. A meta-analysis
of 21 RCTs of CBT-I (primarily stimulus control and sleep restriction
therapies) and pharmacological (BzRA) treatments for primary insomnia
concluded that effects for the two treatment modalities are comparable
in the short term, but CBT-I is more effective in decreasing sleep onset
latency (Smith et al., 2002). Additionally, a study by Sivertsen et
al. (2006) compared CBT-I, zopiclone, and placebo. The results clearly
favored CBT-I, which resulted in improved short- and long-term
functioning relative to zopiclone on three out of the four outcome
measures. Moreover, for most outcomes zopiclone was no better than
placebo. Because longer-term posttreatment follow-ups are often not
included in studies of pharmacological interventions, questions
concerning efficacy after treatment has ceased cannot yet be answered.
Addressing the issue of whether a combined pharmacological and CBT-I
approach is indicated, Morin, Colecchi, Stone, Sood, and Brink (1999)
compared pharmacological treatment alone (temazepam, with an initial
dosage of 7.5 mg and a maximum dosage

382

Sleep-Wake Disorders

of 30 mg per night), CBT-I alone (delivered in eight weekly sessions),
temazepam plus CBT-I (combination treatment), and placebo medication as
treatments for insomnia in older adults. All three active treatments
were associated with short-term clinical gains, while placebo was not.
However, only individuals who received CBT-I were found to sustain
treatment gains over time (up to 24-month follow-up). The combination
treatment was associated with some sustained gains, but treatment
efficacy became more variable over follow-up than in the CBT-I-alone
group. Additionally, study participants, their significant others, and
their treating clinicians rated the CBT-I to be more effective than and
preferable to pharmacotherapy alone (Morin, Colecchi, et al., 1999).

Brief Overview of Other Sleep Disorders Although a full description of
other sleep disorders and their treatment is beyond the scope of this
chapter, we provide a brief description of each of the other major sleep
disorders here. The presence of one of these disorders is an
exclusionary criterion for an insomnia disorder (APA, 2013). Thus, their
presence should be assessed in all insomnia cases. Each of these
disorders is relatively common and can have serious consequences for the
health and daytime functioning of the sufferer. For further information
on these disorders, we refer the reader to Kryger, Roth, and Dement
(2011).

Sleep Apnea Transient closure of the upper airway during sleep is
associated with disruption to sleep. The nighttime symptoms of sleep
apnea can include snoring, pauses in breathing during sleep, shortness
of breath during sleep, choking during sleep, headaches on waking, and
difficulty getting breath or breathlessness on waking. The adverse
outcomes include daytime sleepiness and cardiovascular problems.

Restless Legs Syndrome The symptoms of restless legs syndrome (RLS) are
a sensation of an urge to move the limbs (usually legs) and a feeling of
restlessness because of sensations in the limbs (usually legs). The
sensations start or get worse when resting, relaxing, or first going to
bed. A clear circadian pattern must be present.

Periodic Limb Movement Disorder The hallmark feature of periodic limb
movement disorder (PLMD) is repetitive episodes of limb movements during
sleep, usually the legs. The movements are associated with a partial or
full awakening.

Circadian Rhythm Disorders There are two main circadian rhythm
disorders: advanced phase (common among older adults), which involves
falling asleep early and waking up early, and delayed sleep phase

Summary and Future Directions

383

(common among adolescents), which involves not being able to fall asleep
until the early hours in the morning and sleeping well into the next
day.

Narcolepsy This is a disorder characterized by excessive sleepiness.
Episodes of short uncontrollable naps during the day are typical. Often
the nap is associated with cataplexy (loss of muscle tone triggered by
strong emotion), sleep paralysis, or hypnogogic hallucinations.

Hypersomnia Unlike the sleep disorders discussed previously in this
section, a diagnosis of hypersomnia is not an exclusionary criterion for
a diagnosis of insomnia. Hypersomnia is a sleep disorder characterized
by prolonged nighttime sleep episodes, excessive daytime sleepiness, and
frequent napping. Hypersomnia has been associated with emotional
disturbance, increased interpersonal problems (Roberts, Roberts, & Chen,
2001), a greater likelihood of substance abuse, and future incidence of
major depressive episodes (Breslau, Roth, Rosenthal, & Andreski, 1996).
Cognitive behavioral strategies discussed earlier are very adaptable to
treatment of hypersomnia (Kaplan & Harvey, 2009). See Kaplan and Harvey
(2009) for a comprehensive review.

Summary and Future Directions The most common sleep disorder is chronic
insomnia. This chapter provides a description of the disorder, an
overview of the various theories of the factors that predispose an
individual to developing insomnia, the factors that precipitate
insomnia, and those that perpetuate insomnia. In addition, it presents
an overview of the assessment and treatment of insomnia and a brief
introduction to other sleep disorders. Although humans spend
approximately one third of their lives sleeping, sleep is a relatively
new topic of scientific study, and there are a myriad of mysteries and
questions about the function of sleep and sleep disorders that are yet
to be answered. The results that have emerged to date clearly document
that sleep is critical for the health and well-being of humans
throughout the age ranges. As such, it is a domain that holds a large
number of exciting opportunities for future research. Before closing we
draw attention to three of the many interesting questions that remain to
be answered relating to chronic insomnia and the role of sleep in other
psychiatric and medical disorders.

Sleep Intervention for Children and Adolescents Given the evidence for
the efficacy and effectiveness of CBT-I for both adults and older
adults, the downward extension of developmentally appropriate CBT-I
components for adolescents and children has been of recent interest.
There is a small but growing evidence base reporting on the
effectiveness of using CBT-I components with children and adolescents
who suffer from sleep disturbance (Bootzin & Stevens, 2005; de Bruin,
Oort,

384

Sleep-Wake Disorders

Bögels, & Meijer, 2014; Gradisar, Dohnt, et al., 2011; Gradisar,
Gardner, & Dohnt, 2011; Owens, France, & Wiggs, 1999; Paine & Gradisar,
2011; Sadeh, 2005; Schlarb, Liddle, & Hautzinger, 2010). Moreover, a
transdiagnostic intervention has recently been developed to treat sleep
and circadian problems in children and adolescents (TranS-C-Youth;
Harvey, 2016). This intervention draws on relevant components from three
evidence-based interventions: (1) components from CBT-I to increase
homeostatic pressure to sleep (stimulus control and sleep restriction)
and reduce arousal (cognitive therapy); (2) components from the delayed
sleep phase type (DSPT) to gradually move bedtime earlier (planned sleep
modification) and get exposure to natural sunlight; and (3) components
from interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT) to stabilize daily
rhythms (e.g., physical and social activities) and sleep-wake schedules.
The developer of TranS-C-Youth adopted a transdiagnostic approach, with
the result that this treatment can be used for sleep problems in
multiple psychiatric disorders. This intervention is currently being
tested in a large community sample of youth (ages 10--18) who have
evening preference and are "at risk" in one or more domains (e.g.,
cognitive, behavioral, emotional) of their lives.

Improvement of Treatment There is no doubt that CBT-I is an effective
treatment, as indicated by several metaanalyses (Morin & Culbert, 1994;
Murtagh & Greenwood, 1995; Smith et al., 2002) and reviews conducted by
the Standards of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine (Chesson et al., 1999; Morin, Bootzin, et al., 2006; Morin,
Hauri, et al., 1999). However, the field is not as yet at a point where
patients can be offered a maximally effective psychological treatment,
as indicated by (a) the significant subset of patients who do not
improve following CBT-I (19% to 26%), (b) the average overall
improvement being in the range of 50% to 60% (Morin, Culbert, &
Schwartz, 1994; Murtagh & Greenwood, 1995), and (c) the fact that only a
minority of patients reach a high end state (i.e., become good sleepers)
(Harvey & Tang, 2003). Furthermore, the widely held assumption that a
treatment that addresses sleep will also effectively address the daytime
consequences of insomnia has not yet been supported (Means, Lichstein,
Epperson, & Johnson, 2000). In fact, there is some evidence that aspects
of the daytime impairment suffered by patients with insomnia are
independent of nighttime sleep and are instead associated with the
subjective perception of inadequate sleep (Neitzert Semler & Harvey,
2005). Hence, treatment development efforts that improve outcome and
target daytime symptoms are an important direction for the future.

Comorbidity The comorbidity between chronic insomnia and other
psychiatric or medical conditions has been widely recognized (NIH, 2005;
Buysse, 2005). The cause-effect relationship may be difficult to
establish, and therefore it is likely that treating insomnia may
alleviate symptoms of the comorbid condition. Morin and colleagues
(Morin, Bootzin, et al., 2006) as well as Smith and colleagues (2005)
suggest that improvement in sleep following CBT-I treatment has great
potential to facilitate improvement in medical and psychological
symptoms of the so-called primary psychiatric or medical disorder. In
fact, data

Summary and Future Directions

385

suggest that treating comorbid sleep disturbance improves symptoms in
PTSD (Germain, Shear, Hall, & Buysse, 2007), chronic pain (Currie,
Wilson, Pontefract, & deLaplante, 2000), depression (Manber et al.,
2008), and anxiety (Belleville, Cousineau, Levrier, & St-Pierre-Delorme,
2011), and also positive symptoms in psychotic patients (Freeman et al.,
2015). Moreover, in terms of sleep in bipolar disorder (Harvey, 2008b,
2011), as discussed above, treating sleep disturbance with CBT-I during
interepisode periods of bipolar disorder may prevent relapse into a mood
episode and increase quality of life (Harvey et al., 2015). Hence, this
is clearly an exciting direction for future exploration, and more
research on other comorbid medical and psychological symptoms/disorders
is needed. Theoretically, this links back to issues covered earlier in
this chapter that sleep likely has a mood and emotion regulatory role as
well as a role in bodily repair and immune system functioning. Hence,
sleep disturbance is likely to contribute to the exacerbation of
symptoms in psychiatric and medical disorders, and the treatment of
sleep disturbance may be critical for full recovery.

References Achermann P., & Borbély, A. A. (2011). Sleep homeostasis and
models of sleep regulation. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement
(Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed.,
pp. 431--444). Saint Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders. American Academy of
Sleep Medicine. (2014). International Classification of Sleep Disorders:
Diagnostic and coding manual (3rd ed.). Westchester, IL: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Ascher, L.
M., & Efran, J. (1978). Use of paradoxical intention in a behavioral
program for sleep onset insomnia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 46, 547--550. Bartel, K. A., Gradisar, M., & Williamson, P.
(2015). Protective and risk factors for adolescent sleep: A
meta-analytic review. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 21, 72--85. Bastien, C.
H., Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Validation of the Insomnia
Severity Index as an outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep
Medicine, 2, 297--307. Belleville, G., Cousineau, H., Levrier, K., &
St-PierreDelorme, M.-È. (2011). Meta-analytic review of the impact of
cognitive-behavior therapy for insomnia on concomitant anxiety. Clinical
Psychology Review, 31(4), 638--652. Besset, A., Villemin, E., Tafti, M.,
& Billiard, M. (1998). Homeostatic process and sleep spindles in
patients with sleep-maintenance insomnia: Effect of partial (21 h) sleep
deprivation. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
107(2), 122--132. Bonnet, M. H., & Arand, D. L. (1992). Caffeine use as
a model of acute and chronic insomnia. Sleep, 15, 526--536. Bonnet, M.
H., & Arand, D. L. (1995). 24-Hour metabolic rate in insomniacs and
matched normal sleepers. Sleep, 18(7), 581--588.

Bootzin, R. R. (1972). Stimulus control treatment for insomnia.
Proceedings of the American Psychological Association, 7, 395--396.
Bootzin, R. R. (1979). Effects of self-control procedures for insomnia.
American Journal of Clinical Biofeedback, 2, 70--77. Bootzin, R. R.,
Epstein, D., & Wood, J. M. (1991). Stimulus control instructions. In P.
J. Hauri (Ed.), Case studies in insomnia (pp. 19--28). New York, NY:
Plenum Press. Bootzin, R. R., & Stevens, S. J. (2005). Adolescents,
substance abuse, and the treatment of insomnia and daytime sleepiness.
Clinical Psychology Review, 25(5), 629--644. Borbély, A. A. (1982). A
two process model of sleep regulation. Human Neurobiology, 1, 195--204.
Breslau, N., Roth, T., Rosenthal, L., & Andreski, P. (1996). Sleep
disturbance and psychiatric disorders: A longitudinal epidemiological
study of young adults. Biological Psychiatry, 39, 411--418. Buysse, D.
J. (2005). Insomnia state of the science: An evolutionary,
evidence-based assessment. Sleep, 28(9), 1045--1046. Buysse, D.,
Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Lichstein, K. L., & Morin, C. M.
(2006). Recommendations for a standard research assessment of insomnia.
Sleep, 29, 1155--1173. Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Monk, T. H.,
Berman, S. R., & Kupfer, D. J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality
Index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research.
Psychiatry Research, 28, 193--213. Carney, C. E., Buysse, D. J.,
Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Krystal, A. D., Lichstein, K. L., &
Morin, C. M. (2012). The consensus sleep diary: Standardizing
prospective sleep self-monitoring. Sleep, 35, 287--302. Carskadon, M. A.
(2002). Factors influencing sleep patterns of adolescents. In M. A.
Carskadon (Ed.), Adolescent sleep patterns: Biological, social, and
psychological influences (pp. 4--26). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. Carskadon, M. A., & Dement, W. C. (2011). Normal human sleep: An
overview. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles
and practice of

386

References sleep medicine (5th ed., pp. 16--26). Saint Louis, MO:
Elsevier Saunders. Carskadon, M. A., Mindell, J. A., & Drake, C. (2006).
2006 Sleep in America poll. The National Sleep Foundation. Retrieved
from http://www .sleepfoundation.org/hottopics/index.php?secid16&id=392
Chambers, M. J., & Alexander, S. D. (1992). Assessment and prediction of
outcome for a brief behavioral insomnia treatment program. Journal of
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 23, 289--297. Chambless,
D. L., & Hollon, S. D. (1998). Defining empirically supported theories.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1, 7--18. Chesson, A. L.,
Jr., Anderson, W. M., Littner, M., Davila, D., Hartse, K., Johnson, S.,
... Rafecas, J. (1999). Practice parameters for the nonpharmacologic
treatment of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine
report. Standards of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine. Sleep, 22, 1128--1133. Currie, S. R., Wilson, K. G.,
Pontefract, A. J., & deLaplante, L. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral
treatment of insomnia secondary to chronic pain. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 68, 407--416. Dauvilliers, Y., Morin, C.,
Cervena, K., Carlander, B., Touchon, J., Besset, A., & Billiard, M.
(2005). Family studies in insomnia. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
58(3), 271--278. de Bruin, E. J., Oort, F. J., Bögels, S. M., & Meijer,
A. M. (2014). Efficacy of internet and groupadministered cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents: A pilot study.
Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 12(3), 235--254. Deuschle, M., Schredl, M.,
Schilling, C., Wüst, S., Frank, J., Witt, S. H., ... Schulze, T. G.
(2010). Association between a serotonin transporter length polymorphism
and primary insomnia. Sleep, 33(3), 343--347. Dinges, D. F., Pack, F.,
Williams, K., Gillen, K. A., Powell, J. W., Ott, G. E., ... Pack, A. I.
(1997). Cumulative sleepiness, mood disturbance, and psychomotor
vigilance performance decrements during a week of sleep restricted to
4--5 hours per night. Sleep, 20, 267--277. Dinges, D. F., Rogers, N. L.,
& Baynard, M. D. (2005). Chronic sleep deprivation. In M. H. Kryger, T.
Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of

387

sleep medicine (4th ed., pp. 67--76). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier
Saunders. Drake, C. L., Scofield, H., & Roth, T. (2008). Vulnerability
to insomnia: The role of familial aggregation. Sleep Medicine, 9(3),
297--302. Edinger, J. D., Bonnet, M. H., Bootzin, R. R., Doghramji, K.,
Dorsey, C. M., Espie, C. A., ... American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work
Group. (2004). Derivation of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia:
Report of an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work Group. Sleep, 27,
1567--1596. Edinger, J. D., Wohlgemuth, W. K., Radtke, R. A., Marsh, G.
R., & Quillian, R. E. (2001). Cognitive behavioral therapy for treatment
of chronic primary insomnia: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 285,
1856--1864. Espie, C. A. (2002). Insomnia: Conceptual issues in the
development, persistence, and treatment of sleep disorder in adults.
Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 215--243. Espie, C. A., Broomfield, N.
M., MacMahon, K. M., Macphee, L. M., & Taylor, L. M. (2006). The
attention-intention-effort pathway in the development of
psychophysiologic insomnia: A theoretical review. Sleep Medicine
Reviews, 10, 215--245. Espie, C. A., & Lindsay, W. R. (1985).
Paradoxical intention in the treatment of chronic insomnia: Six case
studies illustrating variability in therapeutic response. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 23, 703--709. Ford, D. E., & Kamerow, D. B.
(1989). Epidemiologic study of sleep disturbances and psychiatric
disorders: An opportunity for prevention? JAMA, 262, 1479--1484.
Fortier-Brochu, É., Beaulieu-Bonneau, S., Ivers, H., & Morin, C. M.
(2012). Insomnia and daytime cognitive performance: A meta-analysis.
Sleep Medicine Reviews, 16(1), 83--94. Freeman, D., Waite, F., Startup,
H., Myers, E., Lister, R., McInerney, J., ... Yu, L.-M. (2015). Efficacy
of cognitive behavioural therapy for sleep improvement in patients with
persistent delusions and hallucinations (BEST): A prospective,
assessor-blind, randomised controlled pilot trial. Lancet Psychiatry,
2(11), 975--983. Germain, A., Shear, M. K., Hall, M., & Buysse, D. J.
(2007). Effects of a brief behavioral treatment for PTSD-related sleep
disturbances: A pilot study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45,
627--632.

388

Sleep-Wake Disorders

Gordon, A. M., & Chen, S. (2013). The role of sleep in interpersonal
conflict: Do sleepless nights mean worse fights? Social Psychological &
Personality Science, 5(2), 168--175. Gradisar, M., Dohnt, H., Gardner,
G., Paine, S., Starkey, K., Menne, A., ... Trenowden, S. (2011). A
randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavior therapy plus bright
light therapy for adolescent delayed sleep phase disorder. Sleep,
34(12), 1671--1680. Gradisar, M., Gardner, G., & Dohnt, H. (2011).
Recent worldwide sleep patterns and problems during adolescence: A
review and meta-analysis of age, region, and sleep. Sleep Medicine,
12(2), 110--118. Harvey, A. G. (2002). A cognitive model of insomnia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40, 869--894. Harvey, A. G. (2005). A
cognitive theory of and therapy for chronic insomnia. Journal of
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19, 41--60. Harvey, A. G. (2008a). Insomnia,
psychiatric disorders, and the transdiagnostic perspective. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 299--303. Harvey, A. G.
(2008b). Sleep and circadian rhythms in bipolar disorder: Seeking
synchrony, harmony, and regulation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165,
820--829. Harvey, A. G. (2011). Sleep and circadian functioning:
Critical mechanisms in the mood disorders? Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 7, 297--319. Harvey, A. G. (2016). A transdiagnostic
intervention for youth sleep and circadian problems. Cognitive and
Behavioral Practice, 23(3), 341--355. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpra.2015.06.001
Harvey, A. G., Bélanger, L., Talbot, L., Eidelman, P., Beaulieu-Bonneau,
S., Fortier-Brochu, É., ... Morin, C. M. (2014). Comparative efficacy of
behavior therapy, cognitive therapy, and cognitive behavior therapy for
chronic insomnia: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 82(4), 670--683. Harvey, A. G., Sharpley, A.,
Ree, M. J., Stinson, K., & Clark, D. M. (2007). An open trial of
cognitive therapy for chronic insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
45, 2491--2501. Harvey, A. G., Soehner, A. M., Kaplan, K. A., Hein, K.,
Lee, J., Kanady, J., ... Buysse, D. J. (2015). Treating insomnia
improves mood state, sleep, and functioning in bipolar disorder: A pilot
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 83(3), 564--577.

Harvey, A. G., & Tang, N.K.J. (2003). Cognitive behavior therapy for
insomnia: Can we rest yet? Sleep Medicine Reviews, 7, 237--262. Harvey,
C. J., Gehrman, P., & Espie, C. A. (2014). Who is predisposed to
insomnia: A review of familial aggregation, stress-reactivity,
personality and coping style. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 18(3), 217--227.
Heath, A. C., Kendler, K. S., Eaves, L. J., & Martin, N. G. (1990).
Evidence for genetic influences on sleep disturbance and sleep pattern
in twins. Sleep, 13(4), 318--335. Hebert, E. A., Vincent, N., Lewycky,
S., & Walsh, K. (2010). Attrition and adherence in the online treatment
of chronic insomnia. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 8(3), 141--150. Hoban,
T. F. (2004). Sleep and its disorders in children. Seminars in
Neurology, 24, 327--340. Hoddes, E., Zarcone, V., Smythe, H., Phillips,
R., & Dement, W. C. (1973). Quantification of sleepiness: A new
approach. Psychophysiology, 10, 431--436. Holbrook, A. M., Crowther, R.,
Lotter, A., Cheng, C., & King, D. (2000). The diagnosis and management
of insomnia in clinical practice: A practical evidencebased approach.
Canadian Medical Association Journal, 162, 216--220. Jacobson, E.
(1934). Progressive relaxation. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press. Johnson, E. O., Roth, T., Schultz, L., & Breslau, N. (2006).
Epidemiology of DSM-IV insomnia in adolescence: Lifetime prevalence,
chronicity, and an emergent gender difference. Pediatrics, 117(2),
e247--e256. Kaplan, K. A., & Harvey, A. G. (2009). Hypersomnia across
mood disorders: A review and synthesis. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 13,
275--285. Kryger, M. H., Roth, T., & Dement, W. C. (Eds.). (2011).
Principles and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier Saunders. Krystal, A. D. (2009). A compendium of
placebocontrolled trials of the risks/benefits of pharmacological
treatments for insomnia: The empirical basis for U.S. clinical practice.
Sleep Medicine Reviews, 13, 265--274. Krystal, A. D. (2011).
Pharmacologic treatment: Other medications. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, &
W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed.,
pp. 916--930). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders. Krystal, A. D.,
Walsh, J. K., Laska, E., Caron, J., Amato, D. A., Wessel, T., & Roth, T.
(2003). Sustained

References efficacy of eszopiclone over 6 nights of nightly treatment:
Results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in
adults with chronic insomnia. Sleep, 26, 793--799. Kupfer, D. J., &
Reynolds, C. F., 3rd. (1997). Management of insomnia. New England
Journal of Medicine, 336, 341--346. Lack, L. C., & Bootzin, R. B.
(2003). Circadian rhythm factors in insomnia and their treatment. In M.
L. Perlis & K. L. Lichstein (Eds.), Treating sleep disorders: Principles
and practice of behavioral sleep medicine (pp. 305--343). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley. LeBlanc, M., Mérette, C., Savard, J., Ivers, H., Baillargeon, L.,
& Morin, C. M. (2009). Incidence and risk factors of insomnia in a
population-based sample. Sleep, 32(8), 1027--1037. Léger, D.,
Guilleminault, C., Bader, G., Lévy, E., & Paillard, M. (2002). Medical
and socio-professional impact of insomnia. Sleep, 25(6), 625--629.
Léger, D., Morin, C. M., Uchiyama, M., Hakimi, Z., Cure, S., & Walsh, J.
K. (2012). Chronic insomnia, quality-of-life, and utility scores:
Comparison with good sleepers in a cross-sectional international survey.
Sleep Medicine, 13(1), 43--51. Lichstein, K. (2000). Secondary insomnia.
In K. Lichstein & C. Morin (Eds.), Treatment of late-life insomnia
(pp. 297--319). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Lichstein, K. L., Durrence, H.
H., Taylor, D. J., Bush, A. J., & Riedel, B. W. (2003). Quantitative
criteria for insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 427--445.
Lichstein, K. L., & Riedel, B. W. (1994). Behavioral assessment and
treatment of insomnia: A review with an emphasis on clinical
application. Behavior Therapy, 25, 659--688. Littner, M., Hirshkowitz,
M., Kramer, M., Kapen, S., Anderson, W. M., Bailey, D., ... Standards of
Practice Committee. (2003). Practice parameters for using
polysomnography to evaluate insomnia: An update. Sleep, 26(6), 754--760.
Lundh, L.-G. (1998). Cognitive-behavioural analysis and treatment of
insomnia. Scandinavian Journal of Behaviour Therapy, 27, 10--29. Manber,
R., Edinger, J. D., Gress, J. L., San Pedro-Salcedo, M. G., Kuo, T. F.,
& Kalista, T. (2008). Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia enhances
depression outcome in patients with comorbid major depressive disorder
and insomnia. Sleep, 31, 489--495.

389

Martin, S. A., Aikens, J. E., & Chervin, R. D. (2004). Toward
cost-effectiveness analysis in the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia.
Sleep Medicine Reviews, 8, 63--72. Means, M. K., Lichstein, K. L.,
Epperson, M. T., & Johnson, C. T. (2000). Relaxation therapy for
insomnia: Nighttime and daytime effects. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
38, 665--678. Monroe, L. J. (1967). Psychological and physiological
differences between good and poor sleepers. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 72, 255--264. Morgenthaler, T., Alessi, C., Friedman, L.,
Owens, J., Kapur, V., Boehlecke, B., ... American Academy of Sleep
Medicine. (2007). Practice parameters for the use of actigraphy in the
assessment of sleep and sleep disorders: An update for 2007. Sleep,
30(4), 519--529. Morin, C. M. (1993). Insomnia: Psychological assessment
and management. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Morin, C. M., Bélanger,
L., LeBlanc, M., Ivers, H., Savard, J., Espie, C. A., ... Grégoire,
J.-P. (2009). The natural history of insomnia. Archives of Internal
Medicine, 169(5), 447. Morin, C. M., Bootzin, R. R., Buysse, D. J.,
Edinger, J. D., Espie, C. A., & Lichstein, K. L. (2006). Psychological
and behavioral treatment of insomnia: An update of recent evidence
(1998--2004). Sleep, 29, 1396--1406. Morin, C. M., Colecchi, C., Stone,
J., Sood, R., & Brink, D. (1999). Behavioral and pharmacological
therapies for late-life insomnia. JAMA, 281, 991--999. Morin, C. M., &
Culbert, P. (1994). Nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia: A
meta-analysis of treatment efficacy. American Journal of Psychiatry,
151(8), 1172--1180. Morin, C. M., Culbert, J. P., & Schwartz, S. M.
(1994). Nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia: A meta-analysis
of treatment efficacy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1172--1180.
Morin, C. M., Drake, C., Harvey, A. G., Krystal, A. D., Manber, R.,
Riemann, D., & Spiegelhalder, K. (2015). Insomnia disorder. Nature
Reviews Disease Primers. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.26 Morin, C. M., &
Espie, C. A. (2003). Insomnia: A clinical guide to assessment and
treatment. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers. Morin, C.
M., Hauri, P. J., Espie, C. A., Spielman, A. J., Buysse, D. J., &
Bootzin, R. R. (1999). Nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia:
An

390

Sleep-Wake Disorders

American Academy of Sleep Medicine review. Sleep, 22, 1134--1156. Morin,
C. M., LeBlanc, M., Daley, M., Gregoire, J. P., & Mérette, C. (2006).
Epidemiology of insomnia: Prevalence, self-help treatments,
consultations, and determinants of help-seeking behaviors. Sleep
Medicine, 7(2), 123--130. Morin, C. M., Rodrigue, S., & Ivers, H.
(2003). Role of stress, arousal, and coping skills in primary insomnia.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 259--267. Morphy, H., Dunn, K. M., Lewis,
M., Boardman, H. F., & Croft, P. R. (2007). Epidemiology of insomnia: A
longitudinal study in a UK population. Sleep, 30(3), 274--280. Murtagh,
D.R.R., & Greenwood, K. M. (1995). Identifying effective psychological
treatments for insomnia: A meta-analysis. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 63(1), 79--89. National Institutes of Health.
(2005). National Institutes of Health State of the Science Conference
statement on manifestations and management of chronic insomnia in
adults, June 13--15, 2005. Sleep, 28, 1049--1057. Neitzert Semler, C., &
Harvey, A. G. (2005). Misperception of sleep can adversely affect
daytime functioning in insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43,
843--856. Nowell, P. D., Mazumdar, S., Buysse, D. J., Dew, M. A.,
Reynolds, C. F., 3rd, & Kupfer, D. J. (1997). Benzodiazepines and
zolpidem for chronic insomnia: A meta-analysis of treatment efficacy.
JAMA, 278, 2170--2177. Ohayon, M. M., Carskadon, M. A, Guilleminault,
C., & Vitiello, M. V. (2004). Meta-analysis of quantitative sleep
parameters from childhood to old age in healthy individuals: Developing
normative sleep values across the human lifespan. Sleep, 27(7),
1255--1273. Ohayon, M. M., & Reynolds, C. F. (2009). Epidemiological and
clinical relevance of insomnia diagnosis algorithms according to the
DSM-IV and the International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD).
Sleep Medicine, 10(9), 952--960. Owens, J. L., France, K. G., & Wiggs,
L. (1999). Behavioural and cognitive-behavioural interventions for sleep
disorders in infants and children: A review. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 3,
281--302. Paine, S., & Gradisar, M. (2011). A randomised controlled
trial of cognitive-behaviour therapy for behavioural insomnia of
childhood in school-aged

children. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49(6--7), 379--388. Perlis, M.
L., Giles, D. E., Mendelson, W. B., Bootzin, R. R., & Wyatt, J. K.
(1997). Psychophysiological insomnia: The behavioural model and a
neurocognitive perspective. Journal of Sleep Research, 6, 179--188.
Perlis, M. L., & Lichstein, K. L. (Eds.). (2003). Treating sleep
disorders: Principles and practice of behavioral sleep medicine.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Perlis, M. L., McCall, W. V., Krystal, A. D., &
Walsh, J. K. (2004). Long-term, non-nightly administration of zolpidem
in the treatment of patients with primary insomnia. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 65, 1128--1137. Perlis, M. L., Merica, H., Smith, M. T., &
Giles, D. E. (2001). Beta EEG activity and insomnia. Sleep Medicine
Reviews, 5, 363--374. Perlis, M. L., Smith, M. T., & Pigeon, W. R.
(2005). Etiology and pathophysiology of insomnia. In M. H. Kryger, T.
Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine
(4th ed., pp. 714--725). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders. Pilcher,
J. J., & Huffcutt, A. I. (1996). Effects of sleep deprivation on
performance: A meta-analysis. Sleep, 19, 318--326. Pillai, V., Roth, T.,
& Drake, C. L. (2015). The nature of stable insomnia phenotypes. Sleep,
38(1), 127--138. Reynolds, C. F., & Redline, S. (2010). The DSM-V
sleep-wake disorders nosology: An update and an invitation to the sleep
community. Sleep, 33, 10--11. Roberts, R. E., Roberts, C. R., & Chen, I.
G. (2001). Functioning of adolescents with symptoms of disturbed sleep.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 30, 1--18. Roth, T., Coulouvrat, C.,
Hajak, G., Lakoma, M. D., Sampson, N. A., Shahly, V., ... Kessler, R. C.
(2011). Prevalence and perceived health associated with insomnia based
on DSM-IV-TR; International Statistical Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision; and Research Diagnostic
Criteria/International Classification of Sleep Disorders, Second Edition
criteria: Results from the America Insomnia Survey. Biological
Psychiatry, 69(6), 592--600. Rybarczyk, B., Lopez, M., Schelble, K., &
Stepanski, E. (2005). Home-based video CBT for comorbid geriatric
insomnia: A pilot study using secondary data analyses. Behavioral Sleep
Medicine, 3, 158--175.

References Sadeh, A. (2005). Cognitive-behavioral treatment for
childhood sleep disorders. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 612--628.
Schlarb, A. A., Liddle, C. C., & Hautzinger, M. (2010). A multimodal
program for treatment of insomnia in adolescents: A pilot study. Nature
and Science of Sleep, 3, 13. Sivertsen, B., Omvik, S., Pallesen, S.,
Bjorvatn, B., Havik, O. E., Kvale, G., ... Nordhus, I. H. (2006).
Cognitive behavioral therapy vs zopiclone for treatment of chronic
primary insomnia in older adults: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA,
295, 2851--2858. Sloan, E. P., Hauri, P., Bootzin, R., Morin, C. M.,
Stevenson, M., & Shapiro, C. M. (1993). The nuts and bolts of behavioral
therapy for insomnia. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 37, 19--37.
Smith, L. J., Nowakowski, S., Soeffing, J. P., Orff, H. J., & Perlis, M.
L. (2003). The measurement of sleep. In M. L. Perlis & K. L. Lichstein
(Eds.), Treating sleep disorders: Principles and practice of behavioral
sleep medicine (pp. 29--73). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Smith, M. T., Huang, M.
I., & Manber, R. (2005). Cognitive behavior therapy for chronic insomnia
occurring within the context of medical and psychiatric disorders.
Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 559--592. Smith, M. T., Perlis, M. L.,
Park, A., Smith, M. S., Pennington, J., Giles, D. E., & Buysse, D. J.
(2002). Comparative meta-analysis of pharmacotherapy and behavior
therapy for persistent insomnia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(1),
5--11. Spielman, A. J., Caruso, L. S., & Glovinsky, P. B. (1987). A
behavioral perspective on insomnia treatment. Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 10, 541--553. Spielman, A. J., Saskin, P., & Thorpy, M.
J. (1987). Treatment of chronic insomnia by restriction of time in bed.
Sleep, 10, 45--56. Stepanski, E. J., Zorick, F., Roehrs, T., & Roth, T.
(2000). Effects of sleep deprivation on daytime sleepiness in primary
insomnia. Sleep, 23, 215--219. Talbot, L. S., Hairston, I. S., Eidelman,
P., Gruber, J., & Harvey, A. G. (2009). The effect of mood on sleep
onset latency and REM sleep in interepisode bipolar

391

disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118(3), 448--458. Talbot, L.
S., Stone, S., Gruber, J., Hairston, I. S., Eidelman, P., & Harvey, A.
G. (2012). A test of the bidirectional association between sleep and
mood in bipolar disorder and insomnia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
121(1), 39--50. Tate, B. A., Richardson, G. S., & Carskadon, M. A.
(2002). Maturational changes in sleep-wake timing: Longitudinal studies
of the circadian activity rhythm of a diurnal rodent. In M. A. Carskadon
(Ed.), Adolescent sleep patterns: Biological, social, and psychological
influences (pp. 40--49). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Troxel, W. M., Robles, T. F., Hall, M., & Buysse, D. J. (2007). Marital
quality and the marital bed: Examining the covariation between
relationship quality and sleep. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 11(5), 389--404.
Viola, A. U., Archer, S. N., James, L. M., Groeger, J. A., Lo, J.C.Y.,
Skene, D. J., ... Dijk, D. J. (2007). PER3 polymorphism predicts sleep
structure and waking performance. Current Biology, 17(7), 613--618.
Walker, M. P. (2011). The role of sleep in neurocognitive function. In
C. M. Morin & C. A. Espie (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of sleep and sleep
disorders (pp. 110--130). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Walker,
M. P., & Stickgold, R. (2006). Sleep, memory, and plasticity. Annual
Review of Psychology, 57, 139--166. Walsh, J. K., & Roth, T. (2011).
Pharmacological treatment of insomnia: Benzodiazepine receptor agonists.
In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice
of sleep medicine (5th ed., pp. 905--915). Saint Louis, MO: Elsevier
Saunders. Watson, N. F., Goldberg, J., Arguelles, L., & Buchwald, D.
(2006). Genetic and environmental influences on insomnia, daytime
sleepiness, and obesity in twins. Sleep, 29(5), 645--649. Zee, P. C., &
Turek, F. W. (2006). Sleep and health: Everywhere and in both
directions. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 1686--1688. Zhang, B., &
Wing, Y.-K. (2006). Sex differences in insomnia: A meta-analysis. Sleep,
29(1), 85--93.

Chapter 10 Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum Arthur T. Ryan,
Hanan D. Trotman, Vijay A. Mittal, Kevin D. Tessner, and Elaine F.
Walker

I can't find the words to describe it. Schizophrenia is like a
disconnect. My thoughts and my feelings are not connected. I'm not
connected with other people. I don't understand them and they don't
understand me. It is like life is just passing me by, and it is out of
my control. My mind is out of my control and it is frightening.
---Schizophrenia patient

T

he preceding words are from a man in his 40s who was diagnosed with
schizophrenia during his 20s. Schizophrenia is a brain disorder whose
symptoms typically show up by young adulthood and continue as a chronic
condition, albeit waxing and waning over time. It has affected nearly
every aspect of this man's life, including making friends, getting
married, and holding down a job. This chapter will attempt to explain
how this complex and often misunderstood illness can have such pervasive
effects upon those who suffer from it. Schizophrenia falls into the
broader category of psychotic disorders. The defining symptoms of
psychotic disorders involve a disconnect from reality. Psychotic
symptoms include hallucinations (perceiving things that aren't there),
delusions (strange fixed beliefs that are not amenable to change despite
exposure to contradictory evidence), disorganized and illogical
thinking, and bizarre behavior. Schizophrenia is probably the disorder
most closely associated with psychotic symptoms in the minds of
clinicians and the general public alike. Other psychotic disorders
include bipolar I disorder, major depressive disorder with psychotic
features, and delusional disorder. As this chapter will go on to
explain, however, schizophrenia's psychotic symptoms are just one
component of this complex and often misunderstood disease.

392

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

393

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria The modern conceptualization of
schizophrenia divides its symptoms into three major categories. The
names of some of these categories may be confusing at first, but once
one understands the underlying logic, the categories can help to
sensibly organize schizophrenia's wide array of symptoms. The three
categories are positive symptoms, negative symptoms, and cognitive
symptoms. Positive symptoms are the defining feature of psychotic
disorders. Positive symptoms are the set of symptoms typically referred
to as psychotic symptoms: that is, those symptoms that involve a clear
break with reality. As noted, these symptoms may occur within the
context of schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, or they may be
triggered by other causes, such as heavy metal poisoning. The term
positive symptoms is used because these symptoms add on to regular,
everyday experience: in other words, they are experiences that
individuals with psychotic symptoms have that most other people do not
experience in their day-to-day lives. Hallucinations are one kind of
positive symptom: they are perceptual experiences that occur without an
external stimulus. Some examples of hallucinations are hearing voices
when no one is speaking, seeing shadowy figures, and smelling gasoline
when none is present. Individuals who do not have schizophrenia or any
other illness do occasionally experience hallucinations (Tien, 1991).
However, individuals with schizophrenia who experience hallucinations
often have delusional beliefs associated with those hallucinations
(e.g., they believe they hear voices because a radio has been surgically
implanted into their brain), which is generally not true of
hallucinations experienced by people without psychotic illness (e.g.,
they hear the footsteps of a deceased loved one coming in the door, and
they believe their mind is playing tricks on them). The most common
hallucinations in schizophrenia are auditory hallucinations, but
hallucinations can occur in all other sensory modalities (visual,
tactile, olfactory, and gustatory; Behrendt & Young, 2004). Delusions
are another kind of positive symptom. They are fixed false beliefs that
are not common in an individual's cultural milieu and are not amenable
to change even when confronted with conflicting evidence. Delusions can
take a wide variety of forms. One particularly common type of delusion
is a paranoid delusion. Paranoid delusions involve a belief that one or
more people are trying to harm the individual even though there is no
evidence to support that belief. For example, a person may start to
believe that her husband of many years is trying to poison her. Or, as
occurred in the case of Nobel Prize--winning mathematician John Nash, an
individual may believe that a huge conspiracy has been organized against
him and may start to see everyday events as being tied into this
conspiracy (e.g., someone's coughing at a bus stop is interpreted as a
secret signal being communicated to other agents in the area). As one
might imagine, paranoid delusions can wreak terrible damage upon a
person's social life and his or her ability to function in the
workplace. Paranoid delusions are by no means the only kind of delusions
that occur in schizophrenia. Other common delusions include those of
thought insertion (e.g., people are inserting thoughts into my head),
thought broadcasting (e.g., people can hear my thoughts), grandiose
delusions (e.g., I am a particularly famous person, possibly even a
historical

394

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

or fictional character such as Napoleon or Superman), control delusions
(e.g., my body and actions are controlled by an external force), and
bizarre delusions (delusions that are patently absurd; e.g., my stomach
has been replaced with a swimming pool). It is important to keep the
distinction between hallucinations and delusions clear. Delusions are
false beliefs, whereas hallucinations are false perceptual experiences
that may or may not be accompanied by false beliefs. So, on the one
hand, if someone interprets a man's coughing as a secret message, that
is a delusion: the man really is coughing, it is just the individual's
beliefs about the coughing that are atypical. On the other hand, if
someone hears a voice in her head that she interprets as hearing another
person's thoughts, that is a hallucination with an associated delusional
belief. Disorganized thoughts and behavior are another kind of positive
symptom. Disorganized thinking is often diagnosed on the basis of
disorganized speech. Elyn Saks, a University of Southern California law
professor, writes movingly of her experience with schizophrenia in The
Center Cannot Hold (2008). Professor Saks gives examples of her own
disorganized speech and thought throughout the book. In response to her
doctor asking if anything was wrong with her, Saks responded: "There's
cheese and there's whizzes, I'm a cheese whiz. It has to do with effort
and subliminal choice. Vertigo and killing" (Saks, 2008, p. 191). Later,
after her doctor said that Saks's friends were worried about her, Saks
responded: "Oh, they're nice. Do you like spice? I ate it thrice.
They're all hurting me! They're hurting me and I'm scared!" (Saks, 2008,
p. 191). As one can see, the individual sentences may be grammatical and
even seemingly relevant to the topic at hand, but they are also often
nonsensical or contradictory. Disorganized behavior involves behavior
that is disconnected from the physical reality around the person and
seems random or dangerous. Returning to Saks again, she describes how
she stood up and announced, "Let's go out on the roof!" in the middle of
a study session at the Yale Law School library, and she promptly did
just that without any clear reason for doing so (Saks, 2008, p. 1).
Disorganized behavior may sometimes be driven by underlying delusions
(e.g., an individual might say "let's go out on the roof" because he
believes that CIA agents are in pursuit), but sometimes disorganized
behavior has no clear rationale, delusional or otherwise. Catatonia
refers to a subset of disorganized behaviors that have been classified
into a distinct subcategory because they appear to be linked in their
presentation and neural underpinnings (Taylor & Fink, 2003). Similar to
other disorganized behavior, catatonia involves behavior that is not a
response to what is happening in a person's environment: this behavior
may take the form of immobility (e.g., waxy flexibility, where
individuals with catatonia maintain whatever body position they are left
in), or purposeless, repetitive behavior (e.g., repeating the same
pattern of facial expressions over and over). While historically
associated with schizophrenia, catatonic symptoms can be present in a
wide variety of psychotic disorders. In contrast to positive symptoms,
negative symptoms involve the diminution of a part of the normal
psychological experience that most people have (Kirkpatrick, Fenton,
Carpenter, & Marder, 2006). The following are some specific examples of
negative symptoms. Reduced emotional experience is the reduced ability
to imagine or experience emotional extremes. Avolition is a decrease in
motivated, self-directed behavior: individuals may no longer seek out
opportunities to engage with other people, may refrain from tasks they
used to enjoy, and may even spend significant amounts of time sitting
around

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

395

doing nothing in particular. Alogia is a decreased amount of speech
output. Diminished emotional expressiveness is a decreased production of
facial expressions associated with emotions. Anhedonia is a decrease in
the ability to experience pleasurable sensations or imagine experiencing
pleasure in response to remembered situations (Gard, Kring, Gard, Horan,
& Green, 2007). When one examines the wide variety of negative symptoms
that exist, it is apparent that they can affect nearly every aspect of a
person's life: engaging in meaningful work, socializing with others, and
experiencing pleasure and satisfaction in those activities.
Unsurprisingly then, the severity of negative symptoms has been found to
predict poor functioning even more strongly than the severity of
positive symptoms (Strauss et al., 2013). The third set of symptoms
associated with schizophrenia are perhaps the most subtle but
nonetheless may be the most impairing: these are the cognitive symptoms.
People with schizophrenia can have a wide variety of problems with
attention (Nuechterlein, Luck, Lustig, & Sarter, 2009). They can have
difficulty ignoring distractors in the environment (e.g., focusing on a
conversation in a noisy room), persisting in a task that requires
extended attention (e.g., reading a paragraph without drifting off into
thoughts about something else), and inhibiting automatic behavior (e.g.,
stopping themselves from pressing the gas pedal when the light turns
green when another car is still in the intersection). Individuals with
schizophrenia also have difficulty with performing simple mental tasks
quickly (e.g., sorting mail by last name). They often have impaired
working memory (e.g., difficulty doing mental math) as well as
longer-term verbal memory (e.g., difficulty remembering a list of
grocery items while shopping). People with schizophrenia also show
difficulties in social cognition: that is, thinking specifically related
to social information (e.g., identifying facial expressions). As one can
tell from even this brief synopsis of cognitive impairments in
schizophrenia, cognitive symptoms affect nearly every aspect of
domestic, occupational, academic, and social life. While not as obvious
as paranoid delusions or a lack of facial expressions, the pervasiveness
of cognitive symptoms means that deficits in this area are often the
best predictors of whether or not someone with schizophrenia will be
able to function well in everyday life (Bowie, Reichenberg, Patterson,
Heaton, & Harvey, 2006). In day-to-day living with schizophrenia,
symptoms from these different categories can overlap and reinforce one
another. For example, someone with schizophrenia might no longer spend
time with her friends because she is afraid they are plotting against
her (positive symptom), because she can't imagine having a good time if
she did hang out with them (negative symptom), and because when she does
hang out with them, she finds it difficult to follow their conversation
(cognitive symptom). Nonetheless, this division of schizophrenia
symptoms into categories is useful because symptoms within each of the
three categories do tend to have some important similarities (e.g., how
responsive they are to medication and when they first appear in the
course of the illness). It is also worth noting that individuals with
schizophrenia often suffer from a variety of other diagnosable mental
disorders, both before and after the onset of schizophrenia (Buckley,
Miller, Lehrer, & Castle, 2009). Individuals with schizophrenia are more
likely to suffer from depression, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive, and
neurodevelopmental and learning disorders than people in the general
population. The rate of substance use disorders among individuals with
schizophrenia is particularly high; as many as 47% of individuals with
schizophrenia meet lifetime DSM criteria for a substance use disorder

396

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

(Buckley et al., 2009). These disorders add to the already heavy burden
of schizophrenia itself. The symptoms of schizophrenia do not generally
stay at a constant intensity across the entire lifespan of an individual
with schizophrenia. Positive symptoms in particular often come in waves,
sometimes referred to as psychotic episodes, that wax and wane over an
individual's life (Andreasen et al., 2005). This fluctuating intensity
of positive symptoms is present even among individuals who never take
medications to treat their positive symptoms, suggesting that the
fluctuations are not simply due to individuals taking and then not
taking their medications over time. Positive symptoms can fluctuate even
in individuals who take their medication regularly, sometimes
necessitating dosage adjustments or temporary hospitalizations for
individuals whose symptoms were previously well controlled by the exact
same dose of medication. In the long run, positive symptoms often,
though not always, decline in severity as an individual ages. The
mathematician John Nash provides a good example of this. Nash suffered
from uncontrolled positive symptoms of schizophrenia until they slowly
remitted when he was in his sixties (Nasar, 2011). In contrast to
positive symptoms, negative symptoms and cognitive symptoms tend to be
more stable, both in the short run and over a person's lifespan (Harvey,
Koren, Reichenberg, & Bowie, 2006).

How to Differentiate Symptoms of Schizophrenia From Symptoms of Other
Psychotic Disorders One way to better understand schizophrenia and other
psychotic disorders is to learn about the process of making a
differential diagnosis between schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders. Recall that positive symptoms (e.g., hallucinations) can
occur in bipolar I disorder and other psychotic disorders, so the
presence of positive symptoms itself does not differentiate between
schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. Furthermore, the presence
of depression or manic symptoms cannot be used to rule out the diagnosis
of schizophrenia, as the majority of people with schizophrenia will have
at least one major mood episode during their lifetime (Buckley et al.,
2009). The negative and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia also often
mimic the symptoms of a mood episode, further complicating the
distinction. So how does one make the distinction between schizophrenia
and other psychotic disorders? This chapter will now explore this issue,
using the symptom criteria laid out in the fifth edition of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) as a guide
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Let us start with
differentiating between schizophrenia and bipolar I disorder. First, to
be diagnosed with bipolar I disorder, an individual has to have had at
least one manic episode. So if there is no evidence of a manic episode,
that eliminates the possibility of bipolar I disorder. Second, psychotic
symptoms in bipolar disorder occur nearly exclusively during mood
episodes, that is, during diagnosable manic or depressive episodes. So
if psychotic symptoms occur predominantly outside of mood episodes, then
the person does not have bipolar I disorder. The logic is similar when
diagnosing someone with major depressive disorder with psychotic
features: the psychotic symptoms should only occur during major
depressive episodes. So if someone has psychotic symptoms frequently
outside of major depressive or manic episodes, can one definitively
diagnose that individual with schizophrenia? Not quite yet. There is a
third potential diagnosis that lies between

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

397

schizophrenia and mood disorders with psychotic features:
schizoaffective disorder. To be diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder,
an individual needs to (a) have had distinct mood episodes that included
psychotic symptoms, (b) have had psychotic symptoms that occurred for 2
weeks or longer outside of mood episodes, and (c) have experienced mood
episodes during a majority of the time since the onset of the disorder.
Essentially then, schizoaffective disorder is differentiated from
schizophrenia by the existence of prominent mood episodes that occur for
the majority of the illness. It is differentiated from bipolar I
disorder and major depressive disorder with psychotic features by the
requirement of having 2 weeks or longer of psychotic symptoms outside of
a mood episode. As one might imagine, these diagnostic distinctions can
be difficult to make in clinical and even research settings and often
require making educated guesses for any particular individual. This
overlap probably reflects that (a) schizophrenia is not one disease with
a single underlying cause, and (b) schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorder, bipolar I disorder, and major depressive disorder with
psychotic features are not unique or completely independent disorders
that can be perfectly separated from one another (O'Donovan, Craddock, &
Owen, 2009). However, the diagnostic distinctions are still important to
make as useful clinical information can nonetheless be derived from even
imperfect diagnostic distinctions; for example, psychotic symptoms in
bipolar I disorder often respond to lithium while those in schizophrenia
generally do not (Zemlan, Hirschowitz, Sautter, & Garver, 1984).
Accurate schizophrenia diagnosis also requires distinguishing between
other schizophrenia spectrum disorders and miscellaneous mental
disorders with psychotic features. Schizotypal personality disorder,
paranoid personality disorder, and schizoid personality disorder can be
roughly thought of as attenuated versions of schizophrenia with emphases
on different symptom clusters (positive symptoms, paranoia, and
negative/cognitive symptoms, respectively). In fact, the symptom
criteria for schizotypal personality disorder were initially developed
by researchers who interviewed family members of individuals with
schizophrenia (Spitzer, Endicott, & Gibbon, 1979). These family members
tended to have attenuated versions of the symptoms of schizophrenia.
Schizotypal, paranoid, and schizoid personality disorders are often
grouped together under the label "Cluster A personality disorders," as
they tend to occur together at higher rates in families, especially in
families of individuals with schizophrenia (Erlenmeyer-Kimling et al.,
1995). A key way to distinguish between schizophrenia and Cluster A
personality disorders is that individuals with schizophrenia have had
full-blown psychotic symptoms during at least some portion of their
illness. In contrast, positive symptoms in Cluster A personality
disorders tend not to rise to the severity of full-blown delusions or
hallucinations. For example, someone with paranoid personality disorder
may chronically doubt the faithfulness of his romantic partners without
any rational evidence of their infidelity, but he would not believe that
all of his romantic partners are secretly CIA agents who plan to
assassinate him. The diagnostic distinction between schizophrenia and
Cluster A personality disorders is important to make because Cluster A
personality disorders are associated with less impairment than
schizophrenia (Siever & Davis, 2004) and have different recommended
treatments. Delusional disorder is yet another form of psychotic
disorder. Delusional disorder's psychotic symptoms are usually
restricted to one or more delusions, in contrast to the often multiple
psychotic symptoms that occur in schizophrenia. Delusional disorder's
delusions

398

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

are occasionally accompanied by nonprominent hallucinations relevant to
the delusions (e.g., an individual who has the delusion that a microchip
has been installed under her skin may have the tactile hallucination of
feeling the microchip moving underneath her skin). Individuals with
delusional disorder tend to be less functionally impaired than
individuals with schizophrenia (Marneros, Pillmann, & Wustmann, 2012),
and the disease tends to occur much later in life: for example, when
individuals are in their 50s (Wustmann, Pillmann, & Marneros, 2011).
Brief psychotic disorder differs from schizophrenia in that the
psychotic symptoms occur for only a brief time (i.e., less than 1
month), resolve on their own, and once they resolve, the individual
returns to a normal level of functioning. This diagnostic distinction is
important to make because the prognoses of schizophrenia and brief
psychotic disorder are (almost by definition) quite different (Pillmann,
Haring, Balzuweit, Blöink, & Marneros, 2002). Schizophreniform disorder
lies somewhere between brief psychotic disorder and schizophrenia.
Schizophreniform disorder is only diagnosed when a person has had
symptoms of schizophrenia that have lasted at least 1 month but no
longer than 6 months. If all symptoms (including residual symptoms)
spontaneously resolve within 6 months, the individual will never be
diagnosed with schizophrenia and will simply have a history of
schizophreniform disorder. If the symptoms persist beyond 6 months, then
the schizophreniform diagnosis is changed to a schizophrenia diagnosis.
As with brief psychotic disorder, one of the main reasons that
schizophreniform disorder exists as a diagnosis is that it is associated
with a significantly better prognosis than that of schizophrenia
(Mojtabai, Susser, & Bromet, 2003). As one might expect, however,
researchers have found a variety of biological and clinic similarities
between schizophrenia, brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform
disorder, schizoaffective disorder, Cluster A personality disorders, and
delusional disorder: thus the term schizophrenia spectrum disorders
(Siever & Davis, 2004). A few other mental disorders can feature
psychotic symptoms and are worth reviewing before this chapter moves on
to other topics. Substance- or medication-induced psychotic disorder and
psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are differentiated
from schizophrenia because their psychotic symptoms have an identifiable
organic cause. This distinction is important to make because the
psychotic symptoms in these conditions can sometimes be alleviated by
eliminating the psychosis-inducing substance or by treating the
underlying organic problem (Pego-Reigosa & Isenberg, 2008). For example,
in steroid-induced psychosis, the patient's medication dose can be
lowered to alleviate the symptoms (Ross & Cetas, 2012). Several other
mental disorders in the DSM can include delusional beliefs.
Obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD) can be associated with delusional
beliefs related to obsessions or compulsions (O'Dwyer & Marks, 2000).
For example, an individual with OCD might have the delusion that she
will die of an infection if she does not wash her hands 15 times a day
despite repeated assurances by physicians that she will not. Body
dysmorphic disorder, which is categorized as an obsessive-compulsive
related disorder, can be associated with delusional beliefs about the
person's body that result in severe impairment (Phillips, Menard, & Fay,
2006). For example, a 6-foot-tall male individual may be so convinced
that he is grotesquely short that he withdraws from school so that
others will not see him and seeks out dangerous surgery to increase his
height. Anorexia nervosa can also include delusional beliefs about
whether the individual is of normal weight:

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

399

these delusional beliefs can eventually lead to death through starvation
(Steinglass, Eisen, Attia, Mayer, & Walsh, 2007). Neurocognitive
disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal dementia, and
Lewy body dementia, can also present with prominent psychotic symptoms
(Ballard et al., 1995). Because of this, it is especially important to
rule out neurocognitive disorders when an elderly individual reports
experiencing psychotic symptoms for the first time later in life
(McKeith et al., 2005). As can be seen from this review, psychotic
symptoms are not unique to schizophrenia or mood disorders with
psychotic features. Instead, schizophrenia is a disorder that shares
some similarities with other psychotic disorders, yet also has unique
clinical and biological features.

Signs and Symptoms That Precede the Onset of Schizophrenia Many diseases
are preceded by an identifiable set of signs or symptoms that occur
before the cardinal symptoms necessary to diagnose the condition appear.
These preceding symptoms are known as the disease's prodrome, from the
Greek pro- ("before") and dromos ("running"). For example, months or
years before developing the cardinal motor symptoms of Parkinson's
disease, individuals may experience anosmia (i.e., loss of the sense of
smell), depression, and sleepwalking (Postuma et al., 2012). Studying
these prodromal symptoms can give researchers clues to what causes a
disease and perhaps eventually help them to detect the disease before
its symptoms fully manifest. Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders
are often preceded by identifiable prodromal symptoms. These include
subclinical positive symptoms (e.g., increased suspiciousness), negative
symptoms (e.g., mild anhedonia), cognitive problems (e.g., increased
difficulty with attention), and problems with functioning (e.g.,
decreased academic performance; Lencz, Smith, Auther, Correll, &
Cornblatt, 2004). The psychosis prodrome is usually first apparent in
adolescence and can last anywhere from a few weeks to several years.
Researchers are now attempting to predict the development of
schizophrenia by finding out which prodromal symptoms reliably precede
the illness. This chapter will describe research into the psychosis
prodrome in a later section.

Illness Course and Prognosis Schizophrenia is usually first diagnosed
when individuals are between 20 and 29 years old, striking just when
young adults are starting the key tasks of building their independent
lives (DeLisi, 1992). Critical developmental milestones of gaining
independence from parents, developing romantic relationships, pursuing
educational goals, and starting a career are often disrupted at this
critical stage. Only 20% to 30% of individuals with schizophrenia are
able to live independently and/or maintain a job (Grebb & Cancro, 1989).
Another 20% to 30% of individuals with schizophrenia have persistent
moderate symptoms and impairment, while the remaining 50% experience
severe impairment for the remainder of their lives. A 15-year study of
individuals with schizophrenia found that only about 40% had one or more
periods of recovery (Harrow, Grossman, Jobe, & Herbener, 2005). Overall,
individuals with schizophrenia have poorer clinical and functional
prognoses than individuals with other psychotic and most nonpsychotic
mental disorders. Several factors have been established as valid
predictors of better or worse outcomes for individuals diagnosed with
schizophrenia. Individuals with an acute onset of positive

400

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

symptoms have a better prognosis than those with an insidious (gradual)
onset of positive symptoms (Davidson & McGlashan, 1997). There is some
evidence that the longer psychotic symptoms go without treatment, the
worse the prognosis (Harris et al., 2005). Being male and having an
early age of onset, poor premorbid functioning, more severe negative
symptoms negative symptoms, and a family history of schizophrenia are
all associated with a poorer prognosis (Breier, Schreiber, Dyer, &
Pickar, 1991). In addition, some environmental factors seem to
contribute to a worse prognosis. Individuals with schizophrenia who live
in homes where family members express high levels of criticism,
hostility, or emotional overinvolvement are more likely to relapse
(Rosenfarb, Bellack, & Aziz, 2006). Similarly, exposure to psychosocial
stressors (e.g., the death of a parent) has been found to exacerbate
schizophrenia symptoms (Horan et al., 2005).

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors Schizophrenia appears to be a
universal human scourge. While research has shown some interesting
variations in the prevalence of schizophrenia in different
subpopulations, the broad fact remains that schizophrenia's lifetime
prevalence is between 0.5% and 1% across markedly different cultures,
nations, and times (Saha, Chant, Welham, & McGrath, 2005). More
recently, there is evidence to suggest that the use of certain
recreational drugs can be a risk factor for developing schizophrenia. To
the surprise of many scientists---as well as the general public---there
is evidence that marijuana use, especially chronic use, can contribute
to risk for psychosis (Moore et al., 2007). Both retrospective and
prospective studies support this relationship. Although the mechanisms
involved are not yet known, there is reason to suspect that the
principal active ingredient of cannabis---D-9tetrahydrocannabinol
(D-9-THC)---increases risk for psychosis by augmenting dopamine
neurotransmission and stress hormone release (D'Souza et al., 2005). On
average, individuals with schizophrenia die about 15 years earlier than
individuals without the disorder (Healy et al., 2012). This increased
mortality is probably due to several factors, including chronic health
conditions such as heart disease and poorly controlled diabetes.
Increased rates of suicide also partly explain this increased mortality.
It has been estimated that 25% to 50% of individuals with schizophrenia
attempt suicide and 4% to 13% die by suicide (Meltzer, 2001). For
comparison, about 4% of the general U.S. population attempts suicide
(Weissman et al., 1999) and about 1.5% of all deaths are due to suicide
(Xu, Murphy, Kochanek, & Bastian, 2016). Risk factors associated with
suicide in individuals with schizophrenia include having more severe
depressive symptoms, being male, engaging in substance abuse, having an
earlier age of onset, and suffering recent traumatic events
(Gómez-Durán, Martin-Fumadó, & Hurtado-Ruíz, 2012). Clearly then,
schizophrenia is a health crisis not only because of the chaos and
suffering it wreaks upon individuals and their families but also because
it leads to the premature death of thousands of individuals every year.

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors As
noted earlier in the chapter, schizophrenia is not a unidimensional
illness characterized solely by psychotic symptoms. Schizophrenia often
has profound effects on cognitive,

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

401

emotional, and social aspects of the human psyche. Researchers have thus
attempted to study schizophrenia through a wide variety of experimental
lenses. This section reviews what different kinds of experimental
research have revealed about this multifaceted illness.

Cognitive Deficits As noted earlier, people with schizophrenia have
impairments in a wide variety of cognitive domains. The cognitive
abilities affected range from basic sensory processing to abstract
thinking (Mesholam-Gately, Giuliano, Goff, Faraone, & Seidman, 2009).
Given how common and pervasive these cognitive deficits are, some
investigators have argued that such deficits are the core defining
feature of schizophrenia (Elvevag & Goldberg, 2000), or, at least, that
they closely reflect its underlying neurobiology (Allen, Griss, Folley,
Hawkins, & Pearlson, 2009). This claim is supported by the fact that
cognitive deficits are the best predictor of how well individuals with
schizophrenia will function in their personal, academic, and
occupational lives (Bowie et al., 2006). Some of the cognitive deficits
in schizophrenia are detected at the very earliest stages of sensory
information processing. Schizophrenia patients are slower in the initial
processing of visual stimuli (Silverstein & Keane, 2011). This slower
and more error-prone initial processing of visual stimuli means that
individuals with schizophrenia will take longer and make more mistakes
when completing tasks that require visual perception: that is, a huge
proportion of tasks in everyday life. For example, individuals with
schizophrenia often have trouble with reading fluently and some of this
difficulty appears to stem from problems with basic visual perception
(Revheim et al., 2006). Another basic sensory process that is impaired
in individuals with schizophrenia is sensory gating. Sensory gating is
the neurological process of filtering out redundant or unnecessary
stimuli in the environment, and more specifically, of habituation to
repeated exposure to the same sensory stimulus (Potter, Summerfelt,
Gold, & Buchanan, 2006). This inhibition of responsiveness to repetitive
stimulation helps individuals to block out irrelevant stimuli: for
example, to ignore the hum of an air conditioner while focusing on a
friend's conversation. Researchers have documented biological correlates
of this deficit using electroencephalogram (EEG) measures. During
sensory gating tasks, individuals with schizophrenia show measureable
abnormalities in their P50 waveforms, a pattern of electrical activity
associated with successful sensory gating (Bramon, Rabe-Hesketh, Sham,
Murray, & Frangou, 2004). In the realm of higher-level cognitive
functions, individuals with schizophrenia show deficits in verbal and
spatial memory and abstract reasoning (Caspi et al., 2003). Individuals
with schizophrenia also show deficits in executive functioning, a broad
category of cognitive abilities that includes holding things in working
memory, planning, responding flexibly, and inhibiting responses
(Minzenberg, Laird, Thelen, Carter, & Glahn, 2009). Deficits in
executive functioning are of particular interest to researchers because
they may contribute to anosognosia, the striking lack of insight that
many individuals with schizophrenia have into the fact that they suffer
from psychotic symptoms (Shad, Tamminga, Cullum, Haas, & Keshavan,
2006). In addition to deficits in basic sensory processing and
higher-level cognitive abilities, individuals with schizophrenia also
show deficits in social cognition: that is, in thinking about social
phenomena. Studies of social cognition in individuals with schizophrenia
have consistently demonstrated impairments in the ability to comprehend
and solve social

402

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

problems (Penn, Waldheter, Perkins, Mueser, & Lieberman, 2005).
Furthermore, individuals with schizophrenia are less accurate in their
ability to label facial expressions of emotion (Bigelow et al., 2006).
These social cognitive deficits may contribute to the well-documented
impairments in social functioning that are common among individuals with
schizophrenia.

Environmental and Sociocultural Findings The current scientific
consensus is that psychosocial factors can act as stressors that trigger
or worsen schizophrenia's symptoms in vulnerable individuals (Walker &
Diforio, 1997). Just as stress exposure can trigger or exacerbate
physical illnesses (Sapolsky, 2004), stress may increase the risk of
psychotic episodes and worsen functional outcomes in schizophrenia and
other psychotic disorders (Trotman et al., 2014). Both correlational and
treatment studies have shown that persistent social stress can worsen
the course of schizophrenia and, conversely, that decreasing persistent
social stress can reduce the severity of schizophrenia symptoms
(Holtzman et al., 2013). Negative expressed emotion is an interpersonal
communication style characterized by critical, negative, or emotionally
overinvolved speech patterns. Individuals with schizophrenia living in
families characterized by high levels of negative expressed emotion have
worse symptoms and are more likely to require hospitalization in the
future (Miklowitz, 2004). However, it is important to clearly state that
this finding does not mean that schizophrenia is caused by stressful
family communication. Schizophrenia is a disease of the brain, and
family members who support their loved ones with schizophrenia are
engaged in a supremely challenging and praiseworthy endeavor. What this
research does suggest, however, is that there are specific communication
strategies that families can employ to improve the symptoms of
individuals with schizophrenia, in the same way that family members of
individuals with diabetes can employ some nutritional strategies to
improve their loved ones' health. This possibility has been confirmed by
trials that have shown that psychosocial therapies that improve family
communication patterns can decrease rates of hospitalization and
positive symptoms among individuals with schizophrenia (Mueser, Deavers,
Penn, & Cassisi, 2013).

Genetic Vulnerability Vulnerability to schizophrenia is heritable
(Schulze et al., 2014). Behavioral genetics studies utilizing twin,
adoption, and family history methods have all shown that the risk for
schizophrenia is elevated in individuals who have a biological relative
with the illness. The evidence is also conclusive that the more closely
related a relative with schizophrenia is, the greater the risk
(Sullivan, Kendler, & Neale, 2003). Monozygotic (MZ) twins share all of
their genes with their co-twin, and 30% to 50% of MZ co-twins of
individuals with schizophrenia will also go on to develop schizophrenia
(Cardno & Gottesman, 2000). Dizygotic (DZ) twins share only about half
of their genes with their co-twin, and 12% to 17% of DZ co-twins of
individuals with schizophrenia go on to develop the illness. Adoption
studies also provide evidence that the tendency for schizophrenia to run
in families is due to genetic factors, rather than being caused

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

403

by shared environmental stressors (e.g., mentally ill parents). Adoptees
whose biological parents have schizophrenia are more likely to develop
schizophrenia than adoptees whose biological parents do not have
schizophrenia (Heston, 1966). Similarly, biological relatives of
schizophrenia-afflicted adoptees are more likely to have schizophrenia
than their nonbiological relatives. What can one conclude from this
pattern of findings? First, the more an individual's genome resembles
the genome of a family member with schizophrenia, the more likely that
individual is to develop schizophrenia. However, one can also conclude
that schizophrenia is not completely determined by inherited genes. If
this were the case, we should expect a 100% concordance rate in MZ
twins. This is clearly not the case, so schizophrenia's etiology must be
more complicated than a purely genetic one. Inherited genetic
vulnerabilities for schizophrenia can interact with environmental
factors. For example, some studies have shown that the increased risk
for schizophrenia in adopted children whose biological parents have
schizophrenia is only significant when those children have been adopted
into families rated as dysfunctional (Tienari et al., 1994). Thus, to
really increase the risk for developing schizophrenia, a child needed to
have both a genetic vulnerability (e.g., a biological mother with
schizophrenia) as well as psychosocial stressors (i.e., a dysfunctional
home environment). Although researchers initially hoped to find a single
gene or small number of genes that explained risk for schizophrenia,
findings from behavioral and molecular genetic studies of schizophrenia
have led to the conclusion that the disorder involves many genes---with
no single gene or allele having a major impact on risk status (O'Donovan
et al., 2009). Studies have also shown both unique and shared risk genes
for schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders (Riley & Kendler, 2006).
Linkage and candidate gene association studies have provided some
evidence for the involvement of several chromosomal regions as well as
some specific genes that may account for a small proportion of the risk
for schizophrenia. The latter include genes that code for hormones,
nerve growth factors, and serotonin and dopamine receptors (Mowry &
Nancarrow, 2001). Does the fact that inherited genes alone are
insufficient to explain risk for schizophrenia mean that genetics does
not have an important role to play in understanding schizophrenia?
No. The role of genetics research in schizophrenia is likely to be
similar to the role of genetics research in cancer (Cheetham, Gruhl,
Mattick, & Dinger, 2013). Genetics obviously plays an important role in
many cancers. The relationship between genetics and cancer isn't simple,
however. Specific genetic markers are associated with one kind of cancer
and not another, environmental factors (e.g., cigarette smoking)
interact with cancer risk genes, and so on, in a complex web of
findings. When we finally understand the genetics of schizophrenia, the
picture is likely to be similarly complicated. In the past two decades,
researchers have begun using genome-wide approaches to study the
genetics of schizophrenia. This research involves large-scale studies
that scan markers across the entire genome to understand the heritable
variance in schizophrenia. Genome-wide approaches initially met with
limited success. However, more recent studies using larger sample sizes
and advanced statistical approaches that focus on more fine-grained
markers have identified areas of the genome where genetic differences
are reliably associated with increased risk for schizophrenia
(Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium,
2014).

404

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

As strange as it may sound, genetic vulnerability doesn't necessarily
entail inheriting genes present in one's parents' DNA. Schizophrenia may
result from multiple rare genetic variants that can arise from
spontaneous de novo mutations (i.e., mutations not present in the
parents' DNA). One good example of a de novo genetic vulnerability is
22q11.2 deletion syndrome. In 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, a person's
genetic code lacks a long section of DNA on the 22nd chromosome. Most of
the time, however, neither parent of a person with 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome has this length of DNA missing. So where did this gap in the
genetic code come from? This gap is caused by an error during the
copying process that creates a germ cell (sperm or egg cell) that will
form the basis of the child's genetic code. The 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome often leads to a variety of physical signs, including
structural anomalies of the face, head, and heart. Of relevance to the
current chapter, 30% of individuals with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome will
develop schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder in their lifetime, a
30-fold increase over the general population (Gothelf et al., 2007). To
date, 22q11.2 is the strongest genotypic predictor of schizophrenia.
Another recent advance in genetics is the burgeoning field of
epigenetics. Epigenetics is the study of potentially heritable changes
in gene expression that are not due to changes in the DNA sequence. A
brief metaphor may be helpful here. Imagine the DNA code as dozens of
instruction manuals on a wall in a factory. Normally, a person walks up
to the wall, takes a binder off the shelf, reads the instructions, and
does what the instructions tell her to do: turn on this machine, turn
off that machine, put these parts into boxes, and so forth. Epigenetic
modification would be like writing "DO NOT READ" in big red letters on
the cover of one of the binders. Has the text of the instruction manual
been modified? No. Are those instructions less likely to be read and
carried out? Yes. Epigenetic modification of DNA often works in a
similar way. Sections of DNA are made less likely to be transcribed into
RNA by transcription factors (i.e., the workers who now ignore the
instruction manual). Unlike an individual's genetic code, nonrandom
epigenetic changes can be made throughout an individual's lifespan. To
continue the metaphor, while you can't rewrite one of the factory's
instruction manuals, you can put "DO NOT READ" on the cover or strike it
out when you like. Scientists once thought that any epigenetic changes
made during a person's lifetime were reset when her or his genetic code
was copied to form a new egg or sperm cell: that is, when the
instruction manuals were copied, any "DO NOT READ" signs were ignored
and not copied. However, research has shown that epigenetic changes
acquired during a person or animal's lifetime can sometimes be passed
down to their offspring; that is, sometimes "DO NOT READ" is indeed
copied onto the new manual along with the original instructions. Rats
who are trained to fear a certain smell have epigenetic changes in genes
associated with smell perception, and those changes can be found in
their offspring (Dias & Ressler, 2014). Parents who are exposed to
famine have children who have epigenetic changes on genes related to
metabolism and food storage, changes that can be passed down even to
their grandchildren (Handel, Ebers, & Ramagopalan, 2010). Scientists
have shown that stress, toxins, hormones, and a variety of other factors
can modify epigenetic instructions. Schizophrenia researchers have been
interested in whether epigenetic modification can be used to help
explain how a pair of individuals with the same genetic code (i.e., a
pair of monozygotic twins) can be discordant for schizophrenia. Could
the difference between

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

405

the co-twins be a difference in their epigenetic profiles? Returning to
our metaphor, could it be that one twin has "DO NOT READ" printed on an
important brain development instruction manual and the other twin does
not? Scientists have found some evidence that suggests that differences
in epigenetic instructions may indeed help to explain schizophrenia
discordance in monozygotic twins. Schizophrenia discordant monozygotic
twin pairs are more likely to have different epigenetic profiles than
schizophrenia concordant twin pairs (Dempster et al., 2011). Scientists
have also started to analyze the epigenetic profiles themselves and have
shown that some kinds of epigenetic profiles are more common among
individuals who develop schizophrenia (Furrow, Christiansen, & Feldman,
2011). Time will tell how much epigenetics contributes to the
development of schizophrenia, but for now, this is a promising area of
research.

Abnormalities in Brain Structure and Function Since the beginning of the
20th century, writers in the field of psychopathology have suspected
that schizophrenia involved some kind of abnormality in the brain
(Bleuler, 1911). However, it was not until the advent of neuroimaging
techniques that solid empirical data were available to support this
hypothesis. As described below, research on schizophrenia has revealed
abnormalities in the brain's anatomy, neurotransmitters, and functional
activity. Early computerized axial tomography (CAT) brain scans of
individuals with schizophrenia showed evidence of enlarged brain
ventricles (i.e., cerebrospinal fluid-- filled cavities in the brain;
Dennert & Andreasen, 1983). These cavities are a normal part of a
healthy brain: the cerebrospinal fluid plays an important role in moving
organic debris away from the brain and performing other biological
functions. However, when these ventricles are abnormally enlarged, it
can be a sign that the brain has shrunk and the ventricles have expanded
to fill the vacated space, as is seen in some neurodegenerative
conditions (Adams, Fisher, Hakim, Ojemann, & Sweet, 1965). As new brain
scanning techniques were developed, findings of enlarged ventricles in
schizophrenia were replicated and additional abnormalities were detected
(Henn & Braus, 1999). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed
decreased frontal, temporal, and whole brain volume among individuals
with schizophrenia (Olabi et al., 2011). More fine-grained analyses
demonstrated reductions in the size of structures such as the thalamus
and hippocampus: these changes appear to be progressive and are present
prior to the onset of psychotic symptoms (Chan, Di, McAlonan, & Gong,
2011). In fact, of all the regions studied, the hippocampus is the one
that most consistently differentiates individuals with schizophrenia
from healthy controls (Adriano, Caltagirone, & Spalletta, 2011). A
landmark study of monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia was the
first to demonstrate that brain abnormalities are not solely
attributable to genetic factors (Suddath, Christison, Torrey, Casanova,
& Weinberger, 1990). When compared to their healthy identical co-twins,
twins with schizophrenia were found to have smaller temporal lobes, with
the hippocampal region showing the most dramatic reduction in volume.
Other studies have replicated reduced brain volume among
schizophrenia-afflicted twins (Borgwardt et al., 2010). These studies
support the idea that brain abnormalities observed in schizophrenia are
at least partially due to environmental factors that interfere with
prenatal brain development rather than the result of genetic risk alone.

406

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

Functional MRI allows researchers to measure the rate of blood flow
within brain regions, which is correlated with the level of activity in
those brain regions. Functional MRI findings in individuals with
schizophrenia indicate that brain activity in the frontal cortex is
reduced, particularly during working memory tasks (Brown & Thompson,
2010). There is also evidence that brain activity related to processing
emotional stimuli is different in individuals with schizophrenia, with
reduced medial temporal responses to emotional stimuli as compared to
healthy controls (Whalley et al., 2012). A newer advance in imaging,
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), measures the strength and direction of
water diffusion in white matter. Diffusion of water in white matter is
not equal in all directions. In a healthy brain, water flows more
regularly along pathways of myelinated neurons. In an unhealthy brain
(e.g., one with compromised myelinated pathways), water doesn't flow
along these paths as regularly. One can think of an unhealthy brain as
having a lot of leaky pipes, with water seeping out along the length of
the pipes rather that flowing straight through them. Scientists can take
images of the brain using an MRI scanner to see how much water is
flowing along pipes (myelinated pathways) and how much water is moving
around randomly to get an idea of how intact the brain's myelinated
pathways are overall. Functional anisotropy (FA) is a way of
mathematically summarizing how organized water flow in the brain is on
average. People with schizophrenia show functional anisotropy
reductions: that is, more water is flowing around randomly (Scheel,
Prokscha, Bayerl, Gallinat, & Montag, 2013). These reductions may be
indicative of axonal damage and demyelination, the leaky pipes of our
previous metaphor. Reduced functional anisotropy is also apparent in
individuals who are at high risk of developing schizophrenia, suggesting
that this problem precedes the onset of full-blown psychosis (Karlsgodt,
Niendam, Bearden, & Cannon, 2009). Despite a plethora of research
findings indicating the presence of abnormalities in the brains of
individuals with schizophrenia, there is no evidence that any specific
abnormality is unique to schizophrenia or characterizes the brains of
all individuals with schizophrenia. It is likely that the abnormalities
observed in schizophrenia are signs of disturbed neurodevelopment that
leads to schizophrenia-prone neurocircuitry. Given the current evidence,
one can certainly conclude that there are one or more ways in which
neurodevelopment can go wrong and leave someone with a brain predisposed
to developing schizophrenia. However, researchers have not yet been able
to figure out what specific final wiring states are necessary to develop
schizophrenia and why those specific wiring states lead to the symptoms
of schizophrenia. However, this doesn't mean that researchers lack
hypotheses about what some of those schizophrenia-prone brain wiring
states might be. One schizophrenia-prone brain wiring state might be
abnormal connectivity between brain regions, as opposed to abnormal
wiring within a particular brain region (Schmitt, Hasan, Gruber, &
Falkai, 2011). In this model, it is not a poorly functioning hippocampus
that causes someone to develop schizophrenia. It is something wrong with
the way the hippocampus talks with the frontal cortex, the frontal
cortex talks with the basal ganglia, and so on that causes someone to
develop schizophrenia. This theory is consistent with the earlier
described findings of reduced functional anisotropy among individuals
with schizophrenia: those "leaky pipes" are not properly transferring
information between different areas of the brain and these errors in
communication might be an underlying cause of the symptoms of
schizophrenia.

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

407

Neurotransmitter Abnormalities The idea that schizophrenia involves an
abnormality in the function of neurotransmitters has a long history.
Dopamine is used in many areas of the brain and is a key
neurotransmitter in the circuits that link cortical brain regions (e.g.,
those responsible for higher brain functions like planning) with
subcortical brain regions (e.g., those responsible for basic emotions,
like pleasure; Jentsch, Roth, & Taylor, 2000). Theories about dopamine
have played the most enduring role in research into the biochemical
basis of schizophrenia symptoms. Initial support for the role of
dopamine in schizophrenia was based on two key pieces of evidence: (1)
drugs that reduce dopamine activity diminish psychotic symptoms, and (2)
drugs that increase dopamine activity exacerbate or trigger psychotic
symptoms (Carlsson et al., 2001). It was eventually confirmed that
antipsychotic drugs produce their effect by blocking dopamine receptors,
especially the D2 subtype of dopamine receptor. Each neurotransmitter in
the brain has multiple types of receptors that are sensitive to that
neurotransmitter and perform different functions. For example, some
dopamine receptors might cause a neuron to be more likely to fire when
they detect dopamine, while other kinds of dopamine receptors might
initiate long-term changes in the way a cell works. D2 receptors are one
kind of dopamine receptor in the brain. D2 receptors are especially
prevalent in the more primitive subcortical regions of the brain,
suggesting that these regions are important for understanding the
neurobiology of psychotic symptoms. Whereas newer antipsychotic drugs
act on neurotransmitter systems other than dopamine (Gründer, Hippius, &
Carlsson, 2009), even these newer drugs still have effects that
eventually lead to decreased dopamine activity, suggesting that all
current antipsychotic medications require some change be made to
dopamine signaling in the brain. It is not only drugs that block
dopamine signaling that demonstrate the link between dopamine and
psychotic symptoms. Drugs that increase dopamine signaling in the brain
can cause or worsen psychotic symptoms. Stimulants such as cocaine and
amphetamine work by increasing dopamine activity (Boileau et al., 2006).
Thus, cocaine and amphetamine can also cause psychotic symptoms and
movement abnormalities in individuals with schizophrenia, even at
relatively low doses (Weiner, Rabinstein, Levin, Weiner, & Shulman,
2001) and even in individuals without schizophrenia at higher doses
(Brady, Lydiard, Malcolm, & Ballenger, 1991). Given the success of
dopamine-blocking drugs in treating the symptoms of schizophrenia,
researchers hoped that they would be able to find excessive dopamine in
the brains of individuals with schizophrenia. If researchers could find
this hypothesized excessive dopamine, then they could say that
schizophrenia was an illness of "too much dopamine in the brain."
Unfortunately, however, dopamine concentrations were not found to be
markedly elevated in the brains of individuals with schizophrenia
(Davis, Kahn, Ko, & Davidson, 1991). Thus, researchers went back to the
drawing board. If it wasn't excessive dopamine, maybe individuals with
schizophrenia had too many dopamine receptors, meaning that the brains
of individuals with schizophrenia were too sensitive to whatever amount
of dopamine that was present. When investigators tested this, they did
indeed find that individuals with schizophrenia have increased numbers
of dopamine receptors in some areas of the brain (Howes & Kapur, 2009).
However, this finding was not strong

408

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

or reliable enough to conclude that schizophrenia is a disorder of
"excessive dopamine sensitivity." Further complicating the issue,
individuals with schizophrenia appear to have dopamine signaling
deficits in certain areas of the brain associated with effortful control
and long-term planning: for example, the prefrontal cortex (Okubo et
al., 1997). Thus, researchers had to abandon a simple "too much
dopamine" hypothesis of schizophrenia. While theories designating
dopamine as the single cause of schizophrenia seem untenable, the modern
consensus is that dopamine remains an important piece of the
schizophrenia symptom puzzle. Another important line of evidence
suggests that glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, may play a role
in the pathology of schizophrenia. This research has studied the effects
of drugs that block glutamate receptors in the brain. Just as there are
different types of dopamine receptors in the brain (D1, D2, etc.), there
are different kinds of glutamate receptors in the brain. One type of
glutamate receptor is called the N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA)
receptor. Several drugs, such as phencyclidine (PCP) and ketamine, block
NMDA receptors and prevent them from sensing glutamate; these drugs are
thus called NMDA antagonists. The interesting thing about NMDA
antagonists is that they produce schizophrenia-like symptoms in people
who use them (Coyle & Tsai, 2004). In fact, NMDA antagonists induce
symptoms that are even more schizophrenia-like than the symptoms induced
by stimulants: NMDA antagonists cause negative and cognitive symptoms in
addition to positive symptoms. Conversely, drugs that improve NMDA
receptor functioning can reduce negative symptoms and improve cognitive
functioning in individuals with schizophrenia, though the evidence for
this particular finding is more mixed (Menniti et al., 2013). It is
important to note that the finding that NMDA antagonists cause
schizophrenia-like symptoms does not mean that the dopamine hypothesis
of positive symptoms has been proven wrong. There are reciprocal
connections between dopamine circuits and glutamate circuits in the
brain (Del Arco & Mora, 2009). Thus, dysregulation of glutamate circuits
can cause problems in dopamine circuits and vice versa (Kantrowitz &
Javitt, 2010). More broadly speaking, all neurotransmitter systems
interact in varied ways and at multiple levels in the brain's neural
architecture (Mora, Segovia, & Del Arco, 2008). Thus, the final
description of neurotransmitter abnormalities in schizophrenia is
certainly going to be a complex one when it is fully articulated.

Prenatal and Obstetrical Factors The fact that more than 50% of
monozygotic co-twins of individuals with schizophrenia do not develop
the illness clearly illustrates the importance of nongenetic factors in
schizophrenia's etiology. The prenatal period has received greater
attention in recent years as a period that might offer ways to explain
this finding. Obstetrical complications are abnormalities that occur
during pregnancy or labor. There is extensive evidence that obstetrical
complications have an adverse impact on the developing fetal brain and
may contribute to schizophrenia vulnerability. Individuals with
schizophrenia are more likely to have a history of obstetrical
complications (O'Donnell, O'Connor, & Glover, 2009). These
schizophrenia-related obstetrical complications include preeclampsia
(high maternal blood pressure and large amounts of protein in the
mother's urine) and fetal hypoxia (lack of oxygen to the fetus).

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

409

Another prenatal event that has been linked to increased risk for
schizophrenia is maternal viral infection. Researchers have found
elevated risk for schizophrenia among individuals born shortly after a
flu epidemic or after being prenatally exposed to rubella (Brown, 2006).
The critical period of exposure appears to be between the fourth and
sixth months of pregnancy. The findings from research on prenatal viral
infection might help explain the season-of-birth effect in
schizophrenia. A disproportionate number of individuals with
schizophrenia are born during the winter months (Narita et al., 2000).
This may reflect seasonal exposure to viral infections, which are most
common in late fall and early winter. Thus, the fetus would have been
exposed to infection during the second trimester, a critical period for
fetal brain development. Disruptions during this stage may give rise to
brain abnormalities that confer vulnerability to schizophrenia. Indirect
support for the relationship between second-trimester fetal insult
(i.e., a damaging event in the second trimester) and schizophrenia also
comes from the observation that many individuals with schizophrenia show
subtle physical abnormalities in body features, referred to as minor
physical anomalies (Compton & Walker, 2009). Parts of the head, limbs,
and the central nervous system all originate in the same germinal layer
of fetal tissue (i.e., the ectoderm) during this same period of fetal
development. The presence of minor physical abnormalities is thus
assumed to be an outward manifestation of abnormal central nervous
system development. Exposure to nutritional deficiency during the first
trimester is also linked with an increased risk for schizophrenia
(Susser, Brown, & Gorman, 1999). Studies of rodents and nonhuman
primates have shown that prenatal maternal stress can interfere with
fetal brain development and is associated with elevated glucocorticoid
(i.e., stress hormone) release and hippocampal abnormalities in
offspring (Coe et al., 2003). Along the same line, in humans there is
evidence that stressful events during pregnancy are associated with
greater risk for schizophrenia and other mental disorders in adult
offspring. Researchers have found higher rates of schizophrenia in the
offspring of women whose spouses died during their pregnancies
(Huttunen, 1989) and among the offspring of women who were exposed to a
military invasion during their pregnancies (van Os & Selten, 1998). It
is likely that prenatal stress triggers the release of maternal stress
hormones, which can disturb fetal neurodevelopment (Welberg & Seckl,
2001). One of the chief questions confronting researchers is whether
obstetric complications act independently to increase risk for
schizophrenia or produce their effects by interacting with genetic
vulnerability. One possibility is that the genetic vulnerability for
schizophrenia involves an increased sensitivity to prenatal factors that
interfere with fetal neurodevelopment (Walshe et al., 2005). For
examples, individuals with certain immune system genotypes may be more
sensitive to the adverse effects of prenatal exposure to maternal viral
infection (Brown, 2006). This and related questions are currently an
active area of research.

Longitudinal Findings There is compelling evidence that signs of
vulnerability to schizophrenia are present long before the illness is
diagnosed. Most of these signs are subtle and do not reach the level of
severity necessary to make a clinical diagnosis. Nonetheless, when
compared to children with healthy adult outcomes, children who later
develop schizophrenia manifest deficits in

410

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

multiple domains. In some of these domains, the deficits are apparent as
early as infancy. This chapter will classify these pre-schizophrenia
signs and symptoms into two categories: (1) premorbid symptoms, which
are often subtle and occur long before the onset of the illness, and (2)
prodromal symptoms, which more immediately precede the onset of
psychotic symptoms. Both categories of signs and symptoms are described
in the following paragraphs. Children who later develop schizophrenia
tend to perform worse than their healthy siblings and classmates on
measures of cognitive functioning. This is reflected in lower
intelligence and achievement test scores as well as in poorer grades in
school (Cornblatt et al., 2012). Children who later develop
schizophrenia also show abnormalities in social behavior. They are less
responsive in social situations, exhibit less positive emotion (Walker,
Grimes, Davis, & Smith, 1993), show abnormalities in gestural behavior
(Mittal et al., 2006), and have poorer social adjustment compared with
children who have healthy adult outcomes (Ang & Tan, 2004). In a series
of studies examining home movies of children who went on to develop
schizophrenia, researchers employed frame-by-frame analysis to determine
whether behavioral characteristics seen in these videos could predict
which children would go on to develop schizophrenia and which would not
(Walker et al., 1993). The researchers found that children who later
developed schizophrenia showed more negative facial expressions of
emotion than their healthy siblings as early as the first year of life,
thereby indicating that the vulnerability for schizophrenia is subtly
manifested in very early social interactions. The children who went on
to develop schizophrenia also showed higher rates of motor abnormalities
and delays, such as atypical hand gestures, lateness in walking, and so
forth (Walker, 1994). This chapter has already reviewed substantial
evidence that schizophrenia does not emerge out of nowhere in
adolescence or young adulthood. While positive symptoms do not typically
emerge until young adult life, subtle signs of abnormal neurodevelopment
can be seen at birth and in early childhood. However, the fact remains
that the most striking symptoms of schizophrenia (i.e., hallucinations
and delusions) do not emerge until young adulthood for most individuals.
So how can it be that genetic and obstetrical problems, present at
birth, take so long to cause positive symptoms? Examining the
longitudinal development of schizophrenia's signs and symptoms has given
researchers hints as to what biological mechanisms might underlie this
strange pattern. As previously described, prodromal and psychotic level
positive symptoms often emerge during adolescence and young adulthood.
Maturational increases in dopamine activity during adolescence have been
cited as a potential factor accounting for this age of onset for
positive symptoms (Benes, 2003). In addition, following the onset of
puberty, significant developmental changes in brain structure and
function may contribute to an increased likelihood of abnormal brain
development. In particular, adolescence is a time of rapid pruning
(i.e., selective destruction) of excess neural connections. This cutting
away of excess brain connections is key for producing the gains in
cognitive ability and self-control that occur during adolescence
(Paolicelli et al., 2011). However, in individuals who go on to develop
schizophrenia, this pruning process may go too far and leave them with
schizophrenia-prone brains that contain aberrant connectivity in
dopamine-related brain circuits (Cannon, 2015). This possibility has
been supported by

Biological, Psychological, Behavioral, and Environmental Factors

411

excellent recent research that showed evidence for aberrant pruning
activity at multiple levels of analysis, including the levels of genes,
proteins, and neural circuitry (Sekar et al., 2016). As noted earlier,
the onset of schizophrenia is often preceded by weeks, months, or even
years of increasing clinical symptoms that often resemble attenuated
versions of the full-blown symptoms of schizophrenia: for example,
social withdrawal and suspiciousness that doesn't rise to the level of
paranoia. Drawing from retrospective observations of the prodromal
period, researchers attempted to design a set of criteria that would
predict whether someone would develop a psychotic illness within a few
months or years: that is, determine whether an individual is currently
experiencing a schizophrenia prodrome that will eventually develop into
schizophrenia. A team of Australian researchers were eventually able to
do just that; they developed a set of criteria that identified
individuals who had a 30% to 40% chance of developing schizophrenia
within the next 2 years (Yung & Nelson, 2011). This high-risk profile
has been given different names over time, including at-risk mental
states (ARMS), ultra-high-risk (UHR) state, and the clinical high-risk
(CHR) state. We will use the term clinical high-risk state, but remember
that these terms generally refer to the same or very similar things: a
set of clinical criteria that identifies individuals at high risk for
developing schizophrenia within a few years. Clinical high-risk (CHR)
individuals show some of the same abnormalities observed in individuals
with schizophrenia. For example, CHR individuals evince motor
abnormalities, cognitive deficits, and psychosocial impairment
intermediate between those found in individuals with schizophrenia and
in healthy controls (Fusar-Poli et al., 2013). CHR individuals also have
increased levels of cortisol, a stress hormone, and other biological
abnormalities similar to those found among individuals with
schizophrenia (Salokangas et al., 2012). The clinical high-risk state
was considered for inclusion in the DSM-5 under the name "attenuated
psychosis syndrome." Several reasons were presented to support this
inclusion (Fusar-Poli & Yung, 2012). First, the symptoms of the CHR
state are often distressing and are associated with impairments in
social and occupational functioning. Some clinicians wanted to be able
to diagnose the condition so that they could provide treatments to
individuals with the CHR state while billing medical insurance companies
for those services. Second, the CHR state does indeed predict an
increased likelihood of developing schizophrenia, which can be important
information for a clinician to have when deciding on a treatment plan
for a patient. However, other clinicians and researchers argued that
including attenuated psychosis syndrome in DSM-5 was ill advised as it
would lead to clinicians assuming that CHR individuals would develop
schizophrenia when most CHR individuals will not in fact develop
schizophrenia (remember that 60% or more of CHR individuals do not
develop a psychotic illness). Those opposing the inclusion also noted
that standard treatments for psychotic illness did not appear to prevent
the onset of psychotic symptoms and were associated with significant
side effects. In the end, a compromise decision was made to place
attenuated psychosis syndrome in the "Conditions for Further Study"
section of DSM-5 and to wait for more research to be conducted before
deciding whether or not to include the syndrome in the main text of
future editions of the DSM.

412

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

Models of Schizophrenia Theories attempting to explain psychosis have
been documented since antiquity (Evans, McGrath, & Milns, 2003).
However, most researchers now agree that no single cause can explain all
cases of schizophrenia, let alone psychotic disorders more generally
(Jablensky, 2006). Thus, our final understanding of schizophrenia is
likely to resemble our modern understanding of cancer. In the case of
cancer, we know that (a) there are many distinct kinds of cancer; (b)
although there are similar mechanisms and symptoms across different
kinds of cancers, no single biological mechanism can be used to fully
explain all kinds of cancer; and (c) no single treatment or preventive
measure will be effective in preventing or treating all kinds of cancer.
Similarly, schizophrenia researchers generally agree that (a) the
collection of symptoms we label schizophrenia constitutes not a single
disease with a single cause but rather a syndrome with multiple causes;
(b) schizophrenia is a behavioral manifestation of brain dysfunction;
(c) the etiology of schizophrenia involves an interplay between genetic
and environmental factors, including psychosocial stressors; (d)
multiple developmental pathways lead to the onset of schizophrenia; (e)
overlap exists among the genetic and environmental factors that confer
risk for schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders; and (f) brain
maturational processes play a role in schizophrenia's etiology. Figure
10.1 summarizes a contemporary diathesis-stress model of schizophrenia.
This model proposes that diathesis (i.e., vulnerability) for
schizophrenia comes from both genetic (e.g., inherited genetic risk and
genetic mutations) and acquired (e.g., environmental) factors (Walker,
Mittal, & Tessner, 2008). Genetic risk factors are assumed to

Stress Inherited Genetic Factors

Aberrant Developmental Processes

Genetic Mutations Constitutional Vulnerability Prenatal Insults

Delivery Complications

FIGURE 10.1 Disorders

Adolescent Neuromaturation

P S Y C H O S I S

A Diathesis-Stress Model of the Etiology of Schizophrenia and Other
Psychotic

Assessment

413

confer vulnerability by altering structural and functional
characteristics of the brain. Acquired risk factors can result from
delivery complications (e.g., oxygen deprivation during pregnancy) that
compromise fetal brain development. Whatever the combination of genetic
and environmental factors that leads a particular brain to be vulnerable
to developing schizophrenia, the model assumes that a diathesis for
schizophrenia is, in most cases, present at birth. The diathesis-stress
model posits that being born with a diathesis for schizophrenia (i.e., a
schizophrenia-prone brain), does not mean that that a person is
guaranteed to develop schizophrenia during his or her lifetime. The
diathesis-stress model argues that developing schizophrenia typically
involves both a diathesis for schizophrenia and one or more stressors
that occur after the individual is born. These stressors cause the
underlying vulnerability (i.e., the schizophrenia-prone brain) to become
apparent in the form of schizophrenia symptoms. Importantly though, a
person may go through life with a diathesis and never manifest the
symptoms of schizophrenia if he or she is never exposed to a critical
volume of stressors. Finally, it is worth noting that a diathesis for
schizophrenia is not an all or nothing attribute. An individual may
possess an extreme diathesis for schizophrenia and thus be essentially
guaranteed to develop the disorder in even the most propitious of
circumstances (e.g., good childhood nutrition, a positive family
environment, no stressors beyond the normal challenges of growing up).
Conversely, an individual may have only a very mild diathesis for
schizophrenia and thus might develop the symptoms of schizophrenia only
within the context of extreme biological or psychosocial stress (e.g.,
extreme childhood malnutrition, chronic cannabis exposure, and multiple
head traumas). The neural diathesis-stress model also posits biological
mechanisms through which exposure to stress can trigger or exacerbate
psychotic symptoms. Specifically this model focuses on the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, one of the major biological systems
subserving the stress response. This system governs the secretion of the
stress hormone cortisol, which, in turn, can alter the function of
neurons and neurotransmitters, such as dopamine. In the case of
dopamine, the effect of cortisol is to augment its release (Wand et al.,
2007). Thus, stress exposure and elevated cortisol can act to increase
dopamine activity and thereby increase the likelihood of psychotic
symptoms in vulnerable individuals. A parallel with cancer can be drawn
that helps to explain risk for schizophrenia within a diathesis-stress
model. Lifetime risk for lung cancer is very low for individuals who do
not smoke cigarettes: about 0.2% among men who do not smoke (Eldridge,
2016). Regular cigarette smoking dramatically increases the rate of lung
cancer to about 24% in men. However, that means that 75% of male regular
smokers will not develop lung cancer. Developing lung cancer thus
generally requires both a diathesis (e.g., a genetic or other
predisposition toward developing lung cancer) and a stressor (e.g.,
regular smoking). The corresponding percentages are certainly different
in the case of schizophrenia, but the principle of diathesis-stress is
the same.

Assessment For both the individual experiencing her first psychotic
symptoms and her loved ones, the first episode of psychosis is a time of
confusion, uncertainty, and suffering. A good initial

414

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

diagnostic evaluation is an important opportunity to provide the
individual and her loved ones with a way to understand what is going on
and some initial strategies for what they can do to improve the
situation. A number of measures exist to help a clinician make the
diagnosis of schizophrenia. One such measure is the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-5 Disorders (SCID-5; First, Williams, Karg, & Spitzer,
2016). The SCID-5 is a structured diagnostic interview that queries
individuals about their experiences to determine whether they meet
criteria for schizophrenia or other mental disorders. Within the DSM-5
system, clinicians are also encouraged to provide numerical ratings for
schizophrenia's individual symptom domains (e.g., delusions and negative
symptoms) to better communicate the specific nature of an individual's
symptoms. Beyond making the diagnosis of schizophrenia itself, other
important clinical information should be collected during initial and
subsequent assessments. Given the high rate of suicide among individuals
with schizophrenia, it is important to assess the risk of self-harm and
violence (McGirr et al., 2006). Also, a medical examination is typically
conducted to rule out other illnesses that can cause or exacerbate
psychotic symptoms (Richards & Gurr, 2000). This examination includes a
review of the individual's medical history, a physical examination, and
laboratory tests. While the majority of schizophrenialike presentations
cannot be attributed to an identifiable organic condition (e.g., most
people with schizophrenia do not show obvious abnormalities on brain
scans), it is important to have a medical examination to rule out
reversible causes of psychosis. Researchers have also developed more
detailed measures to assess the many individual symptoms of
schizophrenia and provide more objective guidelines for rating their
severity. The gold standard measure for this purpose is the Positive and
Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia (Kay, Fiszbein, &
Opler, 1987). Another important rating scale is the Abnormal Involuntary
Movement Scale (AIMS; Munetz & Benjamin, 1988), which allows clinicians
to monitor for signs of important medication-related side effects, which
will be described later in this chapter. Several structured interviews
have also been developed to identify individuals at clinical high risk
for developing schizophrenia. These structured interviews also produce
symptom ratings to indicate how severe an individual's attenuated
symptoms are. The two most prominent interviews are the Comprehensive
Assessment of At-Risk Mental States (CAARMS; Yung et al., 2005) and the
Structured Interview for Prodromal Syndromes (SIPS; Miller et al.,
2002).

Treatment There are currently no biological or psychotherapeutic cures
for schizophrenia. However, a combination of medication and other
interventions can often control the positive symptoms of schizophrenia
and significantly improve the prognosis of someone afflicted with the
illness. The treatment of schizophrenia can be divided into three
phases: acute, stabilization, and maintenance (Sadock, Sadock, Ruiz, &
Kaplan, 2009). In the acute phase, the goal of treatment is to reduce
the severity of symptoms; this usually involves the administration of
medication to control positive symptoms. In the stabilization phase, the
goal is to

Treatment

415

consolidate treatment gains and help the patient attain a stable living
situation. Finally, during the maintenance phase, when the symptoms are
in partial or complete remission, the goal is to reduce residual
symptoms, prevent relapse, and improve functioning.

Antipsychotic Medication The mainstay biological treatment of
schizophrenia is antipsychotic medication. First introduced in the
1950s, antipsychotic medications had an enormous impact on the lives of
people afflicted with schizophrenia. Many individuals' positive symptoms
were brought under control for the first time, and some people who had
lived in psychiatric hospitals for the majority of their adult lives
were able to return to living in the community. These early medications
are now referred to as typical antipsychotics: chlorpromazine
(Thorazine) is a well-known example of this class. As mentioned earlier,
typical antipsychotics are dopamine antagonists; that is, they work by
blocking dopamine receptors, especially D2 receptors. Unfortunately,
since typical antipsychotics also block dopamine receptors in areas of
the brain associated with coordinating physical movement, typical
antipsychotics can have the side effect of causing problems with motor
functioning. These motor side effects are called extrapyramidal
symptoms. They are named after one of the movement circuits in the brain
that is disrupted (Miyamoto, Duncan, Marx, & Lieberman, 2004).
Extrapyramidal symptoms include bradykinesia (slowed movements), tremor,
akathisia (an extremely uncomfortable desire to move constantly), and
facial masking (little or no facial expression). One might notice that
some of these symptoms resemble those of Parkinson's disease. This is no
coincidence, as typical antipsychotics block the same dopamine receptors
that are destroyed in Parkinson's disease. Luckily, extrapyramidal
symptoms can usually be reversed by lowering the dosage of antipsychotic
medication or changing to a new medication. However, clinicians often
have to balance preventing movement side effects with maintaining a high
enough dose to treat the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. There is a
second, potentially permanent set of motor side effects that can be
caused by antipsychotic medication. This second type of motor side
effect is called tardive dyskinesia. It is important to understand the
difference between extrapyramidal symptoms and tardive dyskinesia, as
tardive dyskinesia is caused by a mechanism that is essentially the
opposite of the one that causes extrapyramidal symptoms. In response to
detecting that motor areas in the brain are not receiving the expected
amount of dopamine signaling, the brain tries to generate extra dopamine
receptors in those areas (Casey, 2000). That way, the motor areas in the
brain can be more sensitive to the little bit of dopamine that is
getting through the antipsychotic blockade. The problem is that these
extra dopamine receptors eventually lead to the misfiring of neurons in
motor areas of the brain, which, in turn, causes abnormal movements:
these abnormal movements are the symptoms of tardive dyskinesia. The
abnormal movements include involuntary lip puckering, tongue thrusting,
and (in more severe cases) movements involving the entire torso. These
symptoms can be permanent because the extra receptors do not go away
once the antipsychotic medication is discontinued. Clinicians use the
Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) to catalogue and measure
involuntary movements over time so that the antipsychotic medication
prescriber can identify and address any involuntary movement symptoms
early and prevent the development of permanent tardive dyskinesia
symptoms (Gharabawi et al., 2005).

416

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

Even though typical antipsychotic medications were a huge success for
the medical and pharmaceutical community, they had obvious limitations.
Namely, they treated only the positive symptoms of schizophrenia and
carried the risk of movement disorders. This spurred pharmaceutical
companies to keep working on new kinds of antipsychotic medications. In
the late 1980s, a new generation of antipsychotic medications was
introduced; these are now generally referred to as atypical
antipsychotics. These medications are dopamine antagonists, like the
typical antipsychotics, but they also affect other neurotransmitter
systems, including serotonin. Atypical antipsychotics were indeed an
improvement in some ways over the typical antipsychotics as they have a
lower risk of inducing movement disorders and are often better tolerated
by patients (Gianfrancesco, Rajagopalan, Sajatovic, & Wang, 2006).
However, atypical antipsychotics did not turn out to be the miracle
drugs that patients and clinicians hoped they would be. First, atypical
antipsychotics can still induce movement disorders, though research
generally suggests that they do so at a lower rate than typical
antipsychotics (Rummel-Kluge et al., 2012). Second, many atypical
antipsychotics carry a substantial risk of causing metabolic syndrome,
which includes substantial weight gain (sometimes dozens of pounds); the
onset or worsening of diabetes mellitus; and lipid abnormalities
(Newcomer, 2005). Third, most atypical antipsychotics turned out to be
no more effective than typical antipsychotics in treating the positive
symptoms of schizophrenia. One exception to this is the atypical
antipsychotic clozapine, which has been shown to be effective in
treating some individuals with schizophrenia whose positive symptoms
have not responded to any other antipsychotic medication. However, in a
small minority of individuals, clozapine can cause a severe side effect
that includes the destruction of an important type of immune cell
throughout the body, so individuals who use it must get regular blood
tests to monitor for this side effect (Nielsen, Correll, Manu, & Kane,
2013). Fourth, like typical antipsychotics, atypical antipsychotics have
little to no effect on the nonpositive symptoms of schizophrenia: that
is, cognitive impairments, mood problems, and negative symptoms (Swartz
et al., 2007). While atypical antipsychotics have not turned out to be
everything they were hoped to be, their demonstrated efficacy in
treating the positive symptoms of schizophrenia combined with their
lower probability of inducing motor side effects has made them the
essential first-line treatment for schizophrenia. Given the efficacy of
atypical antipsychotics in treating the positive symptoms of
schizophrenia, there was some initial hope that low-dose antipsychotics
could prevent the onset of schizophrenia in individuals at clinical high
risk (CHR) for schizophrenia. Unfortunately though, initial studies
showed that, at best, atypical antipsychotics reduce attenuated positive
symptoms in CHR individuals and perhaps delay the onset of full-blown
psychotic symptoms while CHR individuals take the medication. However,
once CHR individuals stop taking atypical antipsychotic medication, they
become as likely to develop psychotic symptoms as they would have been
had they not taken the antipsychotic medication in the first place
(Addington & Heinssen, 2012). To summarize then, the evidence suggests
that atypical antipsychotics cannot be used to permanently prevent the
development of full-blown schizophrenia in CHR individuals. Given the
significant side effects of atypical antipsychotic medications (e.g.,
weight gain and diabetes), the choice of whether to use atypical
antipsychotics with a particular CHR individual is a hotly debated
risk-benefit calculation and probably best determined by a

Treatment

417

cautious and well-informed clinician who works closely with each patient
to weigh the risks and benefits for that particular individual.

Psychosocial Treatments Although antipsychotic medication is the crucial
first step in the treatment of schizophrenia, there is substantial
evidence that psychosocial interventions can also be beneficial for both
the individual suffering from schizophrenia and his or her family. It is
generally agreed that the optimal treatment approach is one that
combines medication and psychosocial interventions. In fact, family and
patient psychoeducation should begin as early as the initial assessment
(Gadelha, Noto, & de Jesus Mari, 2012). Research supports the use of
family psychoeducation therapy---which includes psychoeducational and
behavioral components---in treatment programs for schizophrenia
(Bustillo, Lauriello, Horan, & Keith, 2001). Family psychoeducation
therapy is an evidence-based practice that is included in the
schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) guidelines for
schizophrenia treatment (Dixon et al., 2010). In addition to improving
family members' knowledge of schizophrenia, family psychoeducation
therapy reduces patient relapse and hospitalization rates by as much as
50% (Lucksted, McFarlane, Downing, & Dixon, 2012). Comprehensive
programs for supporting an individual's transition back into the
community have also been effective in enhancing recovery and reducing
relapse. One such program, called assertive community treatment (ACT),
was originally developed in the 1970s by researchers in Madison,
Wisconsin (Udechuku et al., 2005). Assertive community treatment is a
comprehensive treatment approach for the seriously mentally ill living
in the community. Patients are assigned to a multidisciplinary team
(nurse, case manager, general physician, and psychiatrist) that has a
fixed caseload and a high staff-to-patient ratio. The team delivers all
services to the patient when and where he or she needs them and is
available to the patient at all times. Services include home delivery of
medication, monitoring of physical and mental health status, in vivo
social skills training, and frequent contact with family members.
Studies suggest that assertive community treatment can reduce time spent
in a hospital, improve housing stability, and increase patient and
family satisfaction with treatment. Recent studies have shown that
assertive community treatment, especially when focused on finding and
treating individuals during their first episode of psychosis, results in
net cost savings for the local health care system (Rosenheck et al.,
2016). The increased cost of delivering the service is offset by reduced
hospitalizations and incarcerations among individuals who receive it.
Social skills training seeks to improve the overall functioning of
individuals with schizophrenia by teaching the skills necessary to
perform daily living activities, function in the workplace, and develop
interpersonal relationships (Bustillo et al., 2001). Social skills
training programs make use of behavioral techniques, including modeling,
rehearsal, and reinforcement. Recent research indicates that social
skills training improves social competence and treatment compliance, as
compared to structured leisure activities or treatment as usual,
resulting in lower social disability and lower dropout among individuals
who receive social skills training (Rus-Calafell, Gutiérrez-Maldonado,
Ortega-Bravo, Ribas-Sabaté, & Caqueo-Urízar, 2013). However, it remains
unclear to what extent this improvement in social competence translates
into better functioning in

418

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

the community (Pilling et al., 2002). The 2009 PORT schizophrenia
treatment guidelines recommend that social skills training be
accompanied by strategies to increase real-world use of the skills
obtained in therapy (Dixon et al., 2010). Because the rate of
competitive employment for the severely mentally ill is low (Lehman et
al., 2002), vocational rehabilitation has also been a major focus of
many treatment programs. Some evidence suggests that supported
employment programs produce better results than traditional vocational
rehabilitation programs: nonetheless, job retention remains a
significant problem. Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for
schizophrenia draws on the tenets of cognitive therapy that were
originally developed by Beck and Ellis (Beck, 1976; Ellis, 1980). CBT
theory posits that dysfunctional cognitions can contribute to specific
psychotic symptoms (Naeem, Kingdon, & Turkington, 2005). Individual CBT
emphasizes a collaborative relationship between patient and therapist,
with the start of therapy focusing on establishing and developing a
therapeutic alliance without challenging or reinforcing delusional
beliefs (Mueser et al., 2013). Clinicians will then often provide
psychoeducation regarding schizophrenia and the influence of stress upon
symptoms. Clinicians normalize the client's symptoms as a way to reduce
the sense of isolation common among individuals with schizophrenia.
Clinicians will then often employ traditional CBT techniques, such as
examining the antecedents, beliefs, and consequences relevant to the
client's psychotic symptoms. The goal of therapy is generally not to get
clients to conclude that their beliefs are delusional. Instead, the
primary goal is to reduce symptom severity and associated distress by
helping clients develop more effective coping strategies (e.g.,
distraction techniques to make auditory hallucinations less distressing;
Dickerson, 2000). Recent reviews suggest that CBT is effective in
reducing symptom severity in schizophrenia patients (Mueser et al.,
2013), though its effects are mild to moderate and it must generally be
combined with effective antipsychotic medication treatment. There have
also been a few early studies of acceptance and commitment therapy for
psychosis (Bach, Gaudiano, Hayes, & Herbert, 2013), but at this time
there is too little research to draw reliable conclusions about its
effectiveness. Another psychosocial intervention that has shown
promising results is cognitive remediation. Cognitive remediation is
similar to interventions used with individuals who have neurological
problems following a stroke (Wykes, Huddy, Cellard, McGurk, & Czobor,
2011). Individuals with schizophrenia practice over and over again on
tasks that require attention, short-term memory, and other cognitive
abilities that are impaired in schizophrenia. Over time, their
performance on these tasks improves, and it is hoped that this improved
performance then translates to everyday tasks that require concentration
and memory. While research has clearly shown that individuals with
schizophrenia can improve on laboratory measures of cognitive ability,
evidence for if, when, and to what extent this leads to improved
performance on real-world tasks is more mixed and is an active area of
research (Bowie, McGurk, Mausbach, Patterson, & Harvey, 2012). To
summarize then, psychosocial interventions have a significant role to
play in the treatment of schizophrenia. Recent meta-analyses have
generally shown that targeted psychosocial interventions (e.g., CBT for
psychosis), when added to medication treatment as usual, result in
moderate gains in symptom control and on measures of functioning. Better
still are intensive, specialized, multidisciplinary programs that
provide assertive outreach treatment, evidence-based interventions
tailored to patient needs, low-dose atypical antipsychotic regimens,
manualized cognitive-behavioral strategies, individualized

Summary and Future Directions

419

crisis management plans, family counseling, and/or psychoeducation.
These "total package" programs have been shown to reduce relapse rates
and days of hospitalization (Alvarez-Jimenez et al., 2011). While these
programs might seem to be expensive and difficult to implement, recent
research has shown that they are cost effective in the long run,
suggesting that they should be implemented in far more locations than
they currently are (Rosenheck et al., 2016).

Summary and Future Directions Decades of research have documented the
tremendous personal and social cost of schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders. Although the cause of schizophrenia has not yet been
definitively identified, substantial progress has been made in
understanding schizophrenia's precursors and underlying mechanisms. We
now know that the early assumption that schizophrenia was a single
disorder that involved only one or a few etiological factors was
inaccurate. Instead, researchers now agree that schizophrenia is a
syndrome with multiple causes and that some of these involve complex
interactions among genetic and environmental factors. What does the
future hold for the understanding and treatment of schizophrenia? First,
it is likely that research efforts will gradually identify more genetic
and bioenvironmental factors that contribute to schizophrenia. In the
process, it is likely that subgroups of patients characterized by the
same etiological processes will be identified. Second, our understanding
of the brain dysfunction that gives rise to psychotic symptoms will
increase. Advances in neuroimaging have made it possible to explore the
brain from the level of gross anatomy to the microscopic level of
receptor function. It is likely that the neural circuits associated with
psychotic symptoms can be disrupted at multiple points via different
neurotransmitter systems. This information will play a major role in the
development of novel treatments. Third, advances will be made in our
understanding of the way environmental factors---from prenatal
complications to postnatal stress exposure---can trigger the expression
of latent vulnerability to schizophrenia. Advances in this area will set
the stage for efforts at prevention, including public health strategies
aimed at the general population and preventive interventions for at-risk
individuals. Finally, scientific progress in understanding adolescent
brain development will likely move the field forward (Walker & Bollini,
2002). The fact that the overwhelming majority of individuals who are
diagnosed with a major mental disorder, including both psychotic and
mood disorders, experience a clinical decline that begins within years
after the onset of puberty highlights the importance of understanding
the role of adolescent brain development in the etiology of psychotic
disorders.

References Adams, R. D., Fisher, C. M., Hakim, S., Ojemann, R. G., &
Sweet, W. H. (1965). Symptomatic occult hydrocephalus with normal
cerebrospinal-fluid pressure. New England Journal of Medicine, 273(3),
117--126. doi: 10.1056/NEJM196507152730301 Addington, J., & Heinssen, R.
(2012). Prediction and prevention of psychosis in youth at clinical high
risk. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 8(1), 269--289. doi:
10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032511143146 Adriano, F., Caltagirone, C., &
Spalletta, G. (2011). Hippocampal volume reduction in first-episode and
chronic schizophrenia: A review and meta-analysis. Neuroscientist,
18(2), 180--200. doi: 10.1177/ 1073858410395147 Allen, A. J., Griss, M.
E., Folley, B. S., Hawkins, K. A., & Pearlson, G. D. (2009).
Endophenotypes in schizophrenia: A selective review. Schizophrenia
Research, 109(1--3), 24--37. doi: 10.1016/j.schres .2009.01.016
Alvarez-Jimenez, M., Gleeson, J. F., Henry, L. P., Harrigan, S. M.,
Harris, M. G., Amminger, G. P., ... McGorry, P. D. (2011). Prediction of
a single psychotic episode: A 7.5-year, prospective study in
first-episode psychosis. Schizophrenia Research, 125(2--3), 236--246.
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2010 .10.020 American Psychiatric Association.
(2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. Andreasen, N. C., Carpenter, W. T., Kane, J. M.,
Lasser, R. A., Marder, S. R., & Weinberger, D. R. (2005). Remission in
schizophrenia: Proposed criteria and rationale for consensus. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 162(3), 441--449. doi: 10.1176/appi
.ajp.162.3.441 Ang, Y. G., & Tan, H. Y. (2004). Academic deterioration
prior to first episode schizophrenia in young Singaporean males.
Psychiatry Research, 121(3), 303--307. doi:
10.1016/S0165-1781(03)00257-9 Bach, P., Gaudiano, B. A., Hayes, S. C., &
Herbert, J. D. (2013). Acceptance and commitment therapy for psychosis:
Intent to treat, hospitalization outcome and mediation by believability.
Psychosis, 5(2), 166--174. doi: 10.1080/17522439.2012.671349

Ballard, C. G., Saad, K., Patel, A., Gahir, M., Solis, M., Coope, B., &
Wilcock, G. (1995). The prevalence and phenomenology of psychotic
symptoms in dementia sufferers. International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 10(6), 477--485. doi: 10.1002/gps .930100607 Beck, A. T.
(1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. Oxford, England:
International Universities Press. Behrendt, R. P., & Young, C. (2004).
Hallucinations in schizophrenia, sensory impairment, and brain disease:
A unifying model. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27(6), 771--830. doi:
10.1017/S0140525 X04000184 Benes, F. M. (2003). Why does psychosis
develop during adolescence and early adulthood? Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 16(3), 317--319. Bigelow, N. O., Paradiso, S., Adolphs, R.,
Moser, D. J., Arndt, S., Heberlein, A., ... Andreasen, N. C. (2006).
Perception of socially relevant stimuli in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Research, 83(2--3), 257--267. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2005.12.856 Bleuler,
E. (1911). Dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias (J. Zinkin,
Trans.). New York, NY: International Universities Press. Boileau, I.,
Dagher, A., Leyton, M., Gunn, R. N., Baker, G. B., Diksic, M., &
Benkelfat, C. (2006). Modeling sensitization to stimulants in humans: An
\[11 C\]raclopride/positron emission tomography study in healthy men.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(12), 1386--1395. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.63.12 .1386 Borgwardt, S. J., Picchioni, M. M.,
Ettinger, U., Toulopoulou, T., Murray, R., & McGuire, P. K. (2010).
Regional gray matter volume in monozygotic twins concordant and
discordant for schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry, 67(10), 956--964.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.10.026 Bowie, C. R., McGurk, S. R.,
Mausbach, B., Patterson, T. L., & Harvey, P. D. (2012). Combined
cognitive remediation and functional skills training for schizophrenia:
Effects on cognition, functional competence, and real-world behavior.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(7), 710--718. doi: 10.1176/appi
.ajp.2012.11091337

420

References Bowie, C. R., Reichenberg, A., Patterson, T. L., Heaton, R.
K., & Harvey, P. D. (2006). Determinants of real-world functional
performance in schizophrenia subjects: Correlations with cognition,
functional capacity, and symptoms. American Journal of Psychiatry,
163(3), 418--425. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp .163.3.418 Brady, K. T.,
Lydiard, R. B., Malcolm, R., & Ballenger, J. C. (1991). Cocaine-induced
psychosis. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 52(12), 509--512. Bramon, E.,
Rabe-Hesketh, S., Sham, P., Murray, R. M., & Frangou, S. (2004).
Meta-analysis of the P300 and P50 waveforms in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research, 70(2--3), 315--329. doi: 10.1016/j.schres
.2004.01.004 Breier, A., Schreiber, J. L., Dyer, J., & Pickar, D.
(1991). National Institute of Mental Health longitudinal study of
chronic schizophrenia: Prognosis and predictors of outcome. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 48(3), 239--246. Brown, A. S. (2006). Prenatal
infection as a risk factor for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
32(2), 200--202. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbj052 Brown, G. G., & Thompson, W.
K. (2010). Functional brain imaging in schizophrenia: Selected results
and methods. In N. R. Swerdlow (Ed.), Behavioral neurobiology of
schizophrenia and its treatment (pp. 181-- 214). New York, NY: Springer.
Retrieved from http:// link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/7854_2010_54
Buckley, P. F., Miller, B. J., Lehrer, D. S., & Castle, D. J. (2009).
Psychiatric comorbidities and schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
35(2), 383--402. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn135 Bustillo, J. R., Lauriello,
J., Horan, W. P., & Keith, S. J. (2001). The psychosocial treatment of
schizophrenia: An update. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158(2),
163--175. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.158.2.163 Cannon, T. D. (2015). How
schizophrenia develops: Cognitive and brain mechanisms underlying onset
of psychosis. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(12), 744--756. doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2015.09.009 Cardno, A. G., & Gottesman, I. I. (2000).
Twin studies of schizophrenia: From bow-and-arrow concordances to Star
Wars Mx and functional genomics. American Journal of Medical Genetics,
97(1), 12--17. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(200021)97:1\<12::
AID-AJMG3\>3.0.CO;2-U Carlsson, A., Waters, N., Holm-Waters, S.,
Tedroff, J., Nilsson, M., & Carlsson, M. L. (2001). Interactions

421

between monoamines, glutamate, and GABA in schizophrenia: New evidence.
Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 41(1), 237--260. Casey, D.
E. (2000). Tardive dyskinesia: Pathophysiology and animal models.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61(Suppl. 4), 5--9. Caspi, A.,
Reichenberg, A., Weiser, M., Rabinowitz, J., Kaplan, Z., Knobler, H.,
... Davidson, M. (2003). Cognitive performance in schizophrenia patients
assessed before and following the first psychotic episode. Schizophrenia
Research, 65(2--3), 87--94. doi: 10.1016/S0920-9964(03)00056-2 Chan,
R.C.K., Di, X., McAlonan, G. M., & Gong, Q. (2011). Brain anatomical
abnormalities in high-risk individuals, first-episode, and chronic
schizophrenia: An activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of
illness progression. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37(1), 177--188. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbp073 Cheetham, S. W., Gruhl, F., Mattick, J. S., &
Dinger, M. E. (2013). Long noncoding RNAs and the genetics of cancer.
British Journal of Cancer, 108(12), 2419--2425. doi:
10.1038/bjc.2013.233 Coe, C. L., Kramer, M., Czéh, B., Gould, E.,
Reeves, A. J., Kirschbaum, C., & Fuchs, E. (2003). Prenatal stress
diminishes neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of juvenile rhesus monkeys.
Biological Psychiatry, 54(10), 1025--1034. doi: 10.1016/S0006
-3223(03)00698-X Compton, M. T., & Walker, E. F. (2009). Physical
manifestations of neurodevelopmental disruption: Are minor physical
anomalies part of the syndrome of schizophrenia? Schizophrenia Bulletin,
35(2), 425--436. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn151 Cornblatt, B. A., Carrión,
R. E., Addington, J., Seidman, L., Walker, E. F., Cannon, T. D., ...
Lencz, T. (2012). Risk factors for psychosis: Impaired social and role
functioning. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38(6), 1247--1257. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbr136 Coyle, J. T., & Tsai, G. (2004). NMDA receptor
function, neuroplasticity, and the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
International Review of Neurobiology, 59, 491--515. Davidson, L., &
McGlashan, T. H. (1997). The varied outcomes of schizophrenia. Canadian
Journal of Psychiatry, 42(1), 34--43. Davis, K. L., Kahn, R. S., Ko, G.,
& Davidson, M. (1991). Dopamine in schizophrenia: A review and
reconceptualization. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148(11),
1474--1486. doi: 10.1176/ajp.148.11.1474

422

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

Del Arco, A., & Mora, F. (2009). Neurotransmitters and prefrontal
cortex--limbic system interactions: Implications for plasticity and
psychiatric disorders. Journal of Neural Transmission, 116(8), 941--952.
doi: 10.1007/s00702-009-0243-8 DeLisi, L. E. (1992). The significance of
age of onset for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 18(2), 209--215.
doi: 10.1093/schbul/18.2.209 Dempster, E. L., Pidsley, R., Schalkwyk, L.
C., Owens, S., Georgiades, A., Kane, F., ... Mill, J. (2011).
Disease-associated epigenetic changes in monozygotic twins discordant
for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Human Molecular Genetics,
20(24), 4786--4796. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr416 Dennert, J. W., & Andreasen,
N. C. (1983). CT scanning and schizophrenia: A review. Psychiatric
Developments, 1(1), 105--122. Dias, B. G., & Ressler, K. J. (2014).
Parental olfactory experience influences behavior and neural structure
in subsequent generations. Nature Neuroscience, 17(1), 89--96. doi:
10.1038/nn.3594 Dickerson, F. B. (2000). Cognitive behavioral
psychotherapy for schizophrenia: A review of recent empirical studies.
Schizophrenia Research, 43(2--3), 71--90. doi:
10.1016/S0920-9964(99)00153-X Dixon, L. B., Dickerson, F., Bellack, A.
S., Bennett, M., Dickinson, D., Goldberg, R. W., ... Kreyenbuhl, J.
(2010). The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychosocial treatment
recommendations and summary statements. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36(1),
48--70. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbp115 D'Souza, D. C., Abi-Saab, W. M.,
Madonick, S., Forselius-Bielen, K., Doersch, A., Braley, G., ...
Krystal, J. H. (2005). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol effects in
schizophrenia: Implications for cognition, psychosis, and addiction.
Biological Psychiatry, 57(6), 594--608. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004
.12.006 Eldridge, L. (2016, February 11). What percentage of smokers get
lung cancer, anyway? Verywell. Retrieved March 5, 2016, from
http://lungcancer .about.com/od/Lung-Cancer-And-Smoking/f/
Smokers-Lung-Cancer.htm Ellis, A. (1980). Rational-emotive therapy and
cognitive behavior therapy: Similarities and differences. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 4(4), 325--340. doi: 10.1007/BF01178210 Elvevag,
B., & Goldberg, T. E. (2000). Cognitive impairment in schizophrenia is
the core of the disorder.

Critical Reviews in Neurobiology, 14(1), 1--21. doi:
10.1615/CritRevNeurobiol.v14.i1.10 Erlenmeyer-Kimling, L.,
Squires-Wheeler, E., Adamo, U. H., Bassett, A. S., Cornblatt, B. A.,
Kestenbaum, C. J., ... Gottesman, I. I. (1995). The New York High-Risk
Project: Psychoses and cluster A personality disorders in offspring of
schizophrenic parents at 23 years of follow-up. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 52(10), 857--865. Evans, K., McGrath, J., & Milns, R.
(2003). Searching for schizophrenia in ancient Greek and Roman
literature: A systematic review. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 107(5),
323--330. doi: 10.1034/j.1600 -0447.2003.00053.x First, M., Williams, J.
B. W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2016). Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-5 Disorders, Clinician Version (SCID-5-CV). Arlington,
VA: American Psychiatric Association. Furrow, R. E., Christiansen, F.
B., & Feldman, M. W. (2011). Environment-sensitive epigenetics and the
heritability of complex diseases. Genetics, 189(4), 1377--1387. doi:
10.1534/genetics.111.131912 Fusar-Poli, P., Borgwardt, S., Bechdolf, A.,
Addington, J., Riecher-Rössler, A., Schultze-Lutter, F., ... Yung, A.
(2013). The psychosis high-risk state: A comprehensive state-of-the-art
review. JAMA Psychiatry, 70(1), 107--120. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry
.2013.269 Fusar-Poli, P., & Yung, A. R. (2012). Should attenuated
psychosis syndrome be included in DSM-5? Lancet, 379(9816), 591--592.
doi: 10.1016/S0140 -6736(11)61507-9 Gadelha, A., Noto, C. S., & de Jesus
Mari, J. (2012). Pharmacological treatment of schizophrenia.
International Review of Psychiatry, 24(5), 489--498. Gard, D. E., Kring,
A. M., Gard, M. G., Horan, W. P., & Green, M. F. (2007). Anhedonia in
schizophrenia: Distinctions between anticipatory and consummatory
pleasure. Schizophrenia Research, 93(1), 253--260. Gharabawi, G. M.,
Bossie, C. A., Lasser, R. A., Turkoz, I., Rodriguez, S., & Chouinard, G.
(2005). Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) and Extrapyramidal
Symptom Rating Scale (ESRS): Cross-scale comparison in assessing tardive
dyskinesia. Schizophrenia Research, 77(2--3), 119--128. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2005.03.008 Gianfrancesco, F. D., Rajagopalan, K.,
Sajatovic, M., & Wang, R. (2006). Treatment adherence among patients
with schizophrenia treated with atypical

References and typical antipsychotics. Psychiatry Research, 144(2--3),
177--189. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2006 .02.006 Gómez-Durán, E. L.,
Martin-Fumadó, C., & HurtadoRuíz, G. (2012). Clinical and
epidemiological aspects of suicide in patients with schizophrenia. Actas
Españolas Psiquiatría, 40(6), 333--345. Gothelf, D., Feinstein, C.,
Thompson, T., Gu, E., Penniman, L., Van Stone, E., ... Reiss, A. L.
(2007). Risk factors for the emergence of psychotic disorders in
adolescents with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 164(4), 663--669. Grebb, J. A., & Cancro, R. (1989).
Schizophrenia: Clinical features. In J. I. Kaplan & B. J. Sadock (Eds.),
Synopsis of psychiatry: Behavioral sciences, clinical psychiatry (Vol.
5, pp. 757--777). Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins. Gründer, G.,
Hippius, H., & Carlsson, A. (2009). The "atypicality" of antipsychotics:
A concept reexamined and re-defined. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery,
8(3), 197--202. doi: 10.1038/nrd2806 Handel, A. E., Ebers, G. C., &
Ramagopalan, S. V. (2010). Epigenetics: Molecular mechanisms and
implications for disease. Trends in Molecular Medicine, 16(1), 7--16.
doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2009.11.003 Harris, M. G., Henry, L. P., Harrigan,
S. M., Purcell, R., Schwartz, O. S., Farrelly, S. E., ... McGorry, P. D.
(2005). The relationship between duration of untreated psychosis and
outcome: An eight-year prospective study. Schizophrenia Research, 79(1),
85--93. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2005.05.024 Harrow, M., Grossman, L. S.,
Jobe, T. H., & Herbener, E. S. (2005). Do patients with schizophrenia
ever show periods of recovery? A 15-year multi-follow-up study.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 31(3), 723--734. Harvey, P. D., Koren, D.,
Reichenberg, A., & Bowie, C. R. (2006). Negative symptoms and cognitive
deficits: What is the nature of their relationship? Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 32(2), 250--258. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbj011 Healy, D., Le
Noury, J., Harris, M., Butt, M., Linden, S., Whitaker, C., ... Roberts,
A. P. (2012). Mortality in schizophrenia and related psychoses: Data
from two cohorts, 1875--1924 and 1994--2010. BMJ Open, 2(5), e001810.
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001810 Henn, F. A., & Braus, D. F. (1999).
Structural neuroimaging in schizophrenia: An integrative view of
neuromorphology. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 249(Suppl. 4), 48--56.

423

Heston, L. L. (1966). Psychiatric disorders in foster home reared
children of schizophrenic mothers. British Journal of Psychiatry,
112(489), 819--825. Holtzman, C. W., Trotman, H. D., Goulding, S. M.,
Ryan, A. T., MacDonald, A. N., Shapiro, D. I., ... Walker, E. F. (2013).
Stress and neurodevelopmental processes in the emergence of psychosis.
Neuroscience, 249, 172--191. doi: 10.1016/j .neuroscience.2012.12.017
Horan, W. P., Ventura, J., Nuechterlein, K. H., Subotnik, K. L., Hwang,
S. S., & Mintz, J. (2005). Stressful life events in recent-onset
schizophrenia: Reduced frequencies and altered subjective appraisals.
Schizophrenia Research, 75(2), 363--374. Howes, O. D., & Kapur, S.
(2009). The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia: Version III---the
final common pathway. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35(3), 549--562. Huttunen,
M. O. (1989). Maternal stress during pregnancy and the behavior of the
offspring. In S. Doxiadis & S. Stewart (Eds.), Early influences shaping
the individual (pp. 175--182). New York, NY: Plenum Press. Retrieved
from http://link.springer .com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4684-5634-9_15
Jablensky, A. (2006). Subtyping schizophrenia: Implications for genetic
research. Molecular Psychiatry, 11(9), 815--836. Jentsch, J. D., Roth,
R. H., & Taylor, J. R. (2000). Role for dopamine in the behavioral
functions of the prefrontal corticostriatal system: Implications for
mental disorders and psychotropic drug action. Progress in Brain
Research, 126, 433--453. Kantrowitz, J., & Javitt, D. (2010). Thinking
glutamatergically: Changing concepts of schizophrenia based upon
changing neurochemical models. Clinical Schizophrenia & Related
Psychoses, 4(3), 189--200. Karlsgodt, K. H., Niendam, T. A., Bearden, C.
E., & Cannon, T. D. (2009). White matter integrity and prediction of
social and role functioning in subjects at ultra-high risk for
psychosis. Biological Psychiatry, 66(6), 562--569. Kay, S. R., Fiszbein,
A., & Opler, L. A. (1987). The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale
(PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13(2), 261--276. doi:
10.1093/schbul/13.2.261 Kirkpatrick, B., Fenton, W. S., Carpenter, W.
T., & Marder, S. R. (2006). The NIMH-MATRICS consensus statement on
negative symptoms. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32(2), 214--219.

424

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

Lehman, A. F., Goldberg, R., Dixon, L. B., McNary, S., Postrado, L.,
Hackman, A., & McDonnell, K. (2002). Improving employment outcomes for
persons with severe mental illnesses. Archives of General Psychiatry,
59(2), 165--172. Lencz, T., Smith, C. W., Auther, A., Correll, C. U., &
Cornblatt, B. (2004). Nonspecific and attenuated negative symptoms in
patients at clinical high-risk for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Research, 68(1), 37--48. Lucksted, A., McFarlane, W., Downing, D., &
Dixon, L. (2012). Recent developments in family psychoeducation as an
evidence-based practice. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 38(1),
101--121. Marneros, A., Pillmann, F., & Wustmann, T. (2012). Delusional
disorders---are they simply paranoid schizophrenia? Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 38(3), 561--568. McGirr, A., Tousignant, M., Routhier, D.,
Pouliot, L., Chawky, N., Margolese, H. C., & Turecki, G. (2006). Risk
factors for completed suicide in schizophrenia and other chronic
psychotic disorders: A case--control study. Schizophrenia Research,
84(1), 132--143. McKeith, I. G., Dickson, D. W., Lowe, J., Emre, M.,
O'Brien, J. T., Feldman, H., ... The Consortium on DLB. (2005).
Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: Third report of
the DLB consortium. Neurology, 65(12), 1863--1872. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000187889.17253.b1 Meltzer, H. Y. (2001). Treatment of
suicidality in schizophrenia. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 932(1), 44--60. Menniti, F. S., Lindsley, C. W., Conn, P. J.,
Pandit, J., Zagouras, P., & Volkmann, R. A. (2013). Allosteric
modulators for the treatment of schizophrenia: Targeting glutamatergic
networks. Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 13(1), 26--54.
Mesholam-Gately, R. I., Giuliano, A. J., Goff, K. P., Faraone, S. V., &
Seidman, L. J. (2009). Neurocognition in first-episode schizophrenia: A
meta-analytic review. Neuropsychology, 23(3), 315--336. Miklowitz, D. J.
(2004). The role of family systems in severe and recurrent psychiatric
disorders: A developmental psychopathology view. Development and
Psychopathology, 16(3), 667--688. Miller, T. J., McGlashan, T. H.,
Rosen, J. L., Somjee, L., Markovich, P. J., Stein, K., & Woods, S. W.
(2002). Prospective diagnosis of the initial prodrome for

schizophrenia based on the Structured Interview for Prodromal Syndromes:
Preliminary evidence of interrater reliability and predictive validity.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(5), 863--865. Minzenberg, M. J.,
Laird, A. R., Thelen, S., Carter, C. S., & Glahn, D. C. (2009).
Meta-analysis of 41 functional neuroimaging studies of executive
function in schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(8),
811--822. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry .2009.91 Mittal, V. A.,
Tessner, K. D., McMillan, A. L., Delawalla, Z., Trotman, H. D., &
Walker, E. F. (2006). Gesture behavior in unmedicated schizotypal
adolescents. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115(2), 351--358. Miyamoto,
S., Duncan, G. E., Marx, C. E., & Lieberman, J. A. (2004). Treatments
for schizophrenia: A critical review of pharmacology and mechanisms of
action of antipsychotic drugs. Molecular Psychiatry, 10(1), 79--104.
doi: 10.1038/sj.mp .4001556 Mojtabai, R., Susser, E. S., & Bromet, E. J.
(2003). Clinical characteristics, 4-year course, and DSM-IV
classification of patients with nonaffective acute remitting psychosis.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(12), 2108--2115. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.160 .12.2108 Moore, T.H.M., Zammit, S.,
Lingford-Hughes, A., Barnes, T.R.E., Jones, P. B., Burke, M., & Lewis,
G. (2007). Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health
outcomes: A systematic review. Lancet, 370(9584), 319--328. Mora, F.,
Segovia, G., & Del Arco, A. (2008). Glutamate--dopamine--GABA
interactions in the aging basal ganglia. Brain Research Reviews, 58(2),
340--353. Mowry, B., & Nancarrow, D. (2001). Molecular genetics of
schizophrenia. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology,
28(1--2), 66--69. doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1681.2001.03399.x Mueser, K. T.,
Deavers, F., Penn, D. L., & Cassisi, J. E. (2013). Psychosocial
treatments for schizophrenia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology,
9(1), 465--497. doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-050212 -185620 Munetz, M.
R., & Benjamin, S. (1988). How to examine patients using the Abnormal
Involuntary Movement Scale. Psychiatric Services, 39(11), 1172--1177.
doi: 10.1176/ps.39.11.1172

References Naeem, F., Kingdon, D., & Turkington, D. (2005). Cognitive
behaviour therapy for schizophrenia in patients with mild to moderate
substance misuse problems. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 34(4), 207--215.
Narita, K., Sasaki, T., Akaho, R., Okazaki, Y., Kusumi, I., Kato, T.,
... Tokunaga, K. (2000). Human leukocyte antigen and season of birth in
Japanese patients with schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry,
157(7), 1173--1175. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.157 .7.1173 Nasar, S. (2011).
A beautiful mind. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster. Newcomer, J. W.
(2005). Second-generation (atypical) antipsychotics and metabolic
effects. CNS Drugs, 19(1), 1--93. Nielsen, J., Correll, C. U., Manu, P.,
& Kane, J. M. (2013). Termination of clozapine treatment due to medical
reasons: When is it warranted and how can it be avoided? Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 74(6), 603--613. doi: 10.4088/JCP.12r08064
Nuechterlein, K. H., Luck, S. J., Lustig, C., & Sarter, M. (2009).
CNTRICS final task selection: Control of attention. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 35(1), 182--196. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn158 O'Donnell, K.,
O'Connor, T. G., & Glover, V. (2009). Prenatal stress and
neurodevelopment of the child: Focus on the HPA axis and role of the
placenta. Developmental Neuroscience, 31(4), 285--292. O'Donovan, M. C.,
Craddock, N. J., & Owen, M. J. (2009). Genetics of psychosis: Insights
from views across the genome. Human Genetics, 126(1), 3--12. O'Dwyer,
A.-M., & Marks, I. (2000). Obsessivecompulsive disorder and delusions
revisited. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176(3), 281--284. doi:
10.1192/bjp.176.3.281 Okubo, Y., Suhara, T., Suzuki, K., Kobayashi, K.,
Inoue, O., Terasaki, O., ... Toru, M. (1997). Decreased prefrontal
dopamine D1 receptors in schizophrenia revealed by PET. Nature,
385(6617), 634--636. doi: 10.1038/385634a0 Olabi, B., Ellison-Wright,
I., McIntosh, A. M., Wood, S. J., Bullmore, E., & Lawrie, S. M. (2011).
Are there progressive brain changes in schizophrenia? A meta-analysis of
structural magnetic resonance imaging studies. Biological Psychiatry,
70(1), 88--96. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.01.032 Paolicelli, R. C.,
Bolasco, G., Pagani, F., Maggi, L., Scianni, M., Panzanelli, P., ...
Dumas, L. (2011). Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for

425

normal brain development. Science, 333(6048), 1456--1458. Pego-Reigosa,
J. M., & Isenberg, D. A. (2008). Psychosis due to systemic lupus
erythematosus: Characteristics and long-term outcome of this rare
manifestation of the disease. Rheumatology, 47(10), 1498--1502. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/ken260 Penn, D. L., Waldheter, E. J., Perkins, D.
O., Mueser, K. T., & Lieberman, J. A. (2005). Psychosocial treatment for
first-episode psychosis: A research update. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 162(12), 2220--2232. Phillips, K. A., Menard, W., & Fay, C.
(2006). Gender similarities and differences in 200 individuals with body
dysmorphic disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 47(2), 77--87. doi:
10.1016/j.comppsych .2005.07.002 Pilling, S., Bebbington, P., Kuipers,
E., Garety, P., Geddes, J., Martindale, B., ... Morgan, C. (2002).
Psychological treatments in schizophrenia: Metaanalyses of randomized
controlled trials of social skills training and cognitive remediation.
Psychological Medicine, 32(5), 783--791. Pillmann, F., Haring, A.,
Balzuweit, S., Blöink, R., & Marneros, A. (2002). The concordance of
ICD-10 acute and transient psychosis and DSM-IV brief psychotic
disorder. Psychological Medicine, 32(3), 525--533. doi:
10.1017/S0033291702005408 Postuma, R. B., Aarsland, D., Barone, P.,
Burn, D. J., Hawkes, C. H., Oertel, W., & Ziemssen, T. (2012).
Identifying prodromal Parkinson's disease: Pre-motor disorders in
Parkinson's disease. Movement Disorders, 27(5), 617--626. doi:
10.1002/mds .24996 Potter, D., Summerfelt, A., Gold, J., & Buchanan, R.
W. (2006). Review of clinical correlates of P50 sensory gating
abnormalities in patients with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
32(4), 692--700. Revheim, N., Butler, P. D., Schechter, I.,
Jalbrzikowski, M., Silipo, G., & Javitt, D. C. (2006). Reading
impairment and visual processing deficits in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research, 87(1--3), 238--245. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2006.06.022 Richards, C. F., & Gurr, D. E. (2000).
Psychosis. Emergency Medicine Clinics of North America, 18(2), 253--262.
Riley, B., & Kendler, K. S. (2006). Molecular genetic studies of
schizophrenia. European Journal of Human Genetics, 14(6), 669--680.

426

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

Rosenfarb, I. S., Bellack, A. S., & Aziz, N. (2006). Family interactions
and the course of schizophrenia in African American and White patients.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115(1), 112--120. Rosenheck, R., Leslie,
D., Sint, K., Lin, H., Robinson, D. G., Schooler, N. R., ... Kane, J. M.
(2016). Costeffectiveness of comprehensive, integrated care for first
episode psychosis in the NIMH RAISE early treatment program.
Schizophrenia Bulletin. Advance online publication. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbv224 Ross, D. A., & Cetas, J. S. (2012). Steroid
psychosis: A review for neurosurgeons. Journal of NeuroOncology, 109(3),
439--447. doi: 10.1007/s11060 -012-0919-z Rummel-Kluge, C., Komossa, K.,
Schwarz, S., Hunger, H., Schmid, F., Kissling, W., ... Leucht, S.
(2012). Second-generation antipsychotic drugs and extrapyramidal side
effects: A systematic review and meta-analysis of head-to-head
comparisons. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38(1), 167--177. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbq042 Rus-Calafell, M., Gutiérrez-Maldonado, J.,
OrtegaBravo, M., Ribas-Sabaté, J., & Caqueo-Urízar, A. (2013). A brief
cognitive--behavioural social skills training for stabilised outpatients
with schizophrenia: A preliminary study. Schizophrenia Research, 143(2),
327--336. Sadock, B. J., Sadock, V. A., Ruiz, P., & Kaplan, H. I.
(Eds.). (2009). Kaplan & Sadock's comprehensive textbook of psychiatry
(9th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins. Saha, S., Chant, D., Welham, J., & McGrath, J. (2005). A
systematic review of the prevalence of schizophrenia. PLOS Medicine,
2(5), e141. doi: 10.1371/ journal.pmed.0020141 Saks, E. R. (2008). The
center cannot hold: My journey through madness. New York, NY: Hachette
Books. Salokangas, R.K.R., Nieman, D. H., Heinimaa, M., Svirskis, T.,
Luutonen, S., From, T., ... The EPOS Group. (2012). Psychosocial outcome
in patients at clinical high risk of psychosis: A prospective follow-up.
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 48(2), 303--311. doi:
10.1007/s00127 -012-0545-2 Sapolsky, R. M. (2004). Why zebras don't get
ulcers (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Holt Paperbacks. Scheel, M., Prokscha,
T., Bayerl, M., Gallinat, J., & Montag, C. (2013). Myelination deficits
in

schizophrenia: Evidence from diffusion tensor imaging. Brain Structure
and Function, 218(1), 151--156. Schizophrenia Working Group of the
Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. (2014). Biological insights from 108
schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature, 511(7510), 421--427. doi:
10.1038/nature13595 Schmitt, A., Hasan, A., Gruber, O., & Falkai, P.
(2011). Schizophrenia as a disorder of disconnectivity. European
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 261(2), 150--154.
Schulze, T. G., Akula, N., Breuer, R., Steele, J., Nalls, M. A.,
Singleton, A. B., ... McMahon, F. J. (2014). Molecular genetic overlap
in bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and major depressive disorder. World
Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 15(3), 200--208. Sekar, A., Bialas, A.
R., de Rivera, H., Davis, A., Hammond, T. R., Kamitaki, N., ...
McCarroll, S. A. (2016). Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of
complement component 4. Nature, 530(7589), 177--183. doi:
10.1038/nature16549 Shad, M. U., Tamminga, C. A., Cullum, M., Haas, G.
L., & Keshavan, M. S. (2006). Insight and frontal cortical function in
schizophrenia: A review. Schizophrenia Research, 86(1), 54--70. Siever,
L. J., & Davis, K. L. (2004). The pathophysiology of schizophrenia
disorders: Perspectives from the spectrum. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 161(3), 398--413. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.161.3.398
Silverstein, S. M., & Keane, B. P. (2011). Perceptual organization
impairment in schizophrenia and associated brain mechanisms: Review of
research from 2005 to 2010. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37(4), 690--699.
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbr052 Spitzer, R. L., Endicott, J., & Gibbon, M.
(1979). Crossing the border into borderline personality and borderline
schizophrenia: The development of criteria. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 36(1), 17--24. Steinglass, J. E., Eisen, J. L., Attia, E.,
Mayer, L., & Walsh, B. T. (2007). Is anorexia nervosa a delusional
disorder? An assessment of eating beliefs in anorexia nervosa. Journal
of Psychiatric Practice, 13(2), 65--71. doi:
10.1097/01.pra.0000265762.79753.88 Strauss, G. P., Horan, W. P.,
Kirkpatrick, B., Fischer, B. A., Keller, W. R., Miski, P., ...
Carpenter, W. T. (2013). Deconstructing negative symptoms of
schizophrenia: Avolition--apathy and diminished expression clusters
predict clinical presentation and functional outcome. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 47(6), 783--790.

References Suddath, R. L., Christison, G. W., Torrey, E. F., Casanova,
M. F., & Weinberger, D. R. (1990). Anatomical abnormalities in the
brains of monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia. New England
Journal of Medicine, 322(12), 789--794. Sullivan, P. F., Kendler, K. S.,
& Neale, M. C. (2003). Schizophrenia as a complex trait: Evidence from a
meta-analysis of twin studies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(12),
1187--1192. Susser, E. S., Brown, A. S., & Gorman, J. M. (Eds.). (1999).
Prenatal exposures in schizophrenia. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press. Swartz, M. S., Perkins, D. O., Stroup, T. S., Davis,
S. M., Capuano, G., Rosenheck, R. A., ... Lieberman, J. A.; CATIE
Investigators. (2007). Effects of antipsychotic medications on
psychosocial functioning in patients with chronic schizophrenia:
Findings from the NIMH CATIE study. American Journal of Psychiatry,
164(3), 428--436. doi: 10.1176/ajp .2007.164.3.428 Taylor, M. A., &
Fink, M. (2003). Catatonia in psychiatric classification: A home of its
own. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(7), 1233--1241. Tien, A. Y.
(1991). Distribution of hallucinations in the population. Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 26(6), 287--292. doi: 10.1007/
BF00789221 Tienari, P., Wynne, L. C., Moring, J., Lahti, I., Naarala,
M., Sorri, A., ... Kaleva, M. (1994). The Finnish Adoptive Family Study
of Schizophrenia: Implications for family research. British Journal of
Psychiatry. Supplement, 164(23), 20--26. Trotman, H. D., Holtzman, C.
W., Walker, E. F., Addington, J. M., Bearden, C. E., Cadenhead, K. S.,
... McGlashan, T. H. (2014). Stress exposure and sensitivity in the
clinical high-risk syndrome: Initial findings from the North American
Prodrome Longitudinal Study (NAPLS). Schizophrenia Research, 160(1--3),
104--109. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014 .09.017 Udechuku, A., Olver, J.,
Hallam, K., Blyth, F., Leslie, M., Nasso, M., ... Burrows, G. (2005).
Assertive community treatment of the mentally ill: Service model and
effectiveness. Australasian Psychiatry, 13(2), 129--134. van Os, J., &
Selten, J.-P. (1998). Prenatal exposure to maternal stress and
subsequent schizophrenia. The May 1940 invasion of The Netherlands.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 172(4), 324--326.

427

Walker, E. F. (1994). Developmentally moderated expressions of the
neuropathology underlying schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20(3),
453--480. Walker, E. F., & Bollini, A. M. (2002). Pubertal
neurodevelopment and the emergence of psychotic symptoms. Schizophrenia
Research, 54(1), 17--23. Walker, E. F., & Diforio, D. (1997).
Schizophrenia: A neural diathesis-stress model. Psychological Review,
104(4), 667. Walker, E. F., Grimes, K. E., Davis, D. M., & Smith, A. J.
(1993). Childhood precursors of schizophrenia: Facial expressions of
emotion. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150(11), 1654--1660. doi:
10.1176/ajp.150.11.1654 Walker, E. F., Mittal, V., & Tessner, K. (2008).
Stress and the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis in the developmental
course of schizophrenia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 4,
189--216. doi: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.4.022007.141248 Walshe, M.,
McDonald, C., Taylor, M., Zhao, J., Sham, P., Grech, A., ... Murray, R.
M. (2005). Obstetric complications in patients with schizophrenia and
their unaffected siblings. European Psychiatry, 20(1), 28--34. Wand, G.
S., Oswald, L. M., McCaul, M. E., Wong, D. F., Johnson, E., Zhou, Y.,
... Kumar, A. (2007). Association of amphetamine-induced striatal
dopamine release and cortisol responses to psychological stress.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 32(11), 2310--2320. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301373
Weiner, W. J., Rabinstein, A., Levin, B., Weiner, C., & Shulman, L. M.
(2001). Cocaine-induced persistent dyskinesias. Neurology, 56(7),
964--965. Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., Greenwald, S.,
Hwu, H.-G., Joyce, P. R., ... Yeh, E.-K. (1999). Prevalence of suicide
ideation and suicide attempts in nine countries. Psychological Medicine,
29(1), 9--17. Welberg, L. A., & Seckl, J. R. (2001). Prenatal stress,
glucocorticoids and the programming of the brain. Journal of
Neuroendocrinology, 13(2), 113--128. Whalley, H. C., Papmeyer, M.,
Sprooten, E., Lawrie, S. M., Sussmann, J. E., & McIntosh, A. M. (2012).
Review of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies comparing
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Bipolar Disorders, 14(4), 411--431.
Wustmann, T., Pillmann, F., & Marneros, A. (2011). Gender-related
features of persistent delusional

428

Schizophrenia and the Psychosis Spectrum

disorders. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience,
261(1), 29--36. Wykes, T., Huddy, V., Cellard, C., McGurk, S. R., &
Czobor, P. (2011). A meta-analysis of cognitive remediation for
schizophrenia: Methodology and effect sizes. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 168(5), 472--485. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.10060855 Xu,
J., Murphy, S., Kochanek, K., & Bastian, B. (2016). Deaths: Final data
for 2013. National Vital Statistics Reports, 64(2). Yung, A. R., &
Nelson, B. (2011). Young people at ultra high risk for psychosis: A
research update.

Early Intervention in Psychiatry, 5(Suppl. 1), 52--57. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7893.2010.00241.x Yung, A. R., Yuen, H. P., McGorry, P.
D., Phillips, L. J., Kelly, D., Dell'Olio, M., ... Buckby, J. (2005).
Mapping the onset of psychosis: The Comprehensive Assessment of At-Risk
Mental States. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
39(11--12), 964--971. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1614.2005.01714.x Zemlan, F.
P., Hirschowitz, J., Sautter, F. J., & Garver, D. L. (1984). Impact of
lithium therapy on core psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 144(1), 64--69.

Chapter 11 Alcohol Use Disorder Lara A. Ray, Kelly E. Courtney, ReJoyce
Green, and Guadalupe A. Bacio

T

his chapter provides a comprehensive overview of alcohol use disorders,
and also brief descriptions of other substance use disorders. First, we
review the history of alcohol use disorders in the United States and
across Western societies. Second, we review diagnostic considerations,
including research and clinical questions as the field adapts to the
fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5). Third, we discuss a theoretical conceptualization of
alcoholism based on a biopsychosocial model of psychiatric disorders,
and present a review of psychosocial and biological factors thought to
influence the etiology of alcohol use disorders. Finally, we briefly
discuss empirically supported treatment approaches for alcohol use
disorders, including psychosocial and pharmacological interventions.

History Even after the legalization of alcohol in the United States in
the mid-1930s, societal and political views on alcohol consumption have
varied considerably throughout the years. After the drug-friendly
culture of the 1960s and early 1970s, the end of the 20th century saw
increased public concern about heavy alcohol and drug use and underage
drinking (McCrady, 2001). The drinking age was increased to 21 again,
after it had been lowered to 18 during the Vietnam War era, and the
government started increasing its efforts to stop illegal alcohol and
drug use. But not only the government was concerned about underage
drinking; increased deaths from drunk driving were receiving increased
public attention. Groups such as Mothers Against Drunk Driving helped
promote stricter drunk driving laws. Moreover, binge drinking and deaths
resulting from alcohol on college campuses have received increased news
media attention for several years now, with a recent study suggesting
approximately a 3% per 100,000 increase in alcohol-related,
unintentional injury deaths from 1998 to 2005 among college students
(Hingson, Zha, & Weitzman, 2009). As a result, the implementation of
programs to reduce underage drinking is now a major priority for most
colleges in the United States (McCrady, 2001). It appears that society
has taken two opposing approaches to dealing with alcohol use: a
conservative attitude that promotes more punishment for irresponsible
alcohol use (especially any alcohol use

429

430

Alcohol Use Disorder

by underage individuals), and a more liberal approach that focuses
primarily on reducing the harm that may be caused by alcohol use. As the
perspectives on alcohol use have shifted throughout the years, the
treatment modalities for alcohol use disorders have likewise changed.
Until the mid-1930s, individuals who did not have the financial means to
pay for inpatient treatment at a private hospital were forced to use
state hospitals, rescue missions, jails, the Salvation Army, or public
ministries. Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), which was founded in 1935 by two
alcohol-dependent individuals---Bill Wilson, a stock speculator, and
Dr. Bob Smith, a medical doctor---provided the first community-based
approach to supporting the recovery of alcohol-dependent individuals,
regardless of their financial status, by offering free, peer-delivered
group treatment to all comers. For many years, AA has offered one of the
few outpatient treatment approaches that individuals could turn to for
help with alcohol problems. In addition, the AA approach was also the
first to combine religion, medicine, and the help of sponsors
(individuals with a history of recovery from alcohol problems who were
committed to helping others stay sober). AA has since become a
well-known and highly utilized organization, with more than 100,000
groups in more than 150 countries, and with approximately 2 million
members worldwide (Alcoholics Anonymous, 2006). From the perspective of
psychology, AA and the other self-help groups that were developed
following the AA model (e.g., Narcotics Anonymous, Cocaine Anonymous)
have been criticized for their emphasis on individuals' powerlessness
over addiction, and for the spiritual focus of their 12-step program. As
a response to these criticisms, alternative self-help groups have
evolved that are based on more rational and humanistic approaches.
Abstinence-based programs such as Self-Management and Recovery Training
(SMART) and self-help groups emphasizing moderation in drinking (e.g.,
Moderation Management, or MM) promote the use of cognitive-behavioral
principles within a self-help environment to help individuals achieve
desired outcomes. One of the best known of these alternative self-help
programs is Rational Recovery (RR; Trimpey, 1992). Rational Recovery
emphasizes self-empowerment and the individual's ability to replace
harmful behaviors with healthier choices. The process of achieving
sobriety using the Rational Recovery framework involves education and
awareness, and the recognition of instances when the old brain (i.e.,
the addicted part of the brain) may try to "tempt" the new brain.
Currently, research evaluating the effectiveness of RR is based
primarily on self-reports about patients' sobriety, with little backing
from research using randomized controlled trials---the type of research
that has recently become available for 12-step facilitation approaches
(Project MATCH Research Group, 1997). Nevertheless, limited results
suggest that RR may be comparable to (Galanter, Egelko, & Edwards, 1993)
or possibly more effective than (Schmidt, Carns, & Chandler, 2001)
AA-type treatments, and thus that RR may constitute a viable self-help
alternative. There is, however, little research investigating other
variables important in understanding the effectiveness of self-help
treatment in general, such as defensiveness, resistance to recovery, and
denial (Schmidt et al., 2001). Because of its low cost and
accessibility, self-help is likely to remain a core element of
treatment, and more research using objective measures, as well as
multiple outcome variables, is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of
self-help programs. Throughout the past 20 years, treatment of alcohol
use disorders has evolved primarily from two approaches: rehabilitation
and harm reduction. Examples of the rehabilitative approach are employee
assistance programs (EAPs) and the provision of education classes

History

431

for individuals who have been convicted of drunk driving or other
alcohol offenses (e.g., underage drinking). Rehabilitative programs are
based on the belief that treatment is a better alternative to
punishment, and that abstinence-based treatment will increase a person's
chances of returning to his baseline of productive functioning in
society (McCrady, 2001). Conversely, harm-reduction models are based on
the belief that human beings are going to continue to engage in
behaviors that are potentially dangerous. The goal of these models is to
reduce alcohol intake and to minimize harm by providing individuals with
safer ways to engage in such risky behaviors (e.g., by using designated
drivers). Individuals are encouraged to make changes in their use of
alcohol that do not have to be as radical as complete and sustained
abstinence. Controlled drinking, for example, is one approach thought to
promote a decrease in risky alcohol use behaviors and, as a result, a
decrease in the negative consequences of drinking. Although the
harm-reduction model remains widely debated, there is a great deal of
research supporting its effectiveness and efficacy in the treatment and
prevention of alcohol problems (Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2006). The issue
of abstinence versus moderation as alternative treatment goals remains a
highly debated topic. The more traditional approach contends that
abstinence is the only acceptable goal, given the progressive nature of
an alcohol use disorder. The goal of abstinence remains the standard
clinical practice for alcoholism treatment in the United States.
However, drinking moderation has been introduced as an alternative to
abstinence in some programs. This approach is typically criticized when
suggested as an option for treating severe use disorders but has been
better accepted as an alternative for the treatment of mild use
disorders (formally referred to as alcohol abuse). The empirical
findings suggest that having individuals select their treatment goal
(i.e., abstinence or controlled drinking) may increase compliance and
improve outcomes (Öjehegan & Berglund, 1989; Orford & Keddie, 1986). A
recent study looked at three different drinking goals offered within
either a cognitive-behavioral intervention or a medical management only
framework: abstinence, conditional abstinence (i.e., allowing for
occasional use), and controlled drinking (Bujarski, O'Malley, Lunny, &
Ray, 2013). Analyses revealed that those with an abstinence goal had
overall better outcomes, followed by those with a conditional abstinence
goal and then those with a controlled drinking goal. Interestingly, a
treatment × drinking goal interaction emerged such that the benefit of
cognitive behavioral intervention over medical management was only
evident for those individuals who reported controlled drinking as a goal
(Bujarski et al., 2013). Some experts have argued in favor of abstinence
as a preferred treatment goal (McCrady, 1992), and have suggested that
selecting moderation as a goal may reinforce a person's distorted view
that alcohol is important to his functioning and therefore should not be
given up (McCrady, 2001). In line with this conceptualization,
researchers found that health care providers were more likely to
strongly recommend abstinence than controlled drinking for individuals
with a greater severity of alcohol problems and greater social support
(Cox, Rosenberg, Hodgins, Macartney, & Maurer, 2004). Interestingly,
recent research has found that the level of impaired control over
drinking predicted outcome in a moderation-oriented treatment, such that
patients who scored higher on impaired control were less likely to have
been successful in a moderation-oriented treatment program at 6-month
follow-up (Heather & Dawe, 2005). In a different study, controlled
drinking was found to be more appropriate for individuals who were
younger, showed lower levels of dependence and withdrawal, had a history
of being able to drink

432

Alcohol Use Disorder

in moderation, had no medical or psychological problems likely to be
exacerbated by continued drinking, and did not have a family history
positive for alcoholism (Rosenberg, 1993). These findings are consistent
with the clinical impression that moderation-oriented approaches may be
appropriate for individuals with overall lower severity alcohol use
disorders. As noted by McCrady (2001), clinicians should consider any
initial drinking goal (abstinence or moderation) as tentative, given
that goals may need to be reevaluated during the course of therapy.
Thus, individuals who are not succeeding in their efforts to drink in
moderation need to reconsider their drinking goal and reevaluate the
extent of their alcohol problems. Such persons may not be able to
recover from alcohol addiction without embracing abstinence as their
goal. The diagnosis of alcohol use disorders has changed significantly
over the years, a process reflected in the various editions of the DSM.
In the first edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-I; American Psychiatric Association \[APA\], 1952),
alcoholism was classified as a personality disorder, reflecting the
notion that alcoholism stemmed from an addictive personality. More than
20 years later, Edwards and Gross (1976) published an influential paper
describing alcohol dependence syndrome (ADS), which led to a major shift
in the way substance use disorders were conceptualized. Specifically,
Edwards and Gross (1976) emphasized the salience that a given substance
of abuse was occupying in a person's life, thereby expanding the concept
of dependence to various substances---many of which did not have
clinically relevant withdrawal syndromes or tolerance (e.g., cannabis).
As a result, in the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III; APA, 1980), the diagnosis of
alcohol problems was based heavily on the notion that multiple
substances of abuse could lead to a dependence syndrome, based on their
impact on one's life and functioning. Importantly, up through DSM-II,
only diagnostic labels and brief descriptions of the major illnesses had
been provided. It was not until the DSM-III that specific diagnostic
criteria were provided for substance use disorders, an approach that
found rapid acceptance in the United States and internationally (Hasin
et al., 2003). The use of specific diagnostic criteria in the DSM-III
was predated and heavily influenced by the Feighner diagnostic criteria
(Feighner et al., 1972) for alcohol dependence, which had been developed
mainly for research purposes. An important change implemented in DSM-III
was the distinction between abuse and dependence. According to DSM-III,
alcohol abuse was characterized by a pattern of pathological alcohol
use, impairment in social or occupational functioning, and duration of
disturbance of at least 1 month. DSM-III-R (APA, 1987) and DSM-IV (APA,
1994) expanded the characterization of alcohol abuse by providing a more
concrete operational definition of the abuse criteria, which in turn
increased the reliability of the alcohol abuse diagnosis. In DSM-III,
alcohol dependence required that either the tolerance or the withdrawal
criterion had been met. However, in DSM-III-R this was no longer a
necessary requirement for the diagnosis of alcohol dependence.
Furthermore, DSM-III-R established a specific definition for the
tolerance criterion, quantifying the increase in the amount of drinking
necessary to achieve a level of intoxication or desired effect: that is,
intake must be at least 50% higher to demonstrate tolerance. However,
DSM-IV dropped that concept and suggested that tolerance needed to be
established on a case-by-case basis. The DSM-IV expanded on the
DSM-III-R definition for tolerance by introducing the concept that a
casual user's behavior could be impaired with the same level of blood
alcohol at

Diagnosis

433

which an individual with alcohol dependence might function adequately.
With the recently released fifth edition of the DSM (DSM-5; APA, 2013),
the diagnosis of and criteria for alcohol abuse and dependence have once
again received a significant overhaul. However, the notion of tolerance
and withdrawal as sufficient, yet not necessary, symptoms of the
disorder remains (assuming the substance in question is not prescribed
by a physician). In summary, the changes in the definition of alcohol
abuse and dependence and of alcohol use disorder across versions of the
DSM over the years highlight the history of the alcohol use disorder
conceptualization and reflect societal views of alcohol use.
Specifically, the field started with a conceptualization of alcohol
dependence that was based largely on personality traits and the idea of
an addictive personality, but that view has evolved into the current
conceptualization of alcohol use disorder, which emphasizes the
interplay between the biological and psychological processes that lead
to significant impairments in functioning as a result of excessive
alcohol use.

Diagnosis According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), the diagnosis of an alcohol use
disorder necessitates the experience of a problematic pattern of alcohol
use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as
manifested by at least 2 of 11 specified symptoms, occurring within a
12-month period (APA, 2013). (See Table 11.1 for a list of the
criteria.) The DSM-5 criterion set includes the symptoms formerly
subsumed under substance abuse and substance dependence in the DSM-IV,
with some minor, yet important variations. The two most notable changes
include the removal of "legal problems" and the addition of "drug
craving" to the symptom list. The American Psychiatric Association
(APA), publishers of the DSM, noted that the removal of "legal problems"
was based on the observation of distinct variations in international as
well as local U.S. jurisdiction standards (APA, 2012), making this
symptom highly unreliable and not suitable for diagnostic purposes. The
addition of "craving" as a symptom represents an effort to increase
consistency between the DSM-5 and the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD-10; World Health Organization, 2010), as well as an
acknowledgment of the vast amount of scientific research highlighting
the importance of craving in the perpetuation of the disorder. In
treatment settings, moderate to intense cravings are reported by
substantial proportions of patients (Oslin, Cary, Slaymaker, Colleran, &
Blow, 2009; Yoon, Kim, Thuras, Grant, & Westermeyer, 2006), and the
amelioration of craving is a frequent treatment target (Pavlick,
Hoffmann, & Rosenberg, 2009). A longitudinal study of alcoholism course
and chronicity found that craving was associated with the highest
relative risk of all ICD-10 criteria for DSM-IV alcohol dependence (de
Bruijn, Van Den Brink, de Graaf, & Vollebergh, 2005). Further, craving
has been consistently found to predict substance consumption in multiple
laboratory studies (Leeman, Corbin, & Fromme, 2009; Leeman, O'Malley,
White, & McKee, 2010; MacKillop & Lisman, 2005; O'Malley,
Krishnan-Sarin, Farren, Sinha, & Kreek, 2002), and represents a
translational phenotype (Sinha & Li, 2007), thus highlighting its
potential utility in identifying alcohol use disorders. Importantly, the
withdrawal and intoxication symptoms presented in the DSM-5 are unique
to each substance of abuse, and they are based largely on the
pharmacological

434

Alcohol Use Disorder TABLE 11.1

DSM-5 Criteria for Alcohol Use Disorder

In DSM-IV, the criteria for alcohol abuse

Recurrent alcohol use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role
obligations at work, school, or home. Recurrent alcohol use in
situations in which it is physically hazardous. Continued alcohol use
despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal problems
caused or exacerbated by the effects of alcohol.

In DSM-IV, the criteria for alcohol dependence

Tolerance, the need for greater amounts of the alcohol to achieve the
same intoxication level or desired effect, or a markedly diminished
effect with continued use of the same amount of alcohol. Withdrawal, the
physiological and cognitive maladaptive symptoms that occur when the
blood concentration of alcohol declines after prolonged and heavy use of
alcohol. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts and/or over longer
periods of time than intended. Persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts
to stop or cut down alcohol use. Increased amount of time is spent
consuming, obtaining, or recovering from the effects of alcohol.
Important occupational, social, or recreational activities are given up
or reduced because of alcohol use. Alcohol consumption continues despite
the knowledge of having persistent or recurrent physiological and
psychological difficulties (e.g., blackouts, depression, worsening of an
ulcer).

New criterion added in DSM-5 Severity Rating

Craving or strong desire to use alcohol. Mild = 2 to 3 symptoms met.
Moderate = 4 to 5 symptoms met. Severe = 6 to 11 symptoms met.

and behavioral effects of each substance when it is acutely present
(i.e., intoxication) or acutely absent (i.e., withdrawal). The following
alcohol withdrawal symptoms are specified in DSM-5: (a) autonomic
hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or racing heart); (b) increased hand
tremor; (c) insomnia; (d) nausea or vomiting; (e) transient visual,
tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions; (f) psychomotor
agitations; (g) anxiety; and (h) seizures. The DSM-5 provides a distinct
diagnosis for alcohol withdrawal syndrome, which is separate from
alcohol use disorder; for a diagnosis of withdrawal syndrome, at least
two of these symptoms must be met and those symptoms must cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning and must
not be due to a general medical condition or be better accounted for by
another mental disorder. The decision in DSM-5 to move to a single
diagnosis of substance use disorder represents a significant shift from
the previous distinction between substance abuse and substance
dependence as defined in DSM-IV. This change was based on the overall
goal

Diagnosis

435

of simplifying the diagnostic process for clinicians from having to
remember two sets of criteria to having to remember only one ("DSM-5 to
Include Controversial Changes," 2012), and most importantly, on a
sizeable amount of research suggesting that substance use disorders are
more adequately represented by a continuum of severity (Saha, Chou, &
Grant, 2006; Martin, Chung, Kirisci, & Langenbucher, 2006). Thus, the
DSM-5 diagnosis requires the specification of a severity level (i.e.,
mild, moderate, or severe), based on the total number of criteria met
(see Table 11.1). However, consistent with the polythetic nature of the
DSM, any combination of two of the symptoms described is necessary and
sufficient for a diagnosis of an alcohol use disorder. As a result, one
individual may exhibit psychological difficulties after alcohol
consumption and may drink in larger amounts than planned, thus arriving
at an alcohol use disorder diagnosis, while another patient may
experience tolerance and an inability to quit drinking, and receive the
same diagnosis. This is an example of how our current nosology system
allows clinicians to assign the same diagnosis to a variety of
presentations of the same syndrome, which reflects the phenotypic
heterogeneity, discussed further below, which is problematic from a
behavioral genetics viewpoint. In addition to the severity specifiers,
the DSM-5 suggests that remission and environmental specifiers be used
when appropriate. Because individuals are at particularly high risk for
relapse in the first 12 months after symptoms remit, the DSM-5
distinguishes between early remission and sustained remission. Early
remission is specified when none of the criteria for alcohol use
disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12 months
(with the exception of the craving criterion); whereas sustained
remission is used when none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder
have been met at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (again
with the exception of the craving criterion). A controlled environment
specifier is used to indicate the individual is currently in an
environment where access to alcohol is restricted (e.g., a treatment
facility). In addition to alcohol, the DSM-5 lists a number of other
substance use disorders, each of which is diagnosed separately based on
the substance being used (tobacco, cannabis, hallucinogens, inhalants,
opioids, sedatives, hypnotics, anxiolytics, stimulants, caffeine, and
other or unknown substances). Although the focus of this chapter is on
alcohol use disorders, it is important to note that nearly all substance
use disorders outlined in the DSM-5 are diagnosed based on the same
general set of criteria as outlined in Table 11.1. Thus, the overarching
theme of loss of control, failure to fulfill obligations, continued use
despite problems, and so forth, appear to capture the nature of a use
disorder, despite differences in the specific substance used.
Nevertheless, there are unique diagnostic features for each substance
use disorder. For example, smoking behaviors indicative of tobacco use
disorder include smoking more cigarettes per day over time, smoking
within the first 30 minutes of waking, and waking at night to smoke
(Baker, Breslau, Covey, & Shiffman, 2012; Piper, McCarthy, & Baker,
2006). The DSM-5 diagnostic features of post-abstinence withdrawal
symptoms for tobacco use disorder are due largely to nicotine
deprivation. These symptoms are presumably more severe in those smoking
cigarettes or using smokeless tobacco as opposed to those using nicotine
medication, due to the increased levels and quicker onset of nicotine
that accompany cigarette smoking (APA, 2013). Tobacco withdrawal can
occur in daily and nondaily smokers, and withdrawal symptoms include
clinically significant changes in mood, such as irritability, anxiety,
or depressed mood (APA, 2013).

436

Alcohol Use Disorder

Cannabis use disorder tends to develop over an elongated period of time,
with patterns of cannabis use that slowly increase in amount and
frequency (APA, 2013). Cannabis is generally one of the first substances
adolescents try, along with alcohol and tobacco, and cannabis use prior
to the age of 15 is a strong predictor for developing cannabis use
disorder in young adulthood (Fergusson, Boden, & Horwood, 2006). Among
adults, symptoms of cannabis use disorder include daily cannabis use and
failed repeated cessation attempts, while milder adult cases can
parallel adolescent cases in which cannabis use is less frequent but
persists despite significant consequences (APA, 2013). Opioid use
disorder represents a distinct substance use disorder that requires
careful diagnostic consideration from the clinician, as abuse of opioids
can arise in individuals who are prescribed opioid medications for
pain-related medical conditions. Symptoms of opioid use disorder include
compulsive self-administration of opioid substances that are not
prescribed for any medical reason or are used in exorbitant amounts for
the particular medical condition (APA, 2013). Opioid withdrawal can
cause anxiety and restlessness, along with physiological symptoms of
dilated pupils, rhinorrhea, and nausea (APA, 2013). Lastly, stimulant
use disorder can involve a range of abused stimulants, with the most
common being amphetamines, methamphetamines, and cocaine. Features
specific to stimulant withdrawal include disturbances in sleep patterns
and increased daytime sleepiness (APA, 2013). Of note, the tolerance
symptom specifies that this symptom does not count toward the required
number when that substance is prescribed by a physician.

Prevalence Alcohol use is highly prevalent worldwide. According to the
World Health Organization (WHO), alcohol is the third largest risk
factor for disability and disease, and the fourth leading preventable
cause of death (WHO, 2010; Stahre, Roeber, Kanny, Brewer, & Zhang,
2014). As many as 90% of the U.S. population have had some experiences
with alcohol during their lives, and a great number of those have
developed one or more problems related to alcohol. Alcohol use disorders
constitute a frequently occurring psychiatric problem. The lifetime
prevalence of DSM-IV alcohol dependence (the more severe diagnosis) is
approximately 12.5% in the general population, whereas the point
prevalence is approximately 3.8%---suggesting that about 3.8% of the
adult population in the United States meet the criteria for alcohol
dependence in a single year (Hasin, Stinson, Ogburn, & Grant, 2007).
DSM-IV alcohol abuse (the less severe diagnosis), which was given in
cases where alcohol use causes significant interference in one or more
domains of functioning, affects approximately 4% to 5% of the adult
population in the United States (Grant et al., 2004). The 2014 National
Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) revealed that 71.0% of adults had
reported consuming alcohol in the past year, and 6.7% had reported
engaging in heavy drinking in the past month (Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration \[SAMHSA\], 2014a, 2014b). Findings from
a major epidemiological study, the National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC) conducted between 2001 and 2002
by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (Dawson et
al., 2005), indicated that the prevalence of DSM-IV alcohol dependence
in the general population of adults in the United States was
3.81%---with a higher incidence of the disorder among males

Prevalence

437

(5.42%) as compared to females (2.32%). Results from the second wave of
this study (NESARC-II), conducted between 2004 and 2005, indicated that
77.54% of current drinkers who did not have an alcohol use disorder
during the first wave continued to drink without developing an alcohol
use disorder. Of those who reported only past-year alcohol abuse during
the first wave, 14.01% had developed alcohol dependence, and of those
who had dependence during the first wave, 36.34% remained dependent at
the second wave (National Institutes of Health \[NIH\], 2010). The
proportion of individuals remaining dependent from one wave to the next
did vary by age, such that those between the ages of 45 and 64 exhibited
the highest rate of remaining alcohol dependent (44.10%), followed by
38.34% of individuals between the ages of 25 and 44, and 31.78% between
the ages of 18 and 24 (NIH, 2010). Results from the third wave
(NESARC-III), conducted between 2012 and 2013, when compared to the
first wave, revealed an overall increase in the proportion of past-year
drinkers (from 65.4% to 72.7%), with a substantial decrease in lifetime
abstainers (from 17.30% to 11.10%) (Dawson, Goldstein, Saha, & Grant,
2015). Females had nearly twice the increase in the proportion of
past-year drinking (from 59.6% to 69.0%) compared to males (from 71.8%
to 76.7%; Dawson et al., 2015). Additionally, there was a 20% increase
in the prevalence of greater than monthly heavy episodic drinking, which
was defined as 5+ or 4+ drinks (for men and women respectively) (Dawson
et al., 2015). Results from the National Health Interview Survey
revealed that 29.8% of men, in comparison to 18.6% of women, had at
least one heavy drinking day in the past year (Clarke, Ward, Freeman, &
Schiller, 2015). Results from the third wave of NESARC revealed the
prevalence of alcohol use disorder as determined by the DSM-5, which
combines alcohol abuse and dependence criteria into a single category
with the subclassifications of mild, moderate, and severe. The
prevalence of 12-month and lifetime DSM-5 alcohol use disorder was 13.9%
and 29.1%, respectively, with higher rates among males (17.6% and 36.0%,
respectively) than among females (10.4% and 22.7%, respectively) (Grant
et al., 2015). The mean age of alcohol use disorder onset was 26.2
years, and this decreased with increasing disorder severity to 23.9
years for severe alcohol use disorder (Grant et al., 2015). While nearly
20% of those with lifetime alcohol use disorder sought help or
treatment, the mean age of first treatment was 29.4 years, indicating a
3-year gap between onset and treatment (Grant et al., 2015). Taken
together, results from the most recent epidemiological study of alcohol
use disorders suggest that 13.9% of the adult population in the United
States suffer from an alcohol use disorder in a given year, totaling
32.6 million individuals (Grant et al., 2015). These figures clearly
underscore the significance of alcohol use disorders as an important
public health concern, and they are corroborated by studies estimating
that the economic cost of alcohol abuse and dependence was \$249 billion
for 2010 (Sacks, Gonzales, Bouchery, Tomedi, & Brewer, 2015),
representing an astounding but preventable financial burden.

Alcohol Use Disorder Cross-Culturally Patterns of alcohol use and misuse
vary cross-culturally. Although most of the relevant literature is
limited to simple descriptions of alcohol use patterns in different
cultures, these studies highlight the importance of examining cultural
factors influencing alcohol use and, ultimately, alcohol pathology.
Accordingly, various studies have examined differences among
ethnic/racial groups in the United States as well as worldwide. Results
from

438

Alcohol Use Disorder

epidemiological U.S. population studies have revealed stable high-risk
subgroups for alcohol use disorders. These subgroups include whites,
Native Americans, and males (Grant et al., 2015). Native Americans have
the highest risk for alcohol dependence (Delker, Brown, & Hasin, 2015).
Although the exact rates vary by tribe, Native American drinkers report
high rates of alcohol-related health problems, including mortality
(Beals, Novins, Whitsell, Mitchell, & Manson, 2005). Asian Americans,
African Americans, and Hispanics in the United States exhibit lower
rates of lifetime alcohol use disorders than their white non-Hispanic
counterparts do (Grant et al., 2015). However, ethnic/racial differences
in alcohol use disorders continue to change with the evolving
sociocultural context. For example, it remains unknown why African
Americans and Hispanics, who tend to be of lower socioeconomic status,
are at lower risk for alcohol use disorders than their white
non-Hispanic counterparts, given the socioeconomic disparities between
these groups and the strong association between lower socioeconomic
status and poor health (Link & Phelan, 2002; Phelan, Link, & Tehranifar,
2010). Furthermore, African Americans, Asian Americans, and Hispanics
are heterogeneous groups that vary culturally. Nativity, or place of
birth, has been identified as a strong predictor of alcohol use and
misuse. Paradoxically, individuals who are born outside the United
States and then immigrate to the United States seem to have a lower risk
for alcohol use disorders than their U.S.-born counterparts, despite the
fact that the former seemingly encounter more risk factors than the
latter (Caetano, Clark, & Tam, 1998; Vega & Sribney, 2011). This pattern
has come to be commonly known as the immigrant paradox (Vega & Sribney,
2011). However, the mechanisms that account for these differences are
yet to be identified. Worldwide cross-cultural comparisons of drinking
behaviors typically describe cultural factors that could account for the
observed differences in drinking patterns across cultures. For example,
a comparison of drinking habits in Finnish and Canadian samples found a
higher prevalence of binge drinking in Finnish men (Cunningham & Mäkelä,
2003). The study authors discussed these observed differences in the
context of the cultural view of alcohol as an intoxicant in Finland, a
society in which there is a higher cultural acceptance of drunkenness
(Cunningham & Mäkelä, 2003). A study comparing alcohol problems in
Germany and the United States found that at matched drinking levels,
more Americans reported alcohol-related problems than Germans did. The
authors hypothesized that those differences in problem endorsement may
reflect greater cultural ambivalence about the use of alcohol in the
United States (Bloomfield, Greenfield, Kraus, & Augustin, 2002). A
recent examination of the literature on the associations between culture
and alcohol use highlighted how the transition from casual indigenous
societies to regulated Western societies adds additional stressors that
appear to result in increases in alcohol consumption as a form of coping
(Castro, Barrera, Mena, & Aguirre, 2014). Cross-cultural differences in
the relationship between alcohol use and gender are well documented in
the literature (de Lima, Dunn, Novo, Tomasi, & Reisser, 2003; Grant et
al., 2004; Schmid et al., 2003; Wilsnack, Vogeltanz, Wilsnack, & Harris,
2000). Grant and colleagues (2004) identified that young adult African
American females and Asian American males showed a sharp increase in
prevalence rates for alcohol dependence between 1992 and 2002.
Similarly, rates of alcohol abuse increased among Latino males, African
American males, and Asian females in this 10-year span (Grant et al.,
2004). Wilsnack and colleagues (2000), reporting on data from the
International Research Group on Gender

Prevalence

439

and Alcohol, examined gender differences in 10 countries. The main
findings were that women and men differed little in the likelihood of
current drinking versus abstaining, but men reported significantly
higher drinking frequencies, quantities, and rates of heavy drinking.
The authors proposed that gender roles may magnify biological
differences in pharmacological responses to alcohol and that gender
differences in drinking may be impacted by culturally bound constructs
such as gender roles (Wilsnack et al., 2000). In short, these findings
underscore the complex nature of the relationship between cultural
factors and alcohol use. Based on the results of this large
epidemiological study of alcohol use disorders, Grant and colleagues
(2004) argued for new prevention programs designed with the observed
gender and racial/ethnic differences in mind, as well as early
prevention efforts for youth. Although most cross-cultural studies have
focused on comparing alcohol use among various cultures and countries, a
few studies have examined moderators and mediators of the effects of
culture on alcohol use and abuse. In examining ethnic/cultural groups in
the United States, acculturation-related processes such as adopting
drinking behaviors consistent with the majority, host culture continue
to be explored as potential mediators of differences in alcohol use
disorders between whites and ethnic minorities in the United States
(Caetano et al., 1998). An examination of female American Indian parents
and caretakers revealed that historical loss (i.e., trauma/loss
experienced by earlier generations) mediated the effects of
discrimination on past-year alcohol abuse, while enculturation did not
mediate or moderate the effect of discrimination (Les Whitbeck, Chen,
Hoyt, & Adams, 2004). In addition, studies have also focused on
examining beliefs about the use and effects of alcohol in various
cultures. In attempting to capture belief systems and "drinking
cultures," a number of typologies for cultural views of drinking have
been proposed. These typologies include distinctions between "wet" and
"dry" cultures, where the primary factor is whether alcohol use is
integrated into daily life---for example, whether there is acceptance of
having wine with meals. This typology refers primarily to European
societies, especially those in Mediterranean cultures (Room, 1998).
Another model, proposed by Partanen (1991), consists of a
two-dimensional typology with the following two axes: (1) engagement
with alcohol, and (2) serious drinking. According to this typology,
cultural views of alcohol should be analyzed in both domains. An
additional typology for alcohol culture is Levine's distinction between
temperance and nontemperance cultures (Levine, 1992). The distinction is
based on both religion (temperance cultures are mostly Protestant) and
societal position toward alcohol (e.g., temperance cultures are highly
concerned about alcohol misuse and are often active in combating
alcoholism). Studies have found that temperance cultures consume less
alcohol and have more AA groups (Peele, 1993, 1997). Finally, a few
studies have attempted to understand cultural factors associated with
alcohol use by examining cognitive factors, such as alcohol expectancies
(Lindman, Sjöholm, & Land, 2000), and other cultural factors, such as
the role of the family (Bjarnason et al., 2003; Johnson & Johnson,
1999). Regarding alcohol expectancies, results from a large
cross-cultural comparison revealed that expectations of increased
positive affect when drinking were influenced by culture, in addition to
the direct pharmacological effects of alcohol (Lindman et al., 2000). In
summary, most cross-cultural studies to date have focused on comparing
drinking patterns and alcohol misuse cross-culturally, while a few
studies have begun to examine factors that mediate or moderate the
relationship between culture and alcohol use.

440

Alcohol Use Disorder

These efforts represent an important step toward increasing our
understanding of the role of cultural factors in the initiation,
progression, and maintenance of alcohol use disorders.

Developmental Considerations Alcohol use typically starts in early
adolescence and escalates during late adolescence (ages 16 to 20), which
is the period of highest risk for alcohol use disorders (Brown et al.,
2008; Hasin et al., 2007). School-based surveys indicate that by 12th
grade, 72% of adolescents report having drunk alcohol, 55% report having
been drunk, and 25% report binge drinking in the past 2 weeks (Johnston,
O'Malley, Bachman, & Schulenberg, 2010). In fact, starting to drink
before age 15 increases the risk for developing alcohol dependence later
in life (Windle et al., 2008). A recent cross-national examination of
adolescent alcohol use found a decrease in weekly alcohol use in North
America and Europe that was theorized to be due to changes in social
norms or an increased recognition of the harmful effects of alcohol and
utilization of associated preventive strategies (de Looze et al., 2015).
Among U.S. college students, the prevalence of alcohol problems is high
and increasing, with studies suggesting that the prevalence of binge
drinking (i.e., consuming five or more drinks on a single occasion)
among college students is 37.9% within the past month (SAMHSA 2014c),
and that approximately 20% of U.S. college students met the criteria for
an alcohol use disorder (Bianco et al., 2008). Gender differences in
alcohol use emerge in late adolescence/early adulthood. Specifically,
males and females report comparable drinking rates during early
adolescence but males report drinking more often and in greater
quantities compared to females as they transition to adulthood (Windle,
Mun, & Windle, 2005). These gender differences appear to be consistent
across ethnic/racial groups in the United States. Ethnic/racial
differences in drinking patterns among adolescents reflect those of
adult populations, as described above. These ethnic/racial differences,
however, may vary with age. According to the most recent Monitoring the
Future (MFT) survey estimates, by the 8th grade, Latino teens report
higher prevalence rates of binge drinking (10.8%) in the past 2 weeks
than non-Hispanic white (7.1%) and African American (5.3%) adolescents.
However, by the 12th grade, non-Hispanic white teens report the highest
rates of binge drinking (27.6%) compared to Latino (22.1%) and African
American (13.1%) adolescents. Likewise, non-Hispanic white youth report
higher rates of getting drunk (31.6%) than Latino (20.5%) and African
American (14.7%) adolescents. Given that using alcohol during
adolescence is a risk behavior and elevates the probability of
developing an alcohol use disorder later in life, many studies have been
devoted to identifying risk and protective factors for adolescent
alcohol use. On the one hand, one of the most robust risk factors for
drinking alcohol in adolescence is the peer context. Specifically,
associating with substance-using peers (Brown et al., 2008; Spear, 2000)
increases the probability of underage drinking across ethnic groups
(Bacio, Mays, & Lau, 2013; Wood, Read, Mitchell, & Brand, 2004). On the
other hand, the family context remains important throughout adolescence.
The relationships that adolescents have with their families influence
the types of behaviors in which they engage. For example, a decrease

Theory

441

in parental monitoring during adolescence has been associated with
increased risk for alcohol use (Barnes, Reifman, Farrell, & Dintcheff,
2000), whereas parental involvement has been found to attenuate the
relationship between peer use and adolescent alcohol use (Wood et al.,
2004). Similarly, cross-cultural studies of alcohol use among
adolescents have highlighted important cultural factors influencing the
initiation and maintenance of alcohol use, as well as the development of
alcohol-related problems. A recent study comparing alcohol use among
adolescents in the United States and in Puerto Rico found higher rates
of alcohol use among U.S. youth (Warner, Canino, & Colón, 2001).
Interestingly, there were also significant differences in the symptoms
endorsed, in that youth from Puerto Rico were more likely to report
"failure to fulfill obligations." The authors hypothesized that these
findings may reflect differences in familial attachment between the two
cultures (Warner et al., 2001). A larger study examining alcohol use
among 15-year-olds in 22 European and North American countries found
significant geographical differences in adolescent drinking patterns,
with higher drinking levels in the Nordic countries (Schmid et al.,
2003). It was hypothesized that geographical location served as a proxy
for drinking culture. The authors also noted that gender differences in
alcohol use were greater in male-dominated drinking cultures marked by
more classic gender roles (Schmid et al., 2003). Interestingly, analyses
of a multicultural sample of adolescents in the United States suggested
that DSM-IV symptom endorsement patterns and the diagnosis of alcohol
use disorders varied as a function of ethnicity and gender (Wagner,
Lloyd, & Gil, 2002). Furthermore, cross-cultural studies of the family
system and adolescent alcohol use revealed that the adverse effects of
living in a nonintact family on drinking behaviors were greater in
societies with higher alcohol availability and where adolescent heavy
drinking was more common (Bjarnason et al., 2003). These results are
consistent with the hypothesized role of the family in influencing the
negative meaning of alcohol, which in turn is thought to delay the
initiation of drinking and reduce alcohol use (Johnson & Johnson, 1999).
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) strongly
advocates for developing prevention programs to delay drinking
initiation before age 15 in an effort to prevent alcohol use disorders.
Despite the fact that many prevention and intervention programs have
been developed over the years, much work still needs to be done to
effectively address adolescent alcohol use and incorporate cultural
components when necessary.

Theory A theory is a conceptualization of a phenomenon of interest. It
represents an attempt to capture and summarize empirical findings into a
cohesive set of rules that can be used to generate hypotheses. Theories
may vary widely in scope (e.g., broad versus narrow) and focus (e.g.,
focus on the social bases of behavior versus focus on biological
processes). In contemporary psychology, theories have become
increasingly circumscribed. Nevertheless, theories are essential to
fulfill the scientific purpose of "connecting empirical

442

Alcohol Use Disorder

relations with statements of mechanisms and processes" (Kazdin, 2002,
p. 127). In short, we want to make sense of the world by understanding
the why and how of phenomena, and theories represent our attempts to do
so. The overarching framework adopted throughout this chapter for
examining specific theories about factors influencing the development
and maintenance of alcohol use disorders is a biopsychosocial model of
psychiatric disorders. Specifically, the biopsychosocial model applied
to alcohol use disorders posits that the etiology of alcoholism
represents a complex interplay between psychosocial factors (e.g.,
cognitions, personality traits, and environmental variables such as peer
groups and norms) and biological factors (e.g., genetics and
neurobiology). This section of this chapter discusses important
psychosocial and biological factors thought to influence the development
and maintenance of alcohol use disorders, working within the premise
that these factors interplay in the development of the complex and
heterogeneous phenomenon known as an alcohol use disorder. As with all
complex diseases, alcoholism can be thought of as a clinical outcome
resulting from a combination of many risk factors, both biological and
psychosocial. Importantly, the alcohol-dependent population represents a
spectrum of individuals arriving at the diagnosis through diverse
pathways and displaying different sets of symptoms.

Psychosocial Factors In recent years, a number of psychological theories
of alcohol use and abuse have been developed by focusing on specific
factors relevant to alcohol use and alcohol use disorders. These
theoretical frameworks represent attempts to conceptualize the
phenomenon of alcohol use disorders and to explain why some individuals
become dependent on alcohol and by which mechanisms (i.e., how). It has
become increasingly clear that individuals may develop alcohol-related
problems by various mechanisms resulting from a complex interaction
among multiple, and often interrelated, psychosocial and biological
factors. In this section we discuss some of the more widely researched
psychosocial factors and their related theories. These conceptual models
examine the complex pathways to alcohol use disorders from diverse
vantage points, which in turn further highlight the phenotypic
complexity of addictive behaviors. Expectancy theory provides an
explanation for a broad range of psychological phenomena, and it is
often used to integrate psychological processes with their underlying
biological mechanisms. Expectancy refers to processes within the nervous
system that use neurobiological and cognitive residues of previous
experience to guide future behavior. It is thought that the activation
of an expectancy template can directly initiate a behavioral sequence
previously associated with a recognized stimulus. Such a template can
directly activate an affective experience. In a more indirect fashion,
activation of expectancy can elicit a behavior that is associated with,
or results from, the activation of an affective state. For example,
persons may become more socially outgoing because they are affectively
aroused. The cognitive processes associated with expectancies are
theorized to influence all behaviors and have been applied to
understanding drinking and alcohol dependence (Brown, Goldman, Inn, &
Anderson, 1980; Del Boca, Darkes, Goldman, & Smith, 2002). In this
application, information that reflects the reinforcement value of
alcohol acquired as a function of biological, psychological, or
environmental risk variables is viewed as

Theory

443

being stored as memory templates (Goldman & Darkes, 2004). The memory
systems that retain this information are conceptualized as a kind of
information-based buffer. Once acquired, these templates have the
capacity to influence alcohol use and its associated behavioral patterns
over widely varying periods of time. In short, alcohol expectancy refers
to information that reflects the reinforcement value of alcohol, is
stored as memory templates, and can influence alcohol use. Although most
research has focused on alcohol expectancies as moderators of drinking
risk, some theorists argue that alcohol expectancies may serve as a
mediator of alcohol use risk (Goldman, Del Boca, & Darkes, 1999).
Expectancy theory is one of the most widely researched and empirically
supported psychological theories of alcohol misuse. Results have largely
and consistently supported an association between alcohol expectancies
and drinking behaviors, such that higher positive expectancies regarding
the effects of alcohol are strong predictors of heavier alcohol use.
Importantly, expectancy theory has often been integrated into models
that take into account additional risk factors for alcohol misuse, such
as peer influences, personality constructs, and genetic factors (Del
Boca et al., 2002; Schuckit et al., 2006; Zamboanga, Schwartz, Ham,
Jarvis, & Olthuis, 2009). The role of alcohol expectancies has also been
examined in adolescence, with Cranford, Zucker, Jester, Puttler, and
Fitzgerald (2010) demonstrating how early adolescent alcohol
expectancies, coupled with different aspects of parental alcohol
involvement, independently predict middle adolescence drinking behavior.
Recent work using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has
suggested that decreased inhibitory neural processing may be associated
with more positive and less negative alcohol outcome expectancies
(Anderson, Schweinsburg, Paulus, Brown, & Tapert, 2005). In conclusion,
expectancy theory represents an advanced cognitive model of alcohol use
with strong empirical support from a wide array of research
methodologies. Expectancies represent information processing systems
that are proximally related to alcohol use patterns and capture the
incentive value of drinking, which in turn is best conceptualized as a
dynamic and unfolding process. The central tenet of the
tension-reduction theory of alcohol use is the assertion that
individuals drink alcohol because of its ability to reduce tension. This
theory was initially influenced by the drive reduction theory of the
1940s (Hull, 1943), which emphasized motivational aspects underlying
drinking. Although there is significant intuitive appeal to the notion
that individuals drink to reduce tension, an early review by Cappell and
Herman (1972) suggested that empirical support for the theory was
limited. A related theory, developed in the 1980s, focused on the
stress-response dampening (SRD) effects of alcohol (Levenson, Sher,
Grossman, Newman, & Newlin, 1980; Sher & Levenson, 1982). The SRD model
focused on refining the operational definition and laboratory
manipulation of stressors (e.g., electric shock, public speaking task)
and examining individual differences in the stress-response dampening
effects of alcohol, making it a more focused and testable theory
(Greeley & Oei, 1999). As stated by Greeley and Oei (1999) in reviewing
the empirical support for the tension-reduction theory, "the general
consensus has been that alcohol, at certain dosages, is capable of
reducing some signs of tension in some humans, under certain contextual
conditions" (p. 23). More recent work on the tension-reduction model and
related theories emphasizes understanding the pharmacological and
neurobiological mechanisms by which alcohol may dampen a stress
response, as well as the individual and contextual differences that

444

Alcohol Use Disorder

may moderate those effects. Examples of such moderators include
hostility (Zeichner, Giancola, & Allen, 1995), anxiety sensitivity
(Stewart, Karp, Pihl, & Peterson, 1997), gender (Sinha, Robinson, &
O'Malley, 1998), and the type of social situation (Armeli et al., 2003)
or life stressor (Hart & Fazaa, 2004). Further, genetic predispositions
to stress reactivity, via variations in HPA axis genes, have been looked
at as possible mediators of the effects of stress on alcohol consumption
(Clarke et al., 2007). Thus, alcohol-induced stress reduction may be
especially salient for those individuals with genetically determined
heightened stress reactivity. In short, the tension-reduction theory and
its most widely researched offshoot, the SRD model, identify alcohol's
ability to reduce tension and stress reactivity as central to the
motivation to drink and the development of alcohol-related problems.
Recent work on these theories has focused on understanding the
pharmacological mechanisms by which alcohol may reduce tension and the
genetic predispositions to heightened stress reactivity, and on
describing potential moderators of a heightened stress-dampening
response. Personality theory has been applied to alcohol use disorders
for many years. The notion that personality played a causal role in
alcoholism had so much intuitive appeal that many past studies sought to
identify the alleged "alcoholic personality." As noted earlier,
alcoholism was classified as a personality disorder in the first edition
of the DSM. An examination of personality motives in relation to risky
behaviors found that a high degree of neuroticism, along with a high
degree of impulsivity or extraversion, predicted an increased reliance
on alcohol use as a coping method (Cooper, Agocha, & Sheldon, 2000).
Over the past 5 decades, researchers have shown that although
personality traits may account for some of the variance in vulnerability
to alcohol use disorders, personality characteristics are not
necessarily a core component of the disorder and there is clearly not a
specific personality dimension that can reliably predict alcoholism
(Sher, Trull, Bartholow, & Vieth, 1999). Recent research has focused on
the role of personality in the etiology of alcohol use disorders, and on
establishing a causal link between personality traits and the
development of alcohol pathology. In addition, personality
characteristics have been used to identify possible subtypes of alcohol
dependence. For example, Cloninger's (1987) model of Type 1 and Type 2
alcoholics suggests that the first group is marked by an early onset of
alcoholism and by antisocial personality traits, whereas the latter
group is characterized by a late onset of problems and a tendency toward
negative emotionality. A related typology was proposed by Babor (1996),
who recommended parsing the alcohol dependence phenotype into either
Type A or Type B. The Type A alcohol-dependent cluster is characterized
by later onset, fewer childhood risk factors, less severe dependence,
fewer alcohol-related problems, and less psychopathological dysfunction;
whereas the Type B cluster is characterized by childhood risk factors,
familial alcoholism, early onset of alcohol-related problems, greater
severity of dependence, polydrug use, a more chronic treatment history,
greater psychopathological dysfunction, and more life stress (Babor et
al., 1992). Results from a randomized clinical trial based on the A and
B typology found that Type A alcoholics did better in group
psychotherapy and more poorly with coping skills training, whereas Type
B alcoholics had better outcomes with the coping skills treatment and
did worse with interactional group therapy; these results maintained at
2-year follow-up (Litt, Babor, Del Boca, Kadden, & Cooney, 1992). A more
recent review of the clinical subtyping of alcohol use disorders found
mixed results in terms of construct, concurrent, and predictive

Theory

445

validity of these classifications and concluded that further research is
needed before these typologies could be useful in clinical practice
(Babor & Caetano, 2006). In addition to the clinical subtypes developed
largely on the basis of personality characteristics, several studies to
date have suggested a relationship---at times causal in nature---between
certain personality traits and alcohol use disorders. The personality
dimension of impulsivity/disinhibition appears to be the one most
relevant to an individual's risk for developing an alcohol use disorder
(Finn, Earleywine, & Pihl, 1992). Recent findings suggest, however, that
impulsivity is not a unitary construct. In a sample of problem drinkers,
the impulsive decision-making dimension of impulsivity was found to be
more predictive of alcohol use and alcohol pathology than were measures
of response inhibition, risky decision making, and self-reported risk
attitudes (Courtney et al., 2012). Further, a recent neuroimaging study
examined individuals with stimulant dependence and their unaffected
siblings while they performed a task of inhibitory control (i.e., the
stop signal task). The results indicated that abnormalities in
frontostriatal brain systems were implicated in self-control in both
stimulant-dependent individuals and their biological siblings who had no
history of chronic drug abuse (Ersche et al., 2012). This work
highlights the diverse ways in which personality characteristics, and
their complex facets, can relate to alcohol use outcomes. To clarify
these relationships, personality researchers in the addictions field
have begun to integrate personality constructs with parallel lines of
research on behavioral genetics, cognitive neuroscience, stress and
coping, pharmacological responses to alcohol, and developmental
theories. Social learning theory (SLT) emphasizes learning from social
environments and also cognitions as important determinants of behavior.
SLT is a general theory of human behavior whose most notable proponent
is Albert Bandura (1977, 1986). SLT has heavily influenced the
cognitive-behavioral approach to alcohol use disorders (Dimeff &
Marlatt, 1995; Marlatt & Gordon, 1985). Applying SLT to the study of
alcoholism often entails focusing on three aspects of behavior:
social-environmental variables, coping skills, and cognitive factors
(Maisto, Carey, & Bradizza, 1999). Social environmental variables
include situational factors that may be associated (i.e., paired) with
alcohol use; these are generally conceptualized as triggers. Coping
skills, in turn, involve the patient's ability to cope with stressful
events without reverting to the use of alcohol. This approach has been
emphasized in cognitive-behavioral interventions for alcoholism that
focus on building skills such as drinking refusal skills and ways of
coping with urges and with negative thoughts and feelings. SLT also
highlights two cognitive factors thought to be relevant for the
development and maintenance of alcoholism: self-efficacy and outcome
expectancies. Self-efficacy refers to belief in one's ability to enact a
given behavior or obtain a certain outcome. Abstinence self-efficacy has
been found to be a strong predictor of treatment outcome for alcohol use
disorders (Ilgen, McKellar, & Tiet, 2005). Alcohol expectancies---one's
beliefs about the consequences of alcohol use---have received extensive
empirical support for their role in alcohol use disorders (for details,
see the previous section on expectancy theory). One important
application of SLT has been the conceptualization of the relapse process
(Marlatt & Gordon, 1985). In brief, this model conceptualizes lapses as
resulting from the patient's lack of skills for coping with high-risk
situations, which leads to low levels of self-efficacy beliefs about his
or her ability to cope with stressful situations and expectancies that
alcohol use will help him or her cope effectively with situations

446

Alcohol Use Disorder

in the future. Relapse represents an important theoretical and clinical
issue in alcohol use disorders. Recent research on relapse has attempted
to develop multivariate models that can account for both distal and
proximal factors likely to influence the relapse process, in order to
capture its complex nature. For example, distal factors found to predict
relapse include less active coping efforts, lower self-efficacy, higher
craving, and lower participation in self-help groups and treatment
(McKay, Franklin, Patapis, & Lynch, 2006). Proximal factors are personal
characteristics and experiences likely to trigger a particular relapse
episode. The understanding of proximal factors in relapse has been
improved by recent advances in assessment methods, such as ecological
momentary assessment (EMA), that allow for near real-time assessments of
the circumstances surrounding a relapse episode. Studies of proximal
relapse factors using EMA suggested that greater anxiety predicted
higher alcohol use later in the day, especially among men (Swendsen et
al., 2000). More recently, Marlatt's original taxonomy of relapse
precipitants has been updated as the Marlatt-Witkiewitz model of
relapse. In particular, this model emphasizes the dynamic interplay
between distal and proximal risk factors in determining relapse
(Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2007). Using sophisticated quantitative methods,
such as stochastic catastrophe models, Witkiewitz and Marlatt (2007)
elegantly demonstrate that complex models fit the relapse data better
than traditional linear or logistic models of relapse do. An important
implication of this model is to challenge the notion that any drinking
should be considered a treatment failure, when instead a more complete
and dynamic picture of the relapse process can be used to define a range
of successful outcomes beyond complete abstinence. For an in-depth
review of the relapse literature see Maisto and Connors (2006) and the
special issue of Clinical Psychology Review edited by Connors and Maisto
(2006) In short, SLT emphasizes social environments, coping skills, and
cognitions as important determinants of behavior, and SLT concepts have
been widely applied to the current cognitive-behavioral
conceptualization and related treatment models for alcohol use
disorders.

Biological Factors As noted previously, alcoholism is a complex disorder
resulting from the interplay between biological and psychosocial factors
(for reviews on the neurobiology of addiction, see Kalivas & Volkow,
2005; Volkow & Li, 2005). Although several neurotransmitter systems are
activated by alcohol administration, initial models in the literature
focused on the role of mesolimbic dopamine and the stimulatory and
reinforcing effects of alcohol (Littleton & Little, 1994; Samson &
Harris, 1992). Both alcohol consumption and alcohol cue exposure prior
to drinking increase dopamine activity in the nucleus accumbens (NAC),
suggesting that prior learning and anticipation of reinforcement
activates a dopamine response that is isomorphic to the effect of
alcohol on mesolimbic dopamine activation (Weiss, Lorang, Bloom, & Koob,
1993). An important question that has only been partially answered is
how alcohol might influence mesolimbic dopamine activity. Some
researchers have suggested that the consumption of alcohol triggers the
release of endogenous opioids, which may mediate mesolimbic dopamine
activity (Gianoulakis, 1993; Gianoulakis, de Waele, & Thavundayil, 1996;
Schuckit & Smith, 1996; Volpicelli, Pettinati, McLellan, & O'Brien,
2001). In fact, a recent study using positron-emission tomography (PET)
was the first to demonstrate the release of endogenous opioids in the

Theory

447

orbitofrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens following alcohol
administration in humans (Mitchell et al., 2012). The release of
endogenous opioids is also thought to inhibit gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) interneurons that subsequently release dopaminergic neurons from
inhibition (Kalivas & Stewart, 1991). This notion is consistent with a
study demonstrating that the administration of ethanol increased
dopamine activity in the NAC, and that naltrexone---a mu-opioid receptor
antagonist---reduced dopaminergic activity in the NAC (Benjamin, Grant,
& Pohorecky, 1993). In conjunction, these studies highlight the multiple
neurotransmitter systems underlying the pharmacological and behavioral
effects of alcohol. One of the early theories regarding biological
mechanisms that influence the development of alcohol dependence was the
psychostimulant theory of addiction. According to this psychomotor
stimulant theory of addiction, substances with high abuse potential---
including alcohol---have the ability to produce psychomotor stimulation.
This theory further proposes that the stimulatory and rewarding effects
of a vast range of addictive substances share an underlying biological
mechanism (Wise & Bozarth, 1987). Consequently, individuals who
experience greater alcohol-induced reward are thought to be more likely
to develop alcohol problems. Specifically, Wise and Bozarth (1987) based
their theory on three major assertions: (1) that all addictive
substances produce psychomotor stimulation, (2) that the stimulant
effects of these addictive substances share a common biological
mechanism, and (3) that the stimulant effects of these substances
produce their positive reinforcement. Importantly, the common neural
pathway involved in the stimulant and reinforcing properties of several
substances---including alcohol---is thought to be mediated by
mesocorticolimbic dopamine activity in the reward circuitry in the
brain. Although early models of addiction focused on dopamine and the
stimulatory and reinforcing effects of alcohol and drugs, subsequent
biological models shifted the focus from reward to incentive salience
and craving (Berridge & Robinson, 2003; Robinson & Berridge, 1993,
2001). These models suggest that activation along mesolimbic dopamine
substrates is critical to the development of the motivational and
appetitive properties of tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs. The models
also suggest that the mechanisms that serve the motivational properties
of alcohol and other drugs may be distinct from those that mediate
reward. This assertion led to a biological conceptualization of alcohol
craving, which has recently been articulated as an incentive
sensitization model of craving. This model stipulates that mesolimbic
dopamine activation influences the motivational and appetitive
properties of alcohol and drug use by controlling the attribution of
incentive salience to neural representations of alcohol-related stimuli
(Berridge & Robinson, 1998; Robinson & Berridge, 1993; Wise, 1988).
Thus, the acquisition and sensitization of incentive salience (i.e.,
craving) for substances of abuse---including alcohol---is produced by
repeated drug/alcohol ingestion and the associated release of dopamine.
After these pathways have become sensitized, the expression of incentive
salience (i.e., craving) can be activated by the release of dopamine
that is initiated in response to drug cues or priming doses of the drug
itself (de Wit, 1996; Stewart, de Wit, & Eikelboom, 1984). A recent
biological model of alcohol dependence that is more broadly focused is
known as the allostatic model of dependence (Koob, 2003; Koob & LeMoal,
2001, 2005). This model is an important development because it is one of
the first models to integrate the neurobiology of the acute rewarding
effects of alcohol and drugs with mechanisms related to

448

Alcohol Use Disorder

the negative reinforcement associated with alcohol withdrawal and the
influence of stress. Conceptually, the development of an alcohol use
disorder is characterized as an allostatic process that involves changes
in reward and stress circuits that become dysregulated with repeated
exposure to alcohol. More specifically, this process putatively involves
alterations of corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF) and neuropeptide Y
(NPY) in the central nucleus of the amygdala and bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis. In turn, these changes confer vulnerability to relapse
among alcohol-dependent patients. One of the primary advantages of this
model is that it integrates a considerable amount of data on the
molecular, cellular, and neuronal changes associated with the
pathophysiology of alcoholism. In brief, the basic neuroscience of
addiction has provided compelling evidence of the neural and behavioral
bases of key addiction mechanisms, such as the transition from
goal-directed to habitual drug taking; the development of incentive
salience; the neuroadaptive processes underlying tolerance and
withdrawal (including protracted withdrawal); and brain damage from drug
use as well as recovery from such damage during prolonged abstinence.
Although considerable research has yet to be done to effectively
translate these findings to help patients suffering from addictive
disorders, insights from neuroscience are being incorporated into
clinical research and practice. Thus, a new direction in the clinical
psychology of addiction is the integration of basic neuroscience models
into clinical science. This approach, termed clinical neuroscience of
addiction, has the potential to use basic science findings to inform
clinical practice and vice versa (Ray, 2012). Finally, no discussion of
the biological factors underlying alcohol use disorders would be
complete without considering the role of behavioral genetics. Although
behavioral genetics research does not offer a complete model for
understanding alcoholism, the role of genetic factors in the etiology of
the disorder is well established (Dick & Beirut, 2006). One of the most
important contributions of genetic research is the demonstration that
genetic factors account for a significant proportion of the variability
in alcohol use disorders, with recent heritability estimates---based on
twin and adoption studies---of approximately 50% to 60% (Heath et al.,
1997). In addition, twin studies have shown that a number of
alcohol-related traits, or phenotypes, are also heritable---such as
alcohol sensitivity (Health & Martin, 1991; Viken, Rose, Morzoati,
Christian, & Li, 2003), alcohol metabolism (Martin et al., 1985), and
alcohol use (Koopmans & Boomsma, 1996). More recent behavioral genetics
research has focused on identifying specific genes underlying individual
differences in vulnerability to the development of an alcohol use
disorder. In light of such efforts, the identification of more narrow
behavioral phenotypes---or endophenotypes---for alcoholism has received
increased attention (Hines, Ray, Hutchison, & Tabakoff, 2005), as is the
case for most psychiatric disorders (Burmeister, 1999; Gottesman &
Gould, 2003). To be useful, an endophenotype must be narrowly defined,
readily identifiable, and related to the disorder of interest
(Hutchison, McGeary, Smolen, Bryan, & Swift, 2002). When used correctly,
endophenotypes for psychiatric disorders are expected to increase the
power to detect specific genes underlying the risk for a given disorder.
Endophenotypes are thought to be more closely linked to specific
neurobiological processes than are full psychiatric syndromes, which are
often quite heterogeneous phenotypes (Burmeister, 1999; Gottesman &
Gould, 2003). Importantly, clinicians should recognize that alcoholism
represents a disorder of complex genetics, such that no single gene is
likely to fully explain its genetic liability. As stated by McGue
(1999), future research on behavioral genetics of alcoholism should
focus on

Treatment

449

processes intervening between genetic effects and behavior as well as
mechanisms by which environmental factors may interact with an
individual's genetic predisposition and contribute to the behavioral
outcome currently classified as alcoholism.

Treatment It is estimated that approximately 700,000 individuals receive
treatment for alcohol use disorders on any given day (Fuller &
Hiller-Sturmhofel, 1999), with most patients receiving care on an
outpatient basis. This reflects a trend in alcohol treatment, which has
largely moved from primarily residential and inpatient programs to
intensive outpatient treatment programs, preceded by brief
hospitalization for detoxification when needed. In 2014, the National
Survey on Drug Use and Health revealed that approximately 8.9% of adults
who needed treatment received that treatment at a specialized facility
(SAMHSA, 2014d). The most common treatment modalities are
detoxification, behavioral treatments---including AA and 12-step
facilitation---pharmacotherapy, and brief primary care interventions
(Fuller & Hiller-Sturmhofel, 1999). Most treatment-seeking patients
receive some form of psychosocial intervention for alcohol use disorder.
Pharmacotherapies are less commonly used; however, the development of
new and more efficacious medications for alcohol use disorders has
received increased research attention over the past decade. Notably,
recent analyses based on the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol
and Related Conditions suggest that the vast majority (85%) of
individuals who meet lifetime criteria for an alcohol use disorder never
receive formal treatment or participate in self-help groups (Cohen,
Feinn, Arias, & Kranzler, 2007).

Psychosocial Treatments Most psychosocial treatments available for
alcohol use disorders are highly eclectic and have not been evaluated
for efficacy. Empirically supported psychosocial treatments for alcohol
use disorders are described in the following list: • Brief interventions
focus on providing feedback, negotiating behavioral change, and
promoting some form of follow-up. These interventions are often
delivered by health care professionals to opportunistic samples.
Meta-analyses have concluded that brief interventions are superior to no
treatment controls but should not replace specialist-delivered extended
treatment approaches (Moyer, Finney, Swearingen, & Vergun, 2002). •
Motivational interviewing, or motivational enhancement therapy (MET),
focuses on enhancing individuals' motivation and commitment to change by
adopting an empathetic and nonconfrontational therapeutic manner (Miller
& Rollnick, 2002). Results of a recent meta-analysis have supported its
efficacy (Vasilaki, Hosier, & Cox, 2006). • Cognitive-behavioral
therapies (CBT) focus on teaching skills for coping with drinking urges,
including identifying triggers and preventing relapses (Monti, Kadden,
Rohsenow, Cooney, & Abrams, 2002). CBT for alcohol use disorders has
received empirical support over no treatment or minimal treatment
control conditions (Carroll, 1996).

450

Alcohol Use Disorder

• Behavioral marital therapy (BCT) treats the substance-abusing person
along with his or her spouse to ensure the spouse's support. A sobriety
contract is negotiated, communication skills are taught, and positive
alternative activities are scheduled. BCT has been found to be superior
to individual treatment in enhancing motivation to seek treatment,
increasing abstinence, and improving relationship functioning (O'Farrell
& Fals-Stewart, 2003). BCT has also been found to reduce domestic
violence and emotional problems in the treated couple's children. •
Behavioral treatments for alcohol use disorders generally take the form
of the community reinforcement approach (CRA) and contingency management
(CM) programs. Behavioral treatments operate on the assumption that
alcohol use is reinforcing and that in order to decrease alcohol use its
reinforcing value must decrease while alternative sources of
reinforcement must increase. Controlled studies have found support for
this approach in the treatment of alcohol use disorders (Smith, Meyers,
& Delaney, 1998). • Cue-exposure (CE) therapy focuses on repeated
exposure to alcohol cues to produce a decrease in alcohol craving and an
increase in self-efficacy for coping with urges and high-risk
situations. CE treatment has received some empirical support in
comparisons to cognitive-behavioral approaches (Loeber, Croissant,
Heinz, Mann, & Flor, 2006; Rohsenow et al., 2001) and in conjunction
with pharmacotherapies (Monti et al., 2001). However, other studies
suggest that CE does not significantly add to CBT approaches (Kavanagh
et al., 2006). • Twelve-step therapies, which are based on the
philosophy of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), are the most widely used
resource for individuals with alcohol problems. They promote the goal of
long-term complete abstinence and generally discourage the use of any
psychiatric medications (Rychtarik, Connors, Dermen, & Stasiewicz,
2000), although this attitude appears to be changing over time. This
latter aspect can be problematic and needs to be specifically addressed
in the treatment of individuals with comorbid disorders that benefit
from medications. • Mindfulness-based therapies are based on
meditation/mindfulness techniques adapted to Western psychology (from
their Buddhist roots) to increase and promote awareness of the "here and
now." Mindfulness is used to cope with urges such as craving. For
example, Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention (Witkiewitz, Marlatt, &
Walker, 2005) helps individuals cope with craving by increasing their
awareness of their initial response to craving in a nonjudgmental manner
such that this awareness facilitates their ability to modify their
response. Although preliminary findings suggest that this approach may
be promising, further research needs to be conducted to establish its
efficacy. In short, many psychosocial treatment approaches have received
some empirical support for treating alcohol use disorders, but no one
treatment has emerged as highly successful in treating this complex
problem. A large multisite study of outpatient treatments for alcohol
use disorders, called Project MATCH, attempted to identify specific
patient characteristics that might predict which patients would respond
better to a particular treatment. Project MATCH compared

Treatment

451

the efficacy of three widely used psychosocial treatments:
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), motivational enhancement therapy
(MET), and 12-step facilitation (TSF) (Project MATCH Research Group,
1997, 1998). In addition, Project MATCH compared two types of enrollment
into the study. One group of patients was enrolled directly into a
traditional outpatient service, but the other group was enrolled into
the study as an aftercare program, immediately following discharge from
inpatient treatment for alcoholism. Results from Project MATCH revealed
only small differences between the three psychosocial treatment
modalities at 1-year follow-up, such that TSF patients were more likely
to remain abstinent at 1-year follow-up than CBT and MET patients
(Project MATCH Research Group, 1997). One hypothesis is that patients
assigned to TSF may have done slightly better because they would have
been encouraged to continue attending AA meetings once the intervention
ended. However, by 3-year follow-up, drinking outcomes for all of the
three treatment groups were similar, with about 30% of all patients
reporting total abstinence in follow-up months 37 to 39 (Project MATCH
Research Group, 1998). Type of enrollment showed a moderate effect as
somewhat more (35%) of the patients in the aftercare condition were
found to be continuously abstinent from alcohol 1 year following
treatment, compared to 20% of patients in the outpatient condition
(Project MATCH Research Group, 1998). Perhaps those individuals just
coming out of inpatient care were more highly motivated to take
advantage of the outpatient treatment. Results from Project MATCH lent
only moderate support to the hypothesis that matching individuals to
treatment on the basis of patient variables might improve outcomes. Only
4 of the possible 21 matches were found to improve treatment outcomes
for alcohol use disorder, with initial client level of anger being the
most consistent moderator of treatment response. Specifically,
individuals who initially scored higher in anger fared better in MET as
compared to CBT and TSF, whereas individuals who scored lower in anger
did better after CBT and TSF treatment than in MET. Additionally, at
3-year follow-up there was a significant effect of the individual's
pretreatment drinking social network, such that individuals whose social
networks were more supportive of drinking responded better to TSF
treatment than to MET. In summary, results from Project MATCH as well as
the recent literature on psychosocial treatment for alcoholism make it
clear that alternative, more effective psychosocial approaches to
treating alcohol use disorders are still needed.

Pharmacological Treatment Pharmacotherapy for alcohol use disorder is
used less often than psychosocial interventions. Aside from
detoxification treatment, when pharmacological agents are often used to
manage withdrawal symptoms, few community programs combine
pharmacotherapy and psychosocial interventions to treat alcohol use
disorder. The limited use of pharmacotherapy is due, in part, to the
relative lack of effective pharmacological options to treat alcohol use
disorders. Specifically, the only pharmacotherapies currently approved
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of alcohol
dependence are disulfiram (Antabuse), naltrexone, acamprosate, and
Vivitrol---an injectable, longer acting form of naltrexone (Petrakis,
2006; Pettinati & Rabinowitz, 2006). Naltrexone is perhaps the most
studied of these medications. Shortly after two initial trials suggested
that naltrexone resulted in significantly fewer drinking days and lower

452

Alcohol Use Disorder

rates of relapse (a 23% relapse rate for naltrexone versus a 54% relapse
rate for placebo) after 3 months of treatment (O'Malley, 1992;
Volpicelli, Altermana, Hayahida, & O'Brien, 1992), naltrexone was
advanced as one of the more promising pharmacological interventions for
decreasing alcohol consumption and treating alcohol dependence (Litten,
Allen, & Fertig, 1996; Schuckit & Smith, 1996). These findings also
suggested that the effects of naltrexone were more prominent among
individuals who consumed alcohol during the trial, with a 95% relapse
rate among placebo-treated individuals versus a 50% relapse rate among
naltrexone-treated patients (Volpicelli et al., 1992). These initial
results have been largely supported by more recent trials of naltrexone
that generally demonstrate beneficial effects on heavy drinking rates,
particularly among those who are compliant with the medication (Anton et
al., 1999; Chick et al., 2000; Monterosso et al., 2001; Monti et al.,
2001; Morris, Hopwood, Whelan, Gardner, & Drummond, 2001). However,
support for naltrexone is not consistent. A few trials, including a
large multisite trial, have reported no significant outcome differences
between naltrexone and placebo-treated patients (e.g., Krystal, Cramer,
Krol, Kirk, & Rosenheck, 2001; Kranzler, Modesto-Lowe, & Van Kirk,
2000). Moreover, the effect sizes of previous findings are often modest,
even when they reach statistical significance. In sum, studies of
naltrexone to date suggest only a modest effect on the reduction of
alcohol use among treatment-seeking individuals with alcohol use
disorder. Ondansetron and topiramate are two recent pharmacotherapies
currently under study that show promise for the treatment of alcohol use
disorder. Ondansetron is a 5-HT3 antagonist that has demonstrated
effectiveness, relative to placebo, in the reduction of drinking among
early-onset alcoholics (Johnson, Ait-Daoud, & Prihoda, 2000). Although
the mechanism of action is unclear, it has been speculated that
ondansetron might address the serotonergic dysfunction thought to
characterize early-onset DSM-IV alcohol dependence (Johnson & Ait-Daoud,
2000; Johnson et al., 2000). In addition, it has been suggested that
ondansetron might reduce craving for alcohol, possibly through the
influence of 5-HT3 projections to mesolimbic dopaminergic connections in
the midbrain (Johnson et al., 2000; Johnson & Ait-Daoud, 2000).
Topiramate is an anticonvulsant medication that was only recently tested
with alcohol-dependent patients. This trial found that topiramate
reduced drinking and alcohol craving over a 12-week treatment period
(Johnson et al., 2003). The effects of topiramate were not limited to
early-onset alcoholism, as was the case with ondansetron. The mechanism
of action of topiramate, however, remains unclear. In general,
topiramate reduces neuronal excitability through inhibition at glutamate
AMPA/kainate receptors and L-type calcium channels. This could
conceivably decrease the distress of protracted withdrawal. Topiramate
also facilitates brain GABA function and may even increase GABA levels.
Both of these effects (i.e., glutamate blockade and GABA facilitation)
can reduce or inhibit mesolimbic DA activity. It has been suggested that
topiramate may indirectly influence midbrain dopaminergic activity,
thereby reducing craving (Johnson et al., 2003). Two additional
medications that have shown promise are quetiapine (Monnelly, Ciraulo,
Knapp, LoCastro, & Sepulveda, 2004) and olanzapine (Hutchison et al.,
2003, 2006). Both of these medications may show promise, in part,
because of their ability to reduce craving by targeting
mesocorticolimbic dopamine function. In brief, randomized clinical
trials have provided sufficient evidence of the efficacy, albeit modest
efficacy, of acamprosate, naltrexone, and Vivitrol for the treatment of

Summary and Future Directions

453

alcoholism (Kranzler et al., 2000; Mann, 2004; Myrick, Brady, & Malcolm,
2001; Schaffer & Naranjo, 1998). However, much additional work is needed
to identify psychosocial predictors of medication compliance and
efficacy (Kranzler et al., 2000), expand knowledge of dosing issues
(Mason, 1996), improve the dissemination of research findings to
clinicians in the field (Meza & Kranzler, 1996), examine the combined
effects of psychosocial and pharmacotherapy treatments (McCaul & Petry,
2003), and investigate the role of genetic factors in predicting
treatment response to pharmacotherapies as one way to potentially match
patients to treatments (Hutchison et al., 2006; Ray & Hutchison, 2007).
Consistent with the goal of advancing the treatment of alcohol use
disorders by combining pharmacotherapies and psychotherapies, NIAAA
conducted a large multisite trial of naltrexone, acamprosate, or placebo
in combination with a behavioral intervention (combined behavioral
intervention, or CBI) or medication management (COMBINE Study Research
Group, 2003a, 2003b). In this project, a CBI was designed to combine
several elements of empirically supported treatments previously tested
in Project MATCH, such as motivation enhancement therapy,
cognitive-behavioral therapy, and facilitation of involvement in
mutual-help groups (Miller, 2004). Results from the COMBINE study found
that patients receiving medical management (MM) with naltrexone, CBI, or
both fared better on drinking outcomes, whereas acamprosate showed no
evidence of efficacy, either with or without CBI. No combination of
medications produced better efficacy than MM with naltrexone or MM with
CBI (Anton et al., 2006). The authors concluded that naltrexone with
medical management could be most easily delivered in health care
settings, thus serving patients with alcohol use disorder who might
otherwise not receive treatment. A pharmacogenetic study within the
COMBINE project examined whether a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
in the mu-opioid receptor (OPRM1) gene, the Asn40Asp SNP, predicted
clinical response to naltrexone, an opioid antagonist. Results indicated
that if treated with MM and naltrexone, 87.1% of Asp40 carriers had a
good clinical outcome, compared with only 54.8% of individuals with the
Asn40/Asn40 genotype (odds ratio, 5.75; confidence interval, 1.88 to
17.54), while, if treated with placebo, 48.6% of Asp40 carriers and
54.0% of individuals with the Asn40/Asn40 genotype had a good clinical
outcome (Anton et al., 2008). These findings are consistent with
controlled laboratory studies suggesting that individuals with this
polymorphism of the OPRM1 gene had a stronger hedonic response to
alcohol in the lab (Ray & Hutchison, 2004; Ray et al., 2013), in the
natural environment (Ray et al., 2010), and in the scanner when
measuring dopamine release to alcohol administration (Ramchandani et
al., 2011). Further, controlled studies suggest that naltrexone
attenuates the rewarding effects of alcohol more strongly among Asp40
carriers (Ray & Hutchison, 2007; Ray et al., 2012; Setiawan et al.,
2011). As reviewed in detail elsewhere (Ray, Chin, & Miotto, 2010), the
naltrexone × OPRM1 gene interaction is a prime example of
pharmacogenetics in the field of alcoholism, and serves more broadly as
an example of the potential for genetics to allow more personalized
medicine for psychiatric disorders.

Summary and Future Directions Alcohol use disorders are multifaceted in
their etiology, maintenance, and relapse processes. Research reviewed in
this chapter has underscored the complex nature of alcohol

454

Alcohol Use Disorder

use disorders that are currently best accounted for by a biopsychosocial
model, which proposes that alcohol pathology results from the interplay
between biological and psychosocial variables. The factors contributing
to the etiology and development of alcohol problems appear to differ
among individuals, such that patients may arrive at an alcohol use
disorder diagnosis through multiple pathways that are heavily influenced
by culture. Likewise, within a given patient, the factors contributing
to the initial development of alcohol use disorder may be different from
the factors maintaining the disorder or subserving a relapse. The
historical, cultural, developmental, diagnostic, theoretical, and
treatment considerations reviewed in this chapter clearly speak to the
complexity of the alcohol addiction phenomenon. Importantly, the
research reviewed here also highlights the progress of the field over
the past several decades, as marked by an increased understanding of the
psychological and biological factors underlying alcohol problems. This
knowledge has been used to inform the most recent DSM-5 diagnostic
scheme and to guide the development of more effective treatments.
However, current rates of recovery are modest even for the best
available medications and psychosocial treatments. Future progress in
the field hinges on our ability as clinicians and researchers to capture
the complexity of alcohol use disorders in ways that are both cognizant
of the empirical literature in our field and sensitive to each patient's
presenting problems. Research and clinical work is needed to integrate
various aspects of the biopsychosocial model and investigate its
complexity in ways that capture the full picture of alcohol use
disorders. Thus, a clinical neuroscience approach to the etiology and
treatment of alcohol use disorders represents a critical direction in
our field. To that end, clinical psychologists have an important role to
play in the translational science of addiction. Clinical expertise in
the phenomenology of addiction is essential to the success of such
pursuits. Training the next generation of clinical scientists and
practitioners to integrate their knowledge about psychopathology with an
understanding of the underlying neural mechanisms of very complex
behaviors, such as alcoholism, represents both a challenge and a
tremendous opportunity for the field of clinical psychology.

References Alcoholics Anonymous. (2006). AA at a glance. Retrieved from
http://www.alcoholics-anonymous .org American Psychiatric Association.
(1952). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1980).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1987).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., rev.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1994).
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (2012). APA
corrects New York Times article on changes to DSM-5's substance use
disorders. Retrieved from http://
syp4550.socworld.com/docs/APA_DSM-5_NYT.pdf American Psychiatric
Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Anderson, K. G.,
Schweinsburg, A., Paulus, M. P., Brown, S. A., & Tapert, S. (2005).
Examining personality and alcohol expectancies using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) with adolescents. Journal of Studies on
Alcohol, 66, 323--331. Anton, R. F., Moak, D. H., Waid, L. R., Latham,
P. K., Malcom, R. J., & Dias, J. K. (1999). Naltrexone and cognitive
behavioral therapy for the treatment of out-patient alcoholics: Results
of a placebo-controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156,
1758--1764. Anton, R. F., O'Malley, S. S., Ciraulo, D. A., Cisler, R.
A., Couper, D., Donovan, D. M., ... Longabaugh, R. (2006). Combined
pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for alcohol dependence:
The COMBINE study: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 295(17),
2003--2017. Anton, R. F., Oroszi, G., O'Malley, S., Couper, D., Swift,
R., Pettinati, H., & Goldman, D. (2008). An evaluation of μ-opioid
receptor (OPRM1) as a predictor of naltrexone response in the treatment
of alcohol dependence: Results from the Combined Pharmacotherapies and
Behavioral Interventions for Alcohol

Dependence (COMBINE) study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(2),
135--144. Armeli, S., Tennen, H., Todd, M., Carney, M. A., Mohr, C.,
Affleck, G., & Hromi, A. (2003). A daily process examination of the
stress-response dampening effects of alcohol consumption. Psychology of
Addictive Behaviors, 17, 266--276. Babor, T. F. (1996). The
classification of alcoholics: Typology theories from the 19th century to
the present. Alcohol Health and Research World, 20, 6--17. Babor, T. F.,
& Caetano, R. (2006). Subtypes of substance dependence and abuse:
Implications for diagnostic classification and empirical research.
Addiction, 101(Suppl. 1), 104--110. Babor, T. F., Hofmann, M., Del Boca,
F. K., Hesselbrock, V., Meyer, R. E., Dolinsky, Z. S., & Rounsaville, B.
(1992). Types of alcoholics: I. Evidence for an empirically derived
typology based on indicators of vulnerability and severity. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 49, 599--608. Bacio, G. A., Mays, V. M., & Lau, A.
S. (2013). Drinking initiation and problematic drinking among Latino
adolescents: Explanations of the immigrant paradox. Psychology of
Addictive Behaviors, 27(1), 14. Baker, T. B., Breslau, N., Covey, L., &
Shiffman, S. (2012). DSM criteria for tobacco use disorder and tobacco
withdrawal: A critique and proposed revisions for DSM-5. Addiction,
107(2), 263--275. Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of
thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall. Barnes, G. M., Reifman, A. S., Farrell, M. P., &
Dintcheff, B. A. (2000). The effects of parenting on the development of
adolescent alcohol misuse: A six-wave latent growth model. Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 62, 175--186. Beals, J., Novins, D. K.,
Whitsell, N. P., Mitchell, C. M., & Manson, S. M. (2005). Prevalence of
mental disorders and mental health services in two American Indian
reservation populations: Mental health disparities in the national
context. American Journal of Psychiatry, 15(1).

455

456

Alcohol Use Disorder

Benjamin, D., Grant, E. R., & Pohorecky, L. A. (1993). Naltrexone
reverses ethanol-induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens in
awake, freely moving rats. Brain Research, 621, 137--140. Berridge, K.
C., & Robinson, T. E. (1998). What is the role of dopamine in reward:
Hedonic impact, reward learning, or incentive salience? Brain Research
Reviews, 28, 309--369. Berridge, K. C., & Robinson, T. E. (2003).
Parsing reward. Trends in Neuroscience, 26, 507--513. Bianco, C., Okuda,
M., Wright, C., Hasin, D. S., Grant, B. F., Liu, S. M., & Olfson, M.
(2008). Mental health of college students and their
non--college-attending peers: Results from the National Epidemiologic
Study on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry,
65(12), 1429--1437. Bjarnason, T., Andersson, B., Choquet, M., Elekes,
Z., Morgan, M., & Rapinett, G. (2003). Alcohol culture, family structure
and adolescent alcohol use: Multilevel modeling of frequency of heavy
drinking among 15--16 year old students in 11 European countries.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 64, 200--208. Bloomfield, K., Greenfield,
T. K., Kraus, L., & Augustin, R. (2002). A comparison of drinking
patterns and alcohol-use-related problems in the United States and
Germany, 1995. Substance Use & Misuse, 37, 399--428. Brown, S. A.,
Goldman, M. S., Inn, A., & Anderson, L.R. (1980). Expectations of
reinforcement from alcohol: Their domain and relation to drinking
problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 48, 419--426.
Brown, S. A., McGue, M., Maggs, J., Schulenberg, J., Hingson, R.,
Swartzwelder, S., ... Winters, K. C. (2008). A developmental perspective
on alcohol and youths 16 to 20 years of age. Pediatrics, 121,
S290--S310. Bujarski, S., O'Malley S, S., Lunny, K., & Ray, L. A.
(2013). The effects of drinking goal on treatment outcome for
alcoholism. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81(1),
13--22. Burmeister, M. (1999). Basic concepts in the study of diseases
with complex genetics. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 522--532. Caetano, R.,
Clark, C. L., & Tam, T. (1998). Alcohol consumption among racial/ethnic
minorities: Theory and research. Alcohol Research and Health, 22(4),
233--241.

Cappell, H., & Herman, C. P. (1972). Alcohol and tension reduction: A
review. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 33, 33--64. Carroll, K. M.
(1996). Relapse prevention as a psychosocial treatment: A review of
controlled clinical trials. Experimental and Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 4, 46--54. Castro, F. G., Barrera, M., Jr., Mena, L.
A., & Aguirre, K. M. (2014). Culture and alcohol use: Historical and
sociocultural themes from 75 years of alcohol research. Journal of
Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, Supplement (17), 36--49. Chick, J., Anton,
R., Checinski, K., Croop, R., Drummond, D. C., Farmer, R., ... Peters,
T. (2000). A multicentre, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled
trial of naltrexone in the treatment of alcohol dependence or abuse.
Alcohol and Alcoholism, 35(6), 587--593. Clarke, T. K., Treutlein, J.,
Zimmermann, U. S., Kiefer, F., Skowronek, M. H., Rietschel, M., ...
Schumann, G. (2007). Review: HPA-axis activity in alcoholism: Examples
for a gene--environment interaction. Addiction Biology, 13, 1--14.
Clarke, T. C., Ward, B. W., Freeman, G., & Schiller, J. S. (2015,
September). Early release of selected estimates based on data from the
January--March 2015 National Health Interview Survey. Atlanta, GA:
National Center for Health Statistics. Cloninger, C. R. (1987).
Neurogenetic adaptive mechanisms in alcoholism. Science, 236, 410--416.
Cohen, E., Feinn, R., Arias, A., & Kranzler, H. (2007). Alcohol
treatment utilization: Findings from the National Epidemiologic Survey
on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 86,
214--221. COMBINE Study Research Group. (2003a). Testing combined
pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions in alcohol dependence:
Rationale and methods. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research,
27, 1107--1122. COMBINE Study Research Group. (2003b). Testing combined
pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions in alcohol dependence
(The COMBINE Study): A pilot feasibility study. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 27, 1123--1131. Connors, G. J., & Maisto, S. A.
(Eds.). (2006). Relapse in the addictive behaviors \[Special issue\].
Clinical Psychology Review, 26(2).

References Cooper, M. L., Agocha, V. B., & Sheldon, M. S. (2000). A
motivational perspective on risky behaviors: The role of personality and
affect regulatory processes. Journal of Personality, 68(6), 1059--1088.
Courtney, K. E., Arellano, R., Barkley-Levenson, E., Gálvan, A.,
Poldrack, R. A., MacKillop, J., ... Ray, L. A. (2012). The relationship
between measures of impulsivity and alcohol misuse: An integrative
structural equation modeling approach. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 36(6), 923--931. Cox, W. M., Rosenberg, H.,
Hodgins, C.H.A., Macartney, J. I., & Maurer, K. A. (2004). United
Kingdom and United States healthcare providers' recommendations of
abstinence versus controlled drinking. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 39(2),
130--134. Cranford, J. A., Zucker, R. A., Jester, J. M., Puttler, L. I.,
& Fitzgerald, H. E. (2010). Parental alcohol involvement and adolescent
alcohol expectancies predict alcohol involvement in male adolescents.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 24(3), 386. Cunningham, J. A., &
Mäkelä, P. (2003). Comparing drinking patterns in Finland and Ontario
(Canada). Contemporary Drug Problems, 30, 685--699. Dawson, D. A.,
Goldstein, R. B., Saha, T. D., & Grant, B. F. (2015). Changes in alcohol
consumption: United States, 2001--2002 to 2012--2013. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 148, 56--61. Dawson, D. A., Grant, B. F., Stinson, F. S.,
Chou, P. S., Huang, B., & Ruan, W. J. (2005). Recovery from DSM-IV
alcohol dependence: United States, 2001--2002. Addiction, 100, 281--292.
de Bruijn, C., Van Den Brink, W., de Graaf, R., & Vollebergh, W. A.
(2005). Alcohol abuse and dependence criteria as predictors of a chronic
course of alcohol use disorders in the general population. Alcohol and
Alcoholism, 40, 441--446. de Lima, M. S., Dunn, J., Novo, I. P., Tomasi,
E., & Reisser, A.A.P. (2003). Gender differences in the use of alcohol
and psychotropics in a Brazilian population. Substance Use & Misuse, 38,
51--65. de Looze, M., Raaijmakers, Q., Ter Bogt, T., Bendtsen, P.,
Farhat, T., Ferreira, M., ... SimonsMorton, B. (2015). Decreases in
adolescent weekly alcohol use in Europe and North America: Evidence from
28 countries from 2002 to 2010. European Journal of Public Health,
25(Suppl. 2), 69--72.

457

de Wit, H. (1996). Priming effects with drugs and other reinforcers.
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 4, 5--10. Del Boca, F. K.,
Darkes, J., Goldman, M. S., & Smith, G. T. (2002). Advancing the
expectancy concept via the interplay between theory and research.
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 26, 926--935. Delker,
E., Brown, Q., & Hasin, D. (2015). Epidemiological studies of substance
dependence and abuse in adults. Current Behavioral Neuroscience Reports,
2(1), 15--22. Dick, D. M., & Beirut, L. J. (2006). The genetics of
alcohol dependence. Current Psychiatry Reports, 8, 151--157. Dimeff, L.
A., & Marlatt, G. A. (1995). Relapse prevention. In R. H. Hester & W. R.
Miller (Eds.), Handbook of alcoholism treatment approaches
(pp.176--194). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. DSM-5 to include
controversial changes to criteria for substance use disorders. (2012,
July). Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 73. Retrieved from
http://alcoholstudies.rutgers.edu/news/JSADpress/ JSADJuly12_DSM.pdf
Edwards, G., & Gross, M. M. (1976). Alcohol dependence: Provisional
description of a clinical syndrome. British Medical Journal, 1(6017),
1058--1061. Ersche, K. D., Jones, P. S., Williams, G. B., Turton, A. J.,
Robbins, T. W., & Bullmore, E. T. (2012). Abnormal brain structure
implicated in stimulant drug addiction. Science, 335(6068), 601--604.
Feighner, J. P., Robins, E., Guze, S. B., Woodruff, R. A. J., Winokur,
G., & Munoz, R. (1972). Diagnostic criteria for use in psychiatric
research. Archives of General Psychiatry, 26, 57--63. Fergusson, D. M.,
Boden, J. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2006). Cannabis use and other illicit
drug use: Testing the cannabis gateway hypothesis. Addiction, 101(4),
556--569. Finn, P. R., Earleywine, M., & Pihl, R. O. (1992). Sensation
seeking, stress reactivity, and alcohol dampening discriminate the
density of a family history of alcoholism. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 16, 585--590. Fuller, R. K., & Hiller-Sturmhofel,
S. (1999). Alcoholism treatment in the United States: An overview.
Alcohol Research & Health, 23, 69--77.

458

Alcohol Use Disorder

Galanter, M., Egelko, S., & Edwards, H. (1993). Rational recovery:
Alternative to AA for addiction. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol
Abuse, 19, 499--510. Gianoulakis, C. G. (1993). Endogenous opioids and
excessive alcohol consumption. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience,
18, 148--156. Gianoulakis, C. G., de Waele, J. P., & Thavundayil, J.
(1996). Implication of the endogenous opioid system in excessive ethanol
consumption. Alcohol, 13, 19--23. Goldman, M. S., & Darkes, J. (2004).
Alcohol expectancy multiaxial assessment: A memory network-based
approach. Psychological Assessment, 16, 4--15. Goldman, M. S., Del Boca,
F. K., & Darkes, J. (1999). Alcohol expectancy theory: The application
of cognitive neuroscience. In K. E. Leonard & H. T. Blane (Eds.),
Psychological theories of drinking and alcoholism (pp. 203--246). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Gottesman, I. I., & Gould, T. D. (2003). The
endophenotype concept in psychiatry: Etymology and strategic intentions.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 636--645. Grant, B. F., Dawson, D.
A., Stinson, F. S., Chou, S. P., Dufour, M. C., & Pickering, R. P.
(2004). The 12-month prevalence and trends in DSM-IV alcohol abuse and
dependence: United States, 1991--1992 and 2001--2002. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 74, 223--234. Grant, B. F., Goldstein, R. B., Saha, T. D.,
Chou, S. P., Jung, J., Zhang, H., ... Hasin, D. S. (2015). Epidemiology
of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder: Results from the National Epidemiologic
Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions III. JAMA Psychiatry, 72(8),
757--766. Greeley, J., & Oei, T. (1999). Alcohol and tension reduction.
In K. E. Leonard & H. T. Blane (Eds.), Psychological theories of
drinking and alcoholism (pp. 14--53). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Hart, K. E., & Fazaa, N. (2004). Life stress events and alcohol misuse:
Distinguishing contributing stress events from consequential stress
events. Substance Use & Misuse, 39, 1319--1339. Hasin, D. S., Schuckit,
M. A., Martin, C. S., Grant, B. F., Bucholz, K. K., & Helzer, J. E.
(2003). The validity of the DSM-IV alcohol dependence: What do we know
and what do we need to know? Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
Research, 27, 244--252.

Hasin, D. S., Stinson, F. S., Ogburn, E., & Grant, B. F. (2007).
Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV alcohol
abuse and dependence in the United States: Results from the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 64, 830--842. Heath, A. C., Bucholz, K. K., Madden,
P. A., Dinwiddie, S. H., Slutske, W. S., Bierut, L. J., ... Martin, N.
G. (1997). Genetic and environmental contributions to alcohol dependence
risk in a national twin sample: Consistency of findings for women and
men. Psychological Medicine, 27, 1381--1391. Heath, A. C., & Martin, A.
G. (1991). Intoxication after an acute dose of alcohol: An assessment of
its association with alcohol consumption patterns by using twin data.
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 15, 122--128. Heather,
N., & Dawe, S. (2005). Level of impaired control predicts outcome of
moderation-oriented treatment for alcohol problems. Addiction, 100,
945--952. Hines, L., Ray, L. A., Hutchison, K. E., & Tabakoff, B.
(2005). Alcoholism: The dissection for endophenotypes. Dialogues in
Clinical Neuroscience, 7, 153--163. Hingson, R. W., Zha, W., Weitzman,
E. R. (2009). Magnitude of and trends in alcohol-related mortality and
morbidity among U.S. college students ages 18--24, 1998--2005. Journal
of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs,Supplement (16), 12--20. Hull, C. L.
(1943). Principles of behavior. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Hutchison, K. E., McGeary, J., Smolen, A., Bryan, A., & Swift, R. M.
(2002). The DRD4 VNTR polymorphism moderates craving after alcohol
consumption. Health Psychology, 21, 139--146. Hutchison, K. E., Ray, L.
A., Sandman, E., Rutter, M. C., Peters, A., & Swift, R. (2006). The
effect of olanzapine on craving and alcohol consumption.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 31, 1310--1317. Hutchison, K. E., Wooden, A.,
Swift, R. M., Smolen, A., McGeary, J., & Adler, L. (2003). Olanzapine
reduces craving for alcohol: A DRD4 VNTR polymorphism by pharmacotherapy
interaction. Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 1882--1888. Ilgen, M.,
McKellar, J., & Tiet, Q. (2005). Abstinence self-efficacy and abstinence
1 year after substance use disorder treatment. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 73, 1175--1180. Johnson, B. A., & Ait-Daoud, N.
(2000). Neuropharmacological treatments for alcoholism: Scientific

References basis and clinical findings. Psychopharmacology, 149,
327--344. Johnson, B. A., Ait-Daoud, N. & Prihoda, T. J. (2000).
Combining ondansetron and naltrexone effectively treats biologically
predisposed alcoholics: From hypotheses to preliminary clinical
evidence. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 24, 737--742.
Johnson, B. A., O'Malley, S. S., Ciraulo, D. A., Roache, J. D.,
Chambers, R. A., Sarid-Segal, O., & Couper, D. (2003). Dose-ranging
kinetics and behavioral pharmacology of naltrexone and acamprosate, both
alone and combined, in alcohol dependent subjects. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 23, 281--293. Johnson, P. B., & Johnson, H. L.
(1999). Cultural and familial influences that maintain the negative
meaning of alcohol. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 13, 79--83. Johnston,
L. D., O'Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E. (2010).
Monitoring the future national results on adolescent drug use: Overview
of key findings, 2009. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Use.
Kalivas, P. W., & Stewart, J. (1991). Dopamine transmission in the
initiation and expression of drug-and stress-induced sensitization of
motor activity. Brain Research Reviews, 16, 223--244. Kalivas, P. W., &
Volkow, N. D. (2005). The neural basis of addiction: A pathology of
motivation and choice. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1403--1413.
Kavanagh, D. J., Sitharthan, G., Young, R. M., Sitharthan, T., Saunders,
J. B., Shockley, N., & Giannopoulos, V. (2006). Addition of cue exposure
to cognitive-behaviour therapy for alcohol misuse: A randomized trial
with dysphoric drinkers. Addiction, 101, 1106--1116. Kazdin, A. E.
(2002). Research design in clinical psychology (4th ed.). Boston, MA:
Allyn & Bacon. Koob, G. F. (2003). Neuroadaptive mechanisms of
addiction: Studies on the extended amygdala. European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 13, 442--452. Koob, G. F., & LeMoal, M. (2001).
Drug addiction, dysregulation of reward, and allostasis.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 24, 97--129. Koob, G. F., & LeMoal, M. (2005).
Plasticity of reward neurocircuitry and the "dark side" of drug
addiction. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1442--1444. Koopmans, J. R., &
Boomsma, D. L. (1996). Familial resemblances in alcohol use: Genetic or
cultural transmission? Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 57, 19--28.

459

Kranzler, H. R., Modesto-Lowe, V., & Van Kirk, J. (2000). Naltrexone
vs. nefazedone for treatment of alcohol dependence: A placebo-controlled
trial. Neuropsychopharmacology, 22, 493--503. Krystal, J. H., Cramer, J.
A., Krol, W. F., Kirk, G. F., & Rosenheck, R. A. (2001). Naltrexone in
the treatment of alcohol dependence. New England Journal of Medicine,
345, 1734--1739. Leeman, R. F., Corbin, W. R., & Fromme, K. (2009).
Craving predicts within session drinking behavior following placebo.
Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 693--698. Leeman, R. F.,
O'Malley, S. S., White, M. A., McKee, S. A. (2010). Nicotine and food
deprivation decrease the ability to resist smoking. Psychopharmacology,
212, 25--32. Les Whitbeck, B., Chen, X., Hoyt, D. R., & Adams, G. W.
(2004). Discrimination, historical loss and enculturation: Culturally
specific risk and resiliency factors for alcohol abuse among American
Indians. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 65(4), 409--418. Levenson, R.
W., Sher, K. J., Grossman, L. M., Newman, J., & Newlin, D. B. (1980).
Alcohol and stress-response dampening: Pharmacological effects,
expectancy, and tension reduction. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 89,
528--538. Levine, H. G. (1992). Temperance cultures: Alcohol as a
problem in Nordic and English-speaking cultures. In M. Lader, G.
Edwards, & C. Drummond (Eds.), The nature of alcohol and drug-related
problems (pp. 16--36). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Lindman,
R. E., Sjöholm, B. A., & Lang, A. R. (2000). Expectations of
alcohol-induced positive affect: A cross-cultural comparison. Journal of
Studies on Alcohol, 61, 681--687. Link, B. G., & Phelan, J. C. (2002).
McKeown and the idea that social conditions are fundamental causes of
disease. American Journal of Public Health, 92(5), 730--732. Litt, M.
D., Babor, T. F., Del Boca, F. K., Kadden, R. M., & Cooney, N. L.
(1992). Types of alcoholics: II. Application of an empirically derived
typology to treatment matching. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49,
609--614. Litten, R. Z., Allen, J., & Fertig, J. (1996).
Pharmacotherapies for alcohol problems: A review of research with focus
on developments since 1991. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
Research, 20, 859--876.

460

Alcohol Use Disorder

Littleton, J., & Little, H. (1994). Current concepts of ethanol
dependence. Addiction, 89, 1397--1412. Loeber, S., Croissant, B., Heinz,
A., Mann, K., & Flor, H. (2006). Cue exposure in the treatment of
alcohol dependence: Effects on drinking outcome, craving and
self-efficacy. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 45, 515--529.
MacKillop, J., & Lisman, S. A. (2005). Reactivity to alcohol cues:
Isolating the role of perceived availability. Experimental and Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 13, 229. Maisto, S. A., Carey, K. B., & Bradizza, C.
M. (1999). Social learning theory. In K.E. Leonard & H. T. Blane (Eds.),
Psychological theories of drinking and alcoholism (pp. 106--163). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Maisto, S. A., & Connors, G. J. (2006).
Relapse in the addictive behaviors: Integration and future directions.
Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 229--231. Mann, K. (2004).
Pharmacotherapy of alcohol dependence: A review of the clinical data.
CNS Drugs, 18, 485--504. Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (1985). Relapse
prevention. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Martin, C. S., Chung, T.,
Kirisci, L., & Langenbucher, J. W. (2006). Item response theory analysis
of diagnostic criteria for alcohol and cannabis use disorders in
adolescents: Implications for the DSM-V. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
115, 807--814. Martin, N. G., Oakeshott, J. G., Gibson, J. B., Starmer,
G. A., Perl, J., & Wilks, A. V. (1985). A twin study of psychomotor and
physiological responses to an acute dose of alcohol. Behavior Genetics,
15, 305--347. Mason, B. J. (1996). Doing issues in the pharmacotherapy
of alcoholism. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 20,
10--16. McCaul, M. E., & Petry, N. M. (2003). The role of psychosocial
treatment in pharmacotherapy for alcoholism. American Journal of
Addictions, 12, S41--S52. McCrady, B. S. (1992). A reply to Peele: Is
this how you treat your friends? Addictive Behaviors, 17, 67--72.
McCrady, B. S. (2001). Alcohol use disorders. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.),
Clinical handbook of psychological disorders (pp. 376--433). New York,
NY: Guilford Press. McGue, M. (1999). Behavioral genetic models of
alcoholism and drinking. In K. E. Leonard & H. T. Blane (Eds.),
Psychological theories of drinking and

alcoholism (pp. 372--421). New York, NY: Guilford Press. McKay, J. R.,
Franklin, T. R., Patapis, N., & Lynch, K. G. (2006). Conceptual,
methodological, and statistical issues in the study of relapse. Clinical
Psychology Review, 26, 109--127. Meza, E., & Kranzler, H. R. (1996).
Closing the gap between alcoholism research and practice: The case for
pharmacotherapy. Psychiatric Service, 47, 917--920. Miller, W. R. (Ed.).
(2004). Combined behavioral intervention manual: A clinical research
guide for therapists treating people with alcohol dependence. COMBINE
Monograph Series, 1 (NIH 04-5288). Bethesda, MD: National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002).
Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change. Journal of
Studies of Alcohol, 63, 776--777. Mitchell, J. M., O'Neil, J. P.,
Janabi, M., Marks, S. M., Jagust, W. J., & Fields, H. L. (2012). Alcohol
consumption induces endogenous opioid release in the human orbitofrontal
cortex and nucleus accumbens. Science Translational Medicine, 4(116),
116ra6. Monnelly, E. P., Ciraulo, D. A., Knapp, C., LoCastro, J., &
Sepulveda, I. (2004). Quetiapine for treatment of alcohol dependence.
Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 24, 532--535. Monterosso, J. R.,
Flannery, B. A., Pettinati, H. M., Oslin, D. W., Rukstalis, M., O'Brien,
C. P., & Volpicelli, J. R. (2001). Predicting treatment response to
naltrexone: The influence of craving and family history. American
Journal on Addictions, 10(3), 258--268. Monti, P. M., Kadden, R. M.,
Rohsenow, D. J., Cooney, N. L., & Abrams, D. B. (2002). Treating alcohol
dependence: A coping skills training guide (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Monti, P. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Swift, R. M., Gulliver,
S. B., Colby, S. M., Mueller, T. I., ... Asher, M. K. (2001). Naltrexone
and cue exposure with coping and communication skills training for
alcoholics: Treatment process and 1-year outcomes. Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research, 25(11), 1634--1647. Morris, P. L., Hopwood,
M., Whelan, G., Gardner, J., & Drummond, E. (2001). Addiction, 96,
1565--1573. Moyer, A., Finney, J. W., Swearingen, C. E., & Vergun, P.
(2002). Brief interventions for alcohol problems: A meta-analytic review
of controlled investigations

References in treatment-seeking and non-treatment-seeking populations.
Addiction, 97, 279--292. Myrick, H., Brady, K. T., & Malcolm, R. (2001).
New developments in the pharmacotherapy of alcohol dependence. American
Journal of Addictions, 10, 3--15. National Institutes of Health. (2010).
Alcohol epidemiologic data reference manual: Vol 8, No. 2. Alcohol use
and alcohol use disorders in the United States, a 3-year follow-up: Main
findings from the 2004--2005 wave 2 National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC) (NIH Publication No. 10-7677).
Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
O'Farrell, T. J., & Fals-Stewart, W. (2003). Alcohol abuse. Journal of
Marital and Family Therapy, 29, 121--146. Öjehegan, A., & Berglund, M.
(1989). Changes of drinking goals in a two-year outpatient alcoholic
treatment program. Addictive Behaviors, 14, 1--10. O'Malley, S. S.,
Jaffe, A. J., Chang, G., Schottenfeld, R. S., Meyer, R. E., &
Rounsaville, B. (1992). Naltrexone and coping skills therapy for alcohol
dependence. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 881--887. O'Malley, S.
S., Krishnan-Sarin, S., Farren, C., Sinha, R., & Kreek, M. (2002).
Naltrexone decreases craving and alcohol self-administration in
alcoholdependent subjects and activates the
hypothalamopituitary-adrenocortical axis. Psychopharmacology (Berlin),
160, 19--29. Orford, J., & Keddie, A. (1986). Abstinence or controlled
drinking in clinical practice: A test of the dependence and persuasion
hypotheses. British Journal of Addiction, 81, 495--504. Oslin, D. W.,
Cary, M., Slaymaker, V., Colleran, C., & Blow, F. C. (2009). Daily
ratings measures of alcohol craving during an inpatient stay define
subtypes of alcohol addiction that predict subsequent risk for
resumption of drinking. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 103, 131--136.
Partanen, J. (1991). Sociability and intoxication: Alcohol and drinking
in Kenya, Africa and the modern world. Helsinki, Finland: Finnish
Foundation for Alcohol Studies, Vol. 39. Pavlick, M., Hoffmann, E., &
Rosenberg, H. (2009). A nationwide survey of American alcohol and drug
craving assessment and treatment practices. Addiction Research & Theory,
17, 591--600.

461

Peele, S. (1993). The conflict between public health goals and the
temperance mentality. American Journal of Public Health, 83, 805--810.
Peele, S. (1997). Utilizing culture and behavior in epidemiological
models of alcohol consumption and consequences for Western nations.
Alcohol and Alcoholism, 32, 51--64. Petrakis, I. L. (2006). A rational
approach to the pharmacotherapy of alcohol dependence. Journal of
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 26, S3--S12. Pettinati, H. M., &
Rabinowitz, A. R. (2006). Choosing the right medication for the
treatment of alcoholism. Current Psychiatry Reports, 8, 383--388.
Phelan, J. C., Link, B. G., & Tehranifar, P. (2010). Social conditions
as fundamental causes of health inequalities: Theory, evidence, and
policy implications. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 51(Suppl.),
S28--S40. Piper, M. E., McCarthy, D. E., & Baker, T. B. (2006).
Assessing tobacco dependence: A guide to measure evaluation and
selection. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 8(3), 339--351. Project MATCH
Research Group. (1997). Matching alcoholism treatment to client
heterogeneity: Project MATCH posttreatment drinking outcomes. Journal of
Studies on Alcohol, 58, 7--29. Project MATCH Research Group. (1998).
Matching alcoholism treatments to client heterogeneity: Project MATCH
three-year drinking outcomes. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
Research, 22, 1300--1311. Ramchandani, V. A., Umhau, J., Pavon, F. J.,
RuizVelasco, V., Margas, W., Sun, H., ... Schwandt, M. L. (2011). A
genetic determinant of the striatal dopamine response to alcohol in men.
Molecular Psychiatry, 16(8), 809--817. Ray, L. A. (2012). Clinical
neuroscience of addiction: Applications to psychological science and
practice. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 19(2), 154--166.
Ray, L. A., Barr, C. S., Blendy, J. A., Oslin, D., Goldman, D., & Anton,
R. F. (2012). The role of the Asn40Asp polymorphism of the mu opioid
receptor gene (OPRM1) on alcoholism etiology and treatment: A critical
review. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 36(3), 385--394.
Ray, L. A., Bujarski, S., MacKillop, J., Courtney, K. E., Monti, P. M.,
& Miotto, K. (2013). Subjective response to alcohol among
alcohol-dependent individuals: Effects of the mu-opioid receptor (OPRM1)

462

Alcohol Use Disorder

gene and alcoholism severity. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
Research, 37, E116--E124. Ray, L. A., Chin, P. F., & Miotto, K. (2010).
Naltrexone for the treatment of alcoholism: Clinical findings,
mechanisms of action, and pharmacogenetics. CNS & Neurological
Disorders---Drug Targets, 9, 13--22. Ray, L. A., & Hutchison, K. E.
(2004). A polymorphism of the μ-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1) and
sensitivity to the effects of alcohol in humans. Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research, 28(12), 1789--1795. Ray, L. A., & Hutchison,
K. E. (2007). Effects of naltrexone on alcohol sensitivity and genetic
moderators of medication response: A double-blind placebo-controlled
study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(9), 1069--1077. Ray, L. A.,
Miranda, R., Jr., Tidey, J. W., McGeary, J. E., MacKillop, J., Gwaltney,
C. J., ... Monti, P. M. (2010). Polymorphisms of the mu-opioid receptor
and dopamine D4 receptor genes and subjective responses to alcohol in
the natural environment. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119(1),
115--125. Robinson, T. E., & Berridge, K. C. (1993). The neural basis of
drug craving: An incentive sensitization theory of addiction. Brain
Research Reviews, 18, 247--291. Robinson, T. E., & Berridge, K. C.
(2001). Incentivesensitization and addiction. Addiction, 96, 103--114.
Rohsenow, D. J., Monti, P. M., Rubonis, A. V., Gulliver, S. B., Colby,
S. M., Binkoff, J. A., & Abrams, D. B. (2001). Cue exposure with coping
skills training and communication skills training for alcohol
dependence: 6- and 12-month outcomes. Addiction, 96, 1161--1174. Room,
R. (1998). Drinking patterns and alcohol-related social problems:
Frameworks for analysis in developing societies. Drug and Alcohol
Review, 17, 389--398. Rosenberg, H. (1993). Prediction of controlled
drinking by alcoholics and problem drinkers. Psychological Bulletin,
113, 129--139. Rychtarik, R. G., Connors, G. J., Dermen, K. H., &
Stasiewicz, P. R. (2000). Alcoholics Anonymous and the use of
medications to prevent relapse: An anonymous survey of member attitudes.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 61, 134--138. Sacks, J. J., Gonzales, K.
R., Bouchery, E. E., Tomedi, L. E., & Brewer, R. D. (2015). 2010
national and state costs of excessive alcohol consumption. American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 49(5), e73--e79.

Saha, T. D., Chou, S. P., & Grant, B. F. (2006). Toward an alcohol use
disorder continuum using item response theory: Results from the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychological
Medicine, 36, 931--941. Samson, H. H., & Harris, R. A. (1992).
Neurobiology of alcohol abuse. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 13,
206--211. Schaffer, A., & Naranjo, C. A. (1998). Recommended drug
treatment strategies for the alcoholic patient. CNS Drugs, 56, 571--585.
Schmid, H., Bogt, T. T., Godeau, E., Hublet, A., Dias, S. F., & Fotiou,
A. (2003). Drunkenness among young people: A cross-national comparison.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 64, 650--661. Schmidt, E. A., Carns, A.,
& Chandler, C. (2001). Assessing the efficacy of rational recovery in
the treatment of alcohol/drug dependence. Alcoholism Treatment
Quarterly, 19, 97--106. Schuckit, M. A., & Smith, T. L. (1996). An
8-year follow-up of 450 sons of alcoholic and control subjects. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 53, 202--210. Schuckit, M. A., Windle, M., Smith,
T. L., Hesselbrock, V., Ohannessian, C., Averna, S., ... Sher, K. J.
(2006). Searching for the full picture: Structural equational modeling
in alcohol research. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 26,
194--202. Setiawan, E., Pihl, R. O., Cox, S. M., Gianoulakis, C.,
Palmour, R. M., Benkelfat, C., & Leyton, M. (2011). The effect of
naltrexone on alcohol's stimulant properties and self-administration
behavior in social drinkers: Influence of gender and genotype.
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 35(6), 1134--1141. Sher,
K. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1982). Risk for alcoholism and individual
differences in the stressresponse dampening of alcohol. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 91, 350--367. Sher, K. J., Trull, T. J., Bartholow,
B. D., & Vieth, A. (1999). Personality and alcoholism: Issues, methods,
and etiological processes. In K. E. Leonard & H. T. Blane (Eds.),
Psychological theories of drinking and alcoholism (pp. 54--105). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Sinha, R., & Li, C. (2007). Imaging stress-
and cueinduced drug and alcohol craving: Association with relapse and
clinical implications. Drug and Alcohol Review, 26, 25--31. Sinha, R.,
Robinson, J., & O'Malley, S. (1998). Stress response dampening: Effects
of gender and fam-

References ily history of alcoholism and anxiety disorders.
Psychopharmacology, 137, 311--320. Smith, J. E., Meyers, R. J., &
Delaney, H. D. (1998). Community reinforcement approach with homeless
alcohol-dependent individuals. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 66, 541--548. Spear, L. P. (2000). The adolescent brain and
agerelated behavioral manifestations. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Review, 24(4), 417--463. Stahre, M., Roeber, J., Kanny, D., Brewer, R.
D., & Zhang, X. (2014). Contribution of excessive alcohol consumption to
deaths and years of potential life lost in the United States. Preventing
Chronic Disease, 11, E109. Stewart, J., de Wit, H., & Eikelboom, R.
(1984). Role of unconditioned and conditioned drug effects in the
self-administration of opiates and stimulants. Psychological Review, 91,
251--268. Stewart, S. H., Karp, J., Pihl, R. O., & Peterson, R. A.
(1997). Anxiety sensitivity and self-reported reasons for drug use.
Journal of Substance Abuse, 9, 223--240. Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration. (2014a). Table 2.41B---Alcohol use in
lifetime, past year, and past month among persons aged 18 or older, by
demographic characteristics: Percentages, 2013 and 2014. In Results from
the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed tables.
Retrieved from http://www.samhsa.gov/data/
sites/default/files/NSDUH-DetTabs2014/NSDUH -DetTabs2014.htm#tab2-41b
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2014b).
Table 2.46B---Alcohol use, binge alcohol use, and heavy alcohol use in
the past month among persons aged 18 or older, by demographic
characteristics: Percentages, 2013 and 2014. In Results from the 2014
National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed tables. Retrieved from
http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/
NSDUH-DetTabs2014/NSDUH-DetTabs2014.htm #tab2-46b Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration. (2014c). Table 6.89B---Binge
alcohol use in the past month among persons aged 18 to 22, by college
enrollment status and demographic characteristics: Percentages, 2013 and
2014. In Results from the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health:
Detailed tables. Retrieved from http://www.samhsa
.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-DetTabs2014/
NSDUH-DetTabs2014.htm#tab6-89b

463

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2014d).
Table 5.49A---Need for and receipt of treatment at a specialty facility
for an alcohol problem in the past year among persons aged 18 or older,
by demographic characteristics: Numbers in thousands and percentages,
2013 and 2014. In Results from the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and
Health: Detailed tables. Retrieved from
http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/
NSDUH-DetTabs2014/NSDUH-DetTabs2014.htm #tab5-49a Swendsen, J. D.,
Tennen, H., Carney, M. A., Affleck, G., Willard, A., & Hromi, A. (2000).
Mood and alcohol consumption: An experience sampling test of the
self-medication hypothesis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109,
198--204. Trimpey, J. (1992). The small book. New York, NY: Delacorte.
Vasilaki, E. I., Hosier, S. G., & Cox, W. M. (2006). The efficacy of
motivational interviewing as a brief intervention for excessive
drinking: A meta-analytic review. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 41, 328--335.
Vega, W. A., & Sribney, W. M. (2011). Understanding the Hispanic Health
Paradox through a multigeneration lens: A focus on behavior disorders.
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 57, 151--168. Viken, R. J., Rose, R.
J., Morzoati, S. L., Christian, J. C., & Li, T.-K. (2003). Subjective
intoxication in response to alcohol challenge: Heritability and
covariation with personality, breath alcohol level, and drinking
history. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 27, 795--803.
Volkow, N., & Li, T. K. (2005). The neuroscience of addiction. Nature
Neuroscience, 8, 1429--1430. Volpicelli, J. R., Altermana, A. I.,
Hayahida, M., & O'Brien, C. P. (1992). Naltrexone in the treatment of
alcohol dependence. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 876--880.
Volpicelli, J. R., Pettinati, H. M., McLellan, A., & O'Brien, C. P.
(2001). Combining medication and psychosocial treatments for addictions:
The BRENDA approach. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Wagner, E. F., Lloyd,
D. A., & Gil, A. G. (2002). Racial/ethnic and gender differences in the
incidence and onset age of DSM-IV alcohol use disorder symptoms among
adolescents. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 63, 609--619. Warner, L. A.,
Canino, G., & Colón, H. M. (2001). Prevalence and correlates of
substance use disorders among older adolescents in Puerto Rico and

464

Alcohol Use Disorder

the United States: A cross-cultural comparison. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 63, 229--243. Weiss, F., Lorang, M. T., Bloom, F. E., &
Koob, G. F. (1993). Oral alcohol self-administration stimulates dopamine
release in the rat nucleus accumbens: Genetic and motivational
determinants. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics,
267, 250--258. Wilsnack, R. W., Vogeltanz, N. D., Wilsnack, S. C., &
Harris, T. R. (2000). Gender differences in alcohol consumption and
adverse drinking consequences: Cross-cultural patterns. Addiction, 95,
251--265. Windle, M., Mun, E. Y., & Windle, R. C. (2005).
Adolescent-to-young adulthood heavy drinking trajectories and their
prospective predictors. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 66(3), 313--322.
Windle, M., Spear, L. P., Fuligni, A. J., Angold, A., Brown, J. D.,
Pine, D., ... Dahl, R. E. (2008). Transitions into underage and problem
drinking: Developmental processes and mechanisms between 10 and 15 years
of age. Pediatrics, 121(Suppl. 4), S273--S289. Wise, R. A. (1988). The
neurobiology of craving: Implications for the understanding and
treatment of addiction. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97, 118--132.
Wise, R. A., & Bozarth, M. A. (1987). A psychomotor stimulant theory of
addiction. Psychological Review, 94, 469--492. Witkiewitz, K., &
Marlatt, G. A. (2006). Overview of harm reduction treatments for alcohol
problems. International Journal of Drug Policy, 17, 285--294.

Witkiewitz, K., & Marlatt, G. A. (2007). Modeling the complexity of
post-treatment drinking: It's a rocky road to relapse. Clinical
Psychology Review, 27(6), 724--738. Witkiewitz, K., Marlatt, G. A., &
Walker, D. (2005). Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for alcohol and
substance use disorders. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19(3),
211--228. Wood, M. D., Read, J. P., Mitchell, R. E., & Brand, N. H.
(2004). Do parents still matter? Parent and peer influences on alcohol
involvement among recent high school graduates. Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors, 18(1), 19--30. World Health Organization. (2010). Mental and
behavioural disorders due to psychoactive substance use (F10--F19). In
International statistical classification of diseases and related health
problems 10th revision (ICD-10). Geneva: Author. Yoon, G., Kim, S. W.,
Thuras, P., Grant, J. E., & Westermeyer, J. (2006). Alcohol craving in
outpatients with alcohol dependence: Rate and clinical correlates.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 67, 770. Zamboanga, B. L.,
Schwartz, S. J., Ham, L. S., Jarvis, L. H., & Olthuis, J. V. (2009). Do
alcohol expectancy outcomes and valuations mediate peer influences and
lifetime alcohol use among early adolescents? Journal of Genetic
Psychology, 170, 359--376. Zeichner, A., Giancola, P. R., & Allen, J. D.
(1995). Effects of hostility on alcohol stress-response dampening.
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 19, 977--983.

Chapter 12 Eating Disorders Linda W. Craighead, Margaret A. Martinez,
Kelly L. Klump, James Lock, and Nina Kirz

D

isordered eating can take a variety of forms, with the core problem
behaviors that lead to a diagnosis of an eating disorder identified as
(a) restrictive eating (low intake and/or restricted range of food
types), (b) binge eating (loss of control), and (c) compensatory
behaviors. Important cognitive and affective features that go along with
these behaviors include pathologically high levels of concern about
weight and shape and their control, excessive fear of weight gain,
feeling "fat" despite being in the normal weight range, and maladaptive
beliefs about eating, exercise, and desired body weight. A related
feature includes distress about repeatedly eating more than intended,
but this is also characteristic of many individuals worried about weight
and thus does not distinguish those with clinically significant
disorders. Problematic eating behavior can, but does not necessarily,
impact weight and it is notable that weight is featured as a required
diagnostic criterion in only one of the three clinical presentations
that are the focus of this chapter: anorexia nervosa (AN). Bulimia
nervosa (BN) and binge eating disorder (BED) have no weight criteria but
both require binge eating; they are differentiated by the presence or
absence of compensatory behaviors. Prior to the introduction of the
current diagnostic system, the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) (American Psychiatric
Association \[APA\], 2013), AN and BN were the only specified eating
disorder (ED) diagnoses. Often individuals with these diagnoses were put
together and referred to as a sample with Eating Disorders. The DSM-5
maintained the historical distinction between AN and BN, which is based
primarily on weight, but it greatly expanded the scope of eating
disorder diagnoses. These changes were needed because more than half the
individuals presenting for eating concerns failed to meet criteria for
AN or BN. In DSM-5, BED has been added as a distinct diagnosis and the
criteria for AN and BN have been modified to be more inclusive. In
addition, the category Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorder
(OSFED) was added, which identifies subthreshold variants of AN, BN, and
BED, as well as the syndromes called purging disorder and night-eating
syndrome. The hope is that these changes will facilitate research to
improve our understanding of different developmental pathways, encourage
earlier detection and diagnosis, and promote the development of
effective strategies that target specific presenting patterns. Note that
the DSM-5 OSFED category also includes three disorders not discussed in
this

465

466

Eating Disorders

chapter; these are pica (the eating of non-nutritive substances), and
rumination disorder, which were previously listed under disorders of
early infancy and childhood, and the newly created avoidant and
restrictive food intake disorder. Within the current diagnostic system,
it is an even greater challenge to describe and explain the pathology of
individuals with eating disorders when considered as a "unitary group";
that group may now include individuals as different in presentation as a
chronically low weight person who restricts severely and never overeats
and a morbidly obese individual for whom the distinction between
overeating and binge eating is not so clear and for whom obesity is the
urgent problem. Despite this significant range of presentations, recent
theories of eating disorders have emphasized the substantial
similarities among the eating syndromes. Fairburn's transdiagnostic
theory (Fairburn, Cooper, & Shafran, 2003) identifies the centrality of
overvaluation of eating, shape, and weight and their control across the
range of eating pathology. Fairburn postulates that variations in eating
symptomatology are all expressions of this overvaluation and argues that
the mechanism of this core belief must be targeted in treatment. This
transdiagnostic view of eating disorders is supported by data
demonstrating similarities in risk factors (Bakalar, Shank, Vannucci,
Radin, & Tanofsky-Kraff, 2015; Hilbert et al., 2014), genetic mechanisms
(Bulik et al., 2007), neurobiological processes (Uher et al., 2004), and
maintaining factors (Stice, 2002), as well as data showing significant
diagnostic crossover over time (Stice, Marti, & Rohde, 2013). However,
there are critical differences both between and within the three eating
disorders discussed in this chapter. After reviewing the evidence
marshaled to make recommendations for DSM-5, Keel, Brown, Holland, and
Bodell (2012) concluded that this evidence supported the utility of
broad distinctions among AN, BN, and BED. These authors suggested that
the field may find a differentiated diagnostic system more useful in
researching etiology, even if a transdiagnostic model turns out to be
useful clinically in developing and prescribing treatments. Our
intention in this chapter is to highlight differences in presenting
pathology within the broad category of eating disorders while also
identifying the significant similarities in risk factors and in certain
core features that have important implications, particularly in terms of
prevention and early intervention. The reader is also encouraged to bear
in mind that at the individual level, there is significant variety in
presentation within any given diagnostic group.

Diagnostic Criteria and Clinical Presentation As noted above, there are
both substantial similarities and important distinctions between the
three eating disorders. This section is designed to provide clinicians
with the information necessary to identify, differentiate, and diagnosis
AN, BN, and BED.

Anorexia Nervosa (AN) Anorexia nervosa is the earliest of the eating
disorders to be described in the medical literature and remains the most
serious of them in terms of physical sequelae and morbidity. A French
physician (Lasègue, 1883) and a British physician (Gull, 1874)
independently described an illness, primarily affecting girls and young
women, that consisted of

Diagnostic Criteria and Clinical Presentation

467

severe weight loss, amenorrhea, constipation, and restlessness, without
evidence of any organic pathology. Gull first used the term anorexia
nervosa, but the syndrome, which was relatively uncommon, did not
receive widespread attention. Psychoanalytic thinking was predominant
until the 1950s, and within that view, AN was thought of as a fear of
oral impregnation (Thoma, 1967). Psychiatrist Hilde Bruch, who published
her pioneering work in the 1970s (Bruch, 1973, 1978), was the first to
identify the core issues of low self-esteem, limited self-concept, and
distorted body image, which remain central to current formulations of
AN. Crisp (1997) developed a related formulation of AN as an effort to
avoid difficulties associated with physical maturation and emotional and
familial problems---often experienced with the onset of adolescence.
Theories about family psychopathology related to intrusiveness and
overcontrol as contributors to the psychological vulnerability of
adolescents who developed AN were advanced by Minuchin, Rosman, and
Baker (1978) and Selvini Palazzoli (1974). Currently, there are multiple
theories about AN, but none have taken over as the most prominent or
widely accepted model because empirical support for the models remains
limited. However, most theories continue to place at least some emphasis
on issues of individuation and family processes because adolescence is
the most typical age of onset. Theories that would explain more adult
onset are not as well developed. In addition, most theories place AN
within a biopsychosocial framework that includes recognition of the
roles of genetic vulnerability, individual differences in pre-illness
personality traits, the family context, and the larger social context
that supports the thin ideal. In the treatment section, interventions
that have emerged from theories about etiology and the resistance to
weight restoration---that typically persists despite increasing
recognition of the negative consequences of the low weight---are
described. The current diagnostic criteria for AN, as well as for BN and
BED, are outlined in Table 12.1; Figure 12.1 provides a diagnostic
flowchart for making a differential eating disorder diagnosis. The
primary symptom that distinguishes individuals with a diagnosis of AN
from those with BN or BED is restriction of intake leading to a
significantly low weight that is less than minimally normal or (in
children or adolescents) less than minimally expected. Additional
required symptoms include an intense fear of gaining weight or of
becoming fat or persistent behavior that interferes with weight gain (in
the context of low weight), and also body-image disturbance, overconcern
with weight/shape, or lack of recognition of the medical seriousness of
low weight. The DSM-IV (APA, 1994) had required 3 consecutive months of
amenorrhea in postmenarcheal females, but that criterion has been
eliminated; it was not consistently useful and was not applicable to all
individuals. The DSM-5 retains the DSM-IV distinction between two
subtypes of AN---restricting and binge eating/purging---although the
evidence supporting these subtypes as clinically discrete entities is
controversial (e.g., Olatunji et al., 2012). Some evidence suggests that
patients with the binge/purge subtype have a more complicated course and
are more likely to have comorbid problems with depression, substance
abuse, and personality disorders (Le Grange, Fitzsimmons-Craft, et al.,
2014). No differences in recovery rates or psychopathology (Eddy et al.,
2002) have been clearly established. Over a more chronic course, the
distinction becomes less useful due to the crossing over that often
occurs between the subtypes. In clinical presentation, the most salient
feature of AN is the clear and unwavering behavioral refusal to obtain
or maintain weight acceptable for height and health. This

468

Eating Disorders TABLE 12.1

Diagnostic Criteria for DSM-5 Eating Disorders

Anorexia Nervosa

Bulimia Nervosa

Binge Eating Disorder

A. Significantly low body weight resulting from restricted energy intake
relative to expenditure.

A. Repeated episodes of binge eating in which the individual 1. Eats in
a distinct episode an unusually large amount of food relative to what
would be consumed by most individuals. 2. Experiences a sense of loss of
control over eating.

A. Repeated episodes of binge eating in which the individual 1. Eats in
a distinct episode an unusually large amount of food relative to what
would be consumed by most individuals. 2. Experiences a sense of loss of
control over eating.

B. Fear of weight gain or of possibility of being overweight or behavior
that maintains low weight. C. Body-image disturbance, overvaluation of
shape or weight, or denial of severity of low weight. Specify whether
Restricting type: individual does not engage in any binge eating or
purging; weight loss is the product of dieting and/or excessive exercise
only. Binge eating/purging type: individual engages in recurrent
instances of binge eating or purging over the past 3 months.

B. Repeated episodes of behaviors intended to compensate for overeating
and avoid weight gain, such as vomiting, inappropriate use of
laxatives/diuretics/ other medications, fasting, or excessive energy.

D. Individual displays overvaluation of shape or weight.

B. Episodes of binge eating are characterized by at least 3 of the
following: 1. Increased rate of eating. 2. Eating beyond the point of
fullness. 3. Eating in the absence of physical hunger. 4. Eating alone
out of embarrassment. 5. Feelings of disgust, depression, or guilt after
episodes of binge eating.

E. Individual does not meet criteria for anorexia nervosa.

C. Binge eating causes significant distress.

C. Binge eating and purging behaviors occur on average at least once a
week for 3 months.

D. Binge eating occurs on average at least once a week for 3 months. E.
The individual does not meet criteria for either AN or BN. Source: Based
on DSM-5.

behavior is particularly perplexing when it occurs in the context of an
otherwise relatively nonproblematic and often high-achieving adolescent.
The initiation of dieting may occur after an identifiable trigger such
as being called fat by a peer or sibling or the initiation of efforts to
lose weight for a special occasion may escalate to maladaptive levels.
Often these behaviors appear initially innocuous, even consistent with
age-appropriate developmental concerns about appearance; however, over
time, these behaviors take on an urgent and insistent nature while other
important social and emotional pursuits are deferred or avoided all
together. Over time, the weight loss becomes an end in and of itself and
spirals

469

Diagnostic Criteria and Clinical Presentation Differential Diagnosis of
Anorexia, Bulimia, and Binge Eating Disorder

Anorexia Nervosa

Presence of pathological eating behavior (e.g., restriction, binge
eating, purging)

Yes

Significantly low (e.g., BMI\<18.5) body weight?

No

Objective binge episodes?

No

Evaluate for Unspecified or Other Specified Eating Disorder

Yes

Compensatory behaviors and/or objective binge episodes?

No

AN, Restricting Subtype

Bulimia Nervosa

Yes

Inappropriate compensatory behaviors?

Yes

No

AN, Binge/Purge Subtype

Binge Eating Disorder

FIGURE 12.1

Diagnostic Flowchart for AN, BN, and BED.

out of the patient's control, a process hypothesized to be under the
control of dorsostriatal stimulus-response learning systems in the brain
(Foerde, Steinglass, Shohamy, & Walsh, 2015; Walsh, 2013). Many patients
firmly believe the behavior is within their control until they try to
stop, at which point they sometimes realize that their symptoms actually
control them. The behaviors that illustrate this refusal include a
highly restrictive and selective eating pattern, excessive exercise, and
in some cases purging behaviors. Restrictive behaviors take a variety of
forms, some of which are characteristic of eating disorders more
generally. However, intentional dieting that results in an unhealthy low
weight is the hallmark of AN. Hours may be spent calculating calories
and planning meals. Converting to vegetarianism in the context of
dieting can be an early sign of disordered eating. Only certain foods
come to be seen as safe to consume, and the list of permissible foods
typically becomes smaller over time until often a patient eats the exact
same thing every day. Some patients drink excessive amounts of water to
control hunger, while others will consume very little water because it
appears to increase their weight or makes them feel bloated. They may
weigh themselves frequently and may feel the day is ruined if their
weight has not decreased. Exercise may initially be fairly normal in
quantity and quality, but compulsive exercise patterns develop where
attempts to interrupt the behavior are met with extreme resistance
(Davis & Kaptein, 2006). The patient may feel he or she must exercise in
order to be allowed to eat, or may exercise after meals to burn off the
calories consumed. Some patients will not miss a day despite illness or
injury and will forgo almost any other activity to ensure they can
exercise. Some individuals exercise at

470

Eating Disorders

such a high level (e.g., training for a marathon or participation in
intensive sports) that their caloric intake may actually be in the
normal range. This presentation is referred to clinically as exercise
anorexia. Such individuals refuse to eat "unhealthy" foods and to
increase calories sufficiently to achieve or maintain a healthy weight.
Alternatively, some individuals with AN may not engage in intense
physical activity but may instead spend large amounts of time standing
or fidgeting, behaviors that they appear to engage in more often than
healthy controls do and that may contribute to relapse (Gianini et al.,
2015). Individuals who restrict and/or overexercise may also engage in
other, more harmful weight-loss behaviors. Purging behaviors develop in
15% to 20% of cases as an attempt to limit the potential for weight
gain. AN patients may purge after eating normal or even small amounts of
food and may not endorse loss of control over eating (although the
extreme dieting often triggers feelings of loss of control). Patients
may also abuse laxatives, diuretics, or enemas that lead to dehydration
rather than true weight loss, and they may abuse medications, such as
improper use of insulin in diabetics. The "feeling of decreased weight"
or having a "flat stomach" provides temporary reassurance against the
fear of weight gain. Research indicates that purging is fairly
ineffective because a large portion of the calories are actually
absorbed before the patient is able to vomit them up (Kaye, Weltzin,
Hsu, McConaha, & Bolton, 1993), and these unhealthy weight-loss
behaviors are believed to be associated with long-term weight gain,
rather than weight loss (Neumark-Sztainer, Wall, Story, & Standish,
2012). Over time, the experiences of starvation, exercise, and even
purging behaviors become self-reinforcing and are experienced as a
source of support and comfort for the person with AN. The psychological
basis for these weight-loss behaviors is usually considered to be an
intense fear of fat or of gaining weight. The triggers for the
development of this specific type of anxiety and fear are extremely
variable but commonly include the onset of puberty, development of an
extreme health or nutrition focus, being teased about weight or
appearance, initiating social or academic transitions (e.g., starting
middle school or high school), emergence of a medical illness that
initiates weight loss, attempting to improve athletic performance, and
experiences of physical and sexual abuse. The fear of weight gain and
fat is relieved---albeit temporarily---by the various
weight-loss--inducing behaviors. This is accomplished both directly
(because the behaviors lead to weight loss and that reduces the anxiety
and fear) and indirectly (by providing a focus for the obsessive worry
that accompanies these fears). Regardless, the behaviors are strongly
reinforced, which is believed to help explain their persistence in spite
of some negative consequences, and the strong resistance to giving them
up. It is notable that the previous (DSM-IV) requirement for weight
phobia was eliminated in DSM-5. Behavior that interferes with weight
gain is now sufficient to warrant the diagnosis, regardless of the
reasons given for that behavior. Individuals diagnosed with AN in
non-Western countries are less likely to report fear of fatness as the
main motivation for their weight loss, as are younger adolescents and
preadolescents (Nicholls & Bryant-Waugh, 2003). Interestingly, in the
context of the transdiagnostic emphasis on the centrality of overconcern
with weight and its control, Strober, Freeman, and Morrell (1999)
reported that patients without weight phobia (the fear of fatness) were
less likely to have a chronic course or engage in binge eating, and more
likely to be fully weight-recovered at a 10- to 15-year follow-up.
Another important psychological aspect of AN is the disturbance in the
appreciation of current body weight and shape, leading to an
overestimation of body size relative to

Diagnostic Criteria and Clinical Presentation

471

true body size. This body-image distortion likely results from a
consistent and persistent overfocus on the body as a whole or on
specific parts of the body (e.g., thighs, buttocks, cheeks) in an
attempt to assess the success of efforts to lose weight or fat.
Initially, this focus may be a source of limited reassurance, much in
the way that constant checking of weight on a scale may be, because
changes can be seen and measured. However, over time, the hyperfocus on
the body leads to greater and greater distortions and misperceptions.
This can also lead to a severe distortion in evaluating the medical
consequences of being severely underweight. This denial of the
seriousness of malnutrition is a major source of treatment avoidance and
represents a significant psychological hazard for successful weight
restoration. The result of the interaction among the psychological
factors of fear, distortion, and denial and the behaviors precipitating
extreme weight loss is physiological malnutrition. A commonly used
figure for determining malnutrition in adults is a body mass index (BMI)
of 17.5 or below, or a body weight that is 85% or less of ideal body
weight (IBW). Notably, the DSM-5 gives these weight cut-points as
examples, not absolutes, though many clinicians and researchers appear
to treat them as such. Individuals who are overweight before the onset
of illness may lose substantial weight and demonstrate severe thoughts,
behaviors, and medical consequences but not reach the state of
physiological starvation characteristic of AN. In DSM-5 these
individuals are considered subclinical or atypical cases of AN (within
the OSFED category). Importantly, in children and adolescents the weight
cut-points are particularly likely to be misleading as growth and
pubertal status greatly affect these types of norms. Younger patients
may be growth-retarded due to malnutrition, so consideration of their
prior growth curve data must also be taken into consideration.
Malnutrition affects most organ systems, as the body responds to manage
a starvation state and conserves energy by cutting back on all but the
most essential functions. Blood flow to the periphery is decreased,
leading to cold extremities. Skin becomes dry and hair falls out, while
the body becomes coated with lanugo, a fine downy hair meant to conserve
warmth. Menstruation stops or becomes irregular, and fertility is
impaired. Along with these hormonal changes, calcium is lost from the
bones, leading to osteopenia or in severe cases to osteoporosis. In
children who are still growing, growth can be slowed or stopped. Heart
and brain function are preserved for as long as possible but eventually
the cardiac muscle weakens, leading to low heart rate, low blood
pressure, and possible death. Brain scans have shown shrinkage of the
brain during the illness that reverses with weight restoration (Lázaro
et al., 2013; Mainz, Schulte-Rüther, Fink, Herpertz-Dahlmann, & Konrad,
2012). Of all these complications, the only one known to definitely
persist after weight restoration is osteoporosis, the severity of which
depends on the duration of the illness.

Case Example: Anorexia Nervosa Lisa is a 17-year-old female who reports,
"According to other people, I'm not eating safely." About 6 months ago
she decided to "lose a few pounds" for her junior prom. She is 5 feet 5
inches tall, and initially wanted to decrease her weight from 130 pounds
to 120 pounds. She initiated her dieting by eating what she described as
"healthier": she cut out junk food, desserts, and fast food, and limited
her portion sizes. She also started an exercise routine of running 3
miles and doing 100 sit-ups and 100 pushups every day.

472

Eating Disorders

Her weight dropped to 120 pounds by prom, but she still felt overweight.
She cut more and more foods from her diet until she was eating mostly
fruits and vegetables and was skipping lunch at school. She kept careful
track of calories and tried not to eat more than 500 kcal/day. Her
parents noticed that she was losing too much weight and tried to keep
her from exercising, but Lisa felt too guilty about "all those calories
just sitting there" and was afraid of gaining weight. She started
secretly doing jumping jacks and running in place in her room at night.
She thought about trying to throw up her food, but she did not like the
idea because it seemed dirty and messy. As her weight decreased further
she became more and more irritable, especially when her parents tried to
encourage her to eat. Her menses ceased, she felt cold all the time, and
her hair started falling out. She stopped spending time with friends
because she was worried they would comment on her not eating, and
because she just did not have the energy to go out. Her parents became
concerned enough to bring her to the pediatrician, who found that her
weight was down to 100 pounds and her heart rate was 42 beats per
minute. She was admitted to the hospital, which Lisa thought was
completely unnecessary. She was furious at being made to gain weight in
the hospital as she felt her thighs were still "huge."

Bulimia Nervosa (BN) Liddell and Scott (1972) note that the term
boulimos---meaning a great deal of (or ravenous) hunger---was used by
several early Greek authors, including the physician Galen. The term
came to refer both to hunger and to the overeating that extreme hunger
triggers. James (1743) described cases of atypical preoccupation with
food and overeating, including a variant, caninus appetite, that
involved overeating followed by vomiting. In the modern era, Stunkard
(1959) drew attention to clinically significant patterns of eating large
amounts when he described a binge eating syndrome in some individuals.
These patients, some of whom were overweight, would report high levels
of hunger, would seek out food, and would typically not stop eating
until physically uncomfortable. Vomiting was sometimes induced but often
served as a means to relieve abdominal pain rather than specifically to
prevent weight gain. These patients reported guilt, remorse, and
self-contempt related to their failure to control their eating behavior.
This work broadened thinking about eating by considering that failures
to stop eating after normal amounts might be due to decreased sensations
of satiety instead of (or in addition to) being a consequence of
excessive hunger resulting from dieting. This distinction continues to
be useful in understanding that pathways to objective binge eating may
develop in the absence of severe restriction or weight loss, as is more
often the case in BED than in BN. Attention was directed toward purging
behaviors following a publication by BoskindLodahl and White (1978) that
described a variant of AN found among normal weight women that was
considered particularly difficult to treat and that these authors called
"bulimarexia." Russell (1979) described similar cases but used the term
"bulimia nervosa," and it was this term that was adopted when BN was
formally recognized as a distinct diagnosis in the DSM-III-R (APA,
1987). The cognitive and affective features associated with normal
weight individuals who purge are strikingly similar to those found in
individuals with AN. Crossover from BN to a full diagnosis of AN is not
common, but crossover to subclinical AN occurs with some frequency
(i.e., high levels of restriction remain even

Diagnostic Criteria and Clinical Presentation

473

when purging stops). The acceptance of BN as an "eating disorder" far
earlier than the acceptance of BED may have been due to the perception
that that merely eating large amounts was a problem for weight
(i.e. obesity) but not a form of "disordered" eating. Behavioral
interventions for obesity were evolving during this time within the
framework of health psychology rather than within the framework of
eating disorder treatment. Fairburn, Marcus, and Wilson (1993) proposed
a model to explain the persistence (i.e., maintenance) of BN that
explicitly identified excessive dieting as the proximal cause of purging
behaviors and identified overconcern with weight and shape (and their
control) as the more distal feature driving dieting and purging
behaviors. This model does not directly address etiology, but risk
factor models such as those proposed by Stice (2002) identify a number
of societal, family, and other variables that likely contribute to the
development and maintenance of this overconcern with weight and shape.
The stronger than expected short-term effectiveness, particularly for
recent onset cases, of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) treatment
provided strong support for this conceptualization of BN. In this model,
dieting behaviors are targeted first and then the cognitive dysfunction
is addressed. Other theories of BN emerged subsequently that placed more
emphasis on interpersonal difficulties, personality vulnerabilities, and
the role of emotion regulation, and these issues have largely been
incorporated into Fairburn's more recent work. The original CBT for BN
model was expanded to create the transdiagnostic model (Fairburn & Bohn,
2005; Fairburn et al., 2003), which has been proposed as a useful way to
understand the important common pathology across eating disorders while
providing a sufficiently flexible approach to treatment that the basic
strategies can be tailored to address a wide range of problematic ED
behaviors. Treatment also addresses weight issues (underweight or
obesity) when needed. The diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa (BN)
center around the presence of recurrent objective binge episodes (OBEs)
and the various compensatory behaviors such as vomiting, laxative use,
fasting, or excessive exercise that are intended to minimize the impact
of the binges (i.e., to prevent weight gain). OBEs are defined as eating
more than most people would eat in a similar situation and in a discrete
period of time (e.g., 2 hours) and with a sense of loss of control over
eating (i.e., feeling unable to control what or how much food is
consumed). Assessing loss of control can be problematic as some
individuals have difficultly reporting on their experience, and many in
fact "plan" when they are going to binge eat. Episodes in which loss of
control is endorsed but where normal or even small portions are reported
are labeled subjective binge episodes (SBEs); these are common but do
not count toward the frequency criterion required for diagnosis. The
clinical guideline for determining large amounts is a portion at least 3
times the typical portion size for that food. The caloric value reported
by Bartholome, Raymond, Lee, Peterson, and Warren (2006) for an
objective binge episode averaged 1,900 calories and for a subjective
binge episode about 700 calories. The OBEs and compensatory behaviors
may be closely linked in time, forming a distinct binge/purge episode
that is easily identifiable, but that is not necessarily the case. OBEs
and compensatory behaviors are required to occur at least once per week
for 3 months for a diagnosis of BN; these criteria represent a decrease
from those in the DSM-IV (twice per week for 6 months), allowing less
severe and more recent onset cases to be diagnosed. Individuals who do
not meet the weight criterion for AN but who purge only after SBEs or
solely as a deliberate weight control strategy are diagnosed with

474

Eating Disorders

purging disorder (which is in the OSFED category). This pattern is
clinically significant as it may persist over considerable periods of
time or may serve as a pathway to either AN or BN. Clearly identifiable
binge/purge episodes typically occur when the individual is alone, and
evenings are especially high-risk times (Deaver, Miltenberger, Smyth,
Meidinger, & Crosby, 2003; Stein et al., 2007). The behaviors are quite
secretive and are usually associated with high levels of shame and
embarrassment. Individuals with BN typically restrict their food intake,
often severely, between binge/purge episodes. Many individuals binge
primarily on the foods they otherwise restrict (e.g., high-fat,
high-calorie foods such as pastries or ice cream), whereas others binge
on whatever is available or eat large quantities of healthy foods.
Individuals with BN frequently skip meals in an attempt to limit total
intake and many feel at risk for bingeing or overeating whenever they do
eat. Both type and amount of food may be severely limited by a set of
rigid rules (e.g., no fat, no processed foods, no meat, no food after
dinner or eating only at specified times). The most typical BN pattern
is little or no breakfast or lunch, with intake postponed to as late as
possible in the day. Early in the course of the disorder, binges are
often unplanned (normal eating turns into overeating and then bingeing
and purging). As the pattern crystallizes, it becomes more common that
individuals fight the urge to binge and purge. As they struggle to
resist urges, they become very vulnerable, particularly when they are
alone and have the opportunity to binge and purge. When the urge to
binge escalates, the person typically plans to binge/purge at a time
when he or she will not be detected. Some individuals then experience a
period of relief from their urges and can refrain for several days.
Common triggers for bingeing and purging include emotions (both positive
and negative), lapses in self-awareness, interpersonal stressors, the
presence of tempting food, feeling that a dieting rule has been broken,
body-image dissatisfaction, and skipping meals or getting extremely
hungry (Engelberg, Steiger, Gauvin, & Wonderlich, 2007; Kjelsås,
Børsting, & Gudde, 2004; Lavender et al., 2015; Vanderlinden, Grave,
Vandereycken, & Noorduin, 2001). Eating-disordered behaviors often serve
to distract individuals from unpleasant emotions, to comfort or soothe
individuals, to numb unpleasant emotions, or to provide a sense of
control. However, after bingeing and purging, individuals typically
report feeling intense guilt and shame. Although binge episodes are
intended to relieve negative mood, mood often worsens following them
(Hilbert & Tuschen-Caffier, 2007). In chronic cases, the binge/purge
pattern has become so well established it may feel more like a habit
than a conscious response to current distress, and for some, the
episodes are not particularly distressing. Many individuals maintain
some level of purging over long periods of time based on the maladaptive
belief that it is necessary to prevent weight gain. These individuals do
not typically present for treatment until there is a significant
worsening of binge and purge symptoms (Hepworth & Paxton, 2007; Mond et
al., 2009), some life event makes the behaviors more difficult to
maintain, or a significant other confronts them and provides the
motivation to change. Most individuals become very distressed whenever
they do decide to stop and realize they feel powerless to do so. Due to
the high levels of distress that accompany binge/purge symptoms, in
addition to intense fears that their compensatory strategies may be
failing, individuals with bulimia are more likely to seek treatment
voluntarily than are those with AN (Fairburn & Harrison, 2003; Klein &
Walsh, 2004; Polivy & Herman, 2002).

Diagnostic Criteria and Clinical Presentation

475

Individuals with BN are typically within the normal weight range (APA,
2013; Fairburn & Harrison, 2003), although many are at the higher end of
that range, which they consider to be overweight/fat. Regardless of
their actual weight, these individuals either want to be considerably
thinner or are convinced that they will gain weight if they stop their
compensatory behaviors. Thus, while individuals with BN are highly
motivated to stop binge eating and lose weight, most are ambivalent
about stopping or even moderating their compensatory behaviors
(especially exercise). When individuals first start purging, the
behavior is often associated with some weight loss, but its utility in
this regard is usually short-lived. It turns out that purging and
laxative abuse are both fairly ineffective weight control strategies as
substantial portions of calories are still retained by the body (Kaye,
Weltzin, Hsu, McConaha, & Bolton, 1993). The frequency of binge eating
typically escalates as motivation to eat moderately is undermined by
having options to compensate, and normal appetite regulation is
increasingly disrupted. Medical complications arise most often from the
purging behaviors---for example, self-induced vomiting and laxative
abuse (Guarda, Redgrave, & Dressler, 2012; Mehler, 2010)---especially at
high levels of use. In a moderately severe case, the frequency of
purging is limited to a few times a week, but in the most severe cases,
an individual may purge several times a day or purge after any food is
eaten. Extended episodes that include multiple periods of eating and
then purging are not uncommon. Individuals with BN may develop fluid or
electrolyte abnormalities (leading to potentially fatal arrhythmias),
esophageal complications, gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, renal system
problems, menstrual irregularities, and thyroid dysfunction (Mehler,
2010). Medical complications related to prolonged laxative abuse,
another common form of purging, include reflex constipation and the loss
of normal colonic function (cathartic colon syndrome; Mehler, 2010).
However, many individuals show few medical indicators for extended
periods of time. Russell's sign (scarring or calluses on the tops of the
hands from repeatedly inducing vomiting), dental problems (dental enamel
erosion, gum disease), and enlarged parotid glands (chipmunk-like
cheeks) are often the only obvious signs of chronic vomiting. It is
useful for dentists to ask about purging when atypical dental problems
are evident. Laboratory tests (for salivary amylase) can be used as an
indicator of inflammation of the parotid glands, and positive results
may mean the person is purging; but this test is not a specific
indicator, so it is not widely used. BN is very difficult to detect
early in the course of the disorder if a person is motivated to hide the
problem. Social difficulties related to atypical eating patterns, social
isolation, unexplained absences, secretive behavior, missing food (or
money), and excessive bathroom use are often the more observable signs
that a person's problems have reached clinically significant levels.
Decreased stomach motility can contribute to patients' complaints that
they feel very full after eating normal or small amounts of food (making
it more difficult to resist urges to purge). Some data suggest that
individuals with BN have blunted postprandial cholecystokinin (CCK)
release, which may contribute to their difficulty in feeling satisfied
with normal amounts of food (Hannon-Engel, 2011), although data are
mixed (Hannon-Engel, Filin, & Wolfe, 2013; Rigamonti et al., 2014).
Failure to consistently replicate blunted CCK response in individuals
with BN may be related to type of food consumed. For example, protein
may increase production of CCK, which may in turn contribute to
increased feelings of fullness after eating protein-rich foods (Potier,
Darcel, & Tomé, 2009).

476

Eating Disorders

Over time, some individuals identify certain methods of eating (or types
of foods) that make it easier to self-induce vomiting. Using those
strategies may escalate the frequency of both bingeing and purging. Some
individuals find they are able to induce vomiting simply by flexing
their stomach muscles. In contrast, others find that inducing vomiting
becomes more and more difficult over time. A few individuals resort to
using ipecac to induce vomiting, a method that is medically very
dangerous as it can cause irreversible damage to heart muscle tissue.
Individuals with diabetes are at particular risk for medical problems as
they may misuse their medication as a form of compensatory behavior.
Many women with BN seek treatment from a medical doctor for related
medical conditions and weight concerns before they seek psychological
treatment for the disorder (Crow & Peterson, 2003; Mitchell & Crow,
2006; Mond, Hay, Rodgers, & Owen, 2007). Some data suggest that
individuals with BN fail to seek treatment due to shame and
embarrassment in addition to stigma, reluctance to tell parents, lack of
financial resources, and failure to perceive BN as a treatable problem
(Evans et al., 2012).

Binge Eating Disorder (BED) Cultural norms have long supported a variety
of forms of overeating (even to the point of discomfort) as part of
celebrations of the harvest or other social events. The degree to which
"overeating" has always been considered normative complicates the
definition of binge eating. Psychology's adoption of the term binge
eating in the context of diagnosing a mental illness/disorder evolved
over time, and it requires endorsement of loss of control, which does
not entirely correspond to the term binge as it is used by the general
public. This requirement is more problematic to diagnose in BED than in
BN, where the presence of overtly problematic compensatory behaviors
easily distinguishes the pattern as pathological. Because eating large
amounts is normative, many individuals fail to identify the experience
of loss of control as a psychiatric problem or to seek treatment, even
though highly effective treatments for BED are available. Eating large
amounts is often viewed as a "problem" only when the person is also
overweight, and weight loss is often the only goal of individuals with
BED. However, interventions are only modestly effective for weight loss
even when binge eating is eliminated first, leaving most individuals
dissatisfied. When abstinence from binge eating fails to significantly
affect weight, motivation to maintain the normalized patterns can be
undermined; however, a return to dieting can increase vulnerability to
relapse of the binge eating. Stunkard, Grace, and Wolff (1955) may be
best credited with drawing modern-day researchers' attention to the
phenomenon of binge eating as distinct from either purging behaviors or
obesity. They first described a night-eating syndrome (NES), which they
conceptualized as a deficit within the satiety regulation system. These
patients did not report high levels of hunger during the day but ate a
lot at night (often waking up during the night to eat). They had extreme
difficulty in stopping eating as long as food was available but they did
not seem highly motivated to seek out food. This syndrome did not
receive significant attention until more recently, perhaps due to its
relatively low base rate, but it is now described as one option under
the OSFED category and is viewed as distinct from BED, although there
are many similarities. It has been particularly interesting from a
theoretical viewpoint to note that while BED responds well to a variety
of psychosocial interventions

Diagnostic Criteria and Clinical Presentation

477

designed to reduce dieting and moderate overconcern with weight, NES
responds better to antidepressant medication, suggesting it may have a
different etiology. A pattern of eating large amounts without
compensating became the focus of significant research attention in the
1980s and 1990s, as clinicians noted normal or overweight individuals
presenting for eating disorder treatment who were like individuals with
BN in terms of chaotic eating patterns and associated cognitive and
affective features but whose compensatory behaviors were not clearly
unhealthy. In addition, as behavior therapy (BT) for obesity became
broadly accepted as the most effective psychosocial treatment for weight
loss, clinicians noted the presence of BN-like features in some
participants. When present, those features were often associated with
poorer response to the straightforward BT obesity interventions that
focused on reducing intake (though not skipping meals) and were less
likely to address problematic cognitions and emotional eating. Criteria
for binge eating disorder were developed for the DSM-IV, and BED was
identified in that edition as a "condition requiring further study";
notably, overweight was not included as a criterion. Subsequent research
made it clear that BED was much more prevalent than initially thought
and was different from BN in some important ways. Thus, in DSM-5, BED
was elevated to the status of a distinct diagnosis. To be consistent
with the revised criteria for BN, the required frequency and length of
time was set at one binge episode per week for 3 months which was lower
than the original frequency of two binge episodes per week for 6 months
established in DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000). With this change, more individuals
will meet criteria for BED; the fact that binge eating is a risk factor
for obesity (which has serious health consequences and is quite
resistant to treatment) supports the decision to identify and treat BED
as early as possible. As noted earlier, the cognitive model originally
developed by Fairburn for BN evolved into a transdiagnostic model which
applies to BED; this is now perhaps the most widely accepted formulation
of BED. This model clearly identifies binge eating as a response to
periods of restricting or dieting, even when total intake is not
abnormally low and even when significant weight is not lost. However, it
is notable that a significant minority of those with BED report that
binge eating developed before any efforts to diet (Haiman & Devlin,
1999; Marcus, Moulton, & Greeno, 1995). However initiated, binge eating
can lead to weight gain, and worry about overweight status (or the
possibility of weight gain) may well initiate dieting, which could then
exacerbate binge eating. Craighead (Allen & Craighead, 1999; Craighead &
Allen, 1995) proposed that a history of chronic overeating leads to
decreased awareness and responsivity to natural satiety cues, which
increases vulnerability to eating in response to cues other than hunger
(including emotions and food stimuli) as well as failing to stop until
food is gone or one becomes very uncomfortable. This pathway is one
explanation of how binge eating (or obesity) might develop before
efforts to diet. Other models of maladaptive eating(Leehr et al., 2015;
Munsch, Meyer, Quartier, & Wilhelm, 2012) heavily emphasize the role of
eating as a way to regulate emotions, noting that individuals may use
either restriction (i.e., not eating) or overeating as ways to cope with
intense negative emotions. As individuals come to rely more heavily on
eating as a form of emotion regulation, nonpathological eating may
escalate to overeating and ultimately to binge eating. Many individuals
do in fact endorse binge eating as a way to "numb out," providing
anecdotal support for this hypothesis. Regardless of how binge eating
starts, it seems likely that it is the overconcern with weight and

478

Eating Disorders

its control that distinguishes the trajectory to BED from the less
pathological trajectory in which overeating may lead to weight gain
(which may be distressing or impair health) but not to the development
of BED. Criteria for the diagnosis of BED require objective binge
episodes (once per week for the past 3 months) and specify that
individuals cannot meet the BN criteria for compensatory behaviors, even
though they may well diet and exercise to some degree. For a diagnosis
of BED, the OBEs must be characterized by three of the following five
descriptors: eating more rapidly than normal; eating until uncomfortably
full; eating large amounts when not hungry; eating alone due to
embarrassment; and feeling disgusted, depressed, or very guilty after
overeating. These descriptors have been added to help distinguish the
problematic eating pattern of BED from the less pathological overeating
that is problematic primarily because it contributes to obesity. While
the binge behavior must be reported as distressing, the BED criteria do
not require the display of overconcern with weight/shape that is a
requirement for BN. There are some data to suggest that the presence of
overconcern with weight/shape in BED may be associated with more severe
pathology and poorer long-term outcome (Grilo, Masheb, & White, 2010;
Grilo, White, Gueorguieva, Wilson, & Masheb, 2013). Some individuals do
not meet full criteria for BED in spite of a significant diet history
and distress about weight because they no longer endorse loss of
control; these individuals have been described as "burnt out dieters."
In the current system, these individuals could be diagnosed as
subclinical BED (under the OSFED category). In clinical presentation,
the majority of individuals with BED are overweight (with approximately
half reaching the level designated as obese), and these individuals
often have appropriate concerns about their weight related to actual
medical problems or the potential for such problems. Individuals with
BED are typically more invested in the goal of weight loss than in
achieving abstinence from binge eating, so any individuals with BED have
difficulty accepting the normalized eating strategies needed to reduce
binge eating and accepting binge abstinence with no or modest weight
loss as a positive outcome of treatment. Those with BED give a variety
of reasons for their lack of progression to the inappropriate
compensatory behaviors characteristic of BN. These reasons include
social and health concerns, inability to fast or to self-induce
vomiting, and aversion to vomiting and/or exercise. Individuals with BED
who are in the normal weight range present differently from overweight
or obese individuals with BED and in many ways seem more similar to
those with BN in terms of cognitions, fears of weight gain, and
unrealistically low ideal weights (Goldschmidt et al., 2011). These
individuals often cross over between BN and BED, as illustrated in the
case example below. Since overweight status poses special challenges for
treatment, some studies limit the treatment sample to those designated
as overweight BED. Some research compares obese BED samples to samples
labeled as having "nonbingeing obesity" to investigate differences
between these groups that may be relevant to understanding the pathology
and treatment of BED. Individuals presenting for the treatment of BED
may report a fairly clear onset of binge eating, typically triggered by
significant life stressors; however, binge eating is more commonly a
long-term pattern that includes episodes of overeating not marked by
loss of control. The pattern often has no clear onset, waxes and wanes
in relation to situational factors, and has usually been problematic for
many years as individuals have struggled to manage their weight before
they seek treatment for help with weight loss.

Diagnostic Criteria and Clinical Presentation

479

These individuals may be best characterized as chronic, excessively
concerned, distressed, and unsuccessful dieters. They report less
restrictive eating between binge episodes than those with BN, so they
typically have less clearly delineated episodes of binge eating. Binges
may be difficult to distinguish from overeating, especially when a
"grazing" pattern is present (i.e., when an individual snacks over an
extended period of time, such as all afternoon or evening, yet the
overall amount consumed is objectively large and the person endorses
loss of control). Currently, some approaches to treatment suggest
labeling binges loosely as small, medium, or large, because reducing the
size of binges is often a more useful or acceptable initial goal than
abstinence from binge eating. Urgent medical problems associated with
binge eating are relatively uncommon but individuals may report
significant GI distress. However, individuals with BED are at risk for
the development of obesity and its complications (e.g., metabolic
syndrome) (Mitchell, 2015). The risk for metabolic complications in
obese men with BED appears to be higher than for obese females with the
disorder (Udo et al., 2014).

Case Example: Bulimia Nervosa and Binge Eating Disorder Anne, a
20-year-old Caucasian woman, is a junior in college majoring in exercise
physiology. She is an only child who lives at home while attending a
large state university. Anne reports she has always worried about her
weight and has felt "large," particularly in relation to her slightly
thin mother who eats junk food and does not exercise. Anne was not
objectively overweight as a child, but she was always muscular and on
the high side of normal weight. She does not remember exactly when she
started feeling loss of control with eating, but she started purging as
part of her efforts to lose weight around seventh grade. At that point
she would have met criteria for BN, but she was never assessed or
treated. Anne told her mother about purging when she was in high school,
but her mother just told her to stop and threatened severe consequences
if she did not, including removing access to her car. Anne stopped
purging for about a year but continued to binge at least once a week; at
some point during that year she would have met criteria for BED. She
gradually gained weight and reached her highest-ever weight, which was
unacceptable to her. At that point, Anne decided to focus on being
healthy and became involved in intensive competitive fitness training at
a local gym. Her trainer did not want her to count calories or to lose
weight but prescribed a high-protein training diet. Anne followed these
guidelines rigidly and started to purge whenever she ate something
off-limits. Initially, she lost 35 pounds, but she never went below a
BMI of 19 and so never met criteria for AN. She was not able to maintain
her lowest weight as her binge eating and purging escalated. Anne has
been stable for the past year at a BMI of 24 but has very low body fat
due to her intensive exercise. She says she is fairly satisfied with her
current weight and shape but also says her ideal weight would be 30
pounds thinner. She dresses attractively and has a supportive, long-term
romantic relationship. Anne reports thinking about eating, weight, and
shape about 80% of the day, and says these thoughts are highly
distressing, are difficult to stop, and interfere with concentration.
Despite the fact that she eats mostly healthy foods, whenever she does
eat anything she considers unhealthy or eats too much, which occurs
about four times a week, she feels compelled to purge, as she is
unwilling to gain any weight. Anne finds it easy to purge by simply
tensing her stomach. She cannot tolerate the feeling of a very full
stomach, so if she is eating out, she will often leave the

480

Eating Disorders

table to go purge in the middle of the meal and then go back and eat the
rest of her meal. Episodes that most clearly meet criteria for OBEs
typically occur when she is alone at home with access to food. She then
typically purges multiple times in a single episode. Anne has not told
anyone about her purging over the past few years and came to treatment
only after her boyfriend confronted her in a supportive way. After
trying unsuccessfully to stop on her own for 6 weeks, she sought
treatment. She states she is not willing to stop her training, even
though it requires a few weeks of very restricted intake, called
"cutting," prior to the periodic competitions. She believes she can stop
purging while maintaining her planned career as a trainer. She is very
embarrassed by the fact that she is responsible for training other
people in healthy eating and exercise habits yet isn't able to do this
herself. She really wants to be a responsible and healthy role model.

Epidemiology In addition to differences in clinical presentation, the
three EDs also differ in prevalence, course, and patterns of
comorbidity. This section is designed to provide clinicians with basic
information on the epidemiology of eating disorders.

Prevalence Prior to the publication of the DSM-5, there was concern that
prevalence rates of eating disorders would rise substantially with the
relative loosening of the diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa and
bulimia nervosa and the formal recognition of binge eating disorder.
However, the limited data available at present demonstrate that while
prevalence rates have risen slightly from DSM-IV-TR AN and BN (as was
intended, in order to reclassify individuals with subthreshold
versions), the increases have not been as dramatic as feared. The data
available suggest that the prevalence of AN using DSM-5 criteria is
comparable to or slightly higher than previous estimates using DSM-IV-TR
criteria. Most estimates for point prevalence of AN are under 1% of the
population, while rates of atypical AN (i.e., AN with a significant
weight loss but not to the point of being underweight) are around 2.8%
(Stice et al., 2013). Prevalence estimates vary depending on the
population studied (i.e., community versus clinical samples). In their
sample of U.S. adolescent girls, Stice and colleagues (2013) found the
lifetime prevalence of AN to be 0.8%; similarly, in a large population
study of Australians, Hay and colleagues (Hay, Girosi, & Mond, 2015)
found the point prevalence of AN to be 0.8%. The prevalence of AN among
high-risk adolescents (i.e., those who already demonstrate some atypical
eating behaviors or elevated concern with weight/shape/eating) appears
to be higher, with a point prevalence of 1.2% and a lifetime prevalence
of 1.7% (Smink, van Hoeken, Oldehinkel, & Hoek, 2014). Approximately 5%
to 10% of patients with AN are male, although the true incidence in
males may be higher as males are less likely to come to clinical
attention and may present with different symptom profiles
(Striegel-Moore et al., 2009). Prevalence estimates for BN using DSM-5
criteria are slightly higher than those using DSM-IV-TR criteria (Trace
et al., 2011). Several recent studies estimate the lifetime prevalence
of BN to be around 0.6% to 2.6% of females (Hay et al., 2015; Stice et
al., 2013), with lower rates in males. As with AN, the prevalence of
subthreshold BN across both

Epidemiology

481

genders is higher, with a lifetime prevalence of 4.4%, and the
prevalence of any binge eating symptoms is higher still, around 5.7%
(Hudson, Hiripi, Pope Harrison, & Kessler, 2007). Women in late
adolescence or early adulthood (ages 18--24) continue to be at the
highest risk for onset of BN (APA, 2013; Currin, Schmidt, Treasure, &
Jick, 2005; Hudson et al., 2007). Prevalence rates for BED are higher
than those for AN and BN. In community samples of adolescents and
adults, prevalence rates for BED using DSM-5 criteria are around 2% to
5% (Hay et al., 2015; Smink et al., 2014; Stice et al., 2013). These
estimates are only slightly higher than those using DSM-IV-TR criteria
(Hudson, Coit, Lalonde, & Pope Harrison, 2010; Trace et al., 2011). The
prevalence of BED among individuals seeking weight-loss interventions is
substantially higher (≈30%) (Marek, Ben-Porath, Ashton, & Heinberg,
2014; Vinai et al., 2015). Prevalence in other countries may be slightly
lower (Kessler et al., 2013; Smink, van Hoeken, & Hoek, 2012). The
majority of patients with BED presenting for treatment are women.
However, in community samples the rates of BED are more similar for
males and females (55--65% female, 45--35% male) (Hay et al., 2015;
Marek et al., 2014; Vinai et al., 2015), and additional data suggest
that unlike in AN and BN, clinical presentations are overwhelmingly
similar in males and females with BED (Udo et al., 2014). This
discrepancy in the gender breakdown of BN versus BED provides some
support for the hypothesis that binge eating (eating large amounts) may
be associated with certain biological vulnerabilities, whereas patterns
involving compensatory behaviors may be more culture-bound. Although
eating disorders were initially thought to be more prevalent among white
females from higher-income families, current data suggest that eating
disorders are prevalent across ethnicities and socioeconomic groups.
Internationally, rates of eating disorders and the public health burden
of these disorders have increased substantially in recent years,
particularly among cultures "in transition" toward more Westernized
standards of living (Pike, Dunne, & Addai, 2013). Furthermore, within
the United States, increasing attention is being paid to the occurrence
of eating pathology and disorders in racial and ethnic minority groups
and among immigrants. Data suggest that eating disorders (and in
particular those that involve binge eating) are not uncommon among
racial and ethnic minorities, although minority individuals are
significantly less likely to present for treatment (Jennings,
Kelly-Weeder, & Wolfe, 2015; Marques et al., 2010; Pike et al., 2013).
Together, these data challenge popular notions of eating disorders as
culturally limited disorders and highlight the need for culturally
sensitive treatments.

Course Eating disorders often start with dieting or exercising to lose
just a little weight during early adolescence (Rohde, Stice, & Marti,
2015). Age of onset varies across the three disorders, but the typical
onset is late adolescence or early adulthood. Diagnostic crossover is
also extremely common (Stice et al., 2013) and becomes even more so when
the course of illness is extended. The peak age of onset of anorexia
nervosa in females appears to be bimodal, at 14 and 18 years of age, but
onset of the disorder is increasingly seen in individuals as young as 7
years old and also among older adults into middle age (Pike et al.,
2013). It is notable that most adolescents developing AN do not (at
least initially) eat objectively large amounts and many fewer purge
(Peebles, Wilson, & Lock, 2006),

482

Eating Disorders

though if they remain ill for several years, the likelihood of adopting
those behaviors increases (Eddy et al., 2008). Among those diagnosed
with AN, relapse rates are high and vary with age of onset and BMI:
prognosis is better in younger individuals and in those with higher
BMIs, highlighting the need for early intervention (Ackard, Richter,
Egan, & Cronemeyer, 2014; Franko et al., 2013; Treasure & Russell,
2011). Rapid response to treatment (i.e., weight gain early in
treatment) is a powerful predictor of treatment outcome, particularly
among adolescents (Doyle, Le Grange, Loeb, Doyle, & Crosby, 2010; Le
Grange, Accurso, Lock, Agras, & Bryson, 2014). Prognosis worsens with
duration of illness (Franko et al., 2013; Von Holle et al., 2008); the
disorder assumes a chronic course in approximately one third of affected
individuals (Fichter, Quadflieg, & Hedlund, 2006). It is perhaps because
of the propensity to develop a chronic and unrelenting course, that AN
in particular is associated with some of the highest mortality rates of
any psychiatric illness (Arcelus, Mitchell, Wales, & Nielsen, 2011;
Smink et al., 2012). For bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder, the
typical age at which individuals meet full criteria or present for
treatment is somewhat later, in late adolescence or early adulthood
(APA, 2013; Hudson et al., 2007). However, the age of onset of objective
binge eating varies widely and is often quite young (e.g., "I can't even
remember when I didn't binge"). Furthermore, data from longitudinal
studies suggest that, once started, binge eating can persist well into
adulthood (Neumark-Sztainer, Wall, Larson, Eisenberg, & Loth, 2011).
Studies suggest that as many as one third of individuals with BN are not
detected by health care professionals (Keski-Rahkonen et al., 2009), and
an even smaller minority of affected individuals---only about
6%---receive mental health treatment (Hoek, 2006). When treatment is
sought, the average length of illness at presentation is about 5 years
(Mitchell, Hatsukami, Eckert, & Pyle, 1985). In community samples,
approximately 15% to 20% of those with BN reported an earlier episode of
AN (Favaro, Ferrara, & Santonastaso, 2003), whereas in clinical samples,
the percentage of those with past AN increases to around one third (Eddy
et al., 2007). Herzog et al. (1999) found that over a 7-year period, 16%
of women with restricting AN developed BN, but only 7% of women with BN
developed AN---providing some support for the argument that while
restricting AN may have a chronic course, it can be an early phase that
evolves to include binge eating or compensatory behaviors or there is
crossover to BN or BED as individuals become weight restored. Prior
history of AN among individuals with BN is associated with poorer
long-term outcome and higher risk of relapse (Eddy et al., 2007;
Keski-Rahkonen et al., 2009). A personal or family history of obesity
prior to any eating disorder is also important information as some data
suggest it is associated with adverse outcomes such as increased latency
to seek treatment (e.g., Lebow, Sim, & Kransdorf, 2014), which may occur
because experience with obesity tends to reify maladaptive beliefs about
eating and weight and to reduce motivation to normalize eating
behaviors. Once established, both BN and BED may show a chronic course;
it may comprise a number of discrete periods of illness, often initiated
by life transitions or stressors (APA, 2013). Approximately one half of
individuals with bulimia will achieve recovery, whether or not their
illness has been detected (Keski-Rahkonen et al., 2009). However, about
one third will continue to be chronically symptomatic (Keel & Brown,
2010; Keski-Rahkonen et al., 2009; Steinhausen & Weber, 2009). Even
among those who fully recover from BN, relapse rates are high;
approximately one third relapse during follow-up periods (Herzog et al.,
1999; Keel, Mitchell, Miller, Davis, & Crow, 1999). Characteristics

Epidemiology

483

associated with poor prognosis include increased duration of illness,
higher frequency of purging behaviors, and greater weight suppression
(Keel & Heatherton, 2010; Steinhausen & Weber, 2009). Across all EDs,
early response to treatment is the best predictor of positive long-term
outcome, as demonstrated in a recent review and meta-analysis (Vall &
Wade, 2015).

Comorbidity Eating disorders are frequently comorbid with several other
forms of psychopathology, including mood, anxiety, substance use, and
personality disorders (Hudson et al., 2007). Mood disorders, especially
major depression and dysthymia, are common among those with EDs, with
estimates ranging from 36% to 80% (Halfon et al., 2015; Hudson et al.,
2007; Swanson, 2011). Comorbid anxiety disorders are also extremely
prevalent, with estimates ranging between 65% and 75% (Gadalla & Piran,
2008; Swinbourne et al., 2012), and in many cases, the anxiety disorders
predate the onset of eating pathology (Swinbourne et al., 2012).
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and social phobia are two of the
most common comorbid anxiety disorders (Kaye, Bulik, Thornton,
Barbarich, & Masters, 2004; Swinbourne et al., 2012). Comorbid substance
use disorders are also common, particularly among individuals who binge
eat and purge (Fouladi et al., 2015; Grilo, White, & Masheb, 2009).
Despite similarities in patterns of comorbidity across AN, BN, and BED,
there are some critical distinctions. For instance, posttraumatic stress
disorder appears to be the only anxiety disorder that occurs
significantly more often in BN and BED than in AN (Kaye et al., 2004;
Mitchell, Mazzeo, Schlesinger, Brewerton, & Smith, 2011). Additionally,
depression is less likely to predate the onset of AN than that of BN,
suggesting that depressive symptomatology in AN may likely be a product
of the state of starvation (O'Brien & Vincent, 2003), whereas depression
may be a risk factor for BN (Stice, Burton, & Shaw, 2004) and perhaps
BED. There are also some data to suggest that the relationship between
duration of illness and comorbidity may vary across the eating
disorders: some recent data suggest that the frequency of comorbid
conditions in AN may increase with duration of illness (Bühren et al.,
2014). It is worth noting that symptoms of certain comorbid conditions
that start after the onset of an eating disorder (i.e., depression and
OCD) sometimes resolve with improved nutrition, although some residual
symptoms may remain (Mattar, Thiébaud, Huas, Cebula, & Godart, 2012).
However, in follow-up studies a significant minority of patients
continue to have anxiety and depressive disorders even after recovery
from the acute symptoms of the eating disorder (Lock, Couturier, &
Agras, 2006; Steinhausen, 2002). Personality disorders are also
frequently comorbid with eating disorders, with estimates ranging from
27% to 93% (Cassin & von Ranson, 2005). However, personality pathology
among individuals with active eating disorders may be at least in part a
sequela of eating pathology (Rø, Martinsen, Hoffart, Sexton, &
Rosenvinge, 2005), a hypothesis supported by prospective data
demonstrating that personality disorder pathology reduces with
resolution of eating pathology (Rø et al., 2005; Vrabel, Rø, Martinsen,
Hoffart, & Rosenvinge, 2009). Variations in personality disorder
comorbidity across the eating disorders have been widely replicated and
support the notion that there may be distinct personality profiles for
individuals with different eating disorder symptoms and diagnoses

484

Eating Disorders

(Thompson-Brenner & Westen, 2005; Turner et al., 2014; Westen &
Harnden-Fischer, 2001). Individuals with purely restricting behaviors
are generally described as more constricted and overcontrolled and they
have higher rates of avoidant, dependent, and obsessive compulsive
personality disorder, whereas individuals with bingeing and/or purging
behaviors are more often described as impulsive and affectively
dysregulated and they have higher rates of borderline personality
disorder (Cassin & von Ranson, 2005).

Neurobiology The study of the neurobiology of eating disorders is an
emerging area with the potential to improve our understanding of the
biological underpinnings of eating behavior. Current avenues of
exploration include the investigation of neurotransmitters and the use
of neuroimaging techniques to examine certain structural and functional
aspects of the brain as possible contributors to eating disorders.
Serotonin has been the most popular neurotransmitter targeted for
investigation so far, as 5-HT systems are involved in mood and
obsessiveness, appetite regulation, and impulse control. Patients with
AN have been found to have low levels of 5-HT metabolites in the
cerebrospinal fluid and abnormal hormonal response to 5-HT specific
challenges. However, specific abnormalities in the serotonin system have
not been identified. Interest is developing in the dopaminergic
neurotransmitter system. Preference for and overconsumption of palatable
food has been conceptualized as reward-seeking behavior that might share
neurobiological pathways with other reward-based disorders (e.g.,
substance use disorders; Berridge, 2009). Data thus far suggest
overactivity in opioid systems (Nathan & Bullmore, 2009; Nathan et al.,
2012; Stice, Spoor, Bohon, Veldhuizen, & Small, 2008; Stice, Spoor, Ng,
& Zald, 2009) and dopaminergic systems (Gearhardt et al., 2011;
Schienle, Schafer, Hermann, & Vaitl, 2009; Stice, Yokum, Burger,
Epstein, & Small, 2011; Wang et al., 2011) is present that is similar to
what is observed in individuals with substance use disorders.
Nonetheless, research showing underactivity of dopaminergic pathways in
acute BN and BED (Bello & Hajnal, 2010; Bohon, Stice, & Spoor, 2009)
highlights the need to consider stage of illness. It has been proposed
that an overly responsive reward system increases initial risk for binge
eating, but once binge eating develops, chronic overconsumption of
palatable food results in down-regulation and hyposensitivity of the
system, such that more reward is needed to achieve the same effect
(Berridge, 2009). Clearly, additional animal studies and longitudinal
work are needed to disambiguate initial risk from maintenance factors.
Interestingly, hypersensitivity of the dopaminergic system has also been
suggested as an explanation for the extreme reactions of patients with
AN to novel stimuli (Kaye, Strober, & Jimerson, 2008). Recent studies
support the notion that there is a neural basis for eating disorders
(Trummer, Eustacchio, Unger, Tillich, & Flaschka, 2002; Uher et al.,
2004; Ward, Tiller, Treasure, & Russell, 2000). There is a fairly
substantial brain imaging literature for AN---including
positron-emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) studies---that shows regional differences in
metabolism and neurotransmitter (usually receptor) alterations, and
there are also fMRI studies demonstrating differences in activation
response to stimuli (usually food). However, these studies have been
done only on adults and are generally small scale and variable in

Risk Factors

485

terms of patient subtypes, state of illness, and regional neuroanatomy
examined (Frank et al., 2002; Kaye, Grendall, & Strober, 1998; Kaye,
Strober, & Jimerson, 2008; Uher et al., 2004). Neuroimaging generally
reveals decreased brain mass and enlarged sulci in patients in the acute
malnourished phase of the disorder. This is thought to be either the
direct effect of malnutrition or the effect of increased cortisol on
brain tissue, and it seems in most (but not all) studies to resolve with
weight restoration, as found in a recent review (Frank, 2015). SPECT
studies have shown unilateral hypoperfusion (or inadequate blood supply)
in specific areas of the brain in most patients with AN---most commonly
in the temporal lobe---that seems to persist after recovery. Rastram,
Bjure, and Vestergren (2001) found decreased blood flow to the temporal
lobe in 14 of 21 patients 7 years after recovery, with no correlation
between blood flow and BMI or IQ. Chowdhury, Gordon, and Lask (2003)
found unilateral hypoperfusion correlated with eating disorder
psychopathology and not with BMI. Lask (2006) found decreased temporal
blood flow to correlate with eating disorder psychopathology and
impaired executive functioning, and no correlation between blood flow
and BMI, mood, or length of illness. On the 3-year follow-up, this
investigator found that persistent hypoperfusion in 86% of the sample
was associated with persistent eating disorder psychopathology and
persistent cognitive impairment (visuospatial processing and memory, and
cognitive inhibition) (Lask, 2006). Lask hypothesized that this
unilateral hypoperfusion represented a preexisting deficit--- likely
either genetic or due to perinatal insult---that predisposed patients to
develop AN. A study comparing adolescents with restrictive AN, AN
binge/purge subtype adolescents and adolescents with BN, and normally
developing adolescents found evidence of differences in activation
during a test of behavioral inhibition (the go/no-go task) (Lock,
Garrett, Beenhakker, & Reiss, 2011). Adolescents with BN displayed
increased activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior
cingulate gyrus compared to adolescents with AN and normally developing
adolescents without an eating disorder. These data provide evidence of a
neural basis located in the frontostriatal circuit that is
differentiated by disorder type (Marsh, Maia, & Peterson, 2009).
Further, data supportive of a variety of neurocognitive alterations in
AN and BN patients are increasing (Godley, Tchanturia, MacLeod, &
Schmidt, 2001; Tchanturia, Brecelj, et al., 2004; Tchanturia, Morris, et
al., 2004; Tchanturia, Morris, Surguladze, & Treasure, 2002; Tchanturia,
Serpell, Troop, & Treasure, 2001). These include problems with
attention, executive functioning, divided attention, working memory,
response inhibition, and mental inflexibility. These variables, among
others, are likely not only to play a role in the etiology and
maintenance of ED symptoms but also to have an impact on treatment
response. Attention problems can make it difficult to participate in
most psychological treatments. Problems with working memory are likely
to inhibit insight-oriented therapies and cognitive therapies, and
mental inflexibility may increase resistance to new ideas and behaviors
proposed across a variety of treatments.

Risk Factors At this point, the exact cause (or causes) of eating
disorders is unknown. However, a large body of research suggests various
risk factors associated with the development and maintenance of eating
pathology. This literature is briefly summarized here.

486

Eating Disorders

Body Dissatisfaction Body dissatisfaction is a consistent and robust
risk factor for eating pathology, as well as a maintenance factor
(Bakalar et al., 2015; Lilenfeld, Wonderlich, Riso, Crosby, & Mitchell,
2006; Stice, 2002). One recent prospective study found that among
adolescent girls, low self-esteem and increased BMI were significant
predictors of increased body dissatisfaction over a 1-year period
(Wojtowicz & von Ranson, 2012). In addition to its direct impact on
eating pathology, body dissatisfaction can lead to dieting and negative
affect, which can in turn further exacerbate eating disorder symptoms
(Stice, 2002; Stice & Shaw, 2002). It is also hypothesized that other
causal factors affect eating pathology through body dissatisfaction
(Polivy & Herman, 2002). For example, increased sociocultural pressure
to be thin and elevated thin ideal internalization lead to increases in
body dissatisfaction (Stice, 2002), which in turn directly increases
eating pathology. Recent data suggest that it is through the mediating
effects of body surveillance---the tendency to constantly evaluate one's
shape and compare it to others' or to one's ideal---that internalization
of the thin ideal leads to body dissatisfaction and may increase the
risk of disordered eating behavior (Fitzsimmons-Craft et al., 2012).

Dieting Elevated dieting and dietary restraint prospectively predict the
onset of disordered eating symptoms, including binge eating, level of
bulimic pathology, and negative affect (Bakalar et al., 2015; Jacobi,
Hayward, de Zwaan, Kraemer, & Agras, 2004; Stice, 2002; Stice, Presnell,
& Spangler, 2002). In addition, self-reported dieting is a maintenance
factor for bulimic pathology (Stice, 2002), in that binge eating arises
in response to rigid, stringent efforts at dietary control (Fairburn et
al., 2003). Evidence suggests that dieting may result, in part, from
body dissatisfaction (Polivy & Herman, 2002; Stice, 2002), so that it
serves as an attempt to fix the weight and body problem. The most
comprehensive meta-analysis of risk factors for eating disorders
demonstrates that successful caloric deprivation (dieting) does not lead
to increased eating disorder symptoms (Stice, 2002), suggesting that
unsuccessful dieting or struggles with dieting may be more problematic
than the actual restriction per se.

Interoceptive Awareness Interoceptive awareness refers to the ability to
identify internal sensations, including both physiological and emotional
states. Women with eating disorders report poor interoceptive awareness
(Jacobi et al., 2004), and this inability to identify internal
sensations prospectively predicts onset of eating disorder symptoms
(Killen et al., 1996; Leon, Fulkerson, Perry, & Early-Zald, 1995). Some
research suggests that even after recovery these women continue to
struggle with identifying their internal states (Lilenfeld et al.,
2006). However, specific intervention to train appetite awareness has
been shown to improve awareness of internal hunger and satiety cues
(Allen & Craighead, 1999; Craighead & Allen, 1995).

Risk Factors

487

Weight Individuals with higher premorbid body mass were found to be at
increased risk for perceived pressure to be thin, body dissatisfaction,
and dieting, although higher initial body mass did not predict either
negative affect or eating pathology (Stice, 2002). Thus, it seems that
body weight influences other risk factors for eating pathology, rather
than being a direct risk factor itself. It is of note that in a 10-year
longitudinal study of adolescents, the use of unhealthy weight control
behaviors was predictive of an increase in BMI (Neumark-Sztainer et al.,
2012), which may perpetuate dieting and disordered eating. Additional
research is needed to more clearly establish the mechanisms by which
premorbid weight contributes to later risk for eating disorders,
particularly among individuals with BED, where being overweight often
occurs early in life and precedes the initiation of any dieting efforts.

Sociocultural Pressure to Be Thin With the obvious deluge of images of
overly thin women in the mass media, one misperception is that eating
disorders are largely due to misguided efforts (i.e., excessive dieting)
to attain our culture's thin ideal. As noted above, it has been
difficult to establish the degree to which dieting is a direct risk
factor. Similarly, efforts to document a clear causal relationship
between the level of media exposure and eating disorders have not shown
consistent, strong effects. Rather, research suggests that the
transmission of the thin ideal may be occurring more indirectly, given
data that individuals who immigrate to a Western culture and those
living in relatively more urban than rural areas are at increased risk
for eating disorders (Becker, Keel, Anderson-Fye, & Thomas, 2004). Two
points are worth noting here. First, individuals clearly differ in the
extent to which they personally adopt the predominant culture's thin
ideal. The degree of internalization of the thin ideal and the degree to
which a person personally feels pressured by others to be thin appear to
be more closely associated with the development of other risk factors
(i.e., body dissatisfaction) and eating pathology than simply with
degree of media exposure (Bakalar et al., 2015; Culbert, Racine, &
Klump, 2015; Keel & Forney, 2013; Stice et al., 2002). Furthermore,
while media exposure appears to increase the risk of body
dissatisfaction and subsequent dieting as well as binge eating,
particularly among individuals already at increased risk for disordered
eating (Hausenblas et al., 2013), media exposure appears to play less of
a role in maintaining already established eating disorder symptoms
(Stice, 2002).

Family The family may serve as one of the important ways that the thin
ideal is transmitted and internalized. The attitudes and behaviors of
family members and peers, including feeding patterns, critical comments,
weight-related teasing, and modeling of restrictive eating or other
disordered eating behaviors, are powerful influences on the development
of disordered eating (Bakalar et al., 2015; Kluck, 2008, 2010), more so
than media exposure. It is also useful to note that parental obesity is
a risk factor for eating disorders, and in

488

Eating Disorders

particular binge eating disorder (Hilbert et al., 2014). While this
could be a result of shared genetic vulnerability to obesity (or
impulsivity), it may also reflect more subtle environmental influences.
Individuals with overweight family members are more likely to have been
exposed to negative societal attitudes toward obesity and thus may
impose pressure to exercise or diet on themselves. Similarly, parents
who are overweight or concerned about weight or eating may exert
excessive and unhelpful pressure on children to be thin in order to
prevent them from developing weight problems. Beyond transmitting the
pressure of the thin ideal, family environment may also play a role by
failing to teach adaptive eating behavior or coping skills to build
self-esteem (which in turn could reduce risk for EDs). Families of
individuals with eating disorders have been described as more chaotic,
conflicted, and critical, and as lower in positive expressiveness,
cohesion, and caring than other families (Stern et al., 1989). A
negative family environment could increase anxiety and depression, which
are in turn associated with the later development of eating disorders.

Childhood Abuse Physical abuse and sexual abuse have been hypothesized
to be significant risk factors for disordered eating. However, evidence
suggests that childhood abuse---while common among individuals who go on
to develop eating disorders (Hilbert et al., 2014)---is a risk factor
for general psychopathology as opposed to a risk factor specific to
eating disorders (Hund & Espelage, 2005; Katerndahl, Burge, & Kellogg,
2005).

Genetic Risk Factors Twin studies have convincingly shown that genetic
factors account for 50% or more of the variance in AN, BN, and BED in
adulthood (Bulik et al., 2007; Bulik, Sullivan, Wade, & Kendler, 2000;
Klump & Culbert, 2007; Suisman & Klump, 2011). With few exceptions,
moderate-to-large heritabilities have been observed across the spectrum
of threshold and subthreshold cases, and extend even to specific eating
disorder symptoms. These results suggest that eating disorders exhibit
heritabilities that are on a par with other illnesses considered to be
biologically based. An interesting developmental pattern of genetic
effects has emerged, however. Developmental twin studies show that in
females, overall levels of eating disorder symptoms exhibit no genetic
influences before puberty, but significant genetic effects are observed
from mid-puberty on (Klump, 2013). The magnitude of genetic effects
remains stable after puberty into middle adulthood (Klump, Burt, McGue,
Iacono, & Wade, 2010; Klump & Culbert, 2007), suggesting that all of the
genetic risk becomes activated during puberty. However, in contrast to
these findings in girls, results for male twins show no changes in
genetic effects across pre- to early puberty, mid- to late puberty, or
young adulthood. The heritability remains constant at approximately 50%
in all age groups (Klump et al., 2012). These findings suggest that
pubertal increases in genetic influences are specific to girls and point
to the possibility that the ovarian hormones (estrogen and progesterone)
that become activated during puberty and drive pubertal development in
girls (e.g., breast development, increased adiposity) may be
responsible.

Risk Factors

489

Klump, Keel, Sisk, and Burt (2010) indirectly examined the extent to
which estrogen activation may account for increased genetic risk by
comparing the magnitude of genetic effects between female twins in
relation to their levels of estradiol during puberty. Results confirmed
hypotheses and showed stronger genetic effects in girls with high versus
girls with low estrogen levels. Corroborating data have come from twin
studies of males, which do not show effects of puberty on genetic risk
for disordered eating (Klump et al., 2012). Boys do not experience
increases in estrogen during puberty, as their pubertal development is
driven primarily by increases in testosterone. Thus, these preliminary
results support the notion that estrogen may account for pubertal
difference in genetic risk for ED. Interestingly, however, new data
suggest that the effects of hormones on genetic risk may not be confined
to puberty (Klump et al., 2015). Longitudinal studies of adult twins
show substantial changes in genetic risk for disordered eating (e.g.,
emotional eating, or the tendency to overconsume food when feeling sad,
anxious, etc.) across the menstrual cycle, with increasing genetic
influences during menstrual cycle phases characterized by high estradiol
and progesterone levels (i.e., post-ovulation). These data underscore
the likely importance of ovarian hormones for genetic risk across
development and a need to understand how and why hormones activate
genetic risk. Molecular genetic studies have attempted to identify
specific genes that might account for the heritability of eating
disorders in post-puberty and high-risk hormonal phases, but these
investigations have largely fallen short. Initial reports of significant
associations between potential candidate genes---for example, the
serotonin transporter gene (Calati, De Ronchi, Bellini, & Serretti,
2011) and the serotonin 2a receptor polymorphism (Gorwood, Kipman, &
Foulon, 2003)---and eating disorders often go unreplicated in subsequent
studies (Pinheiro et al., 2010). Methodological limitations contribute
to the high rate of nonreplication, most notably small sample sizes,
making it difficult to identify genes that are likely to have very small
effects (Pinheiro et al., 2010). Because of the difficulties encountered
thus far, researchers are focusing on amassing much larger samples that
are sufficiently powered to detect significant effects (Boraska et al.,
2014). The methodological approaches used to examine risk genes are also
changing: instead of zeroing in on one candidate gene or set of genes,
contemporary studies are conducting genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) that examine hundreds of thousands of genes across the genome.
These studies are atheoretical in the sense that no hypotheses are
proposed a priori about specific genes that may confer risk; instead,
all genes are examined for their potential association with eating
disorders by comparing the frequency of gene variants in eating disorder
cases versus controls. The atheoretical stance of these studies is
predicated on the belief that genetic risk for eating disorders is
comprised of thousands of genes of very small effect that would be
difficult to isolate a priori based on existing theory or data. Instead,
the focus is on amassing extremely large samples of cases and controls
(i.e., tens of thousands) that have the power to detect even very small
differences in gene frequencies and identify novel risk genes that may
or may not have been on scientists' radar based on prior data. To date,
researchers conducting GWAS have focused on AN more than BN or BED, and
results have been nonsignificant and/or inconclusive (see Boraska et
al., 2014). It is clear that much larger sample sizes will be needed to
identify significant risk genes using this approach, as GWAS of
schizophrenia have required 50,000+ cases and controls to obtain

490

Eating Disorders

significant results (Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric
Genetics Consortium, 2014). However, global initiatives are under way to
amass these types of samples, with researchers from around the world
combining datasets for GWAS analyses. Thus, it is hoped that significant
findings will be available soon. Finally, an emerging area is the
examination of gene-by-environment interactions in twin and molecular
research. Initial findings are promising in suggesting that dieting
(Racine, Burt, & Klump, 2011) and food restriction (Akkermann, Hiio,
Villa, & Harro, 2011) increase genetic risk for eating disorder
phenotypes, such that genetic effects are stronger in individuals who
score high on these traits. Notably, another form of gene-byenvironment
interaction, epigenetics (i.e., heritable changes in gene expression
that are not due to changes in the DNA sequence), is likely to become
important. Initial results are promising (e.g., epigenetic regulation of
dopamine genes; see Frieling et al., 2010) and may provide critical
information about how ovarian hormones (e.g., by activation of gene
expression during and after puberty) and environmental stressors (e.g.,
a history of abuse) may differentially predict eating disorder risk in
individuals with the same genetic background and/or the same
environmental risk profiles. Nonetheless, despite these difficulties,
there are some promising leads, as serotonin genes, such as the
serotonin transporter gene (Calati, De Ronchi, Bellini, & Serretti,
2011) and the serotonin 2a receptor polymorphism (Gorwood, Kipman, &
Foulon, 2003); neurotrophic factor genes, such as the brain-derived
neurotrophic factor polymorphism (Nakazato, Hashimoto, Shimizu, Niitsu,
& Iyo, 2012; Rask-Andersen, Olszewski, Levine, & Schiöth, 2010);
estrogen receptor genes, such as the estrogen receptor beta gene
(Rask-Andersen et al., 2010); and dopamine genes, such as the dopamine
transporter gene and the COMT polymorphisms (Bello & Hajnal, 2010) have
shown associations with AN, BN, and/or eating disorder symptoms that
have been replicated in some (but not all) studies. An interesting
observation is that most of these systems are regulated by estrogen
(Becker, 2009; Ostlund, Keller, & Hurd, 2003) and therefore may
contribute to the pubertal differences in genetic effects observed in
the twin studies.

Assessment Weight is typically assessed during a medical exam rather
than in a clinical interview, but a variety of interview-based and
self-report assessments are available that are used to confirm the
presence of a specific ED diagnosis or to provide a more dimensional
assessment of general eating pathology. The use of a standardized
assessment tool is particularly useful when considering the cognitive
and affective features, as these do not have clear cutoffs in the
diagnostic criteria. Currently, the most widely used assessment for
disordered eating behaviors (across all diagnoses) in adults is the
semistructured, interviewer-administered Eating Disorder Examination
(EDE; Cooper, Cooper, & Fairburn, 1989; Cooper & Fairburn, 1987;
Fairburn & Cooper, 1993). The EDE is widely considered to be the "gold
standard" in eating disorders assessment and can be used both as a
measure of symptom severity and as a diagnostic tool. The EDE yields
four subscale scores, assessing restraint, eating concern, shape
concern, and weight concern, as well as two behavioral indexes that
quantify the frequency of binge eating and methods of extreme weight
control. Administration takes about 1 hour. Such an assessment is
important to use

Assessment

491

in the research context, where highly reliable diagnoses are required,
but it can also be useful in a clinical context, where its interview
format allows for greater clarification of nuanced and complex eating
disorder symptoms (e.g., binge eating, overconcern about weight).
Furthermore, the interview ensures that many important constructs are
assessed that might not show up in an unstructured format due to the
secrecy and shame associated with many of the behaviors. However, the
level of training required to achieve reliability and the burden for
staff and patients are both sufficiently high that briefer methods are
more typically used in clinical practice. The Eating Disorders
Assessment for DSM-5 (EDA-5; Sysko et al., 2015; Walsh, Attia, Glasofer,
& Sysko, 2015) is a recent, interview-based assessment that was
developed in part to address the shortcomings of existing
interview-based measures, including poor interrater reliability and lack
of DSM-5 diagnostic items. In addition to a paper-and-pencil format, the
interview is also available in the form of a computer-assisted
interview, which has the potential to aid in administration and is
freely available online (www.EDA5.org). Initial data demonstrate that
diagnoses of AN, BN, and BED made by the EDA-5 were highly consistent
with diagnoses made by the EDE and that the EDA-5 took significantly
less time to administer. However, while these data suggest that the
EDA-5 may be a useful tool in the diagnosis of eating disorders, this
interview is primarily a diagnostic instrument; it does not provide
measures of symptom severity to the same extent as other measures. In
addition to the aforementioned interview assessments, there are also a
variety of self-report measures for general eating disorder symptoms.
The 36-item, self-report version of the EDE, the EDE-Q (Fairburn &
Beglin, 1994), is commonly used. Like its interview counterpart, the
EDE-Q provides the basis for a possible diagnosis as well as the same
four subscales. However, a recent factor analysis suggested that a
three-factor solution is more appropriate for the EDE-Q (Peterson et
al., 2007). Correlations between the interview and self-report versions
are reasonable (Fairburn & Beglin, 1994), even though within-individual
discrepancies were common, particularly in terms of frequency of types
of binge episodes. It is not clear whether clients were more willing to
disclose information in a self-report compared to an in-person interview
or whether an interviewer was more likely to be able to elicit accurate
information. Regardless, interviewer ratings and subjective self-reports
of constructs such as overconcern and distress both convey useful
information. Continuous measures also allow for assessing degree of
improvement more globally than simple frequency counts of specific
behaviors do. Many of these measures contain multiple subscales that
attempt to capture the wide range of important constructs associated
with disordered eating. The Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI-3; Garner,
2005) and the Bulimia Test--Revised (Thelen, Farmer, Wonderlich, &
Smith, 1991) are most commonly used in assessing outcome. In addition,
very specific self-reports are available to assess narrower constructs
that may be of interest---such as specific cognitions, body
dissatisfaction, restraint, dietary intent, or food avoidance (see the
review by Anderson & Paulosky, 2004). Body checking is a specific
construct that has only recently been identified as an important aspect
of eating disorders. The Body Checking Questionnaire (Reas, Whisenhunt,
& Netemeyer, 2002) is a 23-item self-report of the frequency and nature
of the relevant behaviors. However, these measures and other measures of
eating pathology are not without limitations, including inconsistent
factor structure and poor discriminant validity. Recently, a 45-item
measure, the Eating Pathology Symptoms Inventory (EPSI;

492

Eating Disorders

Forbush et al., 2013), was developed to address these and other
limitations. The EPSI is a self-report measure intended to assess a wide
variety of symptoms, including those assessed by older measures (e.g.,
body dissatisfaction, restricting, purging, cognitive restraint) as well
as those often overlooked by researchers and clinicians alike (e.g.,
muscle building). There are some data to demonstrate its construct and
discriminant validity in a nonclinical sample (Forbush, Wildes, & Hunt,
2014); however, as this is still a relatively new measure, additional
data are needed to demonstrate its diagnostic and predictive utility.
Assessment of eating disorders in children and adolescents is not well
developed, but several inventories and interviews are available. There
is a child version of the EDE (ChEDE) that has been found to be both
reliable and valid for children ages 8 to 14 (Bryant-Waugh, Cooper,
Taylor, & Lask, 1996). Additionally, the Children's Eating Attitudes
Test (Ch-EAT; Garner & Garfinkel, 1979) has been used, and the use of a
shorter, 26-item version of Ch-EAT was reported by Wallin, Kronovall,
and Majewski (2000). Shapiro, Woolson, et al.'s (2007) report on the
Children's Binge Eating Disorder Scale, a brief structured interview,
suggests that this assessment might be more appropriate if one's purpose
is just to assess the degree to which overeating has become problematic
for a child. In addition to self-reports, daily self-monitoring records
(of food intake, binges, and purges) are frequently an important aspect
of assessment as well as treatment. Monitoring of appetite rather than
food intake (Craighead, 2006) is a relatively recent development that
can provide additional clinically relevant information. For example,
episodes of binge eating can be identified as responses to hunger
violations (i.e., waited until very hungry to start eating) or as
satiety violations (i.e., continued to eat past moderate sensations of
stomach fullness, regardless of level of hunger prior to eating). This
kind of specific assessment of behavioral patterns can be useful in
treatment planning and in tracking changes in response to treatment.
Self-monitoring avoids the difficulty of retrospective recall and has
great face validity but is less useful in reflecting changes in
attitudes and affect. Thus, both monitoring and self-reports continue to
be important.

Interventions As noted earlier, there has been a shift within the field
of eating disorders toward a transdiagnostic view that emphasizes the
similarities in pathology across anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and
binge eating disorder. This shift has been particularly relevant in the
realm of clinical intervention. Fairburn's transdiagnostic CBT for
eating disorders (CBT-E; Fairburn, 2008), which originated as a
treatment for BN, is currently the clearest example of a transdiagnostic
protocol that has been evaluated. However, historically, clinicians who
present themselves as "ED specialists" have always used a range of
approaches and usually apply their particular eclectic blend fairly
broadly in treating individuals across the full range of symptoms.
Within specialized ED inpatient or residential programs, the general
programming is rarely disorder-specific, although individuals may
receive particular interventions (e.g., exposure protocols for comorbid
obsessive-compulsive features). Our intention in this chapter is to
familiarize the reader

Interventions

493

with the literature that provides the empirical basis for the most
common treatment approaches. All these approaches were originally
developed and evaluated to target specific ED diagnoses, and many have
since been empirically evaluated in other ED populations, much as they
have been used broadly in clinical practice. We focus primarily on
psychosocial outpatient treatments, as this is the recommended level of
care for most individuals with an eating disorder (National
Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2004), but will also briefly
discuss more intensive treatments and pharmacological interventions.

Outpatient: Transdiagnostic Treatments The clearest example of a
transdiagnostic approach that has been applied to AN, BN, and BED, as
well as to subthreshold versions of these pathologies, is Fairburn and
colleagues' enhanced form of CBT (CBT-E; Fairburn, 2008; Murphy,
Straebler, Cooper, & Fairburn, 2010). The rationale for transdiagnostic
treatment is that, while initially the focus is normalizing eating
behaviors, ultimately the core cognitive features (i.e., overconcern
with weight and shape) that maintain eating-related pathology across the
spectrum must be addressed. A randomized trial of CBT-E applied to BN
and BED (over 20 weeks) compared it to standard CBT and found both
similarly effective in reducing eating disorder symptoms (Fairburn et
al., 2009). However, evidence suggested some added benefits for the
enhanced form for those individuals with more comorbid pathology. More
recently, data have demonstrated the feasibility and efficacy of CBT-E
for the treatment of AN in both adults and adolescents (for reviews of
CBT-E for AN, see Dalle Grave, El Ghoch, Sartirana, & Calugi, 2016, and
Galsworthy-Francis & Allan, 2014). For AN, CBT-E is extended to 40 weeks
to allow greater time for weight restoration. Retention rates were above
50%, and completers demonstrated significant increases in weight and
decreases in overall eating pathology. These results are considered to
be quite positive as the treatment was relatively acceptable to this
difficult-to-engage population. The content of CBT-E includes the
standard CBT that has accumulated the most evidence by far of any
approach for treating BN and BED. Clients first engage in daily
self-monitoring focused around what and when they are eating to
facilitate careful examination of their eating patterns. Second, clients
are strongly encouraged to adopt a structured plan of three meals and
two snacks a day to replace the chaotic and unhelpful restraint
strategies they have developed in their struggle to restrict intake.
Third, clients learn to use behavioral analysis and problem solving to
develop effective alternatives for bingeing and purging, and to engage
in cognitive restructuring to address dysfunctional thought patterns and
their underlying overconcern with weight and shape, both of which drive
dietary restraint and other unhealthy behaviors. Therapy also addresses
more individualized concerns and establishes plans to prevent relapse.
Patients who respond well to the standard CBT (i.e., who achieve rapid
change in core symptoms over the first 6 to 8 weeks) can continue with
the standard approach; for those not responding adequately, three
mechanisms that may be impeding progress are assessed and, when found to
be present, can then be directly addressed with specific modules. The
issues the modules deal with are severe clinical perfectionism,
unconditional and pervasive low self-esteem, and significant
difficulties with interpersonal relationships. The earliest version of
CBT-E also included an

494

Eating Disorders

optional module targeting emotion dysregulation, but this module is now
incorporated into the core treatment because so many individuals with
eating difficulties demonstrate substantial difficulties in mood
regulation. It is of note that clinical trials for CBT have been almost
exclusively done with young adult women. What little is known about
treatment for more diverse populations, including males and older women,
suggests that the CBT treatment effect is quite robust and does not
require significant modifications. Work by Lock (2005) and others (Dalle
Grave, Calugi, Doll, & Fairburn, 2013; Schapman-Williams, Lock, &
Couturier, 2006) demonstrates that CBT can also be successfully adapted
for adolescents, although other treatments may be preferable for this
population, as will be discussed below. To address issues of
accessibility and affordability, several CBT-based versions of self-help
have been developed and evaluated (Mitchell, Agras, & Wonderlich, 2007).
Generally, results from these studies indicate that self-help is
somewhat (but not significantly) less effective than traditional
therapy. However, abstinence rates are lower and dropout higher.
Nonetheless, self-help is clearly more cost effective and is often the
most viable first step when resources are limited. Recent data suggest
that selfhelp delivered via the Internet is comparable to other
modalities of self-help (e.g., bibliotherapy) (Wagner et al., 2013).
Guided self-help fares somewhat better than pure self-help, and guidance
provided by a mental health professional is somewhat more effective than
guidance provided by other professionals (Wilson & Zandberg, 2012).
Other interventions that stem from CBT have also been applied broadly
across a spectrum of ED symptoms. Appetite awareness training (AAT) was
initially developed for BED to target the overeating directly in
addition to the reduction of dieting (Allen & Craighead, 1999), but it
has since been applied to BN and used in early interventions for
problematic eating patterns (Craighead, 2006). The goal of the approach
is to shift attention away from the typical overfocus on food type and
to promote reliance instead on internal appetite cues (both hunger and
fullness) to guide eating decisions, a strategy accomplished by
centering the self-monitoring on hunger and fullness rather than food.
Treatment based around appetite monitoring demonstrates a level of
effectiveness similar to that of CBT, but appetite monitoring is
reported as more acceptable and helpful than food monitoring by many
individuals. Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), originally developed as
a treatment for chronically suicidal adults with borderline personality
disorder (Linehan, 1993), has been modified for eating disorders on the
basis that problematic eating behaviors may be conceptualized as another
manifestation of emotion dysregulation (see Safer, Telch, & Agras, 2001,
for DBT for BN, and Telch, Agras, & Linehan, 2001, for DBT for BED; see
also Hill, Craighead, & Safer, 2011, for DBT enhanced with appetite
monitoring). As noted above, a focus on emotion regulation has already
been incorporated into core CBT-E. More recently, a modification of DBT,
now called Radically Open DBT (Lynch et al., 2013), is being studied as
an intervention for individuals with AN (see also Chen et al., 2015).
This development may turn out to be useful in understanding the
personality differences that are hypothesized to characterize certain
groups of individuals with EDs and may enhance acceptance of and
response to treatment for some individuals (Martinez & Craighead, 2015).
As described by Lynch (in press), over- and undercontrol are not
conceptualized as opposite ends of a self-control continuum but as
potentially useful labels to describe a set of biopsychosocial behaviors
with similar genotypic/phenotypic features. This work highlights
potential

Interventions

495

new directions that may further the development of transdiagnostic
treatment or suggest ways to further personalize treatment even when
treatment is provided within a larger transdiagnostic framework.

Specific Treatments for AN Given the substantial difficulties in getting
individuals to accept or stay in treatment and the generally poor
response to treatment for severe and enduring AN, the last few decades
have seen an explosion of treatment development for this diagnosis. It
is beyond the scope of this chapter to cover all these developments, so
the reader is directed to recent reviews for more information (see Hay,
Touyz, & Sud, 2012; Martinez & Craighead, 2015; and Watson & Bulik,
2013). A wide array of theoretical formulations have led to approaches
as different as highly behavioral exposure therapy (Steinglass et al.,
2010, 2014) and treatments that emphasize effective emotion regulation
(Wildes, Marcus, Cheng, McCabe, & Gaskill, 2014). Specific treatments
for AN target weight restoration first, and most of the available
literature emphasizes evaluation of success in this domain. Shortening
the length of time at low weight has been considered important to
minimize health consequences. Additionally, as noted above, data suggest
that the prognosis is better for those with higher BMIs, highlighting
the need for early intervention (Treasure & Russell, 2011). The bigger
issues of achieving long-term weight maintenance and improving quality
of life are addressed within a wide range of approaches. Martinez and
Craighead (2015) suggest that highly individualized treatment options
may be needed for AN, as the first goal is to reduce resistance to
engaging in treatment; taking personality-based individual differences
into account may facilitate that first step. In that regard, it is
interesting to note that while inpatient treatment clearly promotes the
quickest weight restoration, it is less clear whether inpatient
treatment is the most effective long-term strategy because failing to
maintain one's weight after discharge is common. As noted above, current
standards of care recommend outpatient treatment, so hospital inpatient
care is usually short-term and based around medical stabilization.
Residential care is recommended for individuals who have not responded
adequately to several attempts at outpatient treatment. Specific
outpatient treatments for AN have been developed and evaluated primarily
for the (more common) cases of adolescent onset. Prior to the 1970s,
pathological family dynamics were believed to be a major cause of
adolescent AN, and treatment generally focused on separating the
adolescent from the family to promote individual development. Then
structural and strategic schools of family therapy were developed that
proposed that the family system could be harnessed to be a helpful force
in resolving the dilemma of AN in the adolescent patient. These
approaches stress family process, communication, and negotiation of
adolescent developmental issues. The most well-established treatment for
adolescents with AN is a family-based treatment (FBT) that is also
referred to as the Maudsley method (named for the hospital in London
where it was originally developed). FBT for AN in adolescents developed
by Dare and Eisler has been studied in a series of randomized clinical
trials (Lock, Le Grange, Agras, & Dare, 2001). In FBT, parents are
empowered to restore the child's weight at home; brief hospitalization
is used only for emergencies. The first phase is aimed at assisting
parents to take charge of weight restoration in their adolescent with
AN. This represents a significant shift from the way parents have
typically been responding to the child. The second phase focuses on

496

Eating Disorders

assisting the adolescent with taking back control of eating once healthy
patterns have been reestablished under parental supervision. The third
phase consists of an exploration of adolescent developmental issues,
particularly as they may have been affected by AN. Principle features of
the approach, which make it quite different from prior family work, are
an agnostic view of the cause of AN---viewing the parents as the primary
agent of change---and separation of the illness from the patient
(externalization). Although the majority of the clinician's time is
spent meeting with the family as a whole, a portion of each session is
spent individually with the adolescent to ascertain her or his
perspective on progress and to identify issues relevant to the overall
family treatment. The body of literature evaluating the effectiveness of
FBT relative to other treatments for adolescent AN suggests that family
therapy is superior to other treatments, though most of the studies are
small in scale (Le Grange & Lock, 2005); the data also clearly
demonstrate that prognosis is improved in adolescent-onset AN, which
highlights the utility of an empirically supported treatment for these
individuals (Ackard et al., 2014; Franko et al., 2013). A relatively
larger study comparing individual therapy (called Adolescent Focused
Therapy, or AFT) to FBT found that the rates of recovery at 1-year
follow-up (defined as normal EDE scores and weight greater than 95% of
expected BMI percentile for age and gender) were more than twice those
of individual therapy (FBT = 50%; individual therapy = 20%) (Lock et
al., 2010). In addition, data from a large multisite study demonstrate
that, relative to AFT, FBT produces weight gain faster, is associated
with fewer days in the hospital, and has lower treatment costs (Agras et
al., 2014). However, AFT remains an important option, as in a
significant number of cases, parents are either unable or unwilling to
take on the roles needed for FBT to work effectively. While a greater
proportion of individuals receiving FBT in clinical trials achieve
remission, longitudinal data suggest that adolescents who achieve
remission with either FBT or AFT maintain these gains over a period of
several years (Le Grange, Lock, et al., 2014). For adults with AN,
McIntosh et al. (2005) developed and evaluated a specialist supportive
individual therapy (SSIT) that focuses on using the therapeutic
relationship to promote adherence, and encouraging adequate nutritional
intake and weight restoration through education, support, and clinical
management. SSIT was originally devised as a control condition for use
in randomized controlled trials comparing the efficacy of other
treatment approaches, so it is not based on a specific theory of
etiology or intervention. In the only trial reported, SSIT turned out to
be superior to both CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), raising
the question of what the mechanism of change may be (McIntosh et al.,
2005). A careful reading of the manual suggests that SSIT maintains a
consistent focus on making behavioral changes in eating patterns within
a supportive, motivation-enhancing therapeutic stance that appears to
minimize patient resistance, perhaps by reducing fears of losing control
over the process of weight restoration. In this trial, IPT was less
effective than CBT, suggesting that a less directive, more
client-focused approach is not a viable alternative treatment for adult
AN, even though it has been effective for BN and BED, as described
later. The common element in SSIT and CBT in the trial seemed to be
their explicit focus on setting behavioral goals. It has been suggested
that CBT's direct challenging of distorted cognitions may elicit greater
client resistance in AN than it does in other presentations because the
symptoms of AN are highly ego-syntonic (Garner & Bemis, 1982; Garner,
Vitousek, & Pike, 1997). If this hypothesis is supported by subsequent
research, it would provide guidance to clinicians regarding differential
foci of

Interventions

497

treatment for disordered eating when low weight is the primary target.
This hypothesis is consistent with the finding noted earlier that a
version of DBT designed to work with the overcontrolled personality type
characteristic of many with AN is showing considerable promise. As
pointed out earlier, there are several reliable predictors of good
response to treatment in AN, despite the many challenges inherent in
treating this disorder. These predictors are relatively higher initial
BMI (Treasure & Russell, 2011), earlier age of onset (Ackard et al.,
2014; Le Grange et al., 2012), and early response to intervention (Doyle
et al., 2010; Le Grange, Accurso, et al., 2014; Turner, Marshall, Wood,
Stopa, & Waller, 2016). Data suggest that individuals with these
indicators are more likely to show improvement in weight, eating
disorder psychopathology, and comorbid psychological pathology following
treatment. There are also limited data suggesting that better social
adjustment is associated with positive response to treatment, whereas
being unemployed, on psychotropic medications, or diagnosed with the
binge/purge subtype of AN is associated with poor outcome (Carter et
al., 2012; Le Grange, Fitzsimmons-Craft, et al., 2014). However, the
reader should be cautious about drawing causal inferences from these
findings as all these data are correlational. Additionally, the majority
of these studies investigated predictors of outcome in
cognitive-behavioral treatments of AN (e.g., CBT-E, FBT); thus, these
findings may not generalize to other treatments.

Specific Treatments for BN As noted earlier, cognitive-behavioral
therapy (CBT) is well established as the first-line treatment for BN,
either alone or in combination with medications (see the review by
Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007). Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) is a
second established option (see Murphy, Straebler, Basden, Cooper, &
Fairburn, 2012; Rieger et al., 2010). Outcomes for IPT at the end of
time-limited treatment are not as positive as for CBT, but individuals
receiving IPT continue to show improvement over the course of follow-up,
so that by 1-year follow-up, individuals who received IPT are not
significantly different from those who received CBT. A more recent
treatment designed specifically for individuals with BN is integrative
cognitive-affective therapy (ICAT; Wonderlich et al., 2014), which is
similar to CBT in its focus on promoting regular eating patterns but
which also offers a greater focus on the role of emotions in maintaining
bulimic symptoms. In the only trial of ICAT to date, the treatment was
found to produce improvements comparable to those of CBT-E for BN
(Wonderlich et al., 2014). More recent data looking at moderators of
treatment outcome suggest that this treatment may be a useful
alternative to CBT-E for individuals with greater affective lability
and/or stimulus seeking (Accurso et al., 2015). For adolescents with BN,
FBT is an effective option. As described above, FBT was initially
designed for adolescents with AN, but two studies have utilized it with
adolescents with BN and support its utility (Le Grange, Crosby, Rathouz,
& Leventhal, 2007; Schmidt et al., 2007). The adaptation of this
treatment for adolescents with BN reflects the general movement within
the field toward more transdiagnostic approaches. The major adjustments
when using FBT with adolescents with BN are related to developmental
differences and symptom presentation differences. Adolescents with BN
are often more accepting of the need for treatment than those with AN,
more involved in adolescent social

498

Eating Disorders

processes, more capable of contributing to their own treatment earlier,
and more likely to have comorbid psychiatric problems, especially
depression (Le Grange & Lock, 2007). Like CBT for adults with BN, FBT
for adolescents with BN requires about 20 sessions. The adolescent is
asked to engage his or her parents in initially helping him or her to
manage binge eating and purging. Once this is accomplished, control over
eating is gradually transferred back to the adolescent, and the second
and third phases of FBT target more general adolescent processes
believed to be important in returning to an age-appropriate
developmental course and reducing risk for relapse. Indeed, some data
suggest that FBT for adolescent BN (FBT-BN) may be superior to CBT for
adolescents (CBT-A): following 18 sessions, the abstinence rate for
teens receiving FBT-BN was 39%, whereas only 20% of adolescents
receiving CBT-A achieved abstinence (Le Grange, Lock, Agras, Bryson, &
Jo, 2015). However, the difference between the two treatments was no
longer significant at the 12-month follow-up point. Interestingly, other
evidence-based approaches for the treatment of BN, such as DBT, are now
being integrated into the FBT framework, with good (albeit preliminary)
results (Murray et al., 2015). Perhaps the most important observation
from the many studies of interventions for BN is that as in AN
treatment, change early in treatment is consistently the best predictor
of ultimate outcome (Fairburn, Agras, Walsh, Wilson, & Stice, 2004; Vall
& Wade, 2015). Additional variables found to be associated with greater
symptom reduction following treatment include higher weight and shape
concern and higher dietary restraint; conversely, the presence of more
severe depressive symptoms at baseline was associated with lesser
reductions in bulimic symptoms at end of treatment (Accurso et al.,
2015). Severity of bulimic symptoms has also been found to be predictive
of poor response to treatment: Dicker and Craighead (2004) reported that
baseline purging once a day or more best differentiated their partial
and poor responders from those who attained abstinence by the end of
treatment. In this study, extending weekly outpatient treatment beyond
24 weeks was of limited benefit in getting partial responders to
remission, supporting the notion that higher levels of care may be
needed for non-responders. Similarly, at least one study examining
predictors of therapeutic outcome in self-help interventions for BN
found that lower frequency of binge eating at baseline was associated
with good outcome at both the end of treatment and the 18-month
follow-up (Wagner et al., 2015). Given that individuals with more severe
symptoms are less likely to respond to standard outpatient
psychotherapies, the question of how best to achieve remission in these
individuals remains. It is unclear whether individuals who fail to
respond to an initial course of outpatient psychotherapy are benefited
by switching to another weekly psychosocial therapy. Increases in
frequency or level of care of treatment (i.e., intensive outpatient or
partial hospitalization programs) are currently the clinical
recommendation if response to outpatient treatment is insufficient, yet
there are virtually no data evaluating the efficacy (or cost
effectiveness) of higher levels of care for the treatment of BN.
Evaluation of treatment options for individuals with BN who respond
poorly or not at all to standard outpatient treatments remains a
critical avenue of future research.

Specific Treatments for BED Most of the treatments that were first used
to treat bulimia nervosa (including CBT, DBT, AAT, and IPT) have also
been successfully applied to binge eating disorder; remission rates
(i.e., no OBEs in the past month) of 70% to 85% are typical (for
reviews,

Interventions

499

see Amianto, Ottone, Abbate Daga, & Fassino, 2015, and Iacovino,
Gredysa, Altman, & Wilfley, 2012). Of note, CBT for BED does not show
the distinct short-term advantage over IPT that has been shown for BN
(Hilbert et al., 2012). The response of BED to a range of treatments
suggests a fairly nonspecific effect of treatment. The common element
among the treatments seems to be that all address emotional eating in
various ways, suggesting that improved emotion regulation may be more
critical to success in treating BED than the reduction in excessive
dieting that is so clearly needed for BN. Unfortunately, no treatments
have led to substantial weight loss (on average), although there are
some data to suggest that whatever weight is lost during treatment may
be maintained for up to 4 years after treatment (Hilbert et al., 2012).
The reason that stopping binge eating does not lead to weight loss is
not clear, but it may be that calories previously consumed as binges
become distributed more appropriately throughout the day so eating no
longer feels out of control even though total intake is not reduced
adequately to achieve weight loss. Recent data suggest that weight gain
precedes treatment seeking among overweight individuals with BED, so
whatever weight is lost during treatment may represent a return to
baseline weight (Masheb, White, & Grilo, 2013). For BED with comorbid
obesity, behavioral weight loss (BWL) has been suggested as a viable
option, although most studies find that the modest initial weight-loss
advantage shown in BWL compared to CBT for BED is not maintained. In
contrast, data do suggest that individuals who achieve abstinence from
binge eating are more likely to lose some weight and maintain lower
weight than those who maintain any level of binge eating (Wilfley et
al., 2002; Wilson, Wilfley, Agras, & Bryson, 2010). Although this
finding might suggest a sequenced treatment approach wherein individuals
receive CBT to facilitate cessation of binge eating and then BWL to
assist with weight loss, the data do not seem to support this model.
Grilo, Masheb, Wilson, Gueorguieva, and White (2011) found that at the
end of a 12-month follow-up, CBT alone was superior to either BWL or a
sequential treatment combining CBT and BWL. Furthermore, Munsch, Meyer,
and Biedert (2012) reported that CBT and BWL produced comparable
reductions in binge frequency at the end of a 12-month follow-up period,
suggesting that sequenced care may not be beneficial. Given the lack of
meaningful weight loss observed with current treatments, treatments that
combine elements of CBT-E with BWL and also treatments that target
impulsivity are currently being evaluated (Palavras et al., 2015; Schag
et al., 2015). As with treatment for BN, access to services is of
critical importance in treating BED. Many of the interventions that are
clearly effective, including CBT, IPT and DBT, are not cost effective
and/or are not always accessible. A growing body of literature documents
the efficacy of guided self-help interventions for BED (Beintner,
Jacobi, & Schmidt, 2014; Striegel-Moore et al., 2010; Wilson et al.,
2010). Many self-help programs use Fairburn's book Overcoming Binge
Eating (2013), and studies evaluating these programs have found them to
be effective. Additionally, Internet-based self-help programs (e.g.,
Carrard et al., 2011; de Zwaan et al., 2012) are gaining in popularity
due in large part to their feasibility, high acceptability, and low
dropout rates (Beintner et al., 2014). Abbreviated versions of CBT
offered in a group setting to enhance access to treatment have been
studied and found to perform comparably to self-help interventions
(Fischer, Meyer, Dremmel, Schlup, & Munsch, 2014). Together, these
alternative modes of treatment have and will likely continue to benefit
many individuals who might not otherwise have access to psychotherapy,
including members of racial and ethnic minorities who could be referred
to self-help

500

Eating Disorders

programs by their primary care physician (Grilo et al., 2014; but see
Thompson-Brenner et al., 2013, for a discussion of additional
limitations of existing treatments for minority populations). Much as
with AN and BN, the most robust predictor of outcome for individuals
receiving treatment for BED is rapid response to treatment, both in
traditional treatment modalities (Munsch et al., 2012) and in self-help
or pharmacological interventions (Grilo, White, Masheb, & Gueorguieva,
2015). Overvaluation of shape and weight has also been found to be
associated with poor prognosis in several studies (Grilo, Masheb, &
Crosby, 2012; Grilo et al., 2013). Additionally, higher levels of
pathology at baseline appear to be associated with worse prognosis
following treatment (Fischer et al., 2014; Thompson-Brenner et al.,
2013). It is useful to note that all existing studies of predictors and
moderators of response to treatment and long-term outcome have examined
data from studies of CBT for the treatment of BED; there are at present
no data as to the long-term efficacy of treatments such as IPT or DBT,
the treatments that most directly address the interpersonal and
emotional triggers for binges and thus may do the best at promoting
long-term maintenance of treatment gains. Additionally, as mentioned
above, effective treatment for the comorbid obesity common in BED
remains elusive and likely awaits new developments in our understanding
of and ability to treat obesity more successfully.

Inpatient, Day Hospital, and Residential Treatments Intensive treatment
in hospital, day hospital, or residential programs is used for severe
and/or chronic AN and, less frequently, for severe BN or BED. The
approaches used are usually based on behavioral principles (meaning that
they involve withholding and/or providing desired activities or
privileges), and they target either weight restoration in the case of AN
or cessation of bingeing and/or purging behaviors for individuals with
BN or BED. Although there is little evidence evaluating these treatment
approaches, they remain a critical aspect of the continuum of care
needed to deal with the urgencies that develop in the context of these
challenging disorders due to malnutrition or other medical
complications. They also provide respite care for families and providers
when outpatient approaches are not perceived as making adequate
progress. In the case of AN, weight gain can be achieved at a
substantially faster rate (in the range of 3--5 lbs/wk) in these more
controlled settings than is feasible on an outpatient basis (in the
range of 1--2 lbs/wk); for a recent review of refeeding practices in AN,
see Garber et al. (2015). However, there is substantial debate as to
whether weight gain in this setting is well maintained and whether
restored normal eating habits generalize to the same extent as with
outpatient treatment. The single review summarizing the effectiveness of
inpatient and outpatient care for AN concluded that outpatient treatment
in a specialist eating disorder service was as effective as inpatient
treatment among those who did not warrant emergency admission (Meads,
Gold, & Burls, 2001); more recent reviews on this topic are ongoing (Hay
et al., 2013). As outpatient care is significantly less expensive,
reliance on such care is likely to increase, and it is to be hoped that
more rigorous evaluation of the associated step-down and residential
programs will be undertaken in the future (Lock, 2003; Striegel-Moore,
Leslie, Petrill, Garvin, & Rosenheck, 2000). Higher levels of care are
used much less frequently for individuals with BN and BED. Indeed, there
are few indications to warrant inpatient hospitalization for these
individuals

Interventions

501

short of significant medical issues or other psychiatric comorbidity.
For individuals with BN or BED, abstinence from bingeing and/or purging
behaviors is achieved almost immediately upon admission into an
inpatient or residential facility, where opportunities to engage in
these disordered behaviors are limited. However, data regarding the
relative long-term efficacy of inpatient versus outpatient interventions
for BN and BED are lacking, which may be partially due to the
infrequency with which higher levels of care are used for the treatment
of these disorders. Inpatient psychiatric treatment programs vary
greatly but most involve a combination of nutritional rehabilitation,
education, medical intervention, psychotherapeutic treatment,
psychosocial rehabilitation, and family therapies. Longer-term
residential care programs provide intensive services (24-hour
programming) and stays are generally between 1 and 2 months. Objective
and systematic data on the outcomes of patients treated in residential
centers are rarely available, but reports from these proprietary
programs themselves suggest that treatment promotes recovery, prevents
relapse, and reduces the development of a chronic course of illness.
Less-intensive day hospital programs for eating disorders are available
for adults and older adolescent patients. These programs usually provide
services 4 to 7 days per week and include supervised meals, therapeutic
groups, and individual therapy (Olmsted, 2002). Intensive outpatient
programs (IOPs) are even less intensive programs (e.g., 3 hours twice a
week) and often serve a transitional role between hospital and
outpatient care or serve when a step up from weekly individual treatment
is needed, as might be the case when BN or BED is not responding
adequately to standard weekly therapy. Because of the high cost and
uncertain outcomes of these programs and also because of the dearth of
recent data evaluating their efficacy, it is important that evaluation
of all these levels of treatment for eating disorders be undertaken
(Frisch, Franko, & Herzog, 2006).

Psychopharmacological and Biological Interventions Medications, either
alone or in combination with psychotherapy, are used frequently in the
treatment of eating disorders, with varying levels of success and
empirical support (for a review and clinical guidelines, see Aigner,
Treasure, Kaye, & Kasper, 2011). A variety of medications have been
tried in treating AN (Miniati et al., 2015). To date, none of them
appears to be systematically useful. The use of fluoxetine---the one
medication approved for the treatment of an eating disorder (BN)---has
been suggested as being useful in preventing relapse after weight
restoration, but studies suggest that it may not be as helpful as
initially believed (Kaye et al., 2001; Walsh et al., 2006). More
recently, the field has begun investigating atypical antipsychotic
medications (in particular olanzapine and aripiprazole) which have
gained popularity in clinical use for their ability to reduce
obsessionality, delusional thinking, and hyperactivity and to facilitate
weight gain in other populations. However, data examining their efficacy
in the treatment of AN are discouraging: recent reviews and
meta-analyses find little effect of these medications on the core
symptoms of AN and note that existing studies are plagued by low sample
sizes and high dropout rates (Dold, Aigner, Klabunde, Treasure, &
Kasper, 2015; Miniati et al., 2015). Given these findings, many
clinicians are beginning to examine the utility of antipsychotic
medications in combination with antidepressants, rather than as
monotherapy, with some promising results (Marzola et al., 2015). In the
face of limited pharmacological options, there have

502

Eating Disorders

been some preliminary examinations of the use of more invasive
biological techniques in severe cases. Deep brain stimulation has shown
some promise (Lipsman & Lozano, 2014), but its use in this population
raises important ethical issues (Maslen, Pugh, & Savulescu, 2015).
Additional data are certainly necessary to evaluate existing
interventions and provide guidance for the treatment of this population.
For the treatment of BN, several antidepressants have demonstrated
overall effectiveness equivalent to CBT alone. Fluoxetine in particular
has received the most consistent empirical support and has received a
denotation of grade A evidence from the World Federation of Societies of
Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) (Aigner et al., 2011). However, compared
to CBT, a smaller proportion of individuals (20%) achieve complete
abstinence by the end of treatment, and relapse following medication
withdrawal is a significant problem (Hay & Claudino, 2012; McElroy,
Guerdjikova, Mori, & O'Melia, 2012). Medication is equally effective
whether or not the individual has diagnosable comorbid depression;
therefore the mechanism through which it works remains unclear. Given
these data, medication alone is not recommended for BN. However,
medication combined with CBT is clinically indicated when comorbid
depression is present or when an individual does not respond adequately
to an initial trial of CBT (Mitka, 2011). Several classes of
psychotropic medications have been examined in the treatment of BED. At
present, several antidepressant (e.g., citalopram/escitalopram and
sertraline), anticonvulsant (e.g., topiramate), and antiobesity (e.g.,
orlistat) medications have been evaluated. Data summarized in several
recent reviews (Brownley, Peat, La Via, & Bulik, 2015; Goracci et al.,
2015; Reas & Grilo, 2015) suggest that these medications help to reduce
binge eating and associated pathology and facilitate weight loss to
varying degrees, but few people achieve full remission with medication
alone. Recently, lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (LDX), a stimulant
medication used for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), was approved by regulatory bodies in the United States
for the treatment of moderate to severe BED (U.S. Food and Drug
Administration \[FDA\], 2015). Of note, LDX is indicated only for the
treatment of binge eating, not for weight loss; the utility of LDX for
weight loss in individuals with BED will likely be explored in future
research. Future directions for the pharmacological treatment of BED
include medications for the treatment of substance abuse (e.g.,
disulfiram, or Antabuse; Farci et al., 2014) and novel antiobesity
agents recently approved or pending approval from the FDA (e.g.,
bupropion/naltrexone and phentermine/topiramate; Brownley et al., 2015;
Goracci et al., 2015). It seems likely, however, that psychotherapy will
remain a critical component of the treatment of BED, particularly given
data showing that adding medications does not provide significant
additional benefit above and beyond psychotherapeutic interventions for
BED and that medication may confer vulnerability to relapse when
withdrawn (Devlin, Goldfein, Petkova, Liu, & Walsh, 2012; Grilo, Crosby,
Wilson, & Masheb, 2012). Additional work investigating predictors and
moderators of response to medication versus psychotherapy will be
critical in clarifying the future role of pharmacological interventions
in the treatment of BED.

Summary and Future Directions The story of eating disorders is one of
constant evolution and change. In this field, a single syndrome gave way
to two and now three distinct diagnoses, diagnostic criteria have

Summary and Future Directions

503

narrowed and broadened over the course of time, and treatments found to
be effective in treating one population (e.g., CBT for BN, FBT for AN)
have been systematically adapted and applied successfully in the
treatment of other diagnoses. For individuals suffering from eating
disorders, diagnostic crossover and symptom fluctuation are almost the
norm, which lends support to a dimensional or transdiagnostic approach
to eating pathology (Olatunji et al., 2012). This chapter highlighted
both the similarities and the differences in symptoms, course,
prevalence, etiology, and response to treatment among the three specific
eating disorders. The clear similarities across these disorders have
encouraged the development of transdiagnostic approaches to their
treatment, with good success. Establishing the relative merit of
disorder-specific versus transdiagnostic treatments remains a critical
question in the field of eating disorders, but it is clear that broad
treatments able to address weight in addition to problematic eating
behaviors and cognitions will be needed for AN and for those with BED
who have comorbid obesity. At this point in time, CBT is well
established as a highly effective, first-line treatment for BN and BED,
although none of the available approaches effectively treat the
frequently comorbid obesity. IPT is a viable alternative to CBT for BN
and BED. A variety of outpatient interventions, including
transdiagnostic CBT, are promising for those with AN, but resistance to
entering and/or engaging in treatment remains a significant challenge.
For example, for adolescents with AN, FBT has strong empirical support
but is not a viable option in many cases. Overall, AN remains less well
understood from a theoretical perspective than the other presentations,
and the more intensive treatment options often required in its treatment
are, unfortunately, not being systematically evaluated. Research on AN
in particular has been limited by the relatively low base rate,
frequency of medical and psychiatric comorbidities, ambivalence about
treatment, and poor participant retention. Across all the eating
disorders, more work is needed to understand what characterizes those
individuals who fail the first-line treatments. This approach was
critical in the development and success of CBT-E (Cooper & Fairburn,
2011) and will likely continue to contribute to the advancement of
eating disorder treatments. Despite substantial similarities among the
three disorders, critical distinctions remain in presentation and
course, a fact that supports the continued need for specific diagnoses
so that research can explore differences in etiology and developmental
trajectories and determine whether specific neurobiological or genetic
underpinnings account for these different trajectories. The extent to
which specific diagnoses will track to specialized interventions remains
an open question, although, at a minimum, specific strategies to address
the need for weight gain in AN and weight loss in many cases of BED will
be needed. Furthermore, developing infrastructures for the successful
dissemination of treatments that have already been found effective is
critical so that more patients with eating disorders can receive
high-quality, affordable care in the community. Only when we have done
this can we hope to mitigate the substantial burden imposed by these
serious and challenging disorders.

References Accurso, E. C., Wonderlich, S. A., Crosby, R. D., Smith, T.
L., Klein, M. H., Mitchell, J. E., ... Peterson, C. B. (2015).
Predictors and moderators of treatment outcome in a randomized clinical
trial for adults with symptoms of bulimia nervosa. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, Advance online publication. doi:
10.1037/ccp0000073 Ackard, D. M., Richter, S., Egan, A., & Cronemeyer,
C. (2014). Poor outcome and death among youth, young adults, and midlife
adults with eating disorders: An investigation of risk factors by age at
assessment. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 47(7), 825--835.
doi: 10.1002/eat.22346 Agras, W. S., Lock, J., Brandt, H., Bryson, S.
W., Dodge, E., Halmi, K. A., ... Woodside, B. (2014). Comparison of 2
family therapies for adolescent anorexia nervosa: A randomized parallel
trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(11), 1279--1286. Aigner, M., Treasure, J.,
Kaye, W., & Kasper, S. (2011). World Federation of Societies of
Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) guidelines for the pharmacological
treatment of eating disorders. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry,
12(6), 400--443. doi: 10.3109/ 15622975.2011.602720 Akkermann, K., Hiio,
K., Villa, I., & Harro, J. (2011). Food restriction leads to binge
eating dependent on the effect of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor
Val66Met polymorphism. Psychiatry Research, 185(1--2), 39--43. Allen, H.
N., & Craighead, L. W. (1999). Appetite monitoring in the treatment of
binge eating disorder. Behavior Therapy, 30(2), 253--272. American
Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (3rd ed., rev.). Washington, DC: Author. American
Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author. American
Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Amianto, F., Ottone,
L., Abbate Daga, G., & Fassino, S. (2015). Binge-eating disorder
diagnosis

and treatment: A recap in front of DSM-5. BMC Psychiatry, 15, 70. doi:
10.1186/s12888-015-0445-6 Anderson, D. A., & Paulosky, C. A. (2004).
Psychological assessment of eating disorders and related features. In J.
K. Thompson (Ed.), Handbook of eating disorders and obesity
(pp. 112--129). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales,
J., & Nielsen, S. (2011). Mortality rates in patients with anorexia
nervosa and other eating disorders: A meta-analysis of 36 studies.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(7), 724. Retrieved from
http://archpsyc.ama-assn.org/ cgi/reprint/68/7/724.pdf Bakalar, J. L.,
Shank, L. M., Vannucci, A., Radin, R. M., & Tanofsky-Kraff, M. (2015).
Recent advances in developmental and risk factor research on eating
disorders. Current Psychiatry Reports, 17(6), 585. doi:
10.1007/s11920-015-0585-x Bartholome, L. T., Raymond, N. C., Lee, S. S.,
Peterson, C. B., & Warren, C. S. (2006). Detailed analysis of binges in
obese women with binge eating disorder: Comparisons using multiple
methods of data collection. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
36, 685--693. Becker, A. E., Keel, P., Anderson-Fye, E. P., & Thomas, J.
J. (2004). Genes and/or jeans? Genetic and socio-cultural contributions
to risk for eating disorders. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 23,
81--103. Becker, J. B. (2009). Sexual differentiation of motivation: A
novel mechanism? Hormones and Behavior, 55(5), 646--654. Beintner, I.,
Jacobi, C., & Schmidt, U. H. (2014). Participation and outcome in
manualized self-help for bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder---a
systematic review and metaregression analysis. Clinical Psychology
Review, 34(2), 158--176. doi: 10.1016/ j.cpr.2014.01.003 Bello, N. T., &
Hajnal, A. (2010). Dopamine and binge eating behaviors. Pharmacology
Biochemistry & Behavior, 97(1), 25--33. Berridge, K. C. (2009). "Liking"
and "wanting" food rewards: Brain substrates and roles in eating
disorders. Physiology and Behavior, 97, 537--550. Bohon, C., Stice, E.,
& Spoor, S. (2009). Female emotional eaters show abnormalities in
consummatory and anticipatory food reward: A functional magnetic

504

References resonance imaging study. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 42(3), 210--221. Boraska, V., Franklin, C. S., Floyd, J. A.
B., Thornton, L. M., Huckins, L. M., Southam, L., ... Bulik, C. M.
(2014). A genome-wide association study of anorexia nervosa. Molecular
Psychiatry, 19(10), 1085--1094. Boskind-Lodahl, M., & White, W. C.
(1978). The definition and treatment of bulimarexia in college women---a
pilot study. Journal of American College Health Association, 27(2),
84--97. Brownley, K. A., Peat, C. M., La Via, M., & Bulik, C. M. (2015).
Pharmacological approaches to the management of binge eating disorder.
Drugs, 75(1), 9--32. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0327-0 Bühren, K.,
Schwarte, R., Fluck, F., Timmesfeld, N., Krei, M., Egberts, K., ...
Herpertz-Dahlmann, B. (2014). Comorbid psychiatric disorders in female
adolescents with first-onset anorexia nervosa. European Eating Disorders
Review, 22(1), 39--44. doi: 10.1002/erv.2254 Bulik, C. M., Hebebrand,
J., Keski-Rahkonen, A., Klump, K. L., Reichborn-Kjennerud, T., Mazzeo,
S. E., & Wade, T. D. (2007). Genetic epidemiology, endophenotypes and
eating disorder classification. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 40(S3), S52--S60. Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley
.com/store/10.1002/eat.20398/asset/20398_ftp.pdf?v
=1&t=gzbi4y6f&s=b61860098c2f8b6a02f48a 033207f3fc1a5f30df Bulik, C. M.,
Sullivan, P. F., Wade, T. D., & Kendler, K. S. (2000). Twin studies of
eating disorders: A review. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
17(3), 251--261. Bruch, H. (1973). Eating disorders: Obesity, anorexia
nervosa, and the person within. New York, NY: Basic Books. Bruch, H.
(1978). The golden cage: The enigma of anorexia nervosa. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. Bryant-Waugh, R., Cooper, P., Taylor, C., &
Lask, B. (1996). The use of the eating disorders examination with
children: A pilot study. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 19,
391--397. Calati, R., De Ronchi, D., Bellini, M., & Serretti, A. (2011).
The 5-HTTLPR polymorphism and eating disorders: A meta-analysis.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(3), 191--199. Carrard, I.,
Crépin, C., Rouget, P., Lam, T., Golay, A., & Van der Linden, M. (2011).
Randomised controlled trial of a guided self-help treatment on the
Internet for

505

binge eating disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49(8), 482--491.
doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2011.05.004 Carter, J. C., Mercer-Lynn, K. B.,
Norwood, S. J., Bewell-Weiss, C. V., Crosby, R. D., Woodside, D. B., &
Olmsted, M. P. (2012). A prospective study of predictors of relapse in
anorexia nervosa: Implications for relapse prevention. Psychiatry
Research, 200(2--3), 518--523. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2012 .04.037
Cassin, S. E., & von Ranson, K. M. (2005). Personality and eating
disorders: A decade in review. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 895--916.
doi: 10.1016/j.cpr .2005.04.012 Chen, E. Y., Segal, K., Weissman, J.,
Zeffiro, T. A., Gallop, R., Linehan, M. M., ... Lynch, T. R. (2015).
Adapting dialectical behavior therapy for outpatient adult anorexia
nervosa---a pilot study. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
48(1), 123--132. doi: 10.1002/eat.22360 Chowdhury, U., Gordon, I., &
Lask, B. (2003). Early onset anorexia nervosa: Is there evidence of
limbic system imbalance. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 33,
388--396. Cooper, P. J., & Fairburn, C. G. (1987). The Eating Disorder
Examination: A semi-structured interview for the assessment of the
specific psychopathology of eating disorders. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 6, 1--8. Cooper, Z., Cooper, P. J., & Fairburn, C. G.
(1989). The validity of the eating disorder examination and its
subscales. British Journal of Psychiatry, 154(6), 807--812. Cooper, Z.,
& Fairburn, C. G. (2011). The evolution of "enhanced" cognitive behavior
therapy for eating disorders: Learning from treatment nonresponse.
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18(3), 394--402. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpra.2010.07.007 Craighead, L. W. (2006). The appetite
awareness workbook: How to listen to your body and overcome binge
eating, overeating, and obsession with food. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Craighead, L. W., & Allen, H. N. (1995). Appetite awareness training: A
cognitive behavioral intervention for binge eating. Cognitive and
Behavioral Practice, 2, 249--270. Crisp, A. H. (1997). Anorexia nervosa
as flight from growth: Assessment and treatment based on the model. In
D. M. Garner & P. Garfinkel (Eds.), Handbook of treatment for eating
disorders (pp. 248--277). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

506

Eating Disorders

Crow, S. J., & Peterson, C. B. (2003). The economic and social burden of
eating disorders: A review. In M. Maj, K. Halmi, J. J. Lopez-Ibor, & N.
Sartorius (Eds.), Eating disorders (pp. 383--396). Chichester, England:
Wiley. Culbert, K. M., Racine, S. E., & Klump, K. L. (2015). Research
review: What we have learned about the causes of eating disorders---a
synthesis of sociocultural, psychological, and biological research.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 56(11), 1141--1164. Currin,
L., Schmidt, U., Treasure, J., & Jick, H. (2005). Time trends in eating
disorder incidence. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 132--135. Dalle
Grave, R., Calugi, S., Doll, H. A., & Fairburn, C. G. (2013). Enhanced
cognitive behaviour therapy for adolescents with anorexia nervosa: An
alternative to family therapy? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51(1),
R9--R12. Dalle Grave, R., El Ghoch, M., Sartirana, M., & Calugi, S.
(2016). Cognitive behavioral therapy for anorexia nervosa: An update.
Current Psychiatry Reports, 18(1), 2. doi: 10.1007/s11920-015-0643-4
Davis, C., & Kaptein, S. (2006). Anorexia nervosa with excessive
exercise: A phenotype with close links to obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Psychiatry Research, 142(2--3), 209--217. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2005
.11.006 de Zwaan, M., Herpertz, S., Zipfel, S., Tuschen-Caffier, B.,
Friederich, H.-C., Schmidt, F., ... Hilbert, A. (2012). INTERBED:
Internet-based guided self-help for overweight and obese patients with
full or subsyndromal binge eating disorder. A multicenter randomized
controlled trial. Trials, 13(1), 220. doi: 10.1186/ 1745-6215-13-220
Deaver, C. M., Miltenberger, R. G., Smyth, J., Meidinger, A., & Crosby,
R. (2003). An evaluation of affect and binge eating. Behavior
Modification, 27, 578--599. Devlin, M. J., Goldfein, J. A., Petkova, E.,
Liu, L., & Walsh, B. T. (2012). Cognitive behavioral therapy and
fluoxetine for binge eating disorder: Two-year follow-up. Obesity,
15(7), 1702--1709. Dicker, S., & Craighead, L. W. (2004). Appetite
focused cognitive behavioral therapy in the treatment of binge eating
with purging. Cognitive Behavioral Practice, 11(2), 213--221. Dold, M.,
Aigner, M., Klabunde, M., Treasure, J., & Kasper, S. (2015).
Second-generation antipsychotic

drugs in anorexia nervosa: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 84(2), 110--116. Retrieved
from http://www.karger.com/DOI/10.1159/000369978 Doyle, P. M., Le
Grange, D., Loeb, K., Doyle, A. C., & Crosby, R. D. (2010). Early
response to family-based treatment for adolescent anorexia nervosa.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 43(7), 659--662. doi:
10.1002/eat.20764 Eddy, K. T., Dorer, D. J., Franko, D. L., Tahilani,
K., Thompson-Brenner, H., & Herzog, D. B. (2007). Should bulimia nervosa
be subtyped by history of anorexia nervosa? A longitudinal validation.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(Suppl.), S67--S71. doi:
10.1002/eat.20422 Eddy, K. T., Dorer, D. J., Franko, D. L., Tahilani,
K., Thompson-Brenner, H., & Herzog, D. B. (2008). Diagnostic crossover
in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa: Implications for DSM-V.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 245--250. Eddy, K. T., Keel, P.,
Dorer, D., Delinsky, S., Franko, D., & Herzog, D. B. (2002).
Longitudinal comparison of anorexia nervosa subtypes. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 31, 191--202. Engelberg, M. J., Steiger,
H., Gauvin, L., & Wonderlich, S. A. (2007). Binge antecedents in bulimic
syndromes: An examination of dissociation and negative affect.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(6), 531--536. Evans, E.
J., Hay, P. J., Mond, J., Paxton, S. J., Quirk, F., Rodgers, B., ...
Sawoniewska, M. A. (2012). Barriers to help-seeking in young women with
eating disorders: A qualitative exploration in a longitudinal community
survey. Eating Disorders, 19(3), 270--285. Fairburn, C. G. (2013).
Overcoming binge eating (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fairburn, C. G. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders.
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Retrieved from
http://books.google.com/books?id =KRvAlB3l8-MC&printsec=frontcover&dq
=cognitive+behavior+therapy+and+eating+disorders
+fairburn+2008&hl=&cd=1&source=gbs_api Fairburn, C. G., Agras, W. S.,
Walsh, B. T., Wilson, G. T., & Stice, E. (2004). Prediction of outcome
in bulimia nervosa by early change in treatment. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 161(12), 2322--2324. Retrieved from
http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/ article.aspx?articleID=177234

References Fairburn, C. G., & Beglin, S. J. (1994). Assessment of eating
disorders: Interview or self-report questionnaire? International Journal
of Eating Disorders, 16, 363--370. Fairburn, C. G., & Bohn, K. (2005).
Eating disorder NOS (EDNOS): An example of the troublesome "not
otherwise specified" (NOS) category in DSM-IV. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 43, 691--701. Fairburn, C. G., & Cooper, Z. (1993). The eating
disorder examination (12th ed.). In C. G. Fairburn & G. T. Wilson
(Eds.), Binge eating: Nature, assessment, and treatment (pp. 317--360).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A.,
O'Connor, M. E., Bohn, K., Hawker, D. M., ... Palmer, R. L. (2009).
Transdiagnostic cognitive-behavioral therapy for patients with eating
disorders: A two-site trial with 60-week follow-up. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 166(3), 311--319. Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Shafran, R.
(2003). Cognitive behaviour therapy for eating disorders: A
"transdiagnostic" theory and treatment. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
41(5), 509--528. Retrieved from
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S0005796702000888
Fairburn, C. G., & Harrison, P. J. (2003). Eating disorders. Lancet,
361, 407--416. Fairburn, C. G., Marcus, M. D., & Wilson, G. T. (1993).
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for binge eating and bulimia nervosa: A
comprehensive treatment manual. In C. G. Fairburn & G. T. Wilson (Eds.),
Binge eating: Nature, assessment, and treatment (pp. 361--404). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Farci, A. M. G., Piras, S., Murgia, M.,
Chessa, A., Restivo, A., Gessa, G. L., & Agabio, R. (2014). Disulfiram
for binge eating disorder: An open trail. Eating Behaviors, 16, 84--87.
doi: 10.1016/j.eatbeh .2014.10.008 Favaro, A., Ferrara, S., &
Santonastaso, P. (2003). The spectrum of eating disorders in young
women: A prevalence study in a general population sample. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 65(4), 701--708. doi: 10.1097/ 01.PSY.0000073871.67679.D8
Fichter, M. M., Quadflieg, N., & Hedlund, S. (2006). Twelve-year course
and outcome predictors of anorexia nervosa. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 39, 87--100. doi: 10.1002/eat.20215 Fischer, S.,
Meyer, A. H., Dremmel, D., Schlup, B., & Munsch, S. (2014). Short-term
cognitive-behavioral

507

therapy for binge eating disorder: Long-term efficacy and predictors of
long-term treatment success. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 58, 36--42.
doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2014.04.007 Fitzsimmons-Craft, E. E., Harney, M. B.,
Koehler, L. G., Danzi, L. E., Riddell, M. K., & Bardone-Cone, A. M.
(2012). Explaining the relation between thin ideal internalization and
body dissatisfaction among college women: The roles of social comparison
and body surveillance. Body Image, 9(1), 43--49. doi:
10.1016/j.bodyim.2011.09.002 Foerde, K., Steinglass, J. E., Shohamy, D.,
& Walsh, B. T. (2015). Neural mechanisms supporting maladaptive food
choices in anorexia nervosa. Nature Neuroscience, 18, 1571--1573. doi:
10.1038/nn.4136 Forbush, K. T., Wildes, J. E., & Hunt, T. K. (2014).
Gender norms, psychometric properties, and validity for the Eating
Pathology Symptoms Inventory. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
47(1), 85--91. doi: 10.1002/eat.22180 Forbush, K. T., Wildes, J. E.,
Pollack, L. O., Dunbar, D., Luo, J., Patterson, K., ... Watson, D.
(2013). Development and validation of the Eating Pathology Symptoms
Inventory (EPSI). Psychological Assessment, 25(3), 859--878. doi:
10.1037/a0032639 Fouladi, F., Mitchell, J. E., Crosby, R. D., Engel, S.
G., Crow, S., Hill, L., ... Steffen, K. J. (2015). Prevalence of alcohol
and other substance use in patients with eating disorders. European
Eating Disorders Review, 23, 531--536. doi: 10.1002/erv.2410 Frank, G.
(2015). Advances from neuroimaging studies in eating disorders. CNS
Spectrums, 20(4), 391--400. Frank, G., Kaye, W. H., Meltzer C. C., Price
J. C., Greer P., McConaha C., & Skovira, K. (2002). Reduced 5-HT2A
receptor binding after recovery from anorexia nervosa. Biological
Psychiatry, 52, 896--906. Franko, D. L., Keshaviah, A., Eddy, K. T.,
Krishna, M., Davis, M. C., Keel, P. K., & Herzog, D. B. (2013). Do
mortality rates in eating disorders change over time? A longitudinal
look at anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 170(8), 917--925. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2013 .12070868
Frieling, H., Römer, K. D., Scholz, S., Mittlebach, F., Wilhelm, J., de
Zwaan, M., ... Bleich, S. (2010). Epigenetic dysregulation of
dopaminergic genes in eating disorders. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 43(7), 577--583.

508

Eating Disorders

Frisch, J., Franko, D., & Herzog, D. B. (2006). Residential treatment
for eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 39,
434--439. Gadalla, T., & Piran, N. (2008). Psychiatric comorbidity in
women with disordered eating behavior: A national study. Women & Health,
48(4), 467--484. doi: 10.1080/03630240802575104 Galsworthy-Francis, L.,
& Allan, S. (2014). Cognitive behavioural therapy for anorexia nervosa:
A systematic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 34(1), 54--72. doi:
10.1016/j.cpr.2013.11.001 Garber, A. K., Sawyer, S. M., Golden, N. H.,
Guarda, A. S., Katzman, D. K., Kohn, M. R., ... Redgrave, G. W. (2015).
A systematic review of approaches to refeeding in patients with anorexia
nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders. Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1002/eat.22482 Garner, D. M. (2005). Eating
Disorder Inventory--3. Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Garner, D. M., & Bemis, K. (1982). A cognitivebehavioral approach to
anorexia nervosa. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 6(2), 123--150.
Garner, D. M., & Garfinkel, P. (1979). The Eating Attitude Test: An
index of the symptoms of anorexia nervosa. Psychological Medicine, 9,
273--279. Garner, D. M., Vitousek, K. M., & Pike, K. M. (1997).
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for anorexia nervosa. In D. M. Garner & P.
E. Garfinkel (Eds.), Handbook of treatment for eating disorders (2nd
ed., pp. 94--144). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Gearhardt, A. N.,
Yokum, S., Orr, P. T., Stice, E., Corbin, W. R., & Brownell, K. D.
(2011). Neural correlates of food addiction. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 68(8), 808--816. Gianini, L. M., Klein, D. A., Call, C.,
Walsh, B. T., Wang, Y., Wu, P., & Attia, E. (2015). Physical activity
and post-treatment weight trajectory in anorexia nervosa. International
Journal of Eating Disorders. Advance online publication. doi:
10.1002/eat.22495 Godley, J., Tchanturia, K., MacLeod, A., & Schmidt, U.
(2001). Future directed thinking in eating disorders. British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 40, 281--296. Goldschmidt, A. B., Le Grange, D.,
Powers, P., Crow, S. J., Hill, L. L., Peterson, C. B., ... Mitchell, J.
E. (2011). Eating disorder symptomatology in normalweight vs. obese
individuals with binge eating disorder. Obesity, 19(7), 1515--1518. doi:
10.1038/oby .2011.24

Goracci, A., di Volo, S., Casamassima, F., Bolognesi, S., Benbow, J., &
Fagiolini, A. (2015). Pharmacotherapy of Binge-Eating Disorder. Journal
of Addiction Medicine, 9(1), 1--19. doi: 10.1097/ADM.00000000 00000089
Gorwood, P., Kipman, A., & Foulon, C. (2003). The human genetics of
anorexia nervosa. European Journal of Pharmacology, 480(1--3), 163--170.
Grilo, C. M., Crosby, R. D., Wilson, G. T., & Masheb, R. M. (2012).
12-Month follow-up of fluoxetine and cognitive behavioral therapy for
binge eating disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
80(6), 1108--1113. Grilo, C. M., Masheb, R. M., & Crosby, R. D. (2012).
Predictors and moderators of response to cognitive behavioral therapy
and medication for the treatment of binge eating disorder. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(5), 897--906. doi: 10.1037/
a0027001 Grilo, C. M., Masheb, R. M., & White, M. A. (2010).
Significance of overvaluation of shape/weight in binge-eating disorder:
Comparative study with overweight and bulimia nervosa. Obesity, 18(3),
499--504. doi: 10.1038/oby.2009.280 Grilo, C. M., Masheb, R. M., White,
M. A., Gueorguieva, R., Barnes, R. D., Walsh, B. T., ... Garcia, R.
(2014). Treatment of binge eating disorder in racially and ethnically
diverse obese patients in primary care: Randomized placebo-controlled
clinical trial of self-help and medication. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 58, 1--9. doi: 10.1016/j.brat .2014.04.002 Grilo, C. M.,
Masheb, R. M., Wilson, G. T., Gueorguieva, R., & White, M. A. (2011).
Cognitivebehavioral therapy, behavioral weight loss, and sequential
treatment for obese patients with binge eating disorder: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79(5),
675--685. doi: 10.1037/a0025049 Grilo, C. M., White, M. A., Gueorguieva,
R., Wilson, G. T., & Masheb, R. M. (2013). Predictive significance of
the overvaluation of shape/weight in obese patients with binge eating
disorder: Findings from a randomized controlled trial with 12-month
follow-up. Psychological Medicine, 43(6), 1335--1344. doi:
10.1017/S0033291712002097 Grilo, C. M., White, M. A., & Masheb, R. M.
(2009). DSM-IV psychiatric disorder comorbidity and its correlates in
binge eating disorder. International

References Journal of Eating Disorders, 42(3), 228--234. doi:
10.1002/eat.20599 Grilo, C. M., White, M. A., Masheb, R. M., &
Gueorguieva, R. (2015). Predicting meaningful outcomes to medication and
self-help treatments for binge-eating disorder in primary care: The
significance of early rapid response. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 83(2), 387--394. Guarda, A. S., Redgrave, G. W., & Dressler,
D. D. (2012). Eating disorders. In S. C. McKean, J. J. Ross, D. D.
Dressler, D. J. Brotman, & J. S. Ginsberg (Eds.), Principles and
practice of hospital medicine (pp. 1908--1914). New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill. Gull, W. (1874). Anorexia nervosa (apepsia hysterica,
anorexia hysterica). Transactions of the Clinical Society of London, 7,
222--228. Haiman, C., & Devlin, M. J. (1999). Binge eating before the
onset of dieting: A distinct subgroup of bulimia nervosa? International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 25(2), 151--157. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1098108X(199903)25:2\<151::AID-EAT4\>3.0.CO;2-5 Halfon,
O., Bizouard, P., Loas, G., Corcos, M., Jeammet, P., & Flament, M. F.
(2015). Mood disorders in eating disorder patients: Prevalence and
chronology of ONSET. Journal of Affective Disorders, 185, 115--122. doi:
10.1016/j.jad.2015.06.039 Hannon-Engel, S. (2011). Regulating satiety in
bulimia nervosa: The role of cholecystokinin. Perspectives in
Psychiatric Care, 48(1), 34--40. Hannon-Engel, S. L., Filin, E., &
Wolfe, B. E. (2013). CCK response in bulimia nervosa and following
remission. Physiology & Behavior, 122, 56--61. doi:
10.1016/j.physbeh.2013.08.014 Hausenblas, H. A., Campbell, A., Menzel,
J. E., Doughty, J., Levine, M., & Thompson, J. K. (2013). Media effects
of experimental presentation of the ideal physique on eating disorder
symptoms: A metaanalysis of laboratory studies. Clinical Psychology
Review, 33(1), 168--181. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2012 .10.011 Hay, P. J., &
Claudino, A. M. (2012). Clinical psychopharmacology of eating disorders:
A research update. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology,
15(4), 209--222. doi: 10.1017/S14611 45711000460 Hay, P. J., Claudino,
A. M., Smith, C. A, Touyz, S., Lujic, S., & Madden, S. (2013). Inpatient
versus outpatient care, partial hospitalisation and wait-list for people
with eating disorders. Cochrane Database of

509

Systematic Reviews, 2013(12), 1--26. doi: 10.1002/ 14651858.CD010827
Hay, P., Girosi, F., & Mond, J. (2015). Prevalence and sociodemographic
correlates of DSM-5 eating disorders in the Australian population.
Journal of Eating Disorders, 3(1), 19. doi: 10.1186/s40337 -015-0056-0
Hay, P. J., Touyz, S., & Sud, R. (2012). Treatment for severe and
enduring anorexia nervosa: A review. Australian and New Zealand Journal
of Psychiatry, 46(12), 1136--1144. doi: 10.1177/00048674 12450469
Hepworth, N., & Paxton, S. J. (2007). Pathways to help-seeking in
bulimia nervosa and binge eating problems: A concept mapping approach.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(6), 493--504. Herzog, D.
B., Dorer, D. J., Keel, P. K., Selwyn, S. E., Ekeblad, E. R., Flores, A.
T., ... Keller, M. B. (1999). Recovery and relapse in anorexia and
bulimia nervosa: A 7.5-year follow-up study. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 38(7), 829--837. Hilbert, A.,
Bishop, M. E., Stein, R. I., Tanofsky-Kraff, M., Swenson, A. K., Welch,
R. R., & Wilfley, D. E. (2012). Long-term efficacy of psychological
treatments for binge eating disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry,
200(3), 232--237. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp .110.089664 Hilbert, A., Pike, K.
M., Goldschmidt, A. B., Wilfley, D. E., Fairburn, C. G., Dohm, F.-A.,
... Striegel Weissman, R. (2014). Risk factors across the eating
disorders. Psychiatry Research, 220, 500--506. doi:
10.1016/j.psychres.2014.05.054 Hilbert, A., & Tuschen-Caffier, B.
(2007). Maintenance of binge eating through negative mood: A
naturalistic comparison of binge eating disorder and bulimia nervosa.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(6), 521--530. Hill, D. M.,
Craighead, L. W., & Safer, D. L. (2011). Appetite-focused dialectical
behavior therapy for the treatment of binge eating with purging: A
preliminary trial. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(3),
249--261. Hoek, H. W. (2006). Incidence, prevalence and mortality of
anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders. Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 19, 389--394. Hudson, J. I., Coit, C. E., Lalonde, J. K., &
Pope Harrison, G. J. (2010). By how much will the proposed new DSM-5
criteria increase the prevalence

510

Eating Disorders

of binge eating disorder? International Journal of Eating Disorders,
45(1), 139--141. doi: 10.1002/eat .20890 Hudson, J. I., Hiripi, E., Pope
Harrison, G. J., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). The prevalence and correlates
of eating disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Biological Psychiatry, 61(3), 348--358. Retrieved from
http://linkinghub.elsevier .com/retrieve/pii/S0006322306004744 Hund, A.
R., & Espelage, D. L. (2005). Childhood sexual abuse, disordered eating,
alexithymia, and general distress: A mediation model. Journal of
Consulting Psychology, 52, 559--573. Iacovino, J. M., Gredysa, D. M.,
Altman, M., & Wilfley, D. E. (2012). Psychological treatments for binge
eating disorder. Current Psychiatry Reports, 14(4), 432--446. Jacobi,
C., Hayward, C., de Zwaan, M., Kraemer, H. C., & Agras, W. S. (2004).
Coming to terms with risk factors for eating disorders: Application of
risk terminology and suggestions for a general taxonomy. Psychological
Bulletin, 130, 19--65. James, R. (1743). A medical dictionary. London,
England: Osborne. Jennings, K. M., Kelly-Weeder, S., & Wolfe, B. E.
(2015). Binge eating among racial minority groups in the United States:
An integrative review. Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses
Association, 21(2), 117--125. doi: 10.1177/1078390315581923 Katerndahl,
D., Burge, S., & Kellogg, N. (2005). Predictors of development of adult
psychopathology in female victims of childhood sexual abuse. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 193, 258--264. Kaye, W. H., Bulik, C. M.,
Thornton, L., Barbarich, N., & Masters, K. (2004). Comorbidity of
anxiety disorders with anorexia and bulimia nervosa. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 161(12), 2215--2221. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.161.12.2215 Kaye,
W. H., Grendall, K., & Strober, M. (1998). Serotonin neuronal function
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment in anorexia
nervosa. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 825--838. Kaye, W. H., Nagata, T.,
Weltzin, T., Hsu, B., Sokol, M., McConaha, C., ... Deep, D. (2001).
Double-blind placebo controlled administration of fluoxetine in
restricting and restricting-purging type anorexia nervosa. Biological
Psychiatry, 49, 644--652. Kaye, W., Strober, M., & Jimerson, D. (2008).
The neurobiology of eating disorders. In D. S. Charney & E. J. Nestler
(Eds.), The neurobiology of mental

illness (3rd ed., pp. 1349--1369). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press. Kaye, W. H., Weltzin, T. E., Hsu, L. K. G., McConaha, C. W., &
Bolton, B. (1993). Amount of calories retained after binge eating and
vomiting. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 969. Retrieved from
http://journals.psychiatryonline.org/data/Journals/ AJP/3600/969.pdf
Keel, P. K., & Brown, T. A. (2010). Update on course and outcome in
eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 43(3),
195--204. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pubmed/20186717
Keel, P. K., Brown, T. A., Holland, L. A., & Bodell, L. P. (2012).
Empirical classification of eating disorders. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 8(1): 381--404. Keel, P. K., & Forney, K. J. (2013).
Psychosocial risk factors for eating disorders. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 46(5), 433--439. doi: 10.1002/ eat.22094 Keel, P. K.,
& Heatherton, T. F. (2010). Weight suppression predicts maintenance and
onset of bulimic syndromes at 10-year follow-up. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 119(2), 268--275. doi: 10.1037/ a0019190 Keel, P. K.,
Mitchell, J. E., Miller, K. B., Davis, T. L., & Crow, S. J. (1999).
Long-term outcome of bulimia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry,
56(1), 63--69. Keski-Rahkonen, A., Hoek, H. W., Linna, M. S., Raevuori,
A., Sihvola, E., Bulik, C. M., ... Kaprio, J. (2009). Incidence and
outcomes of bulimia nervosa: A nationwide population-based study.
Psychological Medicine, 39(5), 823--831. doi: 10.1017/S003329 1708003942
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P. A., Chiu, W. T., Deitz, A. C., Hudson, J.
I., Shahly, V., ... Xavier, M. (2013). The prevalence and correlates of
binge eating disorder in the World Health Organization World Mental
Health Surveys. Biological Psychiatry, 73(9), 904--914. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.11.020 Killen, J. D., Barr Taylor, C., Hayward,
C., Farish Haydel, K., Wilson, D. M., Hammer, L., ... Strachowski, D.
(1996). Weight concerns influence the development of eating disorders: A
4-year prospective study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64, 936--940. Kjelsås, E., Børsting, I., & Gudde, C. B. (2004).
Antecedents and consequences of binge eating

References episodes in women with an eating disorder. Eating and Weight
Disorders, 9(1), 7--15. Klein, D. A., & Walsh, B. T. (2004). Eating
disorders: Clinical features and pathophysiology. Physiology and
Behavior, 81, 359--374. Kluck, A. S. (2008). Family factors in the
development of disordered eating: Integrating dynamic and behavioral
explanations. Eating Behaviors, 9(4), 471--483. doi:
10.1016/j.eatbeh.2008.07.006 Kluck, A. S. (2010). Family influence on
disordered eating: The role of body image dissatisfaction. Body Image,
7(1), 8--14. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2009 .09.009 Klump, K. L., Burt, S.
A., McGue, M., Iacono, W. G., & Wade, T. M. (2010). Age differences in
genetic and environmental influences on weight and shape concerns.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 43(8), 679--688. doi:
10.1002/eat.20772 Klump, K. L., & Culbert, K. M. (2007). Molecular
genetic studies of eating disorders: Current status and future
directions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16(1), 37--41.
Klump, K. L., Culbert, K. M., Slane, J. D., Burt, S. A., Sisk, C. L., &
Nigg, J. T. (2012). The effects of puberty on genetic risk for
disordered eating: Evidence for sex difference. Psychological Medicine,
42(3), 627--638 Klump, K. L., Hildebrandt, B. A., O'Connor, S. M., Keel,
P. K., Neale, M., Sisk, C. L., ... Burt, S. A. (2015). Changes in
genetic risk for emotional eating across the menstrual cycle: A
longitudinal study. Psychological Medicine, 45(15), 3227--3237. Klump,
K. L., Keel, P. K., Sisk, C. L., & Burt, S. A. (2010). Preliminary
evidence that estradiol moderates genetic influences on disordered
eating attitudes and behaviors during puberty. Psychological Medicine,
40(10), 1745--1753. Klump, K. L. (2013). Puberty as a critical risk
period for eating disorders: A review of human and animal studies.
Hormones and Behavior, 64(2), 399--410. Lasègue, E. (1883). De
l'anorexie hystérique. Archives Générales de Medecine, 21, 384--403.
Lask, B. (2006). Functional neuroimaging in earlyonset anorexia nervosa.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37, S49--S51. Lavender, J.
M., Utzinger, L. M., Cao, L., Wonderlich, S. A., Engel, S. G., Mitchell,
J. E., & Crosby, R. D. (2015). Reciprocal associations between negative
affect, binge eating, and purging in the natural environment in women
with bulimia nervosa. Journal

511

of Abnormal Psychology. Advance online publication. doi:
10.1037/abn0000135 Lázaro, L., Andrés, S., Calvo, A., Cullell, C.,
Moreno, E., Plana, M. T., ... Castro-Fornieles, J. (2013). Normal gray
and white matter volume after weight restoration in adolescents with
anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 46(8),
841--848. doi: 10.1002/eat.22161 Le Grange, D., Accurso, E. C., Lock,
J., Agras, S., & Bryson, S. W. (2014). Early weight gain predicts
outcome in two treatments for adolescent anorexia nervosa. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 47(2), 124--129. Le Grange, D., Crosby, R.,
Rathouz, P. J., & Leventhal, B. L. (2007). A randomized comparison of
family-based treatment and supportive psychotherapy for adolescent
bulimia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(9), 1049--1056. Le
Grange, D., Fitzsimmons-Craft, E. E., Crosby, R. D., Hay, P., Lacey, H.,
Bamford, B., ... Touyz, S. (2014). Predictors and moderators of outcome
for severe and enduring anorexia nervosa. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 56, 91--98. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2014.03.006 Le Grange, D., &
Lock, J. (2005). The dearth of psychological treatment studies for
anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37, 79--81.
Le Grange, D., & Lock, J. (2007). Treating bulimia nervosa in
adolescents. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Le Grange, D., Lock, J.,
Accurso, E. C., Agras, S. W., Darcy, A., Forsberg, S., & Bryson, S. W.
(2014). Relapse and remission at two- to four-year follow-up in two
treatments for adolescent anorexia nervosa. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 53(11), 1162--1167. Le Grange,
D., Lock, J., Agras, W. S., Bryson, S. W., & Jo, B. (2015). Randomized
clinical trial of family-based treatment and cognitive-behavioral
therapy for adolescent bulimia nervosa. Journal of the American Academy
of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 54(11), 886-894. Le Grange, D., Lock,
J., Agras, W. S., Moye, A., Bryson, S. W., Jo, B., & Kraemer, H. C.
(2012). Moderators and mediators of remission in family-based treatment
and adolescent focused therapy for anorexia nervosa. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 50(2), 85--92. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2011.11.003 Lebow, J.,
Sim, L. A., & Kransdorf, L. N. (2014). Prevalence of a history of
overweight and obesity in adolescents with restrictive eating disorders.

512

Eating Disorders

Journal of Adolescent Health, 56(1), 19--24. doi:
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2014.06.005 Leehr, E. J., Krohmer, K., Schag, K.,
Dresler, T., Zipfel, S., & Giel, K. E. (2015). Emotion regulation model
in binge eating disorder and obesity---a systematic review. Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 49, 125--34. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014
.12.008 Leon, G. R., Fulkerson, J. A., Perry, C. L., & Early-Zald, M. B.
(1995). Prospective analysis of personality and behavioral
vulnerabilities and gender influences in the later development of
disordered eating. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 140--149.
Liddell, H. G., & Scott, R. (1972). Greek and English lexicon. Oxford,
England: Clarendon Press. Lilenfeld, L. R. R., Wonderlich, S., Riso, L.
P., Crosby, R., & Mitchell, J. (2006). Eating disorders and personality:
A methodological and empirical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 26,
299--320. Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of
borderline personality disorder. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Lipsman,
N., & Lozano, A. M. (2014). Targeting emotion circuits with deep brain
stimulation in refractory anorexia nervosa. Neuropsychopharmacology,
39(1), 250--251. doi: 10.1038/npp.2013.244 Lock, J. (2003). A health
services perspective on anorexia nervosa. Eating Disorders, 11, 197-208.
Lock, J. (2005). Adjusting cognitive behavior therapy for adolescents
with bulimia nervosa: Results of case series. American Journal of
Psychotherapy, 59(3), 267--281. Lock, J., Couturier, J., & Agras, W. S.
(2006). Comparison of long-term outcomes in adolescents with anorexia
nervosa treated with family therapy. American Journal of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 45, 666--672. Lock, J., Garrett, A., Beenhakker,
J., & Reiss, A. (2011). Aberrant brain activation during a response
inhibition task in adolescent eating disorder subtypes. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 168, 55--64. Lock, J., Le Grange, D., Agras, W. S., &
Dare, C. (2001). Treatment manual for anorexia nervosa: A family-based
approach. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Lock, J., Le Grange, D., Agras,
W. S., Moye, A., Bryson, S. W., & Jo, B. (2010). A randomized clinical
trial comparing family-based treatment to adolescent focused individual
therapy for adolescents with

anorexia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 1025--1032. Lynch,
T. R. (In press). Radically open dialectical behavior therapy for
disorders of over-control. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Lynch, T. R.,
Gray, K. L. H., Hempel, R. J., Titley, M., Chen, E. Y., & O'Mahen, H. A.
(2013). Radically open dialectical behavior therapy for adult anorexia
nervosa: Feasibility and outcomes from an outpatient program. BMC
Psychiatry, 13(293), 1--17. Mainz, V., Schulte-Rüther, M., Fink, G. R.,
HerpertzDahlmann, B., & Konrad, K. (2012). Structural brain
abnormalities in adolescent anorexia nervosa before and after weight
recovery and associated hormonal changes. Psychosomatic Medicine, 74(6),
574--582. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e31824ef10e Marcus, M. D., Moulton, M.
M., & Greeno, C. G. (1995). Binge eating onset in obese patients with
binge eating disorder. Addictive Behaviors, 20(6), 747--755. Retrieved
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih .gov/pubmed/8820527 Marek, R. J.,
Ben-Porath, Y. S., Ashton, K., & Heinberg, L. J. (2014). Impact of using
DSM-5 criteria for diagnosing binge eating disorder in bariatric surgery
candidates: Change in prevalence rate, demographic characteristics, and
scores on the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2 Restructured
Form (MMPI-2-RF). International Journal of Eating Disorders, 47(5),
553--557. doi: 10.1002/eat.22268 Marques, L., Alegria, M., Becker, A.
E., Chen, C., Fang, A., Chosak, A., & Diniz, J. B. (2010). Comparative
prevalence, correlates of impairment, and service utilization for eating
disorders across US ethnic groups: Implications for reducing ethnic
disparities in health care access for eating disorders. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(5), 412--420. doi: 10.1002/eat.20787
Marsh, R., Maia, T., & Peterson B. (2009). Functional disturbances
within frontostriatal circuits across multiple childhood
psychopathologies. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 664--674.
Martinez, M. A., & Craighead, L. W. (2015). Toward
person(ality)-centered treatment: How consideration of personality and
individual differences in anorexia nervosa may improve treatment
outcome. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 22(3), 296--314.
Marzola, E., Desedime, N., Giovannone, C., Amianto, F., Fassino, S., &
Abbate-Daga, G. (2015). Atypical antipsychotics as augmentation therapy
in

References anorexia nervosa. Plos One, 10(4), e0125569. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0125569 Masheb, R. M., White, M. A., & Grilo, C. M.
(2013). Substantial weight gains are common prior to treatment-seeking
in obese patients with binge eating disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
54(7), 880--884. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2013.03.017 Maslen, H., Pugh,
J., & Savulescu, J. (2015). The ethics of deep brain stimulation for the
treatment of anorexia nervosa. Neuroethics, 8, 215--230. doi:
10.1007/s12152-015-9240-9 Mattar, L., Thiébaud, M. R., Huas, C., Cebula,
C., & Godart, N. (2012). Depression, anxiety and obsessive-compulsive
symptoms in relation to nutritional status and outcome in severe
anorexia nervosa. Psychiatry Research, 200(2--3), 513--517. doi:
10.1016/j.psychres.2012.04.032 McElroy, S. L., Guerdjikova, A. I., Mori,
N., & O'Melia, A. M. (2012). Current pharmacotherapy options for bulimia
nervosa and binge eating disorder. Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy,
13, 2015--2026. doi: 10.1517/14656566.2012.721781 McIntosh, V. W.,
Jordan, J., Carter, F. A., Luty, S. E., McKenzie, J. M., Bulik, C. M.,
... Joyce, P. R. (2005). Three psychotherapies for anorexia nervosa: A
randomized, controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162,
741--747. Meads, C., Gold, L., & Burls, A. (2001). How effective is
outpatient compared to inpatient care for treatment of anorexia nervosa?
A systematic review. European Eating Disorders Review, 9, 229--241.
Mehler, P. S. (2010). Medical complications of bulimia nervosa and their
treatments. International Journal of Eating Disorders. Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1002/eat.20825 Miniati, M., Mauri, M., Ciberti, A.,
Mariani, M. G., Marazziti, D., & Dell'Osso, L. (2015).
Psychopharmacological options for adult patients with anorexia nervosa.
CNS Spectrums, 21, 134--142. doi: 10.1017/ S1092852914000790 Minuchin,
S., Rosman, B., & Baker, I. (1978). Psychosomatic families: Anorexia
nervosa in context. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Mitchell,
J. E. (2015). Medical comorbidity and medical complications associated
with binge-eating disorder. International Journal of Eating Disorders.
Advance online publication. doi: 10.1002/eat.22452 Mitchell, J. E.,
Agras, S., & Wonderlich, S. (2007). Treatment of bulimia nervosa: Where
are we and

513

where are we going? International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(2),
95--101. Mitchell, J. E., & Crow, S. (2006). Medical complications of
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 19,
438--443. Mitchell, J. E., Hatsukami, D., Eckert, E. D., & Pyle, R. L.
(1985). Characteristics of 275 patients with bulimia. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 142, 482--485. Mitchell, K. S., Mazzeo, S. E.,
Schlesinger, M. R., Brewerton, T. D., & Smith, B. N. (2011). Comorbidity
of partial and subthreshold PTSD among men and women with eating
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey--Replication Study.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 45(3), 307--315. Mitka, M.
(2011). Report weighs options for bulimia nervosa treatment. JAMA,
305(9), 875. Mond, J. M., Hay, P. J., Darby, A., Paxton, S. J., Quirk,
F., Buttner, P., ... Rodgers, B. (2009). Women with bulimic eating
disorders: When do they receive treatment for an eating problem? Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(5), 835--844. Mond, J. M.,
Hay, P. J., Rodgers, B., & Owen, C. (2007). Health service utilization
for eating disorders: Findings from a community-based study.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(5), 399--408. Munsch, S.,
Meyer, A. H., & Biedert, E. (2012). Efficacy and predictors of long-term
treatment success for Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment and Behavioral
Weight-Loss-Treatment in overweight individuals with binge eating
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50(12), 775--785. Retrieved
from http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0005796 712001362
Munsch, S., Meyer, A. H., Quartier, V., & Wilhelm, F. H. (2012). Binge
eating in binge eating disorder: A breakdown of emotion regulatory
process? Psychiatry Research, 195(3), 118--124. Retrieved from
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S016517 8111005208 Murphy,
R., Straebler, S., Basden, S., Cooper, Z., & Fairburn, C. G. (2012).
Interpersonal psychotherapy for eating disorders. Clinical Psychology &
Psychotherapy, 19(2), 150--158. Murphy, R., Straebler, S., Cooper, Z., &
Fairburn, C. G. (2010). Cognitive behavioral therapy for eating
disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33(3), 611--627.

514

Eating Disorders

Murray, S. B., Anderson, L., Cusack, A., Nakamura, T., Rockwell, R.,
Griffiths, S., & Kaye, W. H. (2015). Integrating family-based treatment
and dialectical behavior therapy for adolescent bulimia nervosa:
Preliminary outcomes of an open pilot trial. Eating Disorders, 23(4),
336--344. doi: 10.1080/10640266 .2015.1044345 Nakazato, M., Hashimoto,
K., Shimizu, E., Niitsu, T., & Iyo, M. (2012). Possible involvement of
brainderived neurotrophic factor in eating disorders. IUBMB Life, 64(5),
355--361. Nathan, P. J., & Bullmore, E. T. (2009). From taste hedonics
to motivational drive: Central μ-opioid receptors and binge-eating
behaviour. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 12(7),
995--1008. Nathan, P. J., O'Neill, B. V., Mogg, K., Bradley, B. P.,
Beaver, J., Bani, M., ... Bullmore, E. T. (2012). The effects of the
dopamine D3 receptor antagonist GSK598809 on attentional bias to
palatable food cues in overweight and obese subjects. International
Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 15(2), 149--161. National
Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. (2004). Eating disorders: Core
interventions in the treatment and management of anorexia nervosa,
bulimia nervosa, and related eating disorders. Leicester, UK: British
Psychological Society. Neumark-Sztainer, D., Wall, M., Larson, N. I.,
Eisenberg, M. E., & Loth, K. (2011). Dieting and disordered eating
behaviors from adolescence to young adulthood: Findings from a 10-year
longitudinal study. Journal of the American Dietetic Association,
111(7), 1004--1011. doi: 10.1016/j.jada.2011.04.012 Neumark-Sztainer,
D., Wall, M., Story, M., & Standish, A. R. (2012). Dieting and unhealthy
weight control behaviors during adolescence: Associations with 10-year
changes in body mass index. Journal of Adolescent Health, 50(1), 80--86.
doi: 10.1016/ j.jadohealth.2011.05.010 Nicholls, D., & Bryant-Waugh, R.
(2003). Children and adolescents. In J. L. Treasure, U. Schmidt, & E.
van Furth (Eds.), Handbook of eating disorders (2nd ed., pp. 415--434).
Chichester, England: Wiley. O'Brien, K. M., & Vincent, N. K. (2003).
Psychiatric comorbidity in anorexia and bulimia nervosa: Nature,
prevalence, and causal relationships. Clinical Psychology Review, 23,
57--74. Olatunji, B. O., Broman-Fulks, J. J., Ciesielski, B. G.,
Zawilinski, L. L., Shewmaker, S., & Wall, D. (2012). A taxometric
investigation of the latent structure

of eating disorders. Psychiatry Research, 197(1--2), 97--102. Olmsted,
M. (2002). Day hospital treatment of anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa. In C. G. Fairburn & K. Brownell (Eds.), Eating disorders and
obesity: A comprehensive review (pp. 330--334). New York, NY: Guilford
Press. Ostlund, H., Keller, E., & Hurd, Y. L. (2003). Estrogen receptor
gene expression in relation to neuropsychiatric disorders. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 1007, 54--63. Palavras, M. A., Hay, P.,
Touyz, S., Sainsbury, A., da Luz, F., Swinbourne, J., ... Claudino, A.
(2015). Comparing cognitive behavioural therapy for eating disorders
integrated with behavioural weight loss therapy to cognitive behavioural
therapy-enhanced alone in overweight or obese people with bulimia
nervosa or binge eating disorder: Study protocol for a randomised
controlled trial. Trials, 16(1), 578. doi: 10.1186/s13063-015-1079-1
Peebles, R., Wilson, J., & Lock, J. (2006). How do children with eating
disorders differ from adolescents with eating disorders at initial
evaluation? Journal of Adolescent Health, 39, 800--805. Peterson, C. B.,
Crosby, R. D., Wonderlich, S. A., Joiner, T., Crow, S. J., Mitchell, J.
E., ... Le Grange, D. (2007). Psychometric properties of the Eating
Disorder Examination-Questionnaire: Factor structure and internal
consistency. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 4, 386--389.
Pike, K. M., Dunne, P. E., & Addai, E. (2013). Expanding the boundaries:
Reconfiguring the demographics of the "typical" eating disordered
patient. Current Psychiatry Reports, 15(11), 411. doi:
10.1007/s11920-013-0411-2 Pinheiro, A. P., Bulik, C. M., Thornton, L.
M., Sullivan, P. F., Root, T. L., Bloss, C. S., ... Woodside, D. B.
(2010). Association study of 182 candidate genes in anorexia nervosa.
American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics,
153B(5), 1070--1080. Polivy, J., & Herman, C. P. (2002). Causes of
eating disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 187--213. Potier, M.,
Darcel, N., & Tomé, D. (2009). Protein, amino acids and the control of
food intake. Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care,
12(1), 54--58. Racine, S. E., Burt, S. A., & Klump, K. L. (2011).
Dietary restraint moderates genetic risk for binge eating. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 120, 119--128.

References Rask-Andersen, M., Olszewski, P. K., Levine, A. S., &
Schiöth, H. B. (2010). Molecular mechanisms underlying anorexia nervosa:
Focus on human gene association studies and systems controlling food
intake. Brain Research, 62(2), 147--164. Rastram, M., Bjure, J., &
Vestergren, E. (2001). Regional cerebral blood flow in weight-restored
anorexia nervosa: A preliminary study. Developmental Medicine and Child
Neurology, 43, 239--242. Reas, D. L., & Grilo, C. M. (2015).
Pharmacological treatment of binge eating disorder: Update review and
synthesis. Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy, 16(10), 1--16. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2015.1053465 Reas, D. L., Whisenhunt, B., & Netemeyer,
R. (2002). Development of the Body Checking Questionnaire: A self-report
measure of body checking behaviors. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 31(3), 324--333. Rieger, E., Van Buren, D. J., Bishop, M.,
TanofskyKraff, M., Welch, R., & Wilfley, D. E. (2010). An eating
disorder-specific model of interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT-ED): Causal
pathways and treatment implications. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(4),
400--410. Rigamonti, A. E., Sartorio, A., Scognamiglio, P., Bini, S.,
Monteleone, A. M., Mastromo, D., ... Monteleone, P. (2014). Different
effects of cholestyramine on postprandial secretions of cholecystokinin
and peptide YY in women with bulimia nervosa. Neuropsychobiology, 70(4),
228--234. doi: 10.1159/000368160 Rø, Ø., Martinsen, E. W., Hoffart, A.,
Sexton, H., & Rosenvinge, J. H. (2005). The interaction of personality
disorders and eating disorders: A two-year prospective study of patients
with longstanding eating disorders. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 38(2), 106--111. doi: 10.1002/eat.20166 Rohde, P., Stice, E.,
& Marti, C. N. (2015). Development and predictive effects of eating
disorder risk factors during adolescence: Implications for prevention
efforts. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48(2), 187--198.
doi: 10.1002/eat.22270 Russell, G. (1979). Bulimia nervosa: An ominous
variant of anorexia nervosa. Psychological Medicine, 9, 429--448. Safer,
D. L., Telch, C. F., & Agras, W. S. (2001). Dialectical behavior therapy
for bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158(4), 632--634.
Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih .gov/pubmed/11282700

515

Schag, K., Leehr, E. J., Martus, P., Bethge, W., Becker, S., Zipfel, S.,
& Giel, K. E. (2015). Impulsivity-focused group intervention to reduce
binge eating episodes in patients with binge eating disorder: Study
protocol of the randomised controlled IMPULS trial. BMJ Open, 5(12),
e009445. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009445 Schapman-Williams, A. M.,
Lock, J., & Couturier, J. (2006). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
adolescents with binge eating syndromes: A case series. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 39(3), 252--255. Schienle, A., Schafer, A.,
Hermann, A., & Vaitl, D. (2009). Binge-eating disorder: Reward
sensitivity and brain activation to images of food. Biological
Psychiatry, 65(8), 654--661. Schizophrenia Working Group of the
Psychiatric Genetics Consortium. (2014). Biological insights from 108
schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature, 511(7510), 421--427.
Schmidt, U., Lee, S., Beecham, J., Perkins, S., Treasure, J., Yi, I.,
... Eisler, I. (2007). A randomized clinical trial of family therapy and
cognitive behavioral therapy guided self-care for adolescent bulimia
nervosa and related conditions. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164,
591--598. Selvini Palazzoli, M. (1974). Self-starvation: From the
intrapsychic to the transpersonal approach. London, England: Chaucer.
Shapiro, J. R., Woolson, S. L., Hamer, R. M., Kalarchian, M. A., Marcus,
M. D., & Bulik, C. M. (2007). Evaluating binge eating disorder in
children: Development of the Children's Binge Eating Disorder Scale
(C-BEDS). International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40, 82--89. Smink,
F. R. E., van Hoeken, D., & Hoek, H. W. (2012). Epidemiology of eating
disorders: Incidence, prevalence and mortality rates. Current Psychiatry
Reports, 14(4), 406--414. Retrieved from http://
www.springerlink.com/index/10.1007/s11920-012 -0282-y Smink, F. R. E.,
van Hoeken, D., Oldehinkel, A. J., & Hoek, H. W. (2014). Prevalence and
severity of DSM-5 eating disorders in a community cohort of adolescents.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 47(6), 610--619. doi:
10.1002/eat.22316 Stein, R. I., Kenardy, J., Wiseman, C. V., Dounchis,
J. Z., Arnow, B. A., & Wilfley, D. E. (2007). What's driving the binge
in binge eating disorder? A prospective examination of precursors and
consequences.

516

Eating Disorders

International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(3), 195--203. Steinglass,
J. E., Albano, A. M., Simpson, H. B., Wang, Y., Zou, J., Attia, E., &
Walsh, B. T. (2014). Confronting fear using exposure and response
prevention for anorexia nervosa: A randomized controlled pilot study.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 47(2), 174--180. doi:
10.1002/eat.22214 Steinglass, J. E., Sysko, R., Glasofer, D., Albano, A.
M., Simpson, H. B., & Walsh, B. T. (2010). Rationale for the application
of exposure and response prevention to the treatment of anorexia
nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders. Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1002/eat.20784 Steinhausen, H. C. (2002). The
outcome of anorexia nervosa in the 20th century. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 159(8), 1284--1293. Steinhausen, H. C., & Weber, S. (2009).
The outcome of bulimia nervosa: Findings from one-quarter century of
research. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(12), 1331--1341. Retrieved
from http://www .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19884225 Stern, S. L., Dixon,
K. N., Jones, D., Lake, M., Nemzer, E., & Sansone, R. (1989). Family
environment in anorexia nervosa and bulimia. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 8(1), 25--31. doi:
10.1002/1098-108X(198901)8:1\<25::AID-EAT226 0080104\>3.0.CO;2-S Stice,
E. (2002). Risk and maintenance factors for eating pathology: A
meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 128(5), 825--848. doi:
10.1037//0033 -2909.128.5.825 Stice, E., Burton, E. M., & Shaw, H.
(2004). Prospective relations between bulimic pathology, depression, and
substance abuse: Unpacking comorbidity in adolescent girls. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72(1), 62--71. doi: 10.1037/0022
-006X.72.1.62 Stice, E., Marti, C. N., & Rohde, P. (2013). Prevalence,
incidence, impairment, and course of the proposed DSM-5 eating disorders
diagnoses in an 8-year prospective community study of young women.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122(2), 445--457. doi: 10.1037/a0030679
Stice, E., Presnell, K., & Spangler, D. (2002). Risk factors for binge
eating onset in adolescent girls: A 2-year prospective investigation.
Health Psychology, 21, 131--138. Stice, E., & Shaw, H. E. (2002). Role
of body dissatisfaction in the onset and maintenance of eating

pathology: A synthesis of research findings. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 53, 985--993. Stice, E., Spoor, S., Bohon, C., Veldhuizen, M.
G., & Small, D. M. (2008). Relation of reward from food intake and
anticipated food intake to obesity: A functional magnetic resonance
imaging study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117(4), 924--935. Stice,
E., Spoor, S., Ng, J., & Zald, D. H. (2009). Relation of obesity to
consummatory and anticipatory food reward. Physiology and Behavior,
97(5), 551--560. Stice, E., Yokum, S., Burger, K. S., Epstein, L. H., &
Small, D. M. (2011). Youth at risk for obesity show greater activation
of striatal and somatosensory regions to food. Journal of Neuroscience,
31(12), 4360--4366. Striegel-Moore, R. H., Leslie, D., Petrill, S. A.,
Garvin, V., & Rosenheck, R. A. (2000). One-year use and cost of
inpatient and outpatient services among female and male patients with an
eating disorder: Evidence from a national database of health insurance
claims. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 27, 381--389.
Striegel-Moore, R. H., Rosselli, F., Perrin, N., DeBar, L., Wilson, G.
T., May, A., & Kraemer, H. C. (2009). Gender difference in the
prevalence of eating disorder symptoms. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 42(5), 471--474. doi: 10.1002/eat .20625 Striegel-Moore, R.
H., Wilson, G. T., DeBar, L., Perrin, N., Lynch, F., Rosselli, F., &
Kraemer, H. C. (2010). Cognitive behavioral guided self-help for the
treatment of recurrent binge eating. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 78(3), 312--321. Strober, M., Freeman, A., & Morrell, W.
(1999). Atypical anorexia nervosa: Separation from typical cases in
course and outcome in a long-term prospective study. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 25, 135--142. Stunkard, A. J. (1959).
Eating patterns and obesity. Psychiatric Quarterly, 33, 284--295.
Stunkard, A. J., Grace, W. J., & Wolff, H. G. (1955). The night-eating
syndrome: A pattern of food intake among certain obese patients.
American Journal of Medicine, 19, 78--86. Suisman, J. L., & Klump, K. L.
(2011). Genetic and neuroscientific perspectives on body image. In T. F.
Cash & L. Smolak (Eds.), Body image: A handbook of science, practice,
and prevention (pp. 29--38). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

References Swanson, S. A. (2011). Prevalence and correlates of eating
disorders in adolescents: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication Adolescent Supplement. Archives of General Psychiatry,
68(7), 714. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry .2011.22 Swinbourne, J.,
Hunt, C., Abbott, M., Russell, J., St Clare, T., & Touyz, S. (2012). The
comorbidity between eating disorders and anxiety disorders: Prevalence
in an eating disorder sample and anxiety disorder sample. Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 46(2), 118--131. doi: 10.1177/
0004867411432071 Sysko, R., Glasofer, D. R., Hildebrandt, T., Klimek,
P., Mitchell, J. E., Berg, K. C., ... Walsh, B. T. (2015). The eating
disorder assessment for DSM-5 (EDA-5): Development and validation of a
structured interview for feeding and eating disorders. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 48(5), 452--463. doi: 10.1002/eat.22388
Tchanturia, K., Brecelj, M., Sanchez, P., Morris, R., Rabe-Hesketh, S.,
& Treasure, J. L. (2004). An examination of cognitive flexibility in
eating disorders. Journal of the International Neuropsychological
Society, 10, 1--8. Tchanturia, K., Morris, R., Brecelj Anderluh, M.,
Collier, D. A., Nikolau, V., & Treasure, J. L. (2004). Set shifting in
anorexia nervosa: An examination before and after weight gain in full
recovery and the relationship to childhood and adult OCDP traits.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 38(5), 545--552. Tchanturia, K.,
Morris, R., Surguladze, S., & Treasure, J. L. (2002). An examination of
perceptual and cognitive set shifting tasks in acute anorexia nervosa
and following recovery. Journal of Eating and Weight Disorders, 7,
312--316. Tchanturia, K., Serpell, L., Troop, N. A., & Treasure, J. L.
(2001). Perceptual illusions in eating disorders: Rigid and fluctuating
styles. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 32,
107--115 Telch, C. F., Agras, W. S., & Linehan, M. M. (2001).
Dialectical behavior therapy for binge eating disorder. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69(6), 1061. Retrieved from
http://psycnet.apa.org/ journals/ccp/69/6/1061/ Thelen, M. H., Farmer,
J., Wonderlich, S., & Smith, M. (1991). A revision of the bulimia test:
The BULIT-R. Psychological Assessment, 3, 119--124. Thoma, H. (1967).
Anorexia nervosa. New York, NY: International Universities Press.

517

Thompson-Brenner, H., Franko, D. L., Thompson, D. R., Grilo, C. M.,
Boisseau, C. L., Roehrig, J. P., ... Masheb, R. (2013). Race/ethnicity,
education, and treatment parameters as moderators and predictors of
outcome in binge eating disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 81(4), 710--721. doi: 10.1037/a0032946 Thompson-Brenner, H.,
& Westen, D. (2005). Personality subtypes in eating disorders:
Validation of a classification in a naturalistic sample. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 186, 516--524. doi: 10.1192/bjp .186.6.516 Trace, S. E.,
Thornton, L. M., Root, T. L., Mazzeo, S. E., Lichtenstein, P., Pedersen,
N. L., & Bulik, C. M. (2011). Effects of reducing the frequency and
duration criteria for binge eating on lifetime prevalence of bulimia
nervosa and binge eating disorder: Implications for DSM-5. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 45(4), 531--536. doi: 10.1002/eat.20955
Treasure, J., & Russell, G. (2011). The case for early intervention in
anorexia nervosa: Theoretical exploration of maintaining factors.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 199(1), 5--7. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.110
.087585 Trummer, M., Eustacchio, S., Unger, F., Tillich, M., & Flaschka,
G. (2002). Right hemispheric frontal lesions as a cause for anorexia
nervosa report of three cases. Acta Neurochirurgica (Wien), 144,
797--801. Turner, B. J., Claes, L., Wilderjans, T. F., Pauwels, E.,
Dierckx, E., Chapman, A. L., & Schoevaerts, K. (2014). Personality
profiles in eating disorders: Further evidence of the clinical utility
of examining subtypes based on temperament. Psychiatry Research, 219(1),
157--165. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres .2014.04.036 Turner, H., Marshall, E.,
Wood, F., Stopa, L., & Waller, G. (2016). CBT for eating disorders: The
impact of early changes in eating pathology on later changes in
personality pathology, anxiety and depression. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 77, 1--6. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2015.11.011 Udo, T., McKee, S.
A., White, M. A., Masheb, R. M., Barnes, R. D., & Grilo, C. M. (2014).
Sex differences in biopsychosocial correlates of binge eating disorder:
A study of treatment-seeking obese adults in primary care setting.
General Hospital Psychiatry, 35(6), 587--591. doi:
10.1016/j.genhosppsych .2013.07.010 Uher, R., Murphy, T., Brammer, M.
J., Dalgleish, T., Phillips, M. L., Ng, V. W., ... Treasure, J. (2004).

518

Eating Disorders

Medial prefrontal cortex activity associated with symptom provocation in
eating disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161(7), 1238--1246.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2015). FDA expands use of Vyvanse to
treat binge-eating disorder. \[Press release\]. Retrieved from
http://www.fda .gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/
ucm432543.htm. Vall, E., & Wade, T. D. (2015). Predictors of treatment
outcome in individuals with eating disorders: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. International Journal of Eating Disorders. Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1002/eat.22411 Vanderlinden, J., Grave, R. D.,
Vandereycken, W., & Noorduin, C. (2001). Which factors do provoke
binge-eating? An exploratory study in female students. Eating Behavior,
2(1), 79--83. Vinai, P., Da Ros, A., Speciale, M., Gentile, N.,
Tagliabue, A., Vinai, P., ... Cardetti, S. (2015). Psychopathological
characteristics of patients seeking for bariatric surgery, either
affected or not by binge eating disorder following the criteria of the
DSM IV TR and of the DSM 5. Eating Behaviors, 16, 1--4. doi:
10.1016/j.eatbeh.2014.10.004 Von Holle, A., Pinheiro, P., Thornton, L.
M., Klump, K. L., Berrettini, W. H., Brandt, H., ... Bulik, C. M.
(2008). Temporal patterns of recovery across eating disorders subtype.
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 42(2), 108--117.
Vrabel, K. R., Rø, Ø., Martinsen, E. W., Hoffart, A., & Rosenvinge, J.
H. (2009). Five-year prospective study of personality disorders in
adults with longstanding eating disorders. International Journal of
Eating Disorders. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1002/eat.20662
Wagner, G., Penelo, E., Nobis, G., Mayrhofer, A., Wanner, C., Schau, J.,
... Karwautz, A. (2015). Predictors for good therapeutic outcome and
drop-out in technology assisted guided self-help in the treatment of
bulimia nervosa and bulimia like phenotype. European Eating Disorders
Review, 23(2), 163--169. doi: 10.1002/erv.2336 Wagner, G., Penelo, E.,
Wanner, C., Gwinner, P., Trofaier, M.-L., Imgart, H., ... Karwautz, A.
F. K. (2013). Internet-delivered cognitive-behavioural therapy v.
conventional guided self-help for bulimia nervosa: Long-term evaluation
of a randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 202(2),
135--141. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.111.098582

Wallin, U., Kronovall, P., & Majewski, M. (2000). Body awareness therapy
in teenage anorexia nervosa: Outcome after 2 years. European Eating
Disorders Review, 8, 19--30. Walsh, B. T. (2013). The enigmatic
persistence of anorexia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170(5),
477--484. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2012 .12081074 Walsh, B. T., Attia, E.,
Glasofer, D. R., & Sysko, R. (Eds.). (2015). Handbook of assessment and
treatment of eating disorders. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing. Walsh, B. T., Kaplan, A. S., Attia, E., Olmsted, M.,
Parides, M., Carter, J., ... Rockert, W. (2006). Fluoxetine after weight
restoration in anorexia nervosa: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA, 295,
2605--2612. Wang, G. J., Geliebter, A., Volkow, N. D., Telang, F. W.,
Logan, J., Jayne, M. C., ... Fowler, J. S. (2011). Enhanced striatal
dopamine release during food stimulation in binge eating disorder.
Obesity, 19(8), 1601--1608. Ward, A., Tiller, J., Treasure, J. L., &
Russell, C. (2000). Eating disorders: Psyche or soma? International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 27, 279--287. Watson, H. J., & Bulik, C. M.
(2013). Update on the treatment of anorexia nervosa: Review of clinical
trials, practice guidelines and emerging interventions. Psychological
Medicine, 43(12), 2477--2500. doi: 10.1017/S0033291712002620 Westen, D.,
& Harnden-Fischer, J. (2001). Personality profiles in eating disorders:
Rethinking the distinction between axis I and axis II. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 158(4), 547--562. Retrieved from
http://journals.psychiatryonline.org/article.aspx?
Volume=158&page=547&journalID=13 Wildes, J. E., Marcus, M. D., Cheng,
Y., McCabe, E. B., & Gaskill, J. A. (2014). Emotion acceptance behavior
therapy for anorexia nervosa: A pilot study. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 47(8), 870--873. doi: 10.1002/eat.22241 Wilfley, D.
E., Welch, R. R., Stein, R. I., Spurrell, E. B., Cohen, L. R., Saelens,
B. E., ... Matt, G. E. (2002). A randomized comparison of group
cognitivebehavioral therapy and group interpersonal psychotherapy for
the treatment of overweight individuals with binge-eating disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 59(8), 713--721. Retrieved from
http://www .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12150647

References Wilson, G. T., Grilo, C. M., & Vitousek, K. M. (2007).
Psychological treatment of eating disorders. American Psychologist,
62(3), 199--216. Wilson, G. T., Wilfley, D. E., Agras, W. S., & Bryson,
S. W. (2010). Psychological treatments of binge eating disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 67(1), 1--8. Retrieved from
http://archpsyc .jamanetwork.com.proxy.library.emory.edu/article
.aspx?articleid=210525 Wilson, G. T., & Zandberg, L. J. (2012).
Cognitivebehavioral guided self-help for eating disorders: Effectiveness
and scalability. Clinical Psychology Review, 32(4), 343--357.

519

Wojtowicz, A. E., & von Ranson, K. M. (2012). Weighing in on risk
factors for body dissatisfaction: A oneyear prospective study of
middle-adolescent girls. Body Image, 9(1), 20--30. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim
.2011.07.004 Wonderlich, S. A., Peterson, C. B., Crosby, R. D., Smith,
T. L., Klein, M. H., Mitchell, J. E., & Crow, S. J. (2014). A randomized
controlled comparison of integrative cognitive-affective therapy (ICAT)
and enhanced cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT-E) for bulimia nervosa.
Psychological Medicine, 44(03), 543--553. doi: 10.1017/S0033291713001098

Chapter 13 Sexual Dysfunctions Cindy M. Meston and Amelia M. Stanton

S

exual problems are broadly defined as the inability to respond sexually
or to experience sexual pleasure. In order for a sexual problem to be
diagnosed as a sexual dysfunction, it must meet the criteria specified
in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association \[APA\], 2013); the
individual also needs to report distress and should identify the problem
as persistent and recurrent, occurring for a minimum of 6 months. In the
DSM-5, sexual dysfunctions are also evaluated for severity and duration.
For each disorder there are subtypes of lifelong versus acquired, and
generalized versus situational. A lifelong disorder is one that has
always been present. In contrast, an acquired disorder involves a loss
of function that was previously unimpaired. A generalized sexual
dysfunction is one in which the sexual problem occurs in all contexts
regardless of stimulation, situation, or partner; a situational sexual
disorder is one in which the problem occurs only in certain contexts,
such as with specific partners, or while engaging in specific sexual
activities. Although people may complain of a variety of sexual
concerns, the DSM-5 recognizes only three major categories of sexual
dysfunction: interest/arousal, orgasm, and pain. This chapter provides
an overview of the definition, prevalence, etiology, assessment, and
treatment of each of the sexual disorders described by the DSM-5 that
fall within these three categories.

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders Sexual interest refers to the
motivation to engage in sexual activity. Interest is commonly referred
to as "desire," "sex drive," and "sexual appetite," and describes the
sexual feelings motivating a person to seek some type of sexual
activity, whether partnered or alone. Sexual arousal is conceptualized
as the second phase of the sexual response cycle and is defined by both
physical and mental readiness for sexual activity. Physiological changes
occur in the body to prepare for a sexual interaction (erection in
males, vaginal swelling and lubrication in females).

520

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders

521

Female Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder Definition, Diagnosis, and
Prevalence Female sexual interest/arousal disorder (FSIAD) is defined in
the DSM-5 as lack of, or significantly reduced, sexual interest/arousal.
A woman must have three of the following six symptoms in order to
receive the diagnosis: absent or reduced interest in sexual activity;
absent or reduced sexual thoughts or fantasies; no or reduced initiation
of sexual activity, and typically unreceptive to a partner's attempts to
initiate; absent or reduced sexual excitement or pleasure in almost all
or all sexual encounters; absent or reduced sexual interest/arousal in
response to any internal or external sexual cues; and absent or reduced
genital or nongenital sensations during sexual activity in all or almost
all sexual encounters. These symptoms must cause clinically significant
distress and have persisted for a minimum of 6 months. The disorder is
specified by severity level and subtyped into lifelong versus acquired
and generalized versus situational. In past editions of the DSM, sexual
interest and sexual arousal have been considered to be separate, though
related, constructs. DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) described separate diagnoses
for hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD) and female sexual arousal
disorder (FSAD). HSDD was characterized by the absence of sexual
fantasies and lack of desire for sexual activity, and FSAD was
characterized by continuous or recurrent inability to retain, or
maintain, sufficient lubrication or swelling. The DSM-5 sexual
dysfunction subworkgroup cited evidence that desire and arousal could
not be reliably distinguished in women (e.g., Brotto, Heiman, & Tolman,
2009). Other experts in the field disagree with this conceptualization
(e.g., Clayton, DeRogatis, & Rosen, 2012), and the categorization of
desire and arousal disorders into one diagnostic category in the DSM-5
has led to substantial controversy in the field. As FSIAD is new to the
DSM, prevalence studies have not yet been published. However, previous
work has examined the prevalence of low sexual interest (HSDD) and low
sexual arousal (FSAD) in women. One of the most frequently cited
prevalence studies found low sexual interest in 22% of women in the
general U.S. population (Laumann, Paik, & Rosen, 1999). In a survey of
women from 29 countries, rates of self-reported low sexual interest
ranged from 26% to 43% (Laumann et al., 2005). For a clinical diagnosis
of HSDD, which takes levels of distress into account, rates are lower
and range from around 7% to 23%, depending on a woman's age, cultural
background, and reproductive status. Prevalence studies of sexual
arousal problems in women have focused primarily on self-reported lack
of vaginal lubrication. These studies have not always included all the
information necessary to diagnose FSAD, as many did not inquire about
distress or level of stimulation. Bancroft, Loftus, & Long, (2003) found
that 31.2% of heterosexual women in the United States reported
lubrication problems over the past month. For women living in the United
Kingdom, the prevalence of persistent lubrication problems, lasting 3
months or more, ranged from 2.6% (Mercer et al., 2003) to 28% (Dunn,
Croft, & Hackett, 1999). Research that does reference distress has found
that many women reporting lubrication problems are not distressed by
their lack of lubrication. Lubrication problems increase with age and
menopausal status.

522

Sexual Dysfunctions

Factors Associated With Female Sexual Interest/ Arousal Disorder Since
FSIAD is a new diagnostic category, we must rely on prior research to
describe what is known about the causes and consequences of HSDD and
FSAD (the prior diagnoses) in women. These elements are broken down into
biological factors, including medical health, hormones, and medications,
and psychological factors, including stress, relationships, comorbid
mental illness, and history of sexual abuse.

Biological Factors Endocrine levels are the most commonly discussed
biological factor that may be related to low sexual interest in women.
Lack of sexual desire has been associated with menopause, during which
decreased ovarian function results in lower estrogen production.
Epidemiological studies indicate that "surgical menopause" induced by
oophorectomy (surgical removal of the ovaries), which causes a sharp
drop in estradiol and testosterone, is a more prominent risk factor for
HSDD than natural menopause, particularly among younger cohorts
(Dennerstein, Koochaki, Barton, & Graziottin, 2006). Increased sexual
desire has been found in women near the time of ovulation (e.g., Diamond
& Wallen, 2011), and research has shown that decreased sexual desire
occurs after chemical suppression of ovarian hormones (Schmidt &
Rubinow, 2009). Researchers have concluded that sex hormones,
specifically androgens, estrogens, and progestins, affect female sexual
interest and function, but there is still some uncertainty as to which
hormones are most important. Androgens and estrogens govern the
structure and function of the cervix, vagina, labia, and clitoris. With
respect to sexual interest, androgens may be most influential, as they
represent the immediate precursor to estrogen synthesis and thus affect
sexual desire, mood, and energy. The concept of androgen insufficiency
as a potential cause of low sexual desire in women is controversial.
Researchers originally believed that androgen depletion occurred
organically due to age-related decline in adrenal and ovarian androgen
production; now, the field recognizes that the decline in androgen
production begins in the early 20s, which means that it does not occur
as a result of natural menopause. Though low androgen levels may
contribute to hypoactive sexual desire in women, the lack of reference
ranges for androgens in women has made it difficult to determine when a
clinical insufficiency is present. Evidence for a relationship between
testosterone and women's sexual desire indicates that this hormone is
correlated with solitary desire. In contrast to dyadic desire, or the
desire to be sexual with another person, solitary desire is thought to
be a "true" measure of desire, one that is less influenced by social
context and more responsive to endogenous physiology. Several studies
have indicated that higher levels of testosterone are associated with
increased solitary desire (e.g., Van Anders, Brotto, Farrell, & Yule,
2009). In these same studies, dyadic desire showed no or negative
correlation with testosterone. Masturbation, which is considered to be a
behavioral index of solitary desire, has been linked to testosterone,
such that women with low testosterone and high masturbation reported
higher solitary desire than women with low testosterone and low
masturbation (Van Anders, 2012). There has also been recent interest in
whether the hormonal changes caused by oral contraception use can lead
to low sexual interest in women. Oral contraceptives involve

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders

523

a combination of estrogens and progesterone, and produce substantial
increases in sex hormone-binding globulin, which can lower testosterone
levels. It is possible that this decrease in testosterone could
contribute to the low sexual desire reported by some women taking oral
contraceptives. Research on the relationship between oral contraceptives
and sexual desire has produced mixed results, with studies reporting
that oral contraceptives increase, decrease, or do not change women's
sexual desire. Despite the fact that oral contraceptives have been shown
to decrease androgen levels, they have not been consistently associated
with decreases in sexual desire. When McCall and Meston (2006) assessed
cues for sexual desire, they determined that contraceptive use did not
influence sexual desire in women with and without HSDD. Other studies
have shown that oral contraceptives do have a negative impact on libido.
For instance, a recent study of pre- and postmenopausal women revealed
that women taking oral contraceptives had a significantly lower
incidence of sexual thoughts and sexual interest compared to nonusers
(Davison, Bell, LaChina, Holden, & Davis, 2008). In a study of over
1,000 German medical students, oral contraceptive users had
significantly lower scores on the desire subscale of the Female Sexual
Function Index (FSFI; Rosen et al., 2000) than did nonusers (Wallwiener
et al., 2010); however, the causal nature of the relationship could not
be determined. It is important to note that, for some women, the
benefits derived from the use of oral contraception, such as freedom
from a fear of pregnancy and a reduction in menstrual symptoms, may
serve to enhance, rather than inhibit, sexual desire. It is well known
that many psychoactive medications affect sexual desire. There are both
intraclass and interclass variations among antidepressants with respect
to sexual dysfunction and particularly sexual desire. These variations
are largely dependent on neurotransmitter receptor profiles and
genetics. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), used most
commonly for treating depression and anxiety, increase serotonin levels
and produce a variety of sexual side effects in both men and women
including decreased desire. Sexual dysfunction secondary to SSRI use is
believed to result, in part, from activation of the serotonin2 receptor.
Newer generations of antidepressants that act as antagonists (blockers)
at the serotonin2 receptor---for example, agomelatine (Valdoxan),
bupropion (Wellbutrin), moclobemide (Amira), and reboxetine
(Edronax)---are associated with fewer sexual side effects. Future
research should seek to validate genetic factors associated with
antidepressant medications. Doing so would enable personal genotyping
and the development of individualized treatment approaches. Research has
shown that endocrine levels play a role in female sexual arousal.
Specifically, estrogens influence the physiological function of tissues,
including the lower genital tissues. That is, estrogens have
vasodilatory and vasoprotective effects that govern blood flow into the
vagina and the clitoris. Reductions in estradiol during menopause and
lactation have been associated with reduced blood flow to the vaginal
walls, resulting in reduced vaginal lubrication. One of the major
biological changes that occurs during menopause is a decrease in
circulating estrogen; that helps account for decreased lubrication and
thus decreased genital arousal. Yet, there is no precise estrogen
"cutoff" value that indicates whether a woman's level of estrogen is
adequate for sexual arousal. In other words, it is hard to determine
whether estrogen deficiency can be deemed a specific cause of sexual
arousal problems. Both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous
systems (SNS and PNS) play a role in genital arousal in women.
Norepinephrine (NE) is the primary neurotransmitter

524

Sexual Dysfunctions

involved in SNS communication, and when measured after exposure to a
sexually arousing film, blood levels of NE are higher than pre-film
levels (Exton et al., 2000). The spinal cord literature provides strong
support for the role of the SNS in female sexual arousal. Women with
spinal cord injuries between areas T11 and L2 in the spinal cord show a
lack of lubrication during psychological sexual arousal (Sipski,
Alexander, & Rosen, 1997). This region is associated with
sympathetically mediated genital vasocongestion. That is, this is the
area of the spinal cord where sympathetic nerves project to the genital
region. Laboratory studies have also provided evidence for the role of
SNS involvement in women's sexual arousal. Meston and colleagues
reported that moderate activation of the SNS using either exercise
(Meston & Gorzalka, 1995, 1996a, 1996b) or ephedrine (Meston & Heiman,
1998) facilitated genital sexual arousal, and suppression of the SNS
using clonidine inhibited genital arousal (Meston, Gorzalka, & Wright,
1997). A recent study proposed there is an optimal level of SNS arousal
that is necessary for adequate genital arousal in women (Lorenz, Harte,
Hamilton, & Meston, 2012). Lorenz and colleagues found that moderate
increases in SNS activity were associated with higher physiological
sexual arousal responses, while both very low and very high SNS
activation were associated with lower levels of physiological sexual
arousal. Similarly, low resting state heart rate variability has been
associated with risk for sexual arousal problems (Stanton, Lorenz,
Pulverman, & Meston, 2015). Heart rate variability is a noninvasive test
of autonomic imbalance. Mechanisms that interfere with normal SNS
activity, such as stress, can negatively impact a woman's ability to
become sexually aroused. Vascular and neurological problems (e.g.,
diabetes, pelvic vascular disorder, multiple sclerosis) often lead to
sexual arousal concerns. Prescription drugs, especially SSRIs and SNRIs,
may also decrease sexual arousal and vaginal lubrication in women
(Frohlich & Meston, 2000). Some hormonal forms of contraceptives have
been shown to reduce arousal.

Psychological Factors Low sexual interest and/or arousal has also been
linked with a number of psychosocial factors in both men and women.
After controlling for age, relationship satisfaction, and sexual
satisfaction, Murray and Milhausen (2012) found that relationship
duration significantly predicted variance in sexual desire.
Specifically, women's sexual desire decreased as relationship duration
increased. Among married women, feelings of overfamiliarity and
institutionalization of the relationship may lead to decreased desire.
Daily hassles, such as worrying about children and paying the bills, and
high-stress jobs are offenders for suppressing sexual desire, as are a
multitude of relationship or partner-related issues. In regard to the
latter, couples reporting sexual difficulties have been characterized by
sex therapists as having less overall satisfaction within their
relationships, an increased number of disagreements, more conflict
resolution problems, and more sexual communication problems including
discomfort with discussing sexual activities compared to couples without
sexual problems. Warmth, caring, and affection within the relationship
are undoubtedly linked to feelings of sexual desire. Beliefs and
attitudes about sexuality acquired over the course of sexual development
can influence sexual desire and sexual response across the lifespan.
Women who internalize passive gender roles or negative attitudes toward
sexuality may be at greater risk of experiencing sexual problems (Nobre
& Pinto-Gouveia, 2006). Societal factors may also contribute to low
sexual interest and arousal. Sexual norms differ greatly by region and
by culture. Women who are socialized to believe that being

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders

525

interested in sex is shameful often experience guilt and shame during
sex, feelings that in turn have been associated with a number of sexual
concerns. McCall and Meston (2006) reported four distinct factors that
serve as cues for sexual desire in women. These factors are emotional
bonding cues (e.g., "feeling a sense of commitment from your partner"),
erotic/explicit cues (e.g., "watching an erotic movie"),
visual/proximity cues (e.g., "seeing/talking with someone famous"), and
romantic/implicit cues (e.g., "having a romantic dinner with your
partner"). Not surprisingly, when compared to sexually healthy women,
women diagnosed with HSDD reported significantly fewer cues in each of
these domains. Psychological conditions most commonly associated with a
lack of sexual interest include social phobia, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, panic disorder, and mood disorders---depression in particular.
It is feasible that sexuality becomes of secondary importance when an
individual is experiencing substantial distress in other areas of his or
her life. With regard to depression, it is feasible that rumination
about negative events, a common cognitive aspect of depression, may
contribute to the decrease in desire noted in depressed persons by
leading to an exclusive focus on aspects of sexuality that are
unpleasant. It is well known that people with depression are prone to
interpret negative events as caused by stable, global causes, and this
cognitive style could certainly negatively affect one's perception of
sexuality. A history of unwanted sexual experiences can also negatively
affect sexual desire. Many, but not all, women with a history of
childhood sexual abuse fear sexual intimacy, are likely to avoid sexual
interactions with a partner, and are less receptive to sexual approaches
from their partners (Rellini, 2008). Sexual self-schemas, cognitive
generalizations about sexual aspects of the self that guide sexual
behavior and influence the processing of sexually relevant information,
have been shown to differ between women with and without a history of
childhood sexual abuse (e.g., Meston, Rellini, & Heiman, 2006; Stanton,
Boyd, Pulverman, & Meston, 2015). A high proportion of women with a
history of childhood sexual abuse engage in risky sexual behaviors, such
as sexual intercourse with strangers while intoxicated. It is unknown
whether this behavior is a reflection of high levels of sexual desire,
an inability to maintain or enforce physical boundaries, a compulsive
act, emotional avoidance, or some combination of these reasons. Other
studies have found that prior sexual abuse is associated with low sexual
interest (e.g., Leonard & Follette, 2002). Many of the factors affecting
women's sexual desire noted earlier also affect women's sexual arousal.
According to the dual-control model proposed by Bancroft and Janssen
(2000), sexual arousal is the combination of both excitatory and
inhibitory forces. Five main themes have been described as potential
inhibitors or enhancers of sexual arousal for women aged 18 to 84 years:
feelings about one's body, negative consequences of sexual activity
(e.g., bad reputation, pregnancy), feeling desired and accepted by a
sexual partner, feeling used by a sexual partner, and negative mood
(Graham, Sanders, Milhausen, & Mcbride, 2004).

Assessment and Treatment of Female Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder
Given that FSIAD is new to DSM-5, there are no assessment tools based on
the new diagnostic criteria, and there are no published treatment
studies that use the new criteria. Therefore, this section draws on the
HSDD and FSAD literature.

526

Sexual Dysfunctions

Assessment The assessment of sexual interest in women is difficult due
to the subjective and complex nature of sexual desire. In her model of
the female sexual response, Basson (2000) described the concept of
receptive desire. She explained that, though many women do not seek out
sexual activity, they respond sexually when approached by their partner.
Basson was the first to suggest that level of responsiveness to sexual
stimuli was indicative of desire in women. Assessing for low sexual
desire may include inquiring about sexual thoughts, fantasies, and
daydreams; examining the degree to which patients seek out sexually
suggestive material; questioning how often patients have the urge to
masturbate or engage in sensual self-touching; and determining level of
motivation for partnered sexual activity. Overall, assessment of sexual
desire needs to be carefully considered within the context of the dyadic
relationship, and must take into consideration factors known to affect
sexual functioning, such as the person's age, religion, culture; the
length of the relationship; the partner's sexual function; and the
context of the person's life. In the assessment of sexual arousal,
levels of physiological sexual arousal can be assessed indirectly by
using a vaginal photoplethysmograph to assess vaginal blood engorgement,
as well as by sonograms (pictures of internal organs derived from sound
waves bouncing off organs and other tissues), thermograms (images
derived from radiation in the long-infrared range of the electromagnetic
spectrum), and fMRI (an imaging technique that tracks changes in blood
concentration in inner organs) to assess blood engorgement in the
genitals. However these techniques are more commonly used for research
purposes than as clinical diagnostic tools. Assessment of sexual
interest and sexual arousal should comprise a complete sexual, medical,
and psychosocial history, which can be obtained through standardized
interviews and validated self-administered questionnaires. The clinician
should explore the onset of the sexual problem, taking into account
dates of surgeries, medication changes, and diagnoses of medical
conditions. It is also important to assess the context of the problem,
especially situations or cues that have stimulated sexual desire in the
past. If a person reports specific cues for sexual desire, it should be
determined whether they are now absent from his or her life, no longer
of interest, or are now unacceptable for some reason. It is also
imperative to explore the person's feelings about his or her current
sexual partner to look for relationship factors that could be
contributing to the sexual difficulties. Laboratory testing may be
warranted, given the close relationship between androgens and sexual
desire. A complete psychosocial history should include situational
problems, relationship history, sexual problems of the partner, mood,
sexual satisfaction, and psychological disorders. Treatment For women
experiencing low sexual desire as a result of biologically-compromised
natural levels of androgens, treatment with testosterone replacement
therapy can be an effective option. Currently, no testosterone products
have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
the treatment of low sexual desire in women. However, many clinicians
prescribe "off-label" use of testosterone, in the form of patches or
pills, for women with low sexual desire. One estimate suggests that 4.1
million prescriptions for off-label testosterone are made annually in
the United States (Davis & Braunstein, 2012). The use of transdermal
testosterone for reduced sexual desire in surgically menopausal

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders

527

women was approved by the European Medicines Agency in 2010, but has yet
to be approved by the FDA or by Health Canada. Other hormonal therapies
for low sexual desire include estrogen treatment and tibolone therapy.
Estrogen treatment is particularly efficacious for desire problems that
stem from vulvovaginal atrophy. Given the established relationship
between low levels of estrogen and atrophy, estrogen therapy is the
first-line treatment for this particular condition (Tan, Bradshaw, &
Carr, 2012). Tibolone is a 19-nortestosterone derivative and a selective
tissue estrogenic activity regulator that is metabolized into
metabolites with estrogenic, progestagenic, and androgenic properties
(Brotto & Luria, 2014). Available in 90 countries (but not in the United
States), tibolone therapy has been shown to increase sexual desire and
lubrication. Nijland and colleagues (2008) demonstrated an overall
improvement in sexual function in women receiving tibolone. There are
some concerns, however, that tibolone may increase the risk of breast
cancer recurrence (Kenemans et al., 2009) and stroke (Cummings et al.,
2008) in older women. Since the success of using PDE-5 inhibitors---for
example, sildenafil (Viagra), tadalafil (Cialis), and vardenafil
hydrochloride (Levitra)---to treat erectile dysfunction, researchers
have attempted to find a comparable drug for women who are experiencing
sexual desire or arousal problems. Flibanserin (Addyi) was approved by
the FDA in 2015 after studies showed that the drug increased subjective
reports of sexually satisfying events. Flibanserin acts on different
neurotransmitters in the brain; the drug increases levels of
norepinephrine and dopamine and reduces levels of serotonin. There is
some research on other nonhormonal, centrally acting investigational
medications for low desire and arousal problems in women. Bupropion
(Wellbutrin), sometimes used to counteract sexual dysfunction secondary
to SSRI treatment, led to a modest improvement in sexual interest and
arousal among nondepressed premenopausal women and among premenopausal
women complaining of low sexual desire (Segraves, Clayton, Croft, Wolf,
& Warnock, 2004). Physiological aspects of low sexual arousal are most
commonly treated with topical lubricants that help mask impairments in
vaginal lubrication. They do not, however, enhance genital/clitoral
blood flow or genital sensations that are often decreased, and they have
not been shown to impact psychological sexual arousal. Evidence from
limited placebo-controlled studies indicates that sildenafil (Viagra)
increases genital engorgement in healthy, premenopausal women (Laan,
Smith, Boolell, & Quirk, 2002), and in postmenopausal women with severe
levels of genital arousal concerns (Basson & Brotto, 2003). Despite
reports of increased physiological sexual arousal, studies in general
have not found that these drugs positively impact a woman's
psychological experience of sexual arousal. This suggests that, for
women, psychological factors such as relationship satisfaction, mood
state, and sexual scenarios may play a more important role in feelings
of sexual desire and arousal than do physiological genital cues. If this
is the case, drugs that target increasing vasocongestion are likely to
be most effective in women with genital sexual arousal disorder whose
primary complaint is decreased genital responding, experienced as
decreases in lubrication and/or feelings of vaginal fullness or
engorgement. This would most likely be women who are postmenopausal, who
have undergone oophorectomy, or who suffer from arterial vascular
problems. For some women, if a drug increases vaginal engorgement, to
the extent that it is detected and labeled as a sexual feeling, this may
also enhance their feelings of more general, psychological arousal.

528

Sexual Dysfunctions

Studies on vasodilator drugs for women have revealed a notable placebo
effect on women's sexual arousal. That is, up to 40% of women in the
placebo group of randomized clinical trials for sildenafil and other
pharmacological agents reported significant improvements in sexual
arousal. Nonspecific factors, such as expecting to improve, having
contact with a sexuality professional, and monitoring sexual response,
can exert a powerful influence on women's sexual arousal and
satisfaction in general. The EROS clitoral therapy device (Urometrics,
St. Paul, Minnesota) is an FDAapproved treatment for women's sexual
arousal concerns. This small, handheld device increases vasocongestion
in the clitoral and labial region via a suction mechanism and has been
reported to increase vaginal lubrication and sensation (Billups et al.,
2001). Psychological treatments for low desire include education about
factors that affect sexual desire, couples exercises (e.g., scheduling
times for physical and emotional intimacy), communication training
(e.g., opening up about sexual issues and needs), cognitive
restructuring of dysfunctional beliefs (e.g., a good sexual experience
does not always end with an orgasm), sexual fantasy training (e.g.,
training people to develop and explore mental imagery), and sensate
focus. Sensate focus, introduced by Masters and Johnson in the 1970s, is
a behavioral technique in which couples learn to focus on the
pleasurable sensations brought about by touching, while decreasing
attention on goal-directed sex (e.g., orgasm). Recent research has also
indicated that mindfulness-based approaches, which cultivate active
awareness of the body and its sensations in a nonjudgmental and
compassionate way, may be helpful for women with FSIAD (e.g., Brotto &
Basson, 2014). By focusing on the physical sensations of sexual
activity, instead of being preoccupied with sexual performance or
current level of arousal, couples can learn to be present and to respond
to their partner during the sexual situation. In the beginning stages of
sensate focus couples are encouraged to touch each other's bodies and
assess for sexual sensations but refrain from touching breasts or
genitals, or engaging in intercourse. Over time, couples are encouraged
to touch more and more increasingly erotic areas of the body in order to
build organic desire, in preparation for intercourse. When desire has
been fully heightened, intercourse is reintroduced as part of the sexual
repertoire. For women in satisfying relationships, treatment may include
identifying potential distracting, negative thoughts and helping them to
let go of these thoughts during sexual activity. Leiblum and Wiegel
(2002) described four such types of distracting thoughts in women: myths
and misconceptions (e.g., "women are not supposed to enjoy sex"),
negative emotions, performance anxiety, and body image concerns (e.g.,
focusing on unattractive aspects of one's body). Behavioral techniques
designed to help men and women explore their sexual likes and dislikes,
alone or with their partners, can be used to help them associate sexual
behaviors with positive affect and experiences. For individuals who are
distracted by feelings of shame or embarrassment about their bodies,
cognitive restructuring might involve helping them to identify their
fears (e.g., a fear of rejection) and dysfunctional beliefs (e.g., "my
partner thinks my body is not sexy") and then test the accuracy of these
beliefs through a series of strategically designed behavioral
experiments. The experiments aim to reduce avoidance behavior and
provide corrective experiences to counteract dysfunctional beliefs. For
example, a woman who keeps her clothing on during sex because she feels
that her partner would reject her if he saw her naked would be
encouraged to incrementally remove pieces of clothing, and test the
reaction of her partner.

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders

529

Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Definition, Diagnosis, and
Prevalence Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder (MHSDD) is defined in
the DSM-5 as persistent or recurrently deficient sexual or erotic
thoughts, fantasies, and desire for sexual activity. These symptoms must
have persisted for a minimum of 6 months, and they must cause clinically
significant distress. The disorder is specified by severity level and
subtyped into lifelong versus acquired and generalized versus
situational. In past editions of the DSM, hypoactive sexual desire
disorder was gender nonspecific and could therefore apply to either men
or women. As sexual desire and arousal problems have been combined into
a single disorder for women in DSM-5, MHSDD now accounts only for men.
Other than the change from a gender-nonspecific disorder to a
gender-specific disorder, there have not been any substantive
alterations in the diagnostic criteria from DSM-IV-TR to DSM-5. One
small change is worth noting. In DSM-IV-TR, hypoactive sexual desire
disorder required "persistent" low interest in sex. The DSM-5 now
specifies that the symptoms be present for at least 6 months before a
diagnosis can be conferred. Low desire is less commonly the presenting
clinical sexual complaint for men, who are more likely to present with
erectile dysfunction. Cultural norms that often portray men as being
ever desirous of sex may make it difficult for men to report low sexual
desire to their physicians or their psychologists. Most epidemiological
studies have not inquired about the full set of diagnostic criteria for
HSDD, making it difficult for researchers to determine accurate
prevalence rates for the disorder. Research studies have asked men if
they have a lack of interest in sex, but not whether the problem was
consistent over a period of 6 months and distressing. One European study
that examined the prevalence of distressingly low sexual interest in men
over at least a 2-month period found that 14.4% of men reported a
distressing lack of sexual desire lasting at least 2 months
(Carvalheira, Traeen, & Štulhofer, 2014). Men between the ages of 30 and
39 were most likely to report low sexual interest. Self-reported
prevalence rates of problems with desire range from 4.8% in the United
States (Laumann, Glasser, Neves, & Moreira, 2009) to 17% in the United
Kingdom (Mercer et al., 2003). Desire problems appear to increase with
age. In a sample of Swedish men between the ages of 66 and 74, 41%
experienced low sexual desire (Fugl-Meyer & Fugl-Meyer, 1999).
Prevalence rates typically decrease when studies examine persistent lack
of interest in sexual activity. Among 40- to 80-year-old men in the
United States, 4.8% reported an occasional lack of sexual desire, and
3.3% reported a frequent lack of sexual desire (Laumann et al., 2009).
Men in community samples are more likely to report desire problems than
men in clinical samples. In community samples, reports of desire
concerns exceed reports of erectile problems (e.g., Mercer et al.,
2003). Men in clinical settings may feel more comfortable talking about
erectile problems than desire problems, especially if they consider
their problems to be biological rather than psychological in nature.

Factors Associated With Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Given
that research has not yet examined factors associated with MHSDD as
defined in DSM-5, our review will focus on the causes and consequences
of low sexual interest

530

Sexual Dysfunctions

(formerly HSDD). Historically, hormones have been the focus of
biological research on low sexual desire in men. Recent studies have
also investigated the relationship between neurological disorders and
poor sex drive. Psychological causes of decreased interest in sexual
activity seem to include relationship difficulties and certain mental
health problems.

Biological Factors Hormonal factors are often implicated in low sexual
desire. In men for whom androgen levels have been suppressed, low
testosterone levels have been associated with low levels of sexual
interest (Bancroft, 2005). For these men, testosterone replacement has
been shown to increase sexual desire; this is not the case for men with
normal androgen levels (e.g., Corona, Rastrelli, Forti, & Maggi, 2011).
Hypogonadism, diminished functional activity of the gonads, has been
observed in 3% to7% of men between the ages of 30 and 69 and in 18% of
men aged 70 and older (Araujo et al., 2007). This condition may account
for the relationship between aging and low sexual interest.
Hyperprolactinemia, defined as high levels of prolactin, and
hypothyroidism have also been associated with low sexual desire in men.
Medications such as SSRIs and SNRIs have been linked to low sexual
interest in men. Atypical antidepressants may have a lower incidence of
reduced sexual desire (e.g., Clayton, Croft, & Handiwala, 2014).
Neurological disorders such as multiple sclerosis and medical conditions
such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), Crohn's disease, ulcerative
colitis, coronary disease, heart failure, renal failure, and HIV have
all been linked with low sexual desire in men. However, decreased desire
may result from the medications used to treat conditions like IBD, which
have been shown to lower testosterone. It remains unclear whether
decreases in desire are due to the conditions themselves, the
medications used to treat the conditions, or the psychosocial stressors
that often accompany the conditions. Further research in this area is
warranted. Psychological Factors Many psychological factors have been
associated with low sexual desire in men. These factors include
relationship problems, concerns about one's own sexual performance, and
comorbid psychological conditions, such as depression and anxiety. In a
sample of male outpatients seeking treatment for sexual dysfunction,
psychosocial symptoms were more predictive of low sexual interest than
hormonal and other biological factors (Corona et al., 2004).
Relationship problems and interpersonal factors have been strongly
associated with male sex drive. Men who have partners with low sexual
desire are more likely to have sexual desire concerns than men who have
partners without desire problems (McCabe & Connaughton, 2014). Desire
problems have also been linked to not finding one's partner attractive
and to long-term (more than 5 years) relationships (Carvalheira et al.,
2014). Individual factors, particularly mental health problems, have
also been related to sexual desire problems in men. In a survey of male
outpatients who sought treatment for sexual dysfunction, 43% of the men
with a history of psychiatric symptoms reported moderate to severe loss
of sexual desire (Corona et al., 2004). Many studies have highlighted
the correlation between depression and low sexual desire (e.g.,
Carvalheira et al., 2014).

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders

531

Assessment and Treatment of Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Given
that MHSDD is new to DSM-5, there are no assessment tools or treatment
studies based on the new diagnostic criteria. However, there are many
studies that focus independently on the assessment and treatment of low
sexual desire in men. Treatment for MHSDD varies based on the etiology
of the disorder, but the most common biological treatment centers on
increasing testosterone levels. Though treatments targeting testosterone
have been efficacious, they have recently been overprescribed and
overused by men with normal testosterone levels. Psychosocial treatment
for MHSDD includes cognitive and behavioral components, as well as
attention to building strong communication between partners.

Assessment Assessment for MHSDD should include private meetings with
each member of the couple, as well as a couples meeting. Individual
meetings with the male partner may reveal a number of diagnostic
factors, including atypical arousal patterns that are not being met by
his current partner, decreased attraction to his current partner, or a
sexual affair that is satisfying his sexual needs outside of his current
relationship. In addition to meeting with both the individual and the
couple, clinicians should also assess for changes in health status, life
stressors, and relationship factors around the time that the male
partner started to experience a lack of sexual interest. These factors
may become the target of the clinician's treatment plan. Clinicians
should also consider the possibility that male patients presenting with
complaints of low sexual desire may actually be suppressing their
desires. This often occurs in men with long-standing heterosexual
partners who either have had sexual relations with men or have
fantasized about sexual relations with men during masturbation (Meana &
Steiner, 2014). In such cases, the desire problem may be situational,
such that the patient lacks desire in the context of his heterosexual
relationship but experiences desire in other contexts (e.g., he may
fantasize about engaging in sexual activity with a different partner).
Treatment Treatment for low sexual desire in men should be etiologically
oriented. If low testosterone level is determined to be the likely cause
of MHSDD, biological treatment focuses primarily on increasing
testosterone levels. As mentioned earlier, hypogonadism in males
typically leads to low testosterone production, decreased sexual
interest, and difficulties sustaining an erection. Testosterone
replacement therapy can be delivered through the skin via an
over-the-counter gel or patch, by injections, or by slow release pellets
(Testopel) implanted under the skin. In a couple of studies, increasing
testosterone levels has been shown to have beneficial effects on sexual
motivations and sexual thoughts (Allan, Forbes, Strauss, & McLachlan,
2008; Wang et al., 2000). There has been some concern about the overuse
of testosterone gels, especially by men who have normal testosterone
levels. There has been a marked increase in off-label prescriptions of
testosterone, particularly transdermal testosterone, in most countries
between 2000 and 2011. One of the likely causes of this increase may be
the permissive U.S. and European guidelines for the prescription of
testosterone, which promote the

532

Sexual Dysfunctions

use of the drug for age-related functional androgen deficiency
(Handelsman, 2013). In some countries, total testosterone prescribing
exceeds the maximum amount that could be attributed to pathological
androgen deficiency, which is known to occur in about 0.5% of men
(Handelsman, 2010). In a study of older men randomly assigned to either
daily application of testosterone gel or daily application of a placebo
gel, men in the active condition had a greater frequency of
cardiovascular, respiratory, and dermatological events compared to men
in the control condition (Basaria et al., 2010). The incidence of
adverse cardiovascular events in the testosterone group was significant
enough to stop the trial before the completion of enrollment. If low
sexual desire is caused by elevated prolactin, another endocrinological
disorder, or by depression, or anxiety, there are different biological
treatment approaches to consider. Although organic hyperprolactinemia
more frequently affects women than men, many psychotropic medications
can cause increased prolactin in men. Treatment of other
endocrinological disorders, such as hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism,
can increase sexual desire, as it is often compromised by these
conditions. Depression and anxiety may also lead to decreased sexual
desire in men. Treatment for depression often entails the use of
antidepressants, which have been shown to impact sexual function in both
men and women. If a depressed patient is already experiencing decreases
in sexual desire before starting an antidepressant regimen, then his
doctor should consider prescribing an antidepressant that has more mild
effects on sexual function, such as mirtazapine (Remeron), bupropion
(Wellbutrin), or an SNRI like duloxetine (Cymbalta) (Clayton et al.,
2014). It is also noteworthy that men with metabolic syndrome commonly
report low sexual interest. If low sexual desire appears to be secondary
to metabolic syndrome, then clinicians may recommend a combination of
lifestyle changes, exercise, healthy diet, and testosterone replacement
therapy (Glina, Sharlip, & Hellstrom, 2013). Psychosocial treatment for
MHSDD mirrors psychological treatment for FSIAD, as MHSDD and FSIAD
share many causal psychological factors. Meana and Steiner (2014)
provide a thorough overview of efficacious psychosocial treatments for
MHSDD. Cognitive-affective-behavioral therapy is a treatment approach
that combines cognitive, emotion-centered, and behavioral strategies.
The cognitive component of the treatment includes identifying and
challenging maladaptive thoughts and sexual scripts that interfere with
sexual desire. Therapists may encourage patients with low desire to
refocus on sexual stimuli, either before or during sexual activity. The
emotional regulation aspect may help men decrease or control emotional
reactivity with acceptance techniques like mindfulness. Acceptance
techniques come into play in situations when patients may not be able to
achieve the sexual function or level of desire that they wish. In these
cases, learning to accept certain realities may have as positive an
impact as changing what can be modified. Effective psychosocial
treatment for MHSDD also includes different behavioral activation
strategies, such as using sensate focus and optimizing the timing of
sexual interactions, which help couples to refocus on sensuality and
encourage them to prioritize sexual activity.
Cognitive-affective-behavioral therapy for MHSDD also includes
relationship skills building and communication training, which are
important for men who are having trouble talking about sexual
preferences with their partners. The level of intimate connection
between partners may be linked to sexual desire, so some treatment
approaches highlight the importance of communication. Conflict
resolution is an important part of

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders

533

communication training, as therapists may help their male patients with
desire concerns by teaching them strategies to minimize blaming and
encourage self-soothing. Another relational approach to treating sexual
desire is the adoption of the Good Enough Sex (GES) model (McCarthy &
Metz, 2008), which embraces the acceptance of individual and couple
differences in the meaning and importance of sexual desire within the
context of the relationship.

Erectile Disorder Definition, Diagnosis, and Prevalence Erectile
disorder (ED) is defined in the DSM-5 as the recurrent inability to
achieve an erection, the inability to maintain an adequate erection,
and/or a noticeable decrease in erectile rigidity during partnered
sexual activity. In order to meet the diagnostic criteria, these
symptoms must have persisted for at least 6 months and must have
occurred on at least 75% of occasions. The disorder can be specified by
severity and subtyped as either generalized or situational. Men of all
ages occasionally have difficulty obtaining or maintaining an erection,
but clinically diagnosable erectile disorder is more common after age
50. Among men younger than age 35, the prevalence of ED ranges from 7%
to 10%. At least 18% of men over the age of 40, and more than 50% of men
over the age of 60 report erectile problems. However, only 3.5% of them
report consistent erectile problems (Laumann et al., 2005). It is
important to note that, as age increases, men experience a number of
normal physiological changes that affect erectile function. After age
60, there is a marked decrease in testosterone production, which impacts
erectile ability. Elderly men produce less ejaculate than younger men,
and orgasms become weaker and less frequent. There are a number of
factors beyond age that are associated with the prevalence of ED.
Married men are less likely to report erectile problems compared to
never married or divorced men (Laumann et al., 1999). Men with
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome are more likely
to have ED than men without these diseases (Grover et al., 2006). Health
factors such as smoking, obesity, and lack of exercise have been linked
to higher prevalence of ED (Rosen, Miner, & Wincze, 2014).

Factors Associated With Erection and Erectile Dysfunction There has been
a great deal of research on erectile dysfunction, identifying a number
of key biological and psychological causes. Biological factors are
related to changes in blood flow to the penis, and psychological factors
involve anxiety and negative expectations for performance.

Biological Factors Erection is caused by increased blood pressure in the
corpora cavernosa via increased blood inflow and decreased blood
outflow. In general, the likelihood of ED increases with different types
of vascular disease, such as hyperlipidemia, coronary heart disease, and
diabetes. The link between vascular problems and ED is so strong that ED
is considered an early warning sign of vascular disease, especially in
men under the age of 40

534

Sexual Dysfunctions

(e.g., Chew et al., 2010). Some researchers are in favor of viewing ED
as a vascular disorder (e.g., Schouten et al., 2008). Surgery, diabetes,
alcoholism, infectious diseases such as HIV and other viral infections,
and pelvic pathologies such as systemic lupus are all potential causes
of ED. Drugs that decrease dopamine or reduce testosterone production
are also implicated in ED. These include antihypertensive medications,
antipsychotic drugs, anxiolytics, antiandrogens, anticholesterol agents,
and drugs used to regulate heart rate. Antiparkinsonian medications
increase dopamine and facilitate erection.

Psychological Factors With respect to the different psychological
factors that play a role in male sexual function, Perelman (2009)
proposed the sexual tipping point model, defined as any one individual's
characteristic threshold for the expression of a sexual response.
Perelman suggested that an individual's sexual tipping point is
determined by a variety of multidimensional factors that fall into two
general categories, physiological or organic issues and psychosocial,
cultural, and behavioral issues. Psychosocial issues that have been
linked to ED include performance anxiety, spectatoring, a strong
religious background that leads to guilt or strong avoidance behaviors,
and a history of sexual trauma. The major psychological contributors to
ED as identified by Barlow's (1986) feedback model of sexual dysfunction
are anxiety, negative expectations, and spectatoring. Men who are
anxious about not being able to have an erection tend to focus on
themselves and how they are performing more than on what gives them
pleasure. This spectatoring increases anxiety, which, physiologically,
inhibits the relaxation of the smooth muscles necessary for erection
and, psychologically, leads to a negative mood state and a focus on
negative expectancies. Since the result is impaired erectile responding,
the man's fears of not being able to perform are confirmed, and he is
likely to repeat the process in subsequent sexual situations.
Performance anxiety is inherent in most cases of ED. As a man's penis is
visible to both the man and his partner, the occurrence---or
absence---of an erection is a known event, which increases focus on
performance. According to Rosen and colleagues (2014), men experiencing
performance anxiety will not only worry about erections during sexual
activity but also engage in visual or tactile checking of the penis. By
contrast, men with normal erectile response approach sexual situations
with positive expectancies and a focus on erotic cues. Consequently,
they become aroused and are able to obtain and sustain an erection,
which creates a positive feedback loop for future sexual encounters.
Although spectatoring can be detrimental for men of any age, it appears
to be particularly problematic in young men when they are first becoming
sexually active. In the absence of sexual experience and a variety of
sexual events in which to view evidence of their ability to attain an
erection, these young men are particularly vulnerable to the influence
of negative expectations about erectile performance. Other psychosocial
factors can contribute to the development and maintenance of ED.
According to Nobre and Pinto-Gouveia (2009), men are likely to meet
criteria for ED if they (a) endorse myths about male sexuality (e.g.,
"men always want to have sex"), (b) view themselves as incompetent, and
(c) view their sexual problem as internal and stable over time. Mental
health conditions, such as depression, generalized anxiety disorder,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and paraphilic disorders, have been
linked to ED. In a survey of sexually healthy, college-aged men, Harte
and Meston (2011) found a high

Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorders

535

incidence of off-label sildenafil (Viagra) use that was correlated with
erectile dysfunction. They suggested that recreational sildenafil use
among men without prior concerns about ED could lead to subsequent
erectile problems by making users psychologically dependent on the drug
for performance.

Assessment and Treatment of Erectile Dysfunction The assessment of
erectile dysfunction is conducted via interview and may also include a
physiological test. It is important for the assessor to determine the
primary cause of the disorder, be it organic or psychogenic. Treatment
approach will depend on the etiology of the erectile dysfunction, and
the most common treatments include medication, individual psychotherapy,
and lifestyle modifications.

Assessment The psychological assessment of ED includes identifying the
situation(s) surrounding the onset of ED and the beliefs that may have
been formed at that time. Beliefs may be specific to the relationship
(i.e., a feeling of inadequacy with one specific partner) or generalized
to all sexual encounters. Clinicians can determine whether performance
anxiety is present by assessing whether the patient is able to obtain an
erection during situations where performance is not required, such as
during sleep or masturbation. In cases where ED is the result of a
vascular problem, laboratory assessments that measure genital blood
inflow and outflow during sexual stimulation may be helpful. Blood
outflow can be measured by injecting an agent such as papaverine into
the penile corpora cavernosa. The agent relaxes the smooth muscles at
the base of the penis, which, in presence of normal blood outflow,
produces penile erection even without sexual stimulation. When the drug
fails to provide the expected erection, it is considered evidence for
impairment in vascular mechanisms. Measurement of nocturnal penile
erections, which are expected to increase during the REM sleep cycle in
sexually healthy men, is another commonly used technique for assessing
potential vascular causes of ED. Assays of free and bioavailable serum
testosterone are used to rule out abnormal hormone levels. Treatment
Biomedical treatments for ED include vacuum devices and constriction
rings, intracavernosal injections, intraurethral pharmacotherapy,
topical pharmacotherapy, oral pharmacotherapy, and penile implants. The
first line of treatment is typically a form of PDE-5 inhibitor. As
described earlier, erection is a vascular phenomenon caused by increased
blood pressure in the penis due to increased blood inflow and decreased
blood outflow. The increment of blood inflow is regulated by the
relaxation of the smooth muscles surrounding the arterioles, a
phenomenon that allows the arterioles to dilate. Smooth muscle
relaxation has been attributed to an increase in parasympathetic
activity, which causes a release of the neurotransmitters acetylcholine,
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, and nitric oxide. Nitric oxide causes
a greater amount of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) to be
available in the smooth muscles, and this causes the smooth muscles to
relax. Normally, cGMP is broken down by enzymes known as
phosphodiesterases (PDEs). However, this may be circumvented by
inhibiting the activity of these enzymes. Sildenafil (Viagra)

536

Sexual Dysfunctions

and other drugs used to treat ED inhibit PDE type 5. In doing so, these
drugs enhance the concentration of cGMP, allowing for greater smooth
muscle relaxation and therefore improved erection. Detumescence (i.e.,
loss of erection) occurs with the release of catecholamines during
orgasm and ejaculation. Sildenafil and other PDE-5 inhibitors have a
success rate of at least 65% (Shamloul & Ghanem, 2013). These drugs are
typically well tolerated by a variety of patients, and their side
effects are generally mild. Despite these drugs' success with
facilitating erection, a recent study reported that about 50% of men
with ED who began treatment with sildenafil stopped taking the
medication (Carvalheira, Pereira, Maroco, & Forjaz, 2012). In this
study, the majority of the men who stopped taking the drug (55.1%)
discontinued it during the first 3 months of treatment, and the dropout
rate was highest in men with diabetes. In the same study, a number of
psychosocial factors, such as anxiety, negative emotions, and
dysfunctional beliefs, were commonly cited reasons for discontinuation.
It has been proposed that more comprehensive instruction at the
beginning of pharmacological treatment as well as reeducation throughout
the course of treatment might improve the rates of medication
compliance. When PDE-5 inhibitors fail to treat the erectile problem,
clinicians typically recommend vacuum constriction devices, vasoactive
gels, and intracavernosal injections. Vacuum devices typically consist
of a tube that is placed over the penis, and a vacuum pump that draws
blood into the penile arteries. A constriction ring is placed at the
base of the penis to prevent blood outflow so that the erection is
maintained until completion of the sexual act. Vasoactive gels can be
produced in different dosage levels and with different mixtures of
vasodilators, such as alprostadil (Muse), phentolamine (Regitine), and
papaverine (Pavabid). These gels are inserted into the urethra and are
typically effective within 15 minutes of insertion. Intracavernosal
injections are the next line of treatment. Acting much like the gels,
they are injected into the corpus cavernosum of the penis to induce
erection. Although intracavernosal injections are effective in
approximately 70% to 90% of patients, a large percentage of users
discontinue treatment due to the inconvenience, cost, and/or
invasiveness of treatment. Penile implants are generally considered a
last resort treatment technique, when tissue damage or deterioration is
severe or when all other treatments have failed. This may be the case in
men with severe diabetes mellitus or who have had radical prostatectomy.
Implants can be hydraulic, semirigid, or soft silicone and consist of
two or three cylinders placed in the space normally occupied by the
spongy tissue in the penis. The patient's ability to ejaculate after the
implant surgery remains intact; however, the implant does not restore
sensitivity or sexual desire that may have been present prior to the
onset of ED. Implant surgeries usually result in decreased penis size
which may dissuade some men from undergoing surgery. Researchers are
investigating the application of gene therapy principles to the
treatment of ED. Gene therapy offers hope for a potentially successful
long-term treatment of ED, possibly even a cure for the disorder
(Shamloul & Ghanem, 2013). Other new areas of ED treatment research
include angiogenesis (Xie, Annex, & Donatucci, 2008), defined as the
growth of new blood vessels from preexisting vasculature, and stem cell
therapy (Bivalacqua et al., 2007). Psychosocial treatments for ED
include sensate focus techniques, increasing the level of erotic
stimulation during sexual activity, sex education, and interpersonal
therapy. Sensate focus is considered to be the cornerstone of sex
therapy. Developed by Masters

Orgasm Disorders

537

and Johnson (1970), sensate focus centers on heightening awareness of
the sensations associated with sexual activity, rather than on the
performance of the sexual act. In certain cases of ED, the patient may
not be experiencing sufficient erotic stimulation to achieve an
erection. This may be due to the environment or to a lack of variety or
skill on the part of the male and/or his partner. Couples in
long-standing relationships may have a routine, predictable approach to
sexual activity and thus may be more vulnerable to erectile problems as
well as decreased sexual interest. Sex education involves therapist
guidance on the different aspects of sexual intercourse, and
interpersonal therapy focuses on the relationship problems that may be
driving psychogenic erectile dysfunction. Lifestyle modifications can
significantly improve erectile function. Studies have shown that
targeting factors associated with erectile problems, such as smoking,
obesity, alcohol consumption, and physical activity reduces the rate of
sexual dysfunction. In a meta-analysis of over 700 men, Gupta and
colleagues (2011) assessed the effects of lifestyle modification on the
severity of erectile problems. They found that, regardless of PDE-5 use,
the adoption of lifestyle modifications provided incremental benefits on
erectile function. However, the combination of lifestyle modifications
and PDE-5 inhibitors may more effectively improve erectile function than
either method alone. In a randomized controlled trial that compared the
use of a PDE-5 inhibitor alone with a PDE-5 inhibitor plus at least 3
hours of aerobic exercise per week, the combined approach was more
effective in the treatment of ED (Maio, Saraeb, & Marchiori, 2010).

Orgasm Disorders Orgasm disorders involve difficulties with the presence
or absence of orgasm during sexual activity. This can include an
inability to achieve orgasm and, in men, achieving orgasm too quickly.
Orgasm disorders occur in both men and women; however, early ejaculation
is the most common orgasm disorder in men, and an inability to attain
orgasm is the most common orgasm disorder in women.

Female Orgasmic Disorder Definition, Diagnosis, and Prevalence The DSM-5
defines female orgasmic disorder (FOD) as reduced intensity, delay,
infrequency, and/or absence of orgasm. These symptoms must persist for
at least 6 months, and they may not be related to other physical or
relational problems. The presence of distress related to these symptoms
is necessary for a diagnosis of FOD. The DSM-5 classification of FOD
distinguishes between lifelong and acquired subtypes as well as between
generalized and situational subtypes. Although not stated in the DSM-5,
the clinical consensus is that a woman who can obtain orgasm during
intercourse with manual stimulation but not intercourse alone would not
meet criteria for clinical diagnosis unless she is distressed by the low
frequency of her sexual response. Operationalizing FOD is complicated by
the fact that the field still lacks a clear consensus on the definition
of the female orgasm. Indeed, one study cited more than 25 distinct
definitions proposed by different authors (Mah & Binik, 2001). The
following definition

538

Sexual Dysfunctions

of female orgasm was derived by the committee on female orgasm and
presented at the International Consultation on Urological Diseases in
Official Relationship with the World Health Organization (WHO) in Paris
in 2003: An orgasm in the human female is a variable, transient peak
sensation of intense pleasure, creating an altered state of
consciousness, usually accompanied by involuntary, rhythmic contractions
of the pelvic, striated circumvaginal musculature often with concomitant
uterine and anal contractions and myotonia that resolves the
sexually-induced vasocongestion (sometimes only partially), usually with
an induction of well-being and contentment. (Meston, Hull, Levin, &
Sipski, 2004) Orgasms are caused by erotic stimulation of both genital
and nongenital zones of women's bodies. These areas include the
clitoris, vagina, other areas of the vulva, and the breasts and nipples.
Orgasm may also be caused by fantasy, mental imagery, and hypnosis.
Orgasms can occur during sleep, precluding the necessity of
consciousness for an orgasm to occur. Orgasms are not generally reported
to occur spontaneously without at least some amount of physical or
psychological sexual stimulation; however, some psychotropic drugs have
been reported to induce spontaneous orgasms in women. Women who are
having difficulties with orgasm do not typically present with the same
degree of distress that has been reported in men with ED. This may be
because women, unlike men, are able to "fake" orgasm, thus rendering the
performance anxiety seen in men unlikely. Orgasm difficulties are the
second most frequently reported sexual problems for women in the United
States, with between 22% and 28% of women aged 18 to 59 years reporting
they are unable to attain orgasm (Laumann, Michael, Gagnon, & Kolata,
1994). Young women (18 to 24 years) show lower rates of orgasm than
older women for both orgasm with a partner and orgasm during
masturbation. This is likely due to age-related differences in sexual
experience. It is important to note that differences in research
methodologies and diagnostic criteria make it difficult to accurately
determine prevalence rates for FOD. In a review of 11 epidemiological
studies, Graham (2010) found that the lowest prevalence rate of FOD was
3.5% when DSM-III criteria were used, and the highest rate was 34%,
which was found when women were simply asked whether or not they had
difficulties experiencing orgasm.

Factors Associated with Women's Orgasm and FOD The female orgasm results
from a complex interaction of biological, psychological, and cultural
processes. Disruptions in any of these systems can affect a woman's
ability to experience orgasm. The most common causes of the disorder are
disturbances in the sympathetic nervous system; various types of chronic
illness, particularly spinal cord injury; sexual guilt; anxiety; and
relationship concerns.

Biological Factors Impairments in the nervous system, endocrine system,
or brain mechanisms involved in female orgasm may cause orgasmic
dysfunction in some women. Disease, injury,

Orgasm Disorders

539

and disruptions of the sympathetic or parasympathetic nervous systems
have been identified as potential causes of orgasmic difficulties in
women. Medical conditions that affect women's orgasmic ability include
damage to the sacral/pelvic nerves, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's
disease, epilepsy, hysterectomy complications, vulvodynia,
hypothalamus-pituitary disorders, kidney disease, fibromyalgia, and
sickle-cell anemia. In general, women with spinal cord injuries in the
sacral region (interfering with the sacral reflex arc of the spinal
cord) have shown difficulty attaining orgasm. This is believed to be
caused by interference with the vagus nerve, which has been shown to
connect the cervix to the brain (Whipple, Gerdes, & Komisaruk, 1996).
Both vascular and nervous system problems have also been associated with
orgasm difficulties. Vascular disease, such as diabetes mellitus and
atherosclerosis, has been linked to orgasmic dysfunction. With respect
to the nervous system, studies examining blood plasma levels of
neuromodulators before, during, and after orgasm suggest that
epinephrine and norepinephrine levels peak during orgasm in normally
functioning women (e.g., Exton et al., 2000). With respect to the
endocrine system, oxytocin levels are positively correlated with
subjective intensity of orgasm among orgasmic women, and prolactin
levels are elevated for up to 60 minutes following orgasm (for a review,
see Meston & Frohlich, 2000). Studies in humans suggest that the
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, an area of the brain that
produces oxytocin, is involved in the orgasmic response (McKenna, 1999).
Impairments in any of these systems could feasibly lead to FOD. A number
of psychotherapeutic drugs have been noted to affect the ability of
women to attain orgasm. Drugs that increase serotonergic activity---for
example, antidepressants, such as paroxetine (Paxil), fluoxetine
(Prozac), and sertraline (Zoloft)---or decrease dopaminergic activity
(e.g., antipsychotics) have been shown to affect orgasmic capacity
(Meston, Levin, Sipski, Hull, & Heiman, 2004). Indeed about one third of
women who take SSRIs report problems with orgasm (Stimmel & Gutierrez,
2006). These drugs can lead to delayed orgasm or a complete inability to
reach orgasm. There is variability, however, in that some
antidepressants have been associated with impaired orgasm more often
than others. This seems to be related to the specific serotonin receptor
subtype that is being activated. As noted earlier, drugs that inhibit
serotonin activity at the serotonin2 receptor---for example, nefazodone
(Serzone) and cyproheptadine (Periactin)---cause fewer sexual side
effects in women (for a review, see Meston, Levin, et al., 2004).
Recently, clinicians have reported that an increasing number of women
believe that the structure of their genitalia may be contributing to
difficulties with achieving or maintaining orgasm. This belief has
contributed to an increase in genital plastic surgery, specifically
labiaplasty (reduction of the size of the inner labia and the outer
labia), vaginoplasty (rebuilding the vaginal canal and its mucous
membrane), hymenoplasty (reconstruction of the hymen), perineoplasty
(tightening or loosening of the perineal muscles and the vagina and/or
correcting clinical defects of or damage to the vagina and the anus),
and G-spot augmentation. A few studies have indicated that these
surgeries resulted in increased sexual satisfaction (e.g., Goodman et
al., 2010), but the little current evidence that supports these
procedures failed to use standardized measures that formally assess for
sexual dysfunction and did not include control groups. For these
reasons, the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
Committee on Gynecologic Practice (2007), and the

540

Sexual Dysfunctions

Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada, Clinical Practice
Gynaecology Committee and Ethics Committee (2013), discourage physicians
from performing genital plastic surgery.

Psychological Factors The psychological factors associated with FOD
include sexual guilt, anxiety related to sex, childhood loss or
separation from the father, and relationship issues (for a review, see
Meston, Hull, et al., 2004). Sexual guilt can affect orgasmic abilities
by increasing anxiety and discomfort during sex and also by distracting
a woman from what gives her pleasure. Women who strictly abide by the
values of Western religions sometimes view sexual pleasure as a sin.
Sins are later connected with a sense of shame and guilt, which could
produce negative affect and cause distracting thoughts during sexual
activities. Women who initiate and are more active participants during
sexual activities report more frequent orgasms, most likely because
being active allows women to assume positions that can provide a greater
sense of sexual pleasure. More frequent masturbation and sexual
activities are associated with more frequent orgasms. It is likely that
women who engage in more sexual activities have a greater understanding
of what gives them sexual pleasure and this can help them more easily
reach orgasm. A romantic relationship in which the woman feels
comfortable communicating her sexual needs may facilitate orgasmic
capacity. Therefore, women experiencing relationship discord might be
more at risk of orgasm problems than women who are satisfied with their
relationships. However, only a small percentage of women are distressed
by their anorgasmia (Graham, 2010). Certain demographic factors such as
age, education, and religion also provide clues to the psychological
factors involved in FOD. As noted earlier, younger women, aged 18 to 24
years, are more likely than older women to report orgasm problems,
during both masturbation and partnered sexual activity. It is possible
that as women age they gain more sexual experience as well as become
more aware of what their bodies need to attain orgasm. Women with lower
levels of education reported more orgasm difficulties during
masturbation than women with higher levels of education. Approximately
42% of women with a high school education report "always or usually"
achieving orgasm during masturbation, compared to 87% of women with an
advanced degree (Laumann et al., 1994). More educated women might hold
more liberal views on sexuality and might be more likely to see their
own pleasure as a goal of sexual activity. A negative relation between
high religiosity and orgasmic ability in women is frequently reported in
the clinical literature. Possibly, the more religious a person is, the
more likely she is to experience guilt during sexual activity. Guilt
could impair orgasm via a number of cognitive mechanisms, in particular
via distraction processes. A relationship between improved orgasmic
ability and decreased sexual guilt has also been reported (Davidson &
Moore, 1994). Laumann and colleagues (1994) found that a substantially
higher proportion of women with no religious affiliation (79%) reported
being orgasmic during masturbation compared with groups of religious
women (53% to 67%). In addition to specific demographics, it is also
possible that overarching cultural notions of women's sexuality in
general, and the value of women's sexual pleasure in particular, may
also play a role in women's orgasmic capacity. Women who live in
societies that value female orgasm tend to have more orgasms than women
living in societies that discourage the concept of sexual pleasure for
women (for a review, see Meston, Levin, et al., 2004).

Orgasm Disorders

541

Examples of societies that foster sexual pleasure for women and expect
them to enjoy intercourse include the Mundugumor of Papua New Guinea and
the Mangaians of the Cook Islands. Mangaian women are taught to have
orgasms, hopefully two or three to each one of her male partner's, and
to try to attain mutual orgasm. Mangaian males who are not able to give
their partners multiple orgasms are looked down on. At the opposite end
of the spectrum are societies that assume women will have no pleasure
from coitus and that the female orgasm does not exist. The Arapesh of
Papua New Guinea are such a society. In fact, they do not even have a
word in their language for the female orgasm. It is feasible that women
in societies that promote women's sexual pleasure are more likely to
experiment and therefore learn about what facilitates their ability to
have an orgasm. It may also be that in societies where sexual pleasure
is discouraged, it may be shameful to admit to having an orgasm.

Assessment and Treatment of FOD A doctor or psychologist familiar with
the structure and function of orgasms should conduct the assessment of
FOD. Depending on the etiology of the orgasm problem, a variety of both
cognitive-behavioral and physical therapy techniques can be effective
for increasing orgasmic capacity.

Assessment Assessment of FOD involves a comprehensive sexual, medical,
and psychosocial history similar to that used for assessing FSIAD. It is
important for the clinician to determine whether the woman is unable to
attain orgasm in all situations or just with a certain partner or during
certain intercourse positions or sexual activities because this
information may help to determine the most appropriate type of therapy.
Treatment In general, sex therapy for FOD focuses on promoting healthy
changes in attitudes and sexually relevant thoughts, decreasing anxiety,
and increasing orgasmic ability and satisfaction. Sensate focus and
systematic desensitization are used to treat FOD when anxiety seems to
play a role. Sex education and communication skills training are often
included as adjuncts to treatment. Kegel exercises (Kegel, 1952), which
involve tightening and relaxing the pubococcygeus muscle, are also
sometimes included as part of a treatment regime. Feasibly, they could
help facilitate orgasm by increasing blood flow to the genitals, or by
helping the woman become more aware of and comfortable with her
genitals. To date, the most efficacious treatment for FOD is directed
masturbation (DM). This treatment uses cognitive-behavioral therapy
techniques to educate a woman about her body and the sensations of
manual self-stimulation. DM includes several stages that gradually build
on one another. The first step of DM involves having the woman visually
examine her nude body with the help of a mirror and diagrams of female
genital anatomy. She is then instructed to explore her genitals using
touch, with an emphasis on locating sensitive areas that produce
feelings of pleasure. Once pleasure-producing areas are located, the
woman is instructed to concentrate on manual stimulation of these areas
and to increase the intensity and duration until "something happens."
The use of topical lubricants, vibrators, and erotic videotapes is often
incorporated into the exercises. Next, once

542

Sexual Dysfunctions

the woman is able to attain orgasm alone, her partner is usually
included in the sessions in order to desensitize her to displaying
arousal and orgasm in his or her presence, and to educate the partner on
how to provide her with effective stimulation. Directed masturbation has
been shown to effectively treat primary FOD when provided in a variety
of formats, including individual, group, and couples therapy and also
bibliotherapy (for a review, see Meston, 2006). A study of
therapist-directed group therapy using DM reported a 100% success rate
in treating primary FOD at 2-month follow-up (Heinrich, 1976). It has
been proposed that DM is so effective because, in the early stages, it
eliminates several factors that can impair orgasmic capacity, such as
anxiety that may be associated with the presence of a partner. Since the
exploration is focused on the woman's manual sexual stimulation, she is
not dependent on her partner's sexual ability, or her ability to
communicate her sexual needs to her partner until later in the
treatment. Recent research has indicated that DM is particularly
effective for women with primary FOD (Graham, 2014). It appears that DM
can also be effective for women with secondary FOD who are uncomfortable
touching their genitals, but in general, studies have found DM to be
less effective for secondary FOD than for primary FOD. This may be
because many women with secondary FOD only have trouble attaining orgasm
with their partner. Therefore, treatments for secondary FOD typically
focus on a couple's issues of communication, sexual skills, comfort, and
trust. If the etiology of the FOD appears to be related to anxiety about
sex, then anxiety reduction techniques such as systematic
desensitization and sensate focus may be useful. These strategies are
often combined with sexual techniques training, DM, sex education,
communication training, bibliotherapy, and Kegel exercises. As described
earlier, Kegel exercises strengthen the pubococcygeus muscle, and are
believed to facilitate orgasm by increasing the vascularity of the
genitals. Supporting this technique, one study found a difference in the
size of the pubococcygeus muscle between orgasmic and nonorgasmic women
(Graber & Kline-Graber, 1979). Yet if anxiety is not the presenting
cause of the orgasm problem, these techniques, while effective for
desire and arousal problems, do not appear to be effective for treating
orgasm problems (Meston, Levin, et al., 2004). For women who have orgasm
difficulties resulting from hysterectomy and oophorectomy, combined
estrogen and testosterone therapy has been shown to enhance orgasmic
ability (Shifren et al., 2000). A number of psychotherapeutic drugs have
been used to try to eliminate orgasm problems that are secondary to
antidepressant drug treatments. Results from placebo-controlled studies,
to date, have failed to identify any drugs that enhance orgasmic ability
better than placebo. However, one study indicated that exercise
increases genital arousal in women taking either an SSRI or SNRI (Lorenz
& Meston, 2012). As SSRIs are known to have greater SNS suppression
compared to SNRIs, women taking SSRIs experienced significantly greater
genital response postexercise than women taking SNRIs (Lorenz & Meston,
2012).

Delayed Ejaculation Definition, Diagnosis, and Prevalence Delayed
ejaculation (DE) is defined in DSM-5 as a persistent difficulty or
inability to achieve orgasm despite the presence of adequate desire,
arousal, and stimulation. In order

Orgasm Disorders

543

to be diagnosed with the disorder, patients must present with one of two
symptoms: either a delay in or an infrequency of ejaculation on 75% to
100% of occasions for at least 6 months. The disorder can be specified
as lifelong or acquired as well as generalized or situational. Most
commonly, the term delayed ejaculation refers to a condition in which a
man is unable to achieve orgasm with his partner, even though he is able
to achieve and maintain an erection. Typically, men who present with DE
are able to ejaculate during masturbation or sleep. Researchers and
clinicians alike agree that DE is not only the least common of the male
sexual dysfunctions but also the least understood. A key concern that is
often associated with DE but missed by clinicians is that partnered
sexual activity may not be as exciting as masturbation. Techniques used
during masturbation, such as rubbing the penis against different objects
or rolling the penis between one's hands, may create an intense sense of
friction that is otherwise elusive during sexual activity with a
partner. In addition, masturbation may have a strong fantasy component,
which again may be challenging to maintain when engaging in sexual
intercourse with a partner. It is important to note that men who are
experiencing retrograde ejaculation do not meet the diagnostic criteria
for DE. Retrograde ejaculation occurs when the ejaculatory fluid travels
backward into the bladder rather than forward through the urethra. This
may result from complications after prostate surgery or as a side effect
of certain medications, particularly anticholinergic drugs. The concept
of a "delay" in ejaculation suggests that there are normative amounts of
time in which ejaculation typically occurs. Only one study has addressed
this question. Waldinger and Schweitzer (2005) measured intravaginal
latency time in 500 heterosexual couples across five countries. They
found that the median time was 5.4 minutes, the mean was 8 minutes, and
the standard deviation was 7.1 minutes. Though these values are
illuminating from a research perspective, it is noteworthy that the
DSM-5 does not include any objective measures of latency in the
diagnostic criteria for the disorder, which makes it challenging to
determine prevalence rates. Prevalence rates of DE in the literature are
low, usually 3% or lower. Researchers have suggested that the rate of DE
will rise due to age-related ejaculatory decline (Perelman, 2003) as
well as widespread use of SSRIs (Georgiadis et al., 2007), which have
been implicated in increased ejaculation latency.

Factors Associated With Delayed Ejaculation A number of biological and
psychological factors have been shown to play an important role in
delayed ejaculation. Biological factors include damage to the nerve
pathways that facilitate ejaculation, chronic medical conditions, and
potentially age. The various psychological etiologies of the disorder
span from insufficient stimulation to assorted manifestations of
"psychic conflict."

Biological Factors During ejaculation, the efferent nerves that cause
the release of semen and the closure of the bladder neck are sympathetic
fibers that travel through the sympathetic ganglia and the peripheral
pelvic nerves. Damage to any of these pathways may compromise
ejaculation. Spinal cord injury is most likely to cause the nerve damage
that results in DE.

544

Sexual Dysfunctions

Chronic medical conditions, such as multiple sclerosis and diabetes, are
correlated with DE. Short-term, reversible medical conditions, including
prostate infection, urinary tract infection, and substance abuse may
also lead to symptoms of DE. Various psychopharmacological agents,
including antipsychotics and antidepressants, may also lead to
ejaculatory delay. According to Segraves (2010), there is conflicting
evidence regarding the effect of age on ejaculatory function. As DE is
more common in older males, the disorder may be related to low penile
sensitivity, which is associated with aging (e.g., Paick, Jeong, & Park,
1998). However, low penile sensitivity usually is not the primary cause
of DE (Perelman, 2014). Rather, individual variability in the
sensitivity of the ejaculatory reflex, which is exacerbated with age,
may be driving the relationship between age and DE.

Psychological Factors Recently, Althof (2012) reviewed the four leading
psychological theories of DE. The first theory focuses on insufficient
mental or physical stimulation (Masters & Johnson, 1970). Men with DE
may have a diminished ability to experience penile sensations, as they
have been shown to experience less sexual arousal than men without the
disorder (Rowland, Keeney, & Slob, 2004). It is also possible that a
lack of proper ambiance for sexual activity contributes to insufficient
mental stimulation (Shull & Sprenkle, 1980). The second theory that
Althof (2012) mentions posits that DE is caused by a high frequency of
masturbation or by a unique, idiosyncratic masturbatory style that
differs greatly from the physical stimulation that occurs during vaginal
penetration (e.g., Perelman & Rowland, 2006). Men with DE may experience
a large disparity between the sensations that they experience when
masturbating to a specific fantasy and the sensations that they
experience during partnered sexual activity. The third theory reviewed
by Althof (2012) centers on "psychic conflict" as the root cause of DE.
This theory was more common in the early stages of psychological
treatment for DE, but some psychodynamically oriented therapists still
conceptualize the disorder in terms of psychic conflict. Examples of
psychic conflict include fear of loss of self due to loss of semen, fear
that ejaculation may hurt the partner, fear of impregnating the partner,
and guilt from a strict religious upbringing. The final theory suggests
that delayed ejaculation may be masking the presence of a desire
disorder. In this case, the male may be overly concerned with pleasing
his partner, and even when he is not aroused, may seek to ejaculate
(Apfelbaum, 1989).

Assessment and Treatment of Delayed Ejaculation A medical doctor or
clinical psychologist assesses for delayed ejaculation with an interview
to determine ejaculation latency and to discuss the patient's reactions
to this problem. The most common treatments incorporate behavioral
techniques.

Assessment Both physical and psychological assessment are necessary in
order to gain a thorough understanding of the factors contributing to
DE. To provide a thorough assessment, clinicians should conduct a
genitourinary examination, check androgen levels, identify any

Orgasm Disorders

545

physical anomalies, and assess any contributing neurological factors.
Specific attention should be paid to the identification of urethral,
prostatic, epididymal, and testicular infections (Corona, Jannini,
Vignozzi, Rastrelli, & Maggi, 2012). Assessment of variables that
improve or worsen performance in a given context may be informative,
especially psychosocial factors like the use of fantasy during sex,
anxiety during sexual activity, masturbatory patterns, and perceived
partner attractiveness (Perelman, 2014).

Treatment There has been limited success in the development and testing
of pharmacological agents aimed at treating DE. Drugs that have been
shown to be somewhat effective may only indirectly affect ejaculatory
latency by altering other components of the sexual response cycle or by
countering the effects of the drugs that led to the ejaculatory problem
in the first place. In the future, alpha-1 adrenergic receptor agonists,
such as imipramine, ephedrine, and midodrine, may play a role in the
pharmacological treatment of DE. One study indicated that
midodrine-facilitated ejaculation in men who were previously unable to
ejaculate (Safarinejad, 2009), but further research is necessary. Other
pharmacological agents, including yohimbine, buspirone (BuSpar), and
oxytocin have been anecdotally associated with decreased ejaculation
latency in men with DE. However, well-controlled studies with large
sample sizes are needed to conclusively determine the effects of these
drugs on ejaculation. If the disorder is determined to be primarily
psychological in origin, there are a number of psychosocial
interventions that have been shown to effectively reduce ejaculation
latency. Most sex therapists who treat DE rely on masturbatory
retraining (Masters & Johnson, 1970) as a way to induce higher levels of
arousal and help men rehearse for partnered sexual activity. This
intervention may be particularly helpful for men who have grown
accustomed to masturbating in idiosyncratic ways, such as with specific
objects or under certain conditions. Masturbatory retraining typically
entails introducing the patient to an alternative style of masturbation
that mimics the sensations of partnered sexual activity. It may be that
masturbation exercises, which progress from neutral to pleasurable
sensations, remove the "demand aspects" of performance. If the disorder
is derived from insufficient stimulation, therapists typically recommend
vibrator stimulation, enhanced mental stimulation, and vigorous pelvic
thrusting (Althof, 2012). For those who are experiencing DE due to
heightened concern for the sexual pleasure of their partners, therapists
encourage less focus on pleasing the partner and more attention to the
self and the sensations experienced during sexual activity.

Premature (Early) Ejaculation Definition, Diagnosis, and Prevalence
Premature (early) ejaculation is defined in DSM-5 as a persistent or
recurrent pattern of ejaculation occurring during partnered sexual
activity within about 1 minute following vaginal penetration and before
the individual wishes it. Although the diagnosis may be applied to
individuals who engage in nonvaginal sexual intercourse, specific
duration criteria for such activities have not been established. In
order to meet the diagnostic criteria, the problem must have persisted
for at least 6 months, must be experienced on almost all

546

Sexual Dysfunctions

or approximately all occasions of sexual activity, and must cause
significant distress. The disorder may be specified by severity and can
be categorized as lifelong or acquired and generalized or situational.
In recent years, there has been considerable disagreement about the
definition, nature, and even the name of the disorder. The DSM-5 sexual
dysfunction subworkgroup changed the name of the disorder from
"premature ejaculation" to "premature (early) ejaculation" due to
criticism of the existing name, which some saw as pejorative. The
diagnostic criteria of the disorder have also been critiqued, as
researchers have argued that the time to ejaculation after penetration
criterion oversimplifies, and may limit scientific understanding of the
condition (e.g., Metz, Pryor, Nesvacil, Abuzzahab, & Koznar, 1997). Hong
(1984) stated that premature (early) ejaculation might not warrant the
term "dysfunction" unless it is extreme, "such as occurring before
intromission." Varying prevalence rates of the disorder have been
reported, likely due to the lack of a universally accepted set of
diagnostic criteria. It is important to note that there are currently no
published epidemiological studies that assess the prevalence of
premature (early) ejaculation as defined in DSM-5. However, many studies
have assessed the prevalence of premature ejaculation concerns. Masters
and Johnson (1970) identified premature (early) ejaculation as one of
the most common male sexual dysfunctions. According to Laumann and
colleagues (1994), premature (early) ejaculation is the most commonly
reported sexual disorder in men, with approximately 30% of men in the
United States reporting the condition in the previous year. Unlike ED,
this condition has been estimated to affect younger men more than older
men; prevalence estimates range from 40% of men under 40 years of age to
about 10% of men over age 70. When the intravaginal ejaculation latency
time criterion is used, however, prevalence rates are much lower, around
1% to 3% (Althof et al., 2010). In general, high rates of comorbidity
are reported for premature (early) ejaculation and ED, with about one
third of men who suffer from premature (early) ejaculation also
experiencing ED.

Factors Associated With Premature (Early) Ejaculation A number of
factors have been shown to play an important role in both normal and
premature ejaculation. Historically, premature ejaculation has been
considered a psychological problem. But recent research has implicated a
number of biological systems in the development and maintenance of the
disorder, indicating that it may be important to focus on the
physiological underpinnings of the ejaculatory process.

Biological Factors During the first stage of ejaculation (sperm
emission), sperm moves from the epididymis into the vas deferens. This
process is controlled by the contraction of smooth muscles, which is
generated by the sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system.
After sperm emission, the individual has the subjective experience that
ejaculation is "inevitable," known as the "point of inevitable
ejaculation" or, more commonly, "the point of no return!" The striate
muscles surrounding the spongious tissue and the cavernous tissue and in
the pelvic floor contract rhythmically, causing ejaculation to occur.
Usually, the subjective experience of orgasm is associated with the
contractions of the striate muscles, and in most men, emission,
ejaculation, and orgasm are interconnected. For a

Orgasm Disorders

547

small portion of men, however, these phenomena are independent. For
example, some men train themselves to have the subjective experience of
orgasm without ejaculation and some men with premature (early)
ejaculation experience emission without ejaculation. The precise cause
of premature (early) ejaculation is not known, but the most promising
biological etiologies include malfunction of the serotonin receptors,
genetic predisposition, and disruptions of the endocrine system.
Waldinger, Rietschel, Nothen, Hengeveld, and Olivier (1998) noted that,
in rodents, activation of one serotonin receptor speeds up ejaculation
and activation of another serotonin receptor delays ejaculation. It is
possible, then, that men who report symptoms of the disorder may have
disturbances in central serotonergic neurotransmission, which could
result in a lower threshold for sexual stimulation. Genetic
predispositions may also play a role in the development of PE. In
first-degree male relatives of Dutch men with lifelong PE, researchers
found a high prevalence of PE (Waldinger, Rietschel, Nothen, Hengeveld,
& Olivier, 1998). Similarly, a genetic study of Finnish male twins
indicated that genetics accounts for 28% of the variance in PE (Jern et
al., 2007). Recent research has confirmed the role of the endocrine
system in the control of the ejaculatory reflex. Carani and colleagues
(2005) found that 50% of men with hyperthyroidism also had PE. Indeed,
the hormone thyrotropin, in addition to testosterone and prolactin, has
been shown to play an independent role in the control of ejaculatory
function (e.g., Corona et al., 2012).

Psychological Factors Anxiety has been hypothesized to be one of the
primary causes and maintaining factors for PE. Althof (2014) explained
that three different mental phenomena related to PE can be characterized
by the term anxiety. First, anxiety may reference a phobic response,
such fear of the vaginal canal. Anxiety may also refer to an affective
response, such as anger toward one's partner. Finally, anxiety may
indicate performance concerns, such that a preoccupation with poor
sexual performance leads to decreased sexual function and increased
avoidance of sexual situations. Anxiety may have a reciprocal
relationship with premature (early) ejaculation; specifically,
performance anxiety may lead to problems with early ejaculation, and
then those problems could increase performance anxiety (Althof et al.,
2010). However, laboratory studies have generally not shown significant
differences in levels of anxiety reported by men with and without PE.
One psychological variable that has been shown to distinguish men with
PE from men without PE is perceived control over ejaculation. In an
observational study of men with and without PE, Rosen and colleagues
(2007) determined that subject-reported control over ejaculation and
personal distress most strongly predicted a PE diagnosis. A greater
understanding of the meaning men attribute to ejaculatory control may
provide important insight into the psychological factors involved in
this disorder. Early learned experiences and lack of sensory awareness
may also be important psychological factors that lead to PE. Masters and
Johnson (1970) examined case histories of men with PE and found that
many of these men had early sexual experiences during which they felt
nervous and rushed. According to Masters and Johnson, these men learned
to associate sex and sexual performance with speed and discomfort.
Kaplan (1989) considered lack of sensory awareness to be the immediate
cause of premature ejaculation. She believed that men with PE fail to
develop sufficient awareness of their own level of arousal.

548

Sexual Dysfunctions

Assessment and Treatment of Premature (Early) Ejaculation A medical
doctor or clinical psychologist assesses for premature (early)
ejaculation with an interview to determine ejaculation latency and
discuss reactions to this problem. The most common treatments are
behavioral techniques that increase ejaculation latency.

Assessment A thorough assessment of PE includes measuring three factors;
length of time from penetration to ejaculation (ejaculation latency),
subjective feelings of control over ejaculation, and personal and
relational distress caused by the condition. Usually these dimensions of
PE are assessed with retrospective self-reports provided by the patient.
Sometimes the patient is asked to measure the time from insertion to
ejaculation or to have his partner provide an estimate of his
ejaculatory latency in order to increase measurement reliability.
Treatment The most commonly used psychotherapy for increasing
ejaculatory latency is an integration of psychodynamic, behavioral, and
cognitive approaches. According to Althof (2014), the focus of
psychotherapy for men with PE is to learn to control ejaculation while
understanding the meaning of the symptom and the context in which the
symptom occurs. Psychodynamically oriented therapists consider PE to be
a metaphor for conflict in the relationship, while behavior-oriented
therapists typically view the disorder as a conditioned response to
certain interpersonal or environmental contexts. Common behavioral
techniques for increasing ejaculatory latency are the squeeze technique
developed by Masters and Johnson (1970) and the pause technique (Kaplan,
1989). The squeeze technique consists of engaging in sexual stimulation
alone or with a partner for as long as possible before ejaculation.
Before reaching the "point of inevitable ejaculation," the man is
instructed to stop the activity and apply tactile pressure to the penile
glans to decrease the urge to ejaculate but not to the point that he
completely loses his erection. When the urge has subsided, the man
resumes masturbation or intercourse stopping as many times as needed to
delay ejaculation. The pause technique is similar to the squeeze
technique with the exception that no pressure is applied to the penis.
At times, clinicians may suggest using a PDE-5 inhibitor (e.g.,
sildenafil) along with these techniques so that the man can practice
delaying ejaculation without worrying about maintaining an erection.
Recent treatments combine these techniques and experimentation with new
sexual positions that may reduce the propensity toward premature
ejaculation. In one of the few well-controlled premature (early)
ejaculation treatment studies, there was significant increase in
ejaculation latency time among men treated with the squeeze technique
compared to men in a wait-list control condition (de Carufel & Trudel,
2006). Medical treatments include the use of topical anesthetics, such
as prilocaine (Citanest) or lidocaine (Xylocaine), to diminish
sensitivity; these are used in combination with condoms (to prevent the
partner's genitals from being anesthetized). In men with lifelong PE,
treatment with pharmacological antidepressants has been shown to
increase the ejaculation latency and increase sexual pleasure and
satisfaction. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, such as
sertraline (Zoloft), fluoxetine (Prozac), and paroxetine (Paxil), have
most often been used to treat PE, because of their known side effects of
delaying or inhibiting orgasm. These medications can be taken either
daily or on demand 4 to 6 hours

Sexual Pain Disorders

549

before sexual activity. Clinicians who treat men with PE have come to
view the disorder as a "couple's problem" and recommend including the
partner in treatment as much as possible to enhance both treatment
compliance and treatment efficacy. Dapoxetine (Priligy, Westoxetin), a
rapid-acting SSRI with a short half-life, has been approved for
treatment of premature (early) ejaculation in over 30 countries, but not
in the United States. In clinical trials, dapoxetine taken before sexual
activity was shown to significantly increase ejaculation latency
compared to a pill placebo (Levine, 2006).

Sexual Pain Disorders The DSM-5 subworkgroup on sexual dysfunction
combined the two sexual pain disorders identified in DSM-IV-TR,
dyspareunia and vaginismus, into one disorder, called genito-pelvic
pain/penetration disorder. In DSM-IV-TR, dyspareunia was defined as
genital and/or pelvic pain, and vaginismus referred to an involuntary
spasm or tightening of the pelvic muscles. The merging of dyspareunia
and vaginismus emphasizes the multidimensional nature of genital pain,
particularly in women.

Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder Definition, Diagnosis, and
Prevalence Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder (GPPPD) is defined in
the DSM-5 as persistent or recurrent difficulty with one or more of the
following: (a) vaginal penetration during intercourse; (b) vulvovaginal
or pelvic pain during vaginal intercourse or attempts at penetration;
(c) fear or anxiety about vulvovaginal or pelvic pain in anticipation
of, during, or as a result of vaginal penetration; and (d) tightening or
tensing of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted vaginal
penetration. At least one of these symptoms must have persisted for at
least 6 months and must cause significant distress. The disorder can be
specified by severity and as either lifetime or acquired. The creation
of the diagnosis of GPPPD came about partially as a response to
arguments made by Binik (2010a), who questioned the logic of maintaining
two separate diagnoses, given the high rates of comorbidity between
difficulties with vaginal penetration and painful sexual intercourse. In
a recent study of Portuguese women, 72.4% of women with a diagnosis of
vaginismus reported symptoms of dyspareunia, and 47.7% of women with a
diagnosis of dyspareunia reported symptoms of vaginismus (Peixoto &
Nobre, 2013). Binik (2010a) also argued in favor of a pain
conceptualization, but the DSM-5 subworkgroup decided to maintain the
status of GPPPD as a sexual dysfunction. Kingsberg and Knudson (2011)
have also questioned whether the disorder should be characterized as a
pain disorder that interferes with sexual activity or as a sexual
disorder predominately associated with pain. One study supports the pain
conceptualization of GPPPD, as it indicated that nonpelvic chronic pain
is associated with chronic genito-pelvic pain (Paterson, Davis, Khalifé,
Amsel, & Binik, 2009). More research in this area is warranted. Though
the DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of dyspareunia applied to both males and
females, male dyspareunia has been excluded from the DSM-5 diagnostic
criteria for GPPPD, likely

550

Sexual Dysfunctions

due to a lack of empirical studies that address the condition. However,
some research shows that males do occasionally suffer from localized or
generalized pain during sexual activity. Clemens, Meenan, Rosetti, Gaos,
and Calhoun (2005) suggested that the prevalence of male dyspareunia
ranges from 5% to 15%. Researchers have established a term, urological
chronic pelvic pain syndrome (UCPPS), that applies only to men, but it
is not included in the DSM-5 (Shoskes, Nickel, Rackley, & Pontari,
2009). Davis, Morin, Binik, Khalifé, and Carrier (2011) found that
patterns of sensitivity and pelvic floor muscle function in men with
UCPPS are similar to those of women who report problems with pelvic
pain. Painful intercourse and spasms of the pelvic floor muscle are
frequently comorbid with sexual arousal problems in women. The genital
changes that occur during sexual arousal, such as swelling and
lubrication of the genitals facilitate penetrative intercourse. If these
changes are absent but intercourse is still attempted, it can result in
friction, tearing, and overstimulation of internal genital tissue that
can lead to sexual pain. Therefore, some scientists believe that a lack
of genital arousal may be a key antecedent to experiencing sexual pain
and/or spasms. As GPPPD is new to DSM-5, the prevalence of the disorder
is currently unknown. Prevalence estimates do exist for dyspareunia and
vaginismus. Rates of dyspareunia range from 2% to 7% in the general
population of women (Peixoto & Nobre, 2013), from 6.5% to 45% in older
women (van Lankveld et al., 2010), and from 14% to 34% in younger women
(van Lankveld et al., 2010). With respect to vaginismus, prevalence
rates are reported to be 5% to 6.6% (e.g., Fugl-Meyer et al., 2013), but
higher rates of painful sexual intercourse have been noted in clinical
settings and in countries where arranged marriages, polygamy, and/or
widow inheritance are common (e.g., Amidu et al., 2010). Some women are
at increased risk of genito-pelvic pain after giving birth. Paterson and
colleagues (2009) found that 10% of women who experienced postpartum
genito-pelvic pain continued to experience pain 1 year after childbirth.
Risk factors for sexual pain include poor health, lower education, low
family income, high stress, more frequent emotional problems, and the
presence of urinary tract symptoms.

Factors Associated With Genito-Pelvic Pain/ Penetration Disorder
Research has identified the correlates of sexual pain in women
(dyspareunia), including a number of medical conditions, as well as
anxiety about sexual activity. Though not much is known about the
correlates of painful, involuntary tensing of the pelvic floor muscles
during attempted penetration (vaginismus), a robust association has been
noted between vaginismus and anxiety. When sex is painful, women can
build up anxiety around sex that works to exacerbate and maintain the
pain associated with this disorder.

Biological Factors Pain during sexual activity may result from a variety
of medical conditions and anatomical complications. Superficial pain may
be a symptom of dermatological disorders affecting the external
genitalia, such as vaginal atrophy, anatomical variations, urinary tract
infections, injury, and other diseases and infections of the vulva. Deep
pain may result from uterine fibroids, endometriosis, urinary disease,
and ovarian disease (for a review, see

Sexual Pain Disorders

551

Schultz et al., 2005). Pain may also stem from the treatment of
gynecological and other cancers with pelvic radiation and chemotherapy
(e.g., Fugl-Meyer et al., 2013). One of the major causes of sexual pain
at the superficial level is a biological disorder called provoked
vestibulodynia (PVD; formerly called vulvar vestibulitis syndrome). This
disorder is characterized by sensitivity to touch and pressure of the
vulvar vestibule, a region bounded by the inner labia minora, the
frenulum of the clitoris, and the lower portion of the vaginal opening.
This touch and pressure evokes a sharp, burning pain. Generally, PVD is
diagnosed by a gynecologist, who probes the vulvar vestibule with a
cotton swab to determine the presence of pain sensations. Although the
etiology of PVD is uncertain, it is believed to be at least partially
caused by physiological sensitivity of the vulvar vestibule. Women with
this disorder often have a history of yeast infections and may have had
significant hormonal events in adolescence, including early onset of
menstruation and early use of oral contraceptives (e.g., Farmer et al.,
2011). PVD is the most common cause of premenopausal dyspareunia (Binik,
2010a). Related to superficial vaginal pain is vulvodynia, in which pain
is not specific to the vulvar vestibule and not attributable to any
other identifiable pathology. Another potential cause of superficial
dyspareunia is vulvovaginal atrophy, the deterioration and reduction in
flexibility and lubrication of the vaginal tissue that occurs with
menopause. The vaginal symptoms reported by premenopausal women with PVD
and postmenopausal women with vulvovaginal atrophy are markedly similar.
Causes of dyspareunia involving deep pain include uterine fibroids,
urinary diseases such as uterine retroversion and uterine myomas,
ovarian diseases such as ovarian remnant syndrome, adenomyosis,
endometriosis, pelvic congestion syndrome, levator ani muscle myalgia,
and irritable bowel syndrome. Sensitization of the neurons in the spinal
cord and in parts of the brain has been postulated as the most likely
cause of the deep type of dyspareunia. According to this theory, intense
stimulation of peripheral tissue that occurs because of a physical
trauma or repetitive abrasive stimulation can sensitize the neurons that
bring the pain information to the brain. Consequently, the sensitized
neurons require less stimulation to be activated, or they may even be
activated without the presence of stimulation. Thus, the individual may
feel pain after only a slight touch or even in the presence of no touch.
Women with this type of dyspareunia often also report genital pain
during nonsexual situations (Binik, 2010a). Little research has focused
on the biological factors associated with vaginismus. These involuntary
spasms of the pelvic floor muscles may be due to genital malformations
and/or poor general pelvic muscle control. As with dyspareunia, high
rates of provoked PVD have been reported among women diagnosed with
vaginismus (Binik, 2010b). The vaginal spasms that are associated with
vaginismus may be a physiological response to intense pain during
penetration; that is, the hypothesized vaginal spasm in vaginismus could
be the body's automatic physical reaction to protect itself from
anticipated pain. Associating pain with intercourse could lead to the
avoidance of sexual activity often observed in women with vaginismus.

Psychological Factors Fear of pain and anxiety associated with sexual
activity have been proposed as both psychological symptoms and causes of
sexual pain or dyspareunia. Compared to controls, women with dyspareunia
exhibit a selective attentional bias toward pain stimuli, which is

552

Sexual Dysfunctions

predicted by state and trait anxiety as well as fear of pain (Payne,
Binik, Amsel, & Khalifé, 2005). Although anxiety appears to be a
correlate of dyspareunia, not all women who experience sexual anxiety
manifest the symptoms of sexual pain. Women with dyspareunia tend to
fear sexual interactions and show more phobic anxiety about sexual
activity than do women without sexual pain. It may be that after sexual
pain has been experienced initially, anxiety about sexual activity
maintains dyspareunia by increasing awareness for sexual pain. For
example, women with PVD reported hypervigilance for sexual pain, and
displayed an attentional bias toward pain-related stimuli on an
emotional stressor task when compared to matched control women without
PVD (Payne et al., 2005). In addition to anxiety, negative attitudes
toward sexuality are correlated with dyspareunia. Women with a history
of abuse are more likely than nonabused women to experience
genito-pelvic pain. Harlow and Stewart (2005) found that women who
reported sexual pain were 4.1 times more likely to have a history of
severe physical abuse and 6.5 times more likely to have a history of
severe childhood sexual abuse compared to their nonabused counterparts.
Fear of physical abuse has also been linked to experiencing genital pain
(Landry & Bergeron, 2011), as has a history of abuse (Reissing, Binik,
Khalifé, Cohen, & Amsel, 2004). Depression and genito-pelvic pain are
frequently linked in the literature; however, longitudinal studies have
failed to find a direct relationship. It is likely that women who are
more depressed are more likely to report pain in general and sexual pain
in particular, but there is no evidence at this point that depression
causes sexual pain or vice versa. Negative cognitions such as, "My
partner will leave me," "I am a failure as a woman," and "I must be
tearing inside," are commonly reported by women with sexual pain. From a
relational point of view, women with dyspareunia report more pain when
their relational distress increases, an indication that sexual pain may
be partially associated with negative feelings between partners. With
respect to vaginismus, women who experience vaginal spasms report high
levels of anxiety symptoms. It is unclear, however, whether anxiety
plays a causal role in vaginismus, or whether the experience of the
vaginal spasms contributes to increases in overall anxiety. Lower rates
of positive attitudes toward one's sexuality have been observed in women
who experience these spasms (Reissing et al., 2004). A lack of positive
beliefs about one's sexuality may discourage a woman from seeking out
positive sexual interactions and may contribute to avoidance of sexual
activity.

Assessment and Treatment of Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
Assessment for GPPPD may include both an interview and a physical
examination to identify areas where pain is experienced. The disorder is
most often treated with cognitive-behavioral therapy or physical therapy
methods that work on strengthening the pelvic floor and relaxing the
vaginal muscles.

Assessment The assessment of genito-pelvic pain should include an
accurate description of the location, intensity, quality, duration, and
time course of the pain; the degree of interference it has with
sexuality; a summary of what elicits the pain (both sexual and nonsexual
behaviors); and the meaning attributed to the pain. Pain is considered
subjective and

Sexual Pain Disorders

553

therefore is usually measured by a patient's self-report. Additional
assessment by a gynecologist can help to identify the specific area(s)
of the pain, as well as to take into account other potential
gynecological issues that may be contributing to the pain. Assessment by
a physical therapist may also be useful to confirm a diagnosis of GPPPD.

Treatment The main treatments for genito-pelvic pain are
cognitive-behavioral sex therapy/pain management, electromyographic
feedback, and vestibulectomy. Topical anesthetics and other medications
are also sometimes used to alleviate genital pain, but well-controlled
studies examining their long-term effectiveness are currently lacking.
Physical therapy with a focus on strengthening the pelvic floor through
exercises, and enhancing flexibility with massage and stretching
techniques have been used to treat sexual pain. Antidepressants and
anticonvulsants have been used for pain relief, yet there are a limited
number of clinical trials to support their efficacy. The most current
treatments for genito-pelvic pain combine cognitive-behavioral therapy
to address education and faulty cognitions and physical therapy to
strengthen and relax the vaginal muscles. Cognitive-behavioral sex
therapy for dyspareunia generally includes educating the woman about
sexual pain; the effect it has on sexual desire, arousal, and orgasm;
and the factors that maintain the pain. Often cognitive restructuring
exercises are used to help the woman identify faulty cognitions (e.g.,
"If I have sex my vagina may tear apart") and to replace them with more
accurate beliefs (e.g., "My vagina is made of stretchable muscles that
stretch out during intercourse"). These exercises aim to reduce the
anxiety associated with sexual activity and encourage women to engage in
nonpenetrative sexual activity to enhance sexual pleasure. Short-term
group cognitive-behavioral therapy for PVD significantly reduced genital
pain from pre- to posttreatment, with 39% of women endorsing great
improvement or complete pain relief at the 6-month follow-up interval
(Bergeron, Binik, Khalifé, Pagidas, & Glazer, 2001). Group
cognitive-behavioral therapy and pain management for women with PVD also
showed substantial reductions in genito-pelvic pain. Electromyographic
biofeedback has been used to treat genito-pelvic pain in women.
Electromyography is a physiological response technique that records the
electrical activity of skeletal muscles. The woman is trained to use the
electromyography sensor to assess the tension in her pelvic muscles as
she learns pelvic floor relaxation exercises. The exercises are
practiced at home to reduce hypertonicity and increase the strength and
flexibility of her pelvic floor. This technique was developed by Glazer,
Rodke, Swencionis, Hertz, and Young (1995), who observed a relationship
between PVD and abnormal responding of the pelvic floor musculature.
Evidence suggests that electromyography and pelvic floor training
significantly reduce sexual pain from PVD and may occasionally eliminate
it altogether (e.g., Bergeron et al., 2001). Despite encouraging results
from these trials of electromyography, success rates have varied
considerably, calling for further study. When physical therapy and
psychological treatments have proven ineffective, there are also
surgical treatment options. Vestibulectomy is an outpatient procedure
that involves removal of vulvar vestibular tissue, and it has been shown
to significantly reduce or completely alleviate genital pain among the
majority of recipients. If the genito-pelvic pain appears to have an
etiology related to atrophy of the vaginal tissue, such as is common
postmenopause, estrogen administration may help to rebuild vaginal
tissue. The estrogens are usually administered via oral pharmacology or
topical cream applied to the vagina.

554

Sexual Dysfunctions

Studies on the efficacy of estrogen treatment for dyspareunia related to
atrophy of vaginal tissue have shown encouraging results (for a review,
see Krychman, 2011). Treatment for vaginismus, or involuntary spasms of
the pelvic floor muscle, can include many of the same techniques used
for treating dyspareunia, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy,
electromyographic feedback, and vestibulectomy. As mentioned previously,
cognitive-behavioral sex therapy focuses on educating the woman about
her disorder; its potential impact on sexual desire, arousal, and
orgasm; and potential elements that can maintain pain. Cognitive
restructuring exercises and relaxation exercises like diaphragmatic
breathing and progressive muscle relaxation are used to help the woman
reduce her anxiety and avoidance of sexual activity. Systematic
desensitization has also been used to treat women who experience these
painful pelvic spasms. In the context of sex therapy, systematic
desensitization exercises are assigned for homework and entail
relaxation coupled with gradual habituation to vaginal touch and
penetration, usually beginning with the woman's fingers or artificial
devices specifically designed for this purpose. Partners may also be
incorporated into these exercises if desired. Despite the widespread use
of systematic desensitization to treat this disorder, there is no
empirical evidence that it is an effective treatment (Heiman & Meston,
1997). In a recent randomized clinical trial of cognitive-behavioral
therapy for lifelong vaginismus that included systematic desensitization
as a treatment component, women showed improvements in their ability to
engage in penetrative intercourse (van Lankveld et al., 2006). However
the efficacy of systematic desensitization alone is still unknown.

Summary and Future Directions In summary, it is apparent that both
biological and psychosocial factors play a prominent role in the
etiology of sexual dysfunctions in men and women and must be carefully
considered both in assessment and in treatment. The multidimensionality
of sexuality calls for assessment and treatment strategies that account
for all of the potential dimensions that are at play when an individual
encounters sexual problems. All forms of sexual dysfunction occur in the
context of a person's life. Consideration of that context, especially
relational factors, can be used to guide treatment planning and
recommendations. In the lead-up to the publishing of the DSM-5,
discussions of sexual dysfunction, especially with regard to women,
became highly politicized and emotionally charged. The collapse of
desire and arousal problems into one diagnostic category revealed
tensions regarding the construct of female sexual desire, a construct
that is sociopolitically loaded and challenging to tease apart in an
objective fashion. In order to develop a more nuanced understanding of
the relation between sexual desire and arousal in women, researchers and
clinicians alike need to continue to delve into areas that may be
controversial and uncomfortable. The dramatic increase in medical
approaches to the treatment of sexual problems has changed the landscape
of sexual health research and treatment dissemination. It is evident
that the future of the field will feature a large degree of
multidisciplinary collaboration---among psychologists, psychiatrists,
gynecologists, urologists, and primary care physicians---in order to
continue to develop and refine research on the nature and treatment of
sexual problems.

References Allan, C. A., Forbes, E. A., Strauss, B.J.G., & McLachlan, R.
(2008). Testosterone therapy increases sexual desire in ageing men with
low-normal testosterone levels and symptoms of androgen deficiency.
International Journal of Impotence Research, 20(4), 396--401. Althof, S.
E. (2012). Psychological interventions for delayed ejaculation/orgasm.
International Journal of Impotence Research, 24, 131--136. Althof, S. E.
(2014). Treatment of premature ejaculation: Psychotherapy,
pharmacotherapy, and combined therapy. In Y. M. Binik & K.S.K. Hall
(Eds.), Principles and practice of sex therapy (5th ed., pp. 112--137).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Althof, S. E., Abdo, C.H.N., Dean, J.,
Hackett, G., McCabe, M., McMahon, C. G., ... Tan, H. M. (2010).
International Society for Sexual Medicine's guidelines for the diagnosis
and treatment of premature ejaculation. Journal of Sexual Medicine,
7(9), 2947--2969. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2010.01975.x American
Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Committee on Gynecologic
Practice. (2007). Vaginal "rejuvenation" and cosmetic vaginal procedures
(ACOG Committee Opinion No. 378). Washington, DC: American Congress of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists. American Psychiatric Association.
(2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.,
text rev.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association.
(2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. Amidu, N., Owiredu, W.K.B.A., Woode, E.,
Addai-Mensah, O., Quaye, L., Alhassan, A., & Tagoe, E. A. (2010).
Incidence of sexual dysfunction: A prospective survey in Ghanaian
females. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology, 8, 106. doi:
10.1186/1477-7827-8-106 Apfelbaum, B. (1989). The diagnosis and
treatment of retarded ejaculation. In S. R. Leiblum & R. C. Rosen
(Eds.), Principles and practice of sex therapy: Update for the 1990s
(pp. 168--206). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Araujo, A. B., Esche, G.
R., Kupelian, V., O'Donnell, A. B., Travison, T. G., Williams, R. E.,
... McKinlay, J. B. (2007). Prevalence of symptomatic

androgen deficiency in men. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism, 92(11), 4241--4247. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-1245 Bancroft, J.
(2005). The endocrinology of sexual arousal. Journal of Endocrinology,
186(3), 411--427. doi: 10.1677/joe.1.06233 Bancroft, J., & Janssen, E.
(2000). The dual control model of male sexual response: A theoretical
approach to centrally mediated erectile dysfunction. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 24(5), 571--579. doi:
10.1016/S0149-7634(00)00024-5 Bancroft, J., Loftus, J., & Long, J. S.
(2003). Distress about sex: A national survey of women in heterosexual
relationships. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 32(3), 193--208. doi:
10.1023/A:1023420431760 Barlow, D. H. (1986). Causes of sexual
dysfunction: The role of anxiety and cognitive interference. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54(2), 140--148. doi:
10.1037/0022-006X.54.2.140 Basaria, S., Coviello, A. D., Travison, T.
G., Storer, T. W., Farwell, W. R., Jette, A. M., ... Bhasin, S. (2010).
Adverse events associated with testosterone administration. New England
Journal of Medicine, 362(2), 109--122. Basson, R. (2000). The female
sexual response: A different model. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy,
26(1), 51--65. Basson, R., & Brotto, L. A. (2003). Sexual
psychophysiology and effects of sildenafil citrate in oestrogenised
women with acquired genital arousal disorder and impaired orgasm: A
randomised controlled trial. BJOG: An International Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 110(11), 1014--1024. doi:
10.1111/j.1471-0528.2003.02438.x Bergeron, S., Binik, Y. M., Khalifé,
S., Pagidas, K., & Glazer, H. I. (2001). Vulvar vestibulitis syndrome:
Reliability of diagnosis and evaluation of current diagnostic criteria.
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 98(1), 45--51. doi:
10.1016/S0029-7844(01)01389-8 Billups, K. L., Berman, L., Berman, J.,
Metz, M. E., Glennon, M. E., & Goldstein, I. (2001). A new
non-pharmacological vacuum therapy for female sexual dysfunction.
Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 27(5), 435--441. doi:
10.1080/713846826

555

556

Sexual Dysfunctions

Binik, Y. M. (2010a). The DSM diagnostic criteria for dyspareunia.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39(2), 292--303. doi:
10.1007/s10508-009-9563-x Binik, Y. M. (2010b). The DSM diagnostic
criteria for vaginismus. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39(2), 278--291.
Bivalacqua, T. J., Deng, W., Kendirci, M., Usta, M. F., Robinson, C.,
Taylor, B. K., ... Kadowitz, P. J. (2007). Mesenchymal stem cells alone
or ex vivo gene modified with endothelial nitric oxide synthase reverse
age-associated erectile dysfunction. American Journal of Physiology.
Heart and Circulatory Physiology, 292(3), H1278--H1290. doi: 10.1152/
ajpheart.00685.2006 Brotto, L. A., & Basson, R. (2014). Group
mindfulnessbased therapy significantly improves sexual desire in women.
Behavior Research and Therapy, 57, 43--54. Brotto, L. A., Heiman, J. R.,
& Tolman, D. L. (2009). Narratives of desire in mid-age women with and
without arousal difficulties. Journal of Sex Research, 46(5), 387--398.
doi: 10.1080/00224490902792624 Brotto, L., & Luria, M. (2014). Sexual
interest/ arousal disorder in women. In Y. M. Binik & K.S.K. Hall
(Eds.), Principles and practice of sex therapy (5th ed., pp. 17--41).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Carani, C., Isidori, A. M., Granata, A.,
Carosa, E., Maggi, M., Lenzi, A., & Jannini, E. A. (2005). Multicenter
study on the prevalence of sexual symptoms in male hypo- and
hyperthyroid patients. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism,
90(12), 6472--6479. doi: 10.1210/jc.2005-1135 Carvalheira, A. A.,
Pereira, N. M., Maroco, J., & Forjaz, V. (2012). Dropout in the
treatment of erectile dysfunction with PDE5: A study on predictors and a
qualitative analysis of reasons for discontinuation. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 9(9), 2361--2369. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2012.02787.x
Carvalheira, A., Traeen, B., & Štulhofer, A. (2014). Correlates of men's
sexual interest: A cross-cultural study. Journal of Sexual Medicine,
11(1), 154--164. doi: 10.1111/jsm.12345 Chew, K.-K., Finn, J., Stuckey,
B., Gibson, N., Sanfilippo, F., Bremner, A., ... Jamrozik, K. (2010).
Erectile dysfunction as a predictor for subsequent atherosclerotic
cardiovascular events: Findings from a linked-data study. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 7(1, Pt. 1), 192--202. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2009
.01576.x

Clayton, A. H., Croft, H. A., & Handiwala, L. (2014). Antidepressants
and sexual dysfunction: Mechanisms and clinical implications.
Postgraduate Medicine, 126(2), 91--99. doi: 10.3810/pgm.2014 .03.2744
Clayton, A. H., DeRogatis, L. R., & Rosen, R. C. (2012). Intended or
unintended consequences? The likely implications of raising the bar for
sexual dysfunction diagnosis in the proposed DSM-V revisions: 1. For
women with incomplete loss of desire or sexual receptivity. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 9(8), 2027--2039. Clemens, J. Q., Meenan, R. T.,
Rosetti, M. C. K., Gaos, S. Y., & Calhoun, E. A. (2005). Prevalence and
incidence of interstitial cystitis in a managed care population. Journal
of Urology, 173(1), 98--102. Corona, G., Jannini, E. A., Vignozzi, L.,
Rastrelli, G., & Maggi, M. (2012). The hormonal control of ejaculation.
Nature Reviews Urology, 9(9), 508--519. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2012.147
Corona, G., Petrone, L., Mannucci, E., Ricca, V., Balercia, G., Giommi,
R., ... Maggi, M. (2004). The impotent couple: Low desire. International
Journal of Andrology, 28(Suppl. 2), 46--52. doi: 10.1111/
j.1365-2605.2005.00594.x Corona, G., Rastrelli, G., Forti, G., & Maggi,
M. (2011). Update in testosterone therapy for men (CME). Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 8(3), 639--654. doi: 10.1111/j .1743-6109.2010.02200.x
Cummings, S. R., Ettinger, B., Delmas, P. D., Kenemans, P.,
Stathopoulos, V., Verweij, P., ... Bilezikian. (2008). The effects of
tibolone in older postmenopausal women. New England Journal of Medicine,
359(7), 697--708. Davidson, J. K., & Moore, N. B. (1994). Guilt and lack
of orgasm during sexual intercourse: Myth versus reality among college
women. Journal of Sex Education and Therapy, 20(3), 153--174. Davis, S.
N., Morin, M., Binik, Y. M., Khalifé, S., & Carrier, S. (2011). Use of
pelvic floor ultrasound to assess pelvic floor muscle function in
urological chronic pelvic pain syndrome in men. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 8(11), 3173--3180. Davis, S. R., & Braunstein, G. D. (2012).
Efficacy and safety of testosterone in the management of hypoactive
sexual desire disorder in postmenopausal women. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 9(4), 1134--1148. Davison, S. L., Bell, R. J., LaChina, M.,
Holden, S. L., & Davis, S. R. (2008). Sexual function in

References well women: Stratification by sexual satisfaction, hormone
use, and menopause status. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5(5), 1214--1222.
de Carufel, F., & Trudel, G. (2006). Effects of a new
functional-sexological treatment for premature ejaculation. Journal of
Sex & Marital Therapy, 32(2), 97--114. Dennerstein, L., Koochaki, P.,
Barton, I., & Graziottin, A. (2006). Hypoactive sexual desire disorder
in menopausal women: A survey of Western European women. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 3, 212--222. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2006.00215.x
Diamond, L. M., & Wallen, K. (2011). Sexual minority women's sexual
motivation around the time of ovulation. Archives of Sexual Behavior,
40(2), 237--246. doi: 10.1007/s10508-010-9631-2 Dunn, K. M., Croft, P.
R., & Hackett, G. I. (1999). Association of sexual problems with social,
psychological, and physical problems in men and women: A cross sectional
population survey. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 53(3),
144--148. Exton, N. G., Truong, T. C., Exton, M. S., Wingenfeld, S. A.,
Leygraf, N., Saller, B., ... Schedlowski, M. (2000). Neuroendocrine
response to film-induced sexual arousal in men and women.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 25(2), 187--199. doi:
10.1016/S03064530(99)00049-9 Farmer, M. A., Taylor, A. M., Bailey, A.
L., Tuttle, A. H., MacIntyre, L. C., Milagrosa, Z. E., ... Mogil, J. S.
(2011). Repeated vulvovaginal fungal infections cause persistent pain in
a mouse model of vulvodynia. Science Translational Medicine, 3(101),
101ra91. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002613 Frohlich, P. F., & Meston, C.
M. (2000). Evidence that serotonin affects female sexual functioning via
peripheral mechanisms. Physiology & Behavior, 71(3-4), 383--393. doi:
10.1016/S00319384(00)00344-9 Fugl-Meyer, A. R., & Fugl-Meyer, K. S.
(1999). Sexual disabilities, problems and satisfaction in 18--74 year
old Swedes. Scandinavian Journal of Sexology, 2, 79--105. Fugl-Meyer, K.
S., Bohm-Starke, N., Damsted Petersen, C., Fugl-Meyer, A., Parish, S., &
Giraldi, A. (2013). Standard operating procedures for female genital
sexual pain. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 10(1), 83--93. doi:
10.1111/j.1743-6109.2012.02867.x Georgiadis, J. R., Janniko, R.,
Reinders, A.A.T, Van der Graaf, F.H.C.E., Paans, A.M.J., & Kortekaas, R.
(2007). Brain activation during human male

557

ejaculation revisited. Neuroreport, 18(6), 553--557. doi:
10.1097/WNR.0b013e3280b10bfe Glazer, H. I., Rodke, G., Swencionis, C.,
Hertz, R., & Young, A. W. (1995). Treatment of vulvar vestibulitis
syndrome with electromyographic biofeedback of pelvic floor musculature.
Journal of Reproductive Medicine, 40(4), 283--290. Glina, S., Sharlip,
I. D., & Hellstrom, W. J. (2013). Modifying risk factors to prevent and
treat erectile dysfunction. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 10(1), 115--119.
doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2012.02816.x Goodman, M. P., Placik, O. J.,
Benson, R. H., Miklos, J. R., Moore, R. D., Jason, R. A., ... Gonzalez,
F. (2010). A large multicenter outcome study of female genital plastic
surgery. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 7(4, Pt. 1), 1565--1577. doi:
10.1111/j.1743-6109.2009.01573.x Graber, B., & Kline-Graber, G. (1979).
Female orgasm: Role of pubococcygeus muscle. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 40(8), 348--351. Graham, C. A. (2010). The DSM diagnostic
criteria for female orgasmic disorder. Archives of Sexual Behavior,
39(2), 256--270. Graham, C. A. (2014). Orgasm disorders in women. In Y.
M. Binik & K.S.K. Hall (Eds.), Principles and practice of sex therapy
(5th ed., pp. 89--111). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Graham, C. A.,
Sanders, S. A., Milhausen, R. R., & Mcbride, K. R. (2004). Turning on
and turning off: A focus group study of the factors that affect women's
sexual arousal. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 33(6), 527--538. doi:
10.1023/B:ASEB.0000044737 .62561.fd Grover, S. A., Lowensteyn, I.,
Kaouache, M., Marchand, S., Coupal, L., DeCarolis, E., ... Defoy, I.
(2006). The prevalence of erectile dysfunction in the primary care
setting: Importance of risk factors for diabetes and vascular disease.
Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 213--219. Gupta, B. P., Murad, M.
H., Clifton, M. M., Prokop, L., Nehra, A., & Kopecky, S. L. (2011). The
effect of lifestyle modification and cardiovascular risk factor
reduction on erectile dysfunction: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Archives of Internal Medicine, 171(20), 1797--1803. doi:
10.1001/archinternmed.2011.440 Handelsman, D. J. (2010). Androgen
physiology, pharmacology and abuse. In L. J. DeGroot & J. L. Jameson
(Eds.), Endocrinology (6th ed., pp. 2469--2498). Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier Saunders.

558

Sexual Dysfunctions

Handelsman, D. J. (2013). Global trends in testosterone prescribing,
2000--2011: Expanding the spectrum of prescription drug misuse. Medical
Journal of Australia, 199, 548--551. doi: 10.5694/mja13.10111 Harlow, B.
L., & Stewart, E. G. (2005). Adult-onset vulvodynia in relation to
childhood violence victimization. American Journal of Epidemiology,
161(9), 871--880. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwi108 Harte, C. B., & Meston, C. M.
(2011). Recreational use of erectile dysfunction medications and its
adverse effects on erectile function in young healthy men: The mediating
role of confidence in erectile ability. Journal of Sexual Medicine,
9(7), 1852--1859. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2012.02755.x Heiman, J., &
Meston, C. (1997). Evaluating sexual dysfunction in women. Clinical
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 40(3), 616--629. Heinrich, A. G. (1976). The
effect of group and self-directed behavioral-educational treatment of
primary orgasmic dysfunctions in females treated without their partners.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 37(4-B). Hong, L. K. (1984).
Survival of the fastest: On the origin of premature ejaculation. Journal
of Sex Research, 20(2), 109--122. Jern, P., Santtila, P., Witting, K.,
Alanko, K., Harlaar, N., Johansson, A., ... Sandnabba, K. (2007).
Premature and delayed ejaculation: Genetic and environmental effects in
a population-based sample of Finnish twins. Journal of Sexual Medicine,
4(6), 1739--1749. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2007.00599.x Kaplan, H. S.
(1989). How to overcome premature ejaculation. New York, NY:
Brunner/Mazel. Kegel, A. H. (1952). Stress incontinence and genital
relaxation. Ciba Clinical Symposia, 4(2), 35--51. Kenemans, P., Bundred,
N. J., Foidart, J. M., Kubista, E., von Schoultz, B., Sismondi, P., ...
Beckmann, M. W. (2009). Safety and efficacy of tibolone in breast-cancer
patients with vasomotor symptoms: A double-blind, randomised,
non-inferiority trial. Lancet Oncology, 10(2), 135--146. Kingsberg, S.
A., & Knudson, G. (2011). Female sexual disorders: Assessment,
diagnosis, and treatment. CNS Spectrums, 16(2), 49--62. Krychman, M. L.
(2011). Vaginal estrogens for the treatment of dyspareunia. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 8(3), 666--674. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109 .2010.02114.x
Laan, E., Smith, M. D., Boolell, M., & Quirk, F. (2002). Development of
a sexual function questionnaire for

clinical trials of female sexual dysfunction. Journal of Women's Health
& Gender-Based Medicine, 11(3), 277--289. Landry, T., & Bergeron, S.
(2011). Biopsychosocial factors associated with dyspareunia in a
community sample of adolescent girls. Archives of Sexual Behavior,
40(5), 877--889. doi: 10.1007/s10508010-9637-9 Laumann, E. O., Glasser,
D. B., Neves, R.C.S., & Moreira, E. D. (2009). A population-based survey
of sexual activity, sexual problems and associated help-seeking behavior
patterns in mature adults in the United States of America. International
Journal of Impotence Research, 21(3), 171--178. doi: 10.1038/ijir.2009.7
Laumann, E. O., Michael, R. T., Gagnon, G. H., & Kolata, G. (1994). Sex
in America: A definitive survey. Boston, MA: Little, Brown. Laumann, E.
O., Nicolosi, A., Glasser, D. B., Paik, A., Gingell, C., Moreira, E., &
Wang, T. (2005). Sexual problems among women and men aged 40--80 y:
Prevalence and correlates identified in the Global Study of Sexual
Attitudes and Behaviors. International Journal of Impotence Research,
17(1), 39--57. doi: 10.1038/sj.ijir.3901250 Laumann, E. O., Paik, A., &
Rosen, R. C. (1999). Sexual dysfunction in the United States. JAMA,
281(6), 537--545. doi: 10.1001/jama.281.6.537 Leiblum, S. R., & Wiegel,
M. (2002). Psychotherapeutic interventions for treating female sexual
dysfunction. World Journal of Urology, 20(2), 127--136. Leonard, L. M.,
& Follette, V. M. (2002). Sexual functioning in women reporting a
history of child sexual abuse: Review of the empirical literature and
clinical implications. Annual Review of Sex Research, 13(1), 346--388.
Levine, L. (2006). Evaluation of withdrawal effects with dapoxetine in
the treatment of premature ejaculation (PE). Poster presented at the
meeting of the Sexual Medicine Society of North America. Lorenz, T. A.,
Harte, C. B., Hamilton, L. D., & Meston, C. M. (2012). Evidence for a
curvilinear relationship between sympathetic nervous system activation
and women's physiological sexual arousal. Psychophysiology, 49(1),
111--117. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986 .2011.01285.x Lorenz, T. A., &
Meston, C. M. (2012). Acute exercise improves physical sexual arousal in
women taking antidepressants. Annals of Behavioral

References Medicine, 43(3), 352--361. doi: 10.1007/s12160-011 -9338-1
Mah, K., & Binik, Y. M. (2001). The nature of human orgasm: A critical
review of major trends. Clinical Psychology Review, 21(6), 823--856.
doi: 10.1016/ S0272-7358(00)00069-6 Maio, G., Saraeb, S., & Marchiori,
A. (2010). Physical activity and PDE5 inhibitors in the treatment of
erectile dysfunction: Results of a randomized controlled study. Journal
of Sexual Medicine, 7(6), 2201--2208. Masters, W. H., & Johnson, V. E.
(1970). Human sexual inadequacy. Boston, MA: Little, Brown. McCabe, M.
P., & Connaughton, C. (2014). Psychosocial factors associated with male
sexual difficulties. Journal of Sex Research, 51(1), 31--42. doi:
10.1080/00224499.2013.789820 McCall, K. M., & Meston, C. M. (2006). Cues
resulting in desire for sexual activity in women. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 3(5), 838--852. doi: 10.1111/j .1743-6109.2006.00301.x
McCarthy, B., & Metz, M. E. (2008). The "Good Enough Sex" model. Sexual
and Relationship Therapy, 23(3), 227--234. McKenna, K. E. (1999).
Orgasm. In M. A. Skinner (Ed.), Encyclopedia of reproduction (Vol. 3).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Meana, M., & Steiner, E. T. (2014). Sex
therapy in transition: Are we there yet? In Y. M. Binik & K.S.K. Hall
(Eds.), Principles and practices of sex therapy (5th ed., pp. 541--557).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Mercer, C. H., Fenton, K. A., Johnson, A.
M., Wellings, K., Macdowall, W., McManus, S., ... Erens, B. (2003).
Sexual function problems and help seeking behaviour in Britain: National
probability sample survey. British Medical Journal, 327(7412), 426--427.
doi: 10.1136/bmj.327.7412.426 Meston, C. (2006). Female orgasmic
disorder: Treatment strategies and outcome results. In I. Goldstein, C.
M. Meston, S. Davis, & A. Traish (Eds.), Women's sexual function and
dysfunction: Study, diagnosis, and treatment. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Meston, C. M., & Frohlich, P. F. (2000). The neurobiology of sexual
function. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57(11), 1012--1030. Meston, C.
M., & Gorzalka, B. B. (1995). The effects of sympathetic activation on
physiological and subjective sexual arousal in women. Behavior Research
and Therapy, 33(6), 651--664.

559

Meston, C. M., & Gorzalka, B. B. (1996a). Differential effects of
sympathetic activation on sexual arousal in sexually dysfunctional and
functional women. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105(4), 582--591.
Meston, C. M., & Gorzalka, B. B. (1996b). The effects of immediate,
delayed, and residual sympathetic activation on sexual arousal in women.
Behavior Research and Therapy, 34(2), 143--148. doi:
10.1016/0005-7967(95)00050-X Meston, C. M., Gorzalka, B. B., & Wright,
J. M. (1997). Inhibition of subjective and physiological sexual arousal
in women by clonidine. Psychosomatic Medicine, 59, 339--407. Meston, C.
M., & Heiman, J. R. (1998). Ephedrineactivated physiological sexual
arousal in women. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(7), 652--656.
Meston, C. M., Hull, E., Levin, R. J., & Sipski, M. (2004). Disorders of
orgasm in women. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 1(1), 66--68. Meston, C.
M., Levin, R. J., Sipski, M. L., Hull, E. M., & Heiman, J. R. (2004).
Women's orgasm. Annual Review of Sex Research, 15, 173--257. doi:
10.1080/ 10532528.2004.10559820 Meston, C. M., Rellini, A. H., & Heiman,
J. R. (2006). Women's history of sexual abuse, their sexuality, and
sexual self-schemas. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
74(2), 229--36. doi: 10.1037/ 0022-006X.74.2.229 Metz, M. E., Pryor, J.
L., Nesvacil, L. J., Abuzzahab, F., Sr., & Koznar, J. (1997). Premature
ejaculation: A psychophysiological review. Journal of Sex & Marital
Therapy, 23(1), 3--23. Murray, S. H., & Milhausen, R. R. (2012). Sexual
desire and relationship duration in young men and women. Journal of Sex
& Marital Therapy, 38(1), 28--40. doi: 10.1080/0092623X.2011.569637
Nijland, E. A., Weijmar, S. W., Nathorst-Boos, J., Helmond, F. A., Van
Lunsen, R. H., Palacios, S., ... Davis, S. R. (2008). Tibolone and
transdermal E2/NETA for the treatment of female sexual dysfunction in
naturally menopausal women: Results of a randomized active-controlled
trial. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5(3), 646--656. Nobre, P. J., &
Pinto-Gouveia, J. (2006). Dysfunctional sexual beliefs as vulnerability
factors to sexual dysfunction. Journal of Sex Research, 43(1), 68--75.
doi: 10.1080/00224490609552300 Nobre, P. J., & Pinto-Gouveia, J. (2009).
Cognitive schemas associated with negative sexual events:

560

Sexual Dysfunctions

A comparison of men and women with and without sexual dysfunction.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38(5), 842--851. doi:
10.1007/s10508-008-9450-x Paick, J. S., Jeong, H., & Park, M. S. (1998).
Penile sensitivity in men with premature ejaculation. International
Journal of Impotence Research, 10(4), 247--250. Paterson, L. Q., Davis,
S. N., Khalifé, S., Amsel, R., & Binik, Y. M. (2009). Persistent genital
and pelvic pain after childbirth. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 6(1),
215--221. Payne, K. A., Binik, Y. M., Amsel, R., & Khalifé, S. (2005).
When sex hurts, anxiety and fear orient attention towards pain. European
Journal of Pain, 9(4), 427--436. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpain.2004.10.003
Peixoto, M., & Nobre, P. (2013). Prevalence of female sexual problems in
Portugal: A community-based study. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 10, 394.
Perelman, M. A. (2003). Sex coaching for physicians: Combination
treatment for patient and partner. International Journal of Impotence
Research, 15(Suppl. 5), S67--S74. doi:10.1038/sj.ijir.3901075 Perelman,
M. A. (2009). The sexual tipping point: A mind/body model for sexual
medicine. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 6(3), 629--632. Perelman, M. A.
(2014). Delayed ejaculation. In Y. M. Binik & K.S.K. Hall (Eds.),
Principles and practice of sex therapy (5th ed., pp. 138--155). New
York, NY: Guilford Press. Perelman, M. A., & Rowland, D. L. (2006).
Retarded ejaculation. World Journal of Urology, 24(6), 645--652. doi:
10.1007/s00345-006-0127-6 Reissing, E. D., Binik, Y. M., Khalifé, S.,
Cohen, D., & Amsel, R. (2004). Vaginal spasm, pain, and behavior: An
empirical investigation of the diagnosis of vaginismus. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 33(1), 5--17. doi: 10.1023/B:ASEB.0000007458.32852.c8
Rellini, A. (2008). Review of the empirical evidence for a theoretical
model to understand the sexual problems of women with a history of CSA.
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 5(1), 31--46. Rosen, R., Brown, C., Heiman,
J., Leiblum, S., Meston, C., Shabsigh, R., ... D'Agostino, R. (2000).
The Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI): A multidimensional self-report
instrument for the assessment of female sexual function. Journal of Sex
and Marital Therapy, 26(2), 191--208. doi: 10.1080/009262300278597
Rosen, R. C., McMahon, C. G., Niederberger, C., Broderick, G. A.,
Jamieson, C., & Gagnon, D.

D. (2007). Correlates to the clinical diagnosis of premature
ejaculation: Results from a large observational study of men and their
partners. Journal of Urology, 177(3), 1059--1064; discussion 1064. doi:
10.1016/j.juro.2006.10.044 Rosen, R. C., Miner, M. M., & Wincze, J. P.
(2014). Erectile dysfunction: Integration of medical and psychological
approaches. In Y. M. Binik & K.S.K. Hall (Eds.), Principles and practice
of sex therapy (5th ed., pp. 61--88). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Rowland, D. L., Keeney, C., & Slob, A. K. (2004). Sexual response in men
with inhibited or retarded ejaculation. International Journal of
Impotence Research, 16(3), 270--274. doi: 10.1038/sj.ijir .3901156
Safarinejad, M. R. (2009). Midodrine for the treatment of organic
anejaculation but not spinal cord injury: A prospective randomized
placebo-controlled double-blind clinical study. International Journal of
Impotence Research, 21(4), 213--220. Schmidt, P. J., & Rubinow, D. R.
(2009). Sex hormones and mood in the perimenopause. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 1179, 70--85. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04982.x Schouten, B.W.V., Bohnen, A. M., Bosch,
J.L.H.R., Bernsen, R.M.D., Deckers, J. W., Dohle, G. R., & Thomas, S.
(2008). Erectile dysfunction prospectively associated with
cardiovascular disease in the Dutch general population: Results from the
Krimpen Study. International Journal of Impotence Research, 20(1),
92--9. doi: 10.1038/sj.ijir.3901604 Schultz, W. W., Basson, R., Binik,
Y. M., Eschenbach, D., Wesselmann, U., & Van Lankveld, J. (2005).
Women's sexual pain and its management. Journal of Sexual Medicine,
2(3), 301--316. doi: 10.1111/j .1743-6109.2005.20347.x Segraves, R. T.
(2010). Considerations for diagnostic criteria for erectile dysfunction
in DSM V. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 7(2, Pt. 1), 654--660. Segraves,
R. T., Clayton, A., Croft, H., Wolf, A., & Warnock, J. (2004). Bupropion
sustained release (SR) for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire
disorder (HSDD) in nondepressed women. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy,
27(3), 303--316. doi: 10 .1080/009262301750257155 Shamloul, R., &
Ghanem, H. (2013). Erectile dysfunction. Lancet, 381(9861), 153--165.
doi: 10.1016/ S0140-6736(12)60520-0 Shifren, J. L., Braunstein, G. D.,
Simon, J. A., Casson, P. R., Buster, J. E., Redmond, G. P., ...

References Mazer, N. A. (2000). Transdermal testosterone treatment in
women with impaired sexual function after oophorectomy. New England
Journal of Medicine, 343(10), 682--688. doi: 10.1097/00006254-20010
2000-00021 Shoskes, D. A., Nickel, J. C., Rackley, R. R., & Pontari, M.
A. (2009). Clinical phenotyping in chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic
pain syndrome and interstitial cystitis: A management strategy for
urologic chronic pelvic pain syndromes. Prostate Cancer and Prostatic
Diseases, 12, 177--183. Shull, G. R., & Sprenkle, D. H. (1980). Retarded
ejaculation reconceptualization and implications for treatment. Journal
of Sex & Marital Therapy, 6(4), 234--246. Sipski, M. L., Alexander, C.
J., & Rosen, R. C. (1997). Physiological parameters associated with
sexual arousal in women with incomplete spinal cord injury. Archives of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 78, 305--313. Society of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada, Clinical Practice
Gynaecology Committee and Ethics Committee. (2013). Female genital
cosmetic surgery. Ottawa, ON: Society of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists of Canada. Stanton, A. M., Boyd, R. L., Pulverman, C. S.,
& Meston, C. M. (2015). Determining women's sexual self-schemas through
advanced computerized text analysis. Child Abuse & Neglect, 46, 78--88.
doi: 10 .1016/j.chiabu.2015.06.003 Stanton, A. M., Lorenz, T. A.,
Pulverman, C. S., & Meston, C. M. (2015). Heart rate variability: A risk
factor for female sexual dysfunction. Applied Psychophysiology and
Biofeedback, 40(3), 229--237. doi: 10.1007/s10484-015-9286-9 Stimmel,
G., & Gutierrez, M. A. (2006). Sexual dysfunction and psychotropic
medications. CNS Spectrums, 11(8, Suppl. 9), 24--30. Tan, O., Bradshaw,
K., & Carr, B. R. (2012). Management of vulvovaginal atrophy-related
sexual dysfunction in postmenopausal women: An up-todate review.
Menopause, 19(1), 109--117. Van Anders, S. M. (2012). Testosterone and
sexual desire in healthy women and men. Archives of Sexual Behavior,
41(6), 1471--1484. doi: 10.1007/ s10508-012-9946-2

561

Van Anders, S. M., Brotto, L. A., Farrell, J., & Yule, M. (2009).
Associations among physiological and subjective sexual response, sexual
desire, and salivary steroid hormones in healthy premenopausal women.
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 6, 739--751. Van Lankveld, J., Granot, M.,
Schultz, W. W., Binik, Y. M., Wesselmann, U., Pukall, C. F., ...
Achtrari, C. (2010). Women's sexual pain disorders. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 7(1, Pt. 2), 615--631. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2009.01631.x
Van Lankveld, J. J., ter Kuile, M. M., de Groot, H. E., Melles, R.,
Nefs, J., & Zandbergen, M. (2006). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
women with lifelong vaginismus: A randomized waiting-list controlled
trial of efficacy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74(1),
168--178. Waldinger, M. D., Rietschel, M., Nothen, M. M., Hengeveld, M.
W., & Olivier, B. (1998). Familial occurrence of primary premature
ejaculation. Psychiatric Genetics, 8(1), 37--40. Waldinger, M. D., &
Schweitzer, D. H. (2005). Retarded ejaculation in men: An overview of
psychological and neurobiological insights. World Journal of Urology,
23(2), 76--81. Wallwiener, C. W., Wallwiener, L. M., Seeger, H., Muck,
A. O., Bitzer, J., & Wallwiener, M. (2010). Prevalence of sexual
dysfunction and impact of contraception in female German medical
students. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 7(6), 2139--2148. Wang, C.,
Swerdloff, R. S., Iranmanesh, A., Dobs, A., Snyder, P. J., Cunningham,
G., ... Berman, N. (2000). Transdermal testosterone gel improves sexual
function, mood, muscle strength, and body composition parameters in
hypogonadal men. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism,
85(2), 2839--2853. Whipple, B., Gerdes, C. A., & Komisaruk, B. R.
(1996). Sexual response to self-stimulation in women with complete
spinal cord injury. Journal of Sex Research, 33(3), 231--240. Xie, D.,
Annex, B. H., & Donatucci, C. F. (2008). Growth factors for therapeutic
angiogenesis in hypercholesterolemic erectile dysfunction. Asian Journal
of Andrology, 10(1), 23--27. doi: 10.1111/j.17457262.2008.00372.x

Chapter 14 Borderline Personality Disorder Jill M. Hooley and Sara R.
Masland

B

orderline personality disorder (BPD) is a complex and challenging
clinical problem. It is among the most severe forms of personality
disorder that mental health professionals treat. Moreover, BPD is
typically chronic, involves a high suicide rate, and is associated with
significant distress. Thus, it warrants a great deal of attention from
clinicians and researchers. Unfortunately, the diagnosis of BPD is often
regarded in a pejorative way by mental health professionals, some of
whom view people with this disorder as manipulative and attention
seeking, and they are therefore reluctant to accept them as patients.
Yet few other groups of patients are in as much need of high-quality,
thoughtful, and caring clinical care as those diagnosed with BPD. In
this chapter, we illustrate some of the complexities of this disorder
and the confusions that still surround it. We begin with a consideration
of the clinical features of BPD and the symptoms that are at the heart
of the DSM diagnosis.

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria The suffering experienced by people
with BPD is not easily captured in the summary list of DSM-5 criteria
(American Psychiatric Association \[APA\], 2013) shown in Table 14.1.
BPD is a disorder characterized by profound emotional pain. As Zanarini
and Frankenburg (1997) have noted, from the perspective of patients this
pain is often perceived and described as being "the worst pain anyone
has felt since the history of the world began." Other hallmarks of the
disorder are instability and impulsivity. Indeed, BPD may be best
understood as a disorder of "stable instability." There is instability
in mood. This is reflected in inappropriate, intense anger or in periods
of rapidly changing negative emotions, often in response to
interpersonal stress. There is also instability in self-image: patients
have difficulty in maintaining a sense of who they are and/or what they
want from their lives, or in defining their goals and values. People
with BPD also have highly unstable interpersonal relationships. The
person they idolize in the morning may be the person they despise as the
day draws to a close. Impulsivity further characterizes the BPD
sufferer. This is not carefree spontaneity. Rather, it is the kind of
impulsivity that is potentially self-damaging and likely to create
trouble. People with BPD frequently abuse alcohol or drugs, drive
recklessly, or spend money that they do not have. They may engage in
risky sexual behavior, gamble, or go on

562

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria TABLE 14.1

563

Clinical Features of Borderline Personality Disorder

Five or more of the following symptoms are required for the diagnosis of
BPD: 1. Profound fears of abandonment (real or imagined). The person
makes frantic and sometimes extreme efforts to avoid abandonment by
others. 2. Interpersonal relationships that are both intense and
unstable and that alternate between feelings of idealization and
devaluation of the other person. 3. Identity disturbance characterized
by a highly unstable sense of self or markedly disturbed self-image. 4.
Impulsive behavior in at least two areas that have the potential to be
self-damaging or to have harmful consequences (such as substance abuse,
reckless driving, binge eating, unsafe sexual behavior, excessive
spending). 5. Recurrent self-mutilating behavior or suicide threats,
gestures, or suicidal behavior. 6. Highly reactive mood, leading to
affective instability (e.g., intense negative affect such as depression,
irritability, or anxiety that lasts a few hours or \[rarely\] a few
days). 7. Persistent feelings of emptiness. 8. Intense or inappropriate
anger that is difficult to control (e.g., constant feelings of anger,
angry outbursts, or recurrent physical fights). 9. Brief periods of
paranoid ideation or dissociative symptoms when under stress. Source:
Based on DSM-5.

eating binges. Unstable and strong emotions together with profound
feelings of emptiness place people with BPD at high risk of engaging in
other more direct forms of self-harm as well, such as cutting themselves
with razor blades or burning themselves with cigarettes. Suicidal
thoughts and behaviors are also common, especially in response to fears
of being abandoned. Indeed, around 10% of patients with BPD will
eventually take their own lives (Oldham, 2006). Simply put, the
emotional pain that people with BPD experience is intense; managing
their affective reactions to real or imagined slights or threats of
abandonment presents patients, as well as their families, with serious
challenges. In many cases, suicidal and self-injurious behaviors are
used as strategies to regulate strong negative emotions, as in the
following case example.

Case Example CB is a 22-year-old single Hispanic woman who engages in
nonsuicidal self-injury to manage feelings of anger, anxiety, and guilt.
When she is angry at her boyfriend or another significant person in her
life, she feels guilty for feeling angry; this leads to feelings of deep
self-hatred, which she believes she cannot tolerate, and she begins to
pinch her skin to feel physical pain that will distract her from these
feelings. Sometimes the pinching leads to intense scratching until she
draws blood. This provides a sense of relief from her emotions. The
relief is experienced as "being back in control." CB describes two
low-lethality suicide attempts, which she distinguishes from the
nonsuicidal self-injury. On two separate occasions, on the anniversary
of the death of her father, she became extremely angry at her boyfriend
for not acknowledging the difficulty of the day for her.

564

Borderline Personality Disorder

She became hopeless, feeling that her boyfriend would never be able to
understand her, and that she would always be unbearably sad about losing
her father, and would be unable to get the help she needed to deal with
it. She also felt there was something wrong with her for feeling this
way. These thoughts led to a decision to take an overdose of her
medication in order to kill herself. On both occasions, as soon as she
took about 10 pills (not enough to cause lethal harm), she felt a sense
of relief that at least she had done something to take control of her
situation, and she no longer wished to die. She then fell asleep and had
no other medical consequences from the overdose, and woke up feeling
much better (adapted from Stanley & Brodsky, 2005, p. 54). In addition
to the clinical hallmarks of affective disturbances and impulsivity,
people with BPD also show significant cognitive symptoms. We have
already noted the presence of a disorganized and unstable self-image in
BPD. In addition, in DSM-IV (APA, 1994), the ninth symptom, "brief
paranoid ideas or severe dissociative symptoms related to stress," was
added to the diagnostic criteria established in 1980. Approximately 75%
of patients with BPD report paranoid ideas and/or dissociative episodes
(Lieb et al., 2004; Skodol et al., 2002). More recent research, using
experience sampling methods (which involve participants providing
self-assessments when prompted by a beep from a digital device),
indicates that people with BPD do indeed experience stress-related
psychotic episodes (Glaser, Van Os, Thewissen, & Myin-Germeys, 2010;
Stiglmayr et al., 2008). Importantly, the cognitive symptoms of BPD
differ significantly from the symptoms of patients with psychotic
disorders or schizophrenia. For example, patients with BPD may have
hallucinations, but they tend to have more insight than patients with
psychosis and usually realize that these experiences are misperceptions.
Moreover, when patients with BPD have paranoid ideas, these typically
are not so firmly held that they reach delusional levels. Finally, the
episodes of dissociation that are experienced by BPD patients are
relatively brief and stress-related, often being experienced as a
general feeling of estrangement.

History of the Borderline Diagnosis Borderline personality disorder
formally entered the diagnostic nomenclature in 1980 with the
publication of DSM-III. However, the origins of the concept date back to
the 1930s, when borderline patients were first described by the
psychoanalyst Adolf Stern (1938). Stern's use of the term borderline was
meant to reflect his view that the disorder did not fit well within the
existing classification system, which was principally oriented around
differentiating between neurosis and psychosis. Yet even today, many of
the characteristics of the borderline patient that Stern described,
including hypersensitivity, difficulties in reality testing, and
negative reactions in therapy are recognizable to those familiar with
the disorder. Knight (1953) subsequently described a group of patients
with severely impaired ego functions and primary process thinking, which
is a type of thinking that reflects unconscious wishes and urges.
Although others (e.g., Hoch & Polantin, 1949) had referred to such
patients as suffering from "pseudo-neurotic schizophrenia," Knight used
Stern's term, borderline. However, Knight considered the disorder to be
on the border not just of

Symptoms and Diagnostic Criteria

565

neurosis but of both neurosis and psychosis. Knight observed that this
group of patients had special needs in hospital settings and that
failure to meet these needs could create tensions among staff members.
Subsequently, the term borderline became used to describe atypical
patients who were neither neurotic nor psychotic, but who were
problematic to deal with when they were in the hospital (Gunderson,
2001). The borderline diagnosis had been largely ignored from Stern's
time until the late 1960s. After the psychoanalyst Otto Kernberg began
to offer clinically rich and theoretically insightful perspectives on
the disorder (Kernberg, 1967), interest began to increase. Around the
same time, Grinker, Werble, and Drye (1968) published the first
empirical study of the borderline syndrome. A third key event was the
highly influential literature review conducted by Gunderson and Singer
(1975). This integrated the earlier descriptive efforts and attempted to
provide diagnostic criteria for BPD. By 1980, the construct of
borderline personality disorder was considered to be sufficiently well
developed and valid to warrant inclusion in the most important revision
of the diagnostic nomenclature---the DSM-III (APA, 1980; Spitzer,
Endicott, & Gibbon, 1979; Spitzer, Forman, & Nee, 1979). BPD has since
become the most researched of all the personality disorders. One other
historical note warrants mention. Just before BPD was added to the
DSM-III, U.S. psychiatrists were polled about whether an alternative
name for the disorder should be considered. More specifically, Spitzer,
Endicott, and Gibbon (1979) proposed that the name "unstable personality
disorder" be substituted. However, a majority of clinicians felt
inclined to retain the familiar term, borderline personality. As Paris
(1999) has noted, however, this decision may have been a mistake. The
term borderline is strongly linked to the psychoanalytic tradition. This
may have led to the disorder being less accepted by clinicians from
other perspectives. The term borderline is also inherently confusing
because it is not immediately clear what border is being referred to.
Indeed, Akiskal et al. (1985) have described borderline as "an adjective
in search of a noun." These factors may have created resistance to
accepting the disorder---resistance that, until relatively recently, was
especially strong in Europe (e.g., Tyrer, 1999). Although BPD is now
included in the ICD-10, the more descriptive term emotionally unstable
disorder is used. This term has no psychoanalytic legacy or theoretical
baggage, and from a clinical perspective, it also comes much closer to
capturing some of the key elements of the disorder. Many changes were
originally proposed for personality disorders in the DSM-5. These
included a major reconceptualization of personality pathology and the
removal of several personality disorders from the diagnostic
nomenclature. Although borderline personality was never in serious
danger of being excluded, an early proposal to change the way that BPD
was diagnosed (by matching patients to narrative prototypes) received
severe criticism (Gunderson, 2010) because it represented such a radical
shift from the DSM-IV. This proposal was subsequently discarded.
Moreover, in the final days of the revision process a decision was made
not to incorporate any of the changes that had been proposed by the
Personality and Personality Disorders Work Group. These proposals had
included a hybrid model of personality that incorporated both
categorical and dimensional approaches and a focus on personality traits
rather than on specific behavioral manifestations of these traits.
Instead, an alternative DSM-5 model for personality disorders now
appears in Section III of the DSM-5 manual---the section reserved for
emerging measures

566

Borderline Personality Disorder

and models. What this means is that, after years of meetings and
countless hours of debate and discussion, the official DSM-5 criteria
for personality disorders are exactly the same as they were in DSM-IV.

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors With an estimated prevalence in
the general population of 1% to 2% (Lenzenweger, Lane, Loranger, &
Kessler, 2007) and a prevalence in outpatient samples of around 10% to
15% (Asnaani, Chelminski, Young, & Zimmerman, 2007; Hyman, 2002), BPD is
far from a rare disorder. As we noted earlier, BPD is also associated
with a high level of mortality from suicide. These factors, combined
with the high propensity of patients with BPD to both utilize treatment
resources (Bender et al., 2001; Zanarini, Frankenburg, Khera, &
Bleichmar, 2001) and terminate treatment prematurely (Percudani,
Belloni, Conti, & Barbui, 2002), make BPD a significant problem---both
for those who suffer from it and for society in general. It has long
been accepted that BPD is more commonly found in women than in men, with
women accounting for approximately 75% of cases (APA, 2000). There is
also little support for the idea that this is the result of a gender
bias in the diagnostic criteria (Jane, Oltmanns, South, & Turkheimer,
2007; Sharp et al., 2014), although this issue cannot be considered
fully resolved (see Boggs et al., 2009). Rather, reported gender
differences in the prevalence rates of BPD may be an artifact caused by
samplings in clinical settings (Skodol & Bender, 2003). If women are
more likely to seek treatment, prevalence estimates from clinical
settings will naturally be biased in the direction of finding more
females than males with the disorder. Consistent with this idea, two
representative, population-based studies, one conducted in Norway
(Torgersen, Kringlen, & Cramer, 2001) and one conducted in the United
States (Lenzenweger et al., 2007) have reported no gender differences in
the prevalence of BPD. Further findings from community samples in Great
Britain have even indicated that, in England, Scotland, and Wales, BPD
is more prevalent in men (Coid, Yang, Tyrer, Roberts, & Ullrich, 2006).
In light of these data, we believe there is no evidence to support the
once commonly held assumption that there is a 3:1 female to male gender
ratio in BPD.

Heterogeneity BPD is a clinically heterogeneous disorder. The DSM lists
nine symptoms, with five symptoms being necessary for the diagnosis.
Because no one specific symptom is required, there are 126 different
ways these symptoms can be combined to yield the same diagnostic
outcome. This means that the BPD phenotype varies widely across those
diagnosed with the disorder. The heterogeneity in BPD has prompted
research into the "core aspects" of the disorder and has led to debate
about its most important features. Linehan (1993), for example,
considers affective instability to be at the core of BPD. According to
this view, it is the rapid mood changes, extreme reactivity to the
environment, and dysthymic baseline mood that best characterize the
disorder (Linehan, 1993). Bateman and Fonagy (2003), in contrast, have
suggested that emotional instability is

Prevalence and Epidemiological Factors

567

a secondary phenomenon that results from instability in the
self-structure. Gunderson (1996) takes a more interpersonal perspective
and highlights fear and intolerance of aloneness as central to the
disorder. According to this perspective, the extreme fear of abandonment
and the accompanying "frantic" efforts to avoid it are at the core of
BPD. Still others, working from a more neurobiological framework, have
asserted that disinhibition and general negative affectivity underlie
borderline pathology (Siever & Davis, 1991; Trull, 2001). Finally,
Zanarini, Frankenburg, Hennen, and Silk (2003) have noted that, even
when other symptoms of the disorder remit, high levels of negative
affectivity tend to remain in people with BPD. This suggests that a core
aspect of the personality structure of those inclined to BPD may be an
enduring dysphoria (see Westen, Bradley, & Shedler, 2005). In short,
although BPD is the most common personality disorder found in clinical
settings worldwide (Loranger et al., 1994; Torgersen et al., 2001;
Widiger & Frances, 1989), it is far from being clearly conceptualized.

Comorbidity Another important problem concerns comorbidity. Patients
with BPD are much more likely to be co-diagnosed with other disorders
than are psychiatric patients who do not have BPD (see Gunderson, 2001;
Zanarini et al., 1998). In a representative clinical study, Zimmerman
and Mattia (1999) conducted interviews with 409 psychiatric outpatients
and compared the comorbid diagnoses of 59 patients who had BPD to the
diagnoses of 305 patients who did not have BPD. A diagnosis of BPD was
associated with higher rates of concurrent major depression (61%),
dysthymia (12%), bipolar disorder (20%), eating disorders (17%), PTSD
(36%), and substance abuse problems (14%). Recent findings from a large
community sample also suggest that a majority of people with BPD meet
criteria for a lifetime diagnosis of mood disorder (83%), anxiety
disorder (85%), or substance use disorder (78%) (see Tomko, Trull, Wood,
& Sher, 2014). One unusual feature of BPD is that it tends to be
comorbid with both internalizing and externalizing disorders (Eaton et
al., 2010). The large overlap between BPD and mood disorders has led
some to speculate that BPD is more appropriately regarded as a mood
disorder variant (Akiskal, 2002; Akiskal et al., 1985; Sauer-Zavala &
Barlow, 2014). However, this view is not widely endorsed (Choi-Kain &
Gunderson, 2015; Gunderson & Phillips, 1991; Paris, 2004). Structural
neuroimaging data show that although there is some overlap between the
brain regions implicated in BPD and bipolar disorder, there are also
important differences (Rossi et al., 2013). Functional neuroimaging data
further indicate that, compared to healthy controls and to those
diagnosed with dysthymia, people with BPD show a different pattern of
neural activity when exposed to certain types of emotional stimuli
(Hooley et al., 2010). These findings provide additional support for the
idea that BPD is a distinct condition, different from chronic mood
disorder. Nonetheless, it is highly likely that they share some common
underlying vulnerabilities. BPD is also highly comorbid with other
personality disorders (e.g., antisocial personality disorder)
(Lenzenweger et al., 2007; McGlashan et al., 2000; Tomko et al., 2014).
High rates of comorbidity among personality disorders raise questions
not only about the conceptualization of BPD itself but also about the
conceptualization of personality disorders more broadly.

568

Borderline Personality Disorder

Current Theoretical Perspectives It is important to state from the
outset that the etiology of borderline personality disorder is still
unknown. In this respect, BPD is like most other psychiatric conditions.
Most prominent theorists, regardless of their orientation, highlight the
roles of both biological vulnerabilities and environmental factors.

Psychodynamic Approaches Working within the psychodynamic tradition,
Kernberg (1975) presented one of the earliest theories of the
pathogenesis of BPD. In this perspective, a high level of constitutional
aggression in the child is regarded as a predisposing factor. This
temperamental factor interferes with normal developmental processes such
as the integration of different (positive and negative) perspectives of
the self and others. Accordingly, memories of experiences with
significant others are stored separately from each other as either good
or bad (i.e., by affective valence) rather than being integrated (good
and bad). In the face of environmental frustrations or failures in
caretaking, "good" representations are threatened by strong negative
feelings such as rage or hostile impulses. In Kernberg's
conceptualization of "borderline personality organization"---which
encompasses more than just the symptoms represented by the DSM
diagnosis---patients have an unstable sense of self, together with the
use of primitive (immature) defense mechanisms designed to protect these
split representations of the self and others. At times, temporary
problems in reality testing are apparent as the person experiences
difficulty in determining what is real and what is imagined. Another
theorist whose ideas have been influential is Heinz Kohut (1971, 1977).
As represented by Kohut, the tradition of self-psychology psychoanalytic
theory emphasizes the importance of the caretaker's attunement to the
needs of the child. This is not to say that caretakers have to be
perfect. Rather, what is needed is what Winnicott (1953) referred to as
"good enough mothering." Key components here are empathic responses that
mirror the child's strengths and efforts to explore the world and that
validate the child's sense of mastery. When caretakers are able to meet
the child's needs in this way, the child is able to develop a stable
sense of self and an ability to regulate self-esteem by drawing on an
internal representation of the caretaker as a source of emotional
comfort and soothing. In an unresponsive family environment, however,
the child's angry emotions disrupt the development of a positive sense
of self. In an application of this theory to BPD, Adler and Buie (Adler
& Buie, 1979; Buie & Adler, 1982) have theorized that borderline
patients lack the ability to call on memories of "good objects"
(internal representations or images of nurturing and empathic
caretakers) to provide self-soothing in times of distress. The absence
of these images for people with BPD thus becomes an important factor in
their inability to regulate their own emotions.

Behavioral Approaches The most influential example of the
cognitive-behavioral approach to understanding BPD is provided by the
work of Marsha Linehan. According to Linehan's biosocial theory,

Biological Factors

569

BPD results when biological or temperamental vulnerabilities interact
with failures in the child's social environment, such that problems with
emotion regulation are either created or exacerbated (Linehan, 1993).
More specifically, problems such as a high level of sensitivity to
negative emotions, high emotional reactivity, and a slow return to
baseline after becoming emotionally aroused are thought to be precursors
of the chronic problems with emotional regulation that are so
characteristic of BPD. If the emotionally vulnerable person is able to
manage these vulnerabilities successfully, all may be well. However, if
the family environment does not provide the emotionally vulnerable child
with the skills necessary to contain strong emotions, more severe
emotional dysregulation (and a diagnosis of BPD) may be the result.
Within Linehan's model, the key environmental factor is an invalidating
family environment. This is a concept that, although deeply rooted in
the behavioral tradition, may have some overlap with the parental
failures identified by Kohut and described in the psychoanalytic
literature (e.g., inadequate acknowledgment of a child's emotional
responses). Invalidation means that the child's communications of his or
her actual internal experiences are met by responses on the part of the
parents that are inappropriate, erratic, or otherwise out of touch with
what is truly happening to the child (Fruzetti, Shenk, & Hoffman, 2005).
For example, if the child sees something desirable to eat and says, "I'm
hungry," an invalidating response from the parent might be to say, "No
you aren't. You don't want to eat that." In other words, the child's
experience of seeing the treat and wanting to eat it is dismissed and
denied. In contrast, a validating response might involve the parent
saying, "Yes, I know you want to eat that. But we will be having dinner
very soon so I don't want you to spoil your appetite by eating that
now." Notice that in neither instance does the child receive the
treat---validation is not the same thing as gratification. However, in
the second (validated) example, the child's internal experience of
feeling hungry and wanting the treat is not ignored or rendered
illegitimate. There are many problems that are thought to stem from
pervasive invalidation. These range from heightened emotional arousal
immediately after being invalidated to a failure to learn how to
accurately label one's own emotions. These difficulties, in turn, may
create problems in managing emotions, and may also lead toward a
tendency to self-invalidate (not trust one's own emotional responses).
As we shall later see, some of the most important psychological
treatments for BPD are designed to help patients learn some of the key
skills that they failed to develop with regard to the appraisal and
management of emotional events.

Biological Factors BPD is perhaps best regarded as reflecting the
interplay between biological vulnerabilities and environmental factors
across development. This is important to keep in mind because new
developments in research are making it increasingly clear that
biological processes and psychosocial events can be separated only in
the abstract. For example, different genotypes are associated with
differential sensitivities to environmental stressors such as life
events, child abuse, or maternal neglect (see Caspi et al., 2002;
Gabbard, 2005). Other studies also support the conclusion that both
nature and nurture play critical roles in such behaviors as impulsive
aggression (Bennett et al., 2002; Higley, Suomi, &

570

Borderline Personality Disorder

Linnoila, 1991) and responsiveness to stress (Fish et al., 2004; Francis
& Meaney, 1999). We encourage readers to keep in mind during later
sections of this chapter that genes create differential sensitivities to
environmental factors, that experiences turn some genes "on" while
shutting other genes "off," and that psychosocial events can lead to
changes in the neurobiology and neurochemistry of the brain (see
Gabbard, 2005)

Genetics Family history studies of patients with BPD suggest that
biological relatives have an increased prevalence of the disorder. Until
recently, researchers relied solely on patients as the source of
information and there was no direct assessment of the relatives
themselves (see White, Gunderson, Zanarini, & Hudson, 2003 for a
review). Studies that employ indirect assessment methods of this kind
run the risk that people with BPD might exaggerate the extent to which
their relatives showed elements of the disorder, thus inflating
familiality estimates. Using an approach that involved direct interviews
with people with BPD and their parents and siblings, Gunderson and
colleagues (2011) reported a BPD prevalence of 14.1% in the relatives of
individuals with BPD. This is considerably higher than the 4.9%
prevalence of BPD in the relatives of participants who did not have BPD.
In other words, BPD does show familial aggregation. Overall, people who
have a family member with BPD have somewhere between a three- to
fourfold increased risk of developing the disorder themselves (Gunderson
et al., 2011). The finding that a disorder runs in families does not
necessarily mean that it is genetic. Many problems in children could
arise as a consequence of being raised by a psychiatrically disturbed
parent or from living in the chaotic family environment that might
result from having a mentally ill sibling. To fully disentangle genetic
from rearing effects, adoption studies are necessary. To date, no such
studies have been conducted on the adopted-away offspring of women with
BPD. However, using a twin sample, Torgersen and colleagues (2000)
reported a concordance rate for BPD of 35% in monozygotic (MZ) twins
compared with a concordance rate of 7% for dizygotic (DZ) twins. Other
studies using even more sophisticated designs also support the idea that
BPD has a heritable component (Distel et al., 2009). But what is
inherited? It is noteworthy that the family pedigrees of people with BPD
also show increased prevalence rates of mood and anxiety disorders,
impulse control disorders, and personality disorders such as antisocial
PD (White et al., 2003; Zanarini, Barison, Frankenburg, Reich, & Hudson,
2009). It is also the case that the elements of BPD (e.g., affective
instability) are more commonly found in the relatives of those with the
disorder than is the diagnosis itself (Zanarini et al., 2004). What may
therefore be inherited are traits that are linked to the neurobehavioral
dimensions underlying a diagnosis of BPD (e.g., Depue & Lenzenweger,
2005). Heritability has been demonstrated for traits such as
neuroticism, cognitive dysregulation, anxiety, and affective lability
(Jang, Livesley, Vernon, & Jackson, 1996; Livesley, Jang, Jackson, &
Vernon, 1993; Lubke et al., 2014). Impulsivity also appears to have a
genetic component (see Goodman, New, & Siever, 2004). In other words,
rather than inheriting the DSM disorder of BPD, it is much more likely
that individuals inherit genetic propensities to exhibit traits that
underlie the behavioral manifestations of BPD but that are also
transdiagnostic.

Biological Factors

571

For example, evidence is beginning to accumulate linking the serotonin
transporter gene (5-HTT) with suicide and impulsivity, as well as with
emotional lability (Bondy, Erfurth, deJonge, Kruger, & Meyer, 2000;
Frankle et al., 2005; Hoefgen et al., 2005). Because these are
characteristics of BPD, the serotonin transporter gene is now being
investigated as a possible candidate gene for this disorder.
Associations between certain aspects of the 5-HTT gene and BPD have been
reported (Maurex, Zaboli, Öhman, Åsberg, & Leopardi, 2010; Ni et al.,
2006). However, findings from other studies suggest that the link
between the serotonin transporter gene and BPD is not likely to be
straightforward (Pascual et al., 2008; Wagner, Baskaya, Lieb, Dahman, &
Tadíc, 2009). The same is also true for other genes, such as MAO-A
(monoamine oxidase A) and TPH-1 (tryptophan hydroxylase-1), that are
involved in serotonin production and regulation. Despite some promising
results indicating the importance of serotonergic genes for
understanding BPD, meta-analysis results have been disappointing. In one
meta-analytic study, no direct associations were found between any
polymorphism and BPD (Calati, Gressier, Balestri, & Serretti, 2013).
Similarly, a recent meta-analysis by Amad, Ramoz, Thomas, Jardri, and
Gorwood (2014) found no association between the 5-HTT or TPH-1 genes and
BPD. These same researchers have argued that we might best view genes as
"susceptibility to environment genes" or "plasticity genes" rather than
"vulnerability genes." That is, it may be more fruitful to consider that
some genes may interact with both negative and positive aspects of the
environment, and that the net effect of these interactions may determine
how those genes are expressed. Other candidate genes that have attracted
the attention of researchers include the dopamine transporter gene
(DAT1) as well as genes that code for dopamine reception production
(such as DRD2 and DRD4). Dopamine is involved in the reward pathways of
the brain. Cloninger (2000) has suggested that the trait of high novelty
seeking, which is associated with BPD, may be related to altered
dopaminergic function in the brain. The high levels of comorbidity
between BPD and substance use disorders further support the hypothesized
link between dopamine and BPD (Ebstein, Benjamin, & Belmaker, 2000).
Using a sample of depressed patients, Joyce and his colleagues (Joyce et
al., 2009, Joyce, Stephenson, Kennedy, Mulder, & McHugh, 2014) have now
replicated their earlier finding that the 9-repeat allele of the DAT1
gene is more likely to be found in depressed patients with BPD than in
depressed patients who do not have BPD. This finding suggests that this
polymorphism may be a risk factor for BPD. Other research reports
significant associations between variants of the DRD2 and DRD4 dopamine
receptor genes and the presence of BPD traits (Nemoda et al., 2010).
These findings provide further support for the role of abnormalities in
the dopamine system in the disorder. It is also intriguing to note that
dopamine is an important neurotransmitter in psychotic disorders and
that, when under stress, people with BPD sometimes experience transient
psychotic episodes (Glaser et al., 2010). A recent focus of research
involves receptor genes for the neuropeptide oxytocin. A polymorphism of
the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR rs53576) has been shown to predict
borderline pathology through an interaction with early family
functioning (Hammen, Bower, & Cole, 2015). Only individuals with a
specific polymorphism of this gene showed susceptibility to the effects
of good versus poor family functioning.

572

Borderline Personality Disorder

With regard to the prediction of borderline pathology, the interaction
between genes regulating oxytocin and environmental factors may also be
moderated by gender. Cicchetti, Rogosch, Hecht, Crick, and Hetzel (2014)
argue that a plasticity framework, in which genes influence the
susceptibility of an individual to given environments (for better or
worse), best explains the role of OXTR in predicting borderline
pathology in boys. This means that OXTR polymorphisms predict the
effects of both positive (protective) and negative (risk-conferring)
environmental factors on boys. For girls, however, borderline pathology
appears to be predicted by the interaction of specific polymorphisms
with the experience of negative environmental stressors (child
maltreatment in Cicchetti et al.'s 2014 study). In contrast to the
situation with boys, OXTR polymorphisms did not predict the influence of
positive environmental influences on girls. It is also noteworthy that
this study also found that the "risk" alleles for boys and girls were
opposite: homozygous major alleles (GG) conferred greater risk for
borderline symptoms in boys. For girls it was combinations involving
minor alleles (AG or AA) that conferred greater risk. In summary,
although there are many reasons to believe that genetic factors play an
important role in BPD, nothing definitive can be said at this stage. To
date, only two genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been
conducted and both have been limited by relatively small sample sizes
(at least for genetic research). No reliable findings identifying
specific genes for BPD have yet been found, although there are some
preliminary leads (Witt et al., 2014). A focus on genetic transmission
of BPD features, rather than the diagnosis itself, is likely to
represent the most fruitful approach.

Neurobiology The high level of comorbidity between BPD and other
disorders makes it difficult to evaluate the extent to which BPD has
specific neurobiological correlates. It is also rather unlikely that the
disorder itself has a distinct and specific neurobiological signature.
More likely the various trait dimensions of BPD (e.g., impulsivity or
anger and aggressiveness) are associated with underlying neurochemical
or neuroanatomical dysregulations. Disturbances in serotonin,
norepinephrine, and dopamine functioning have been implicated in BPD.
There is also evidence of abnormalities in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. In the following sections, we
describe some of the key findings to date.

Neurotransmitters As we have already noted, there are several reasons to
believe that disturbances in the neurotransmitter serotonin might be
implicated in BPD. Both animal and human studies have linked low levels
of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), which is a major metabolite of
serotonin, to higher levels of impulsive aggression (Coccaro, Siever,
Klar, & Maurer, 1989; see also Goodman et al., 2004). A large literature
has also linked low 5-HIAA in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to suicide,
especially violent forms of suicide (Åsberg, 1997). Moreover, rhesus
monkeys with low levels of CSF 5-HIAA are also more inclined to consume
alcohol when it is made available in experimental settings (Suomi,
2003). Because all of these behaviors are associated with BPD, it seems
reasonable to expect that patients with the disorder might have
disturbances in serotonergic function. To test the serotonin hypothesis,
Rinne, Westenberg, den Boer, and van den Brink (2000) administered a
neuroendocrine challenge test to 12 women with BPD and 9 healthy

Biological Factors

573

control subjects. The neuroendocrine challenge involved the oral
ingestion of m-CPP (meta-chlorophenylpiperazine), a serotonin agonist
that acts on serotonin receptors to trigger the release of prolactin and
cortisol. After receiving the m-CPP challenge, patients with BPD showed
significantly lower levels of prolactin and cortisol in their blood than
did the healthy controls. In particular, a history of physical and
sexual abuse was highly and negatively correlated with the overall
prolactin response. The results suggest that traumatic stress in
childhood (which is reported by 20% to 75% of BPD patients; see Herman,
Perry, & van der Kolk, 1989; Ogata et al., 1990; Salzman et al., 1993)
may alter aspects of the serotonin system, perhaps at the level of the
serotonin receptors. Noradrenergic function may also be disturbed in
BPD, possibly due to the link between norepinephrine function and
aggression. Coccaro, Lee, and McClosky (2003) measured plasma levels of
the major metabolite of norepinephrine (3-methoxy-4hydroxyphenylglycol,
or MHPG) in 30 males with personality disorders. Levels of MHPG were
lower in the men who had BPD than in those who had other disorders.
However, the strongest association was between MHPG levels and the life
history of aggression that was reported by the subjects, with higher
levels of aggressive behavior being associated with lower levels of
MHPG. These findings suggest that norepinephrine may play an important
role in modulating aggressive behaviors. Simeon, Knutelska, Smith,
Baker, and Hollander (2007) have also reported a positive correlation
between levels of urinary norepinephrine and severity of dissociation
(brief periods of detachment from reality) in a small sample of subjects
(n = 11) with BPD. However, no differences were found between the BPD
subjects and the controls with respect to baseline levels of urinary
norepinephrine. To the extent that aggression and dissociation form part
of the clinical picture of BPD, norepinephrine remains a
neurotransmitter of interest to BPD researchers. However, understanding
the role of norepinephrine in BPD is complicated by the high level of
comorbidity between BPD and depression and the link between
noradrenergic dysregulation and mood disorders (see Thase, Jindal, &
Howland, 2002). As already mentioned, an allele of the dopamine
transporter gene is currently being explored as a possible candidate
gene for BPD. Friedel (2004) has noted that antipsychotic medications,
which act primarily via the blockade of dopamine receptors, often
provide clinical benefits for BPD patients. Human and animal studies
have further illustrated the importance of dopamine in emotion,
impulsivity, and cognition (see Friedel, 2004), all of which are domains
highly relevant to borderline pathology. Most of the current research on
the role of dopamine dysfunction in BPD involves candidate genes,
however, rather than the neurotransmitter directly. Many of these
candidate genes are implicated in other disorders as well. In all
probability, the etiology of BPD reflects biological mechanisms and
pathways that are transdiagnostic, rather than specific to the disorder
itself. This may also help us understand why there is so much
comorbidity between BPD and a broad range of other psychiatric
conditions.

Hormonal Systems Other biological disturbances in BPD involve the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The HPA axis, which is
involved in stress regulation, has been widely studied in depression
through the use of the dexamethasone suppression test (DST). This test
involves administering an oral dose of dexamethasone, a synthetic
glucocorticoid that

574

Borderline Personality Disorder

acts via a feedback mechanism to suppress cortisol production. The
"normal" response to the DST is a reduction in cortisol. In a
naturalistic study, Lieb and colleagues (2004) collected a total of 32
saliva samples from 23 women with BPD who were not taking any
medications and 24 matched healthy controls. Using the saliva samples,
they measured cortisol levels in the two groups of women. Although far
from conclusive, the data were suggestive of heightened adrenal activity
in the BPD patients. When assessments from the first 2 days of the study
were combined, total cortisol levels obtained in the first hour after
awakening from sleep were significantly higher in the women with BPD
than they were in the healthy women. Moreover, after receiving a dose of
dexamethasone, women with BPD had a higher total daily level of cortisol
compared to the healthy control women. One problem with the Lieb et
al. (2004) study, as well as with many other studies of HPA axis
function in patients with BPD, is that the investigators did not assess
comorbid PTSD. This is important, because 20% to 40% of patients with
BPD also suffer from PTSD (see Gunderson & Sabo, 1993), and because PTSD
is often associated with abnormalities in HPA axis function (see Rinne,
de Kloet, et al., 2002). In a related vein, controlling for the possible
effects of concurrent major depression is also necessary---again because
major depressive disorder is highly comorbid with BPD (Corruble,
Ginestet, & Guelfi, 1996), and because abnormal responses to a challenge
with dexamethasone are often found in patients who are depressed. These
problems make it difficult to interpret the existing data. A large-scale
study of HPA axis function in BPD, using a carefully diagnosed sample
with full attention given to issues of comorbidity as well as exposure
to trauma, is much needed. In fact, trauma may even be more important
with regard to hyperresponsiveness of the HPA axis than BPD, major
depressive disorder (MDD), or PTSD. When Rinne and colleagues (Rinne, de
Kloet, et al., 2002) gave a combined dexamethasone/
corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) challenge to a sample of 39
patients with BPD, those who had experienced childhood abuse (n = 24)
showed higher levels of cortisol and ACTH after the challenge than did
those (n = 15) who had experienced little or no abuse in their
childhoods. Importantly, these elevated responses were independent of
BPD pathology; they were also unrelated to the presence of a comorbid
diagnosis of PTSD or major depression (although patients with comorbid
PTSD tended to have an attenuated ACTH response to the challenge whether
or not they had a history of childhood abuse). Overall, Rinne, de Kloet,
et al.'s data support the idea that sustained abuse early in life may
lead to a hyperresponsiveness of ACTH release. This is consistent with
research in women with histories of early childhood trauma (Heim et al.,
2000). To the extent that many people with BPD report early and often
chronic adverse life experiences, we might therefore expect to find
evidence of hyperreactivity of the HPA axis in unselected samples of BPD
patients. Taken together, the evidence suggests that HPA axis
functioning is abnormal in people with BPD (Zimmerman & Choi-Kain,
2009). Some of this may be due to comorbid PTSD or depression. Highly
plausible, however, is that early childhood trauma (which, as will be
seen later, is implicated in the development of BPD) may result in
changes in the functioning of the HPA axis. BPD may therefore be
associated with dysregulated HPA axis functioning in its own right.
Nonetheless, the high degree of comorbidity between BPD and depression
and PTSD (both of which are associated with HPA axis abnormalities)
makes it challenging to confirm this hypothesis.

Biological Factors

575

Oxytocin As discussed earlier in relation to receptor genes, Oxytocin
(OXT), sometimes referred to as the "love hormone" because of its role
in attachment and social relationships, is now attracting the attention
of BPD researchers. Oxytocin is a neuropeptide produced in the
hypothalamus and the posterior pituitary gland. OXT has been shown to
play an important role in parent-child attachment relationships
(Feldman, Gordon, Influs, Gutbir, & Ebstein, 2013), which are often
impaired for individuals with BPD. There is also some evidence that
women with BPD have lower levels of plasma oxytocin, although the
interplay of childhood maltreatment, oxytocin levels, and borderline
pathology remains unclear (Bertsch, Schmidinger, Neumann, & Herpertz,
2013). OXT has attracted attention because intranasally administered OXT
increases trust and cooperation in healthy populations (Kosfeld,
Heinrichs, Zak, Fischbacher, & Fehr, 2005; De Dreu, 2012; Keri & Kiss,
2011). Trust and cooperation are impaired in BPD. OXT is also implicated
in attachment, another process known to be problematic for those with
BPD. Findings such as these have led some to conclude that administering
OXT might help individuals with BPD function better in their social
relationships. Counter to expectations, however, work to date has shown
that intranasal OXT administration actually decreases trust and
cooperation for individuals with BPD (Bartz et al., 2010; Ebert et al.,
2013). In contrast, other work has shown that OXT attenuates emotional
dysphoria (Simeon et al., 2011), attentional avoidance of angry faces
(Brune et al., 2013), and hypersensitivity to angry faces (Bertsch,
Gamer, et al., 2013) in BPD. Although it seems clear from genetic and
behavioral studies that OXT is an important neuropeptide, its specific
role in BPD, as well as its potential as a treatment agent, is much less
clear. Herpertz and Bertsch (2015) have offered an organizing framework
for further study, highlighting the effects of OXT on five biobehavioral
mechanisms: attention bias to social cues, poor affect regulation, poor
social reward experiences, maladaptive empathy, and abnormal pain
processing. Further work is needed to understand specifically how OXT
may interact with the neural circuits that underlie each of these
mechanisms. Additionally, greater understanding of the interaction of
OXT with vasopressin, a similar neuropeptide implicated in social
behavior, is warranted.

Neuroimaging Studies of BPD Neuroimaging studies of BPD are a topic of
considerable interest. Overall they suggest that patients with this
disorder may have some abnormalities in limbic and prefrontal brain
areas when compared to nonpatient controls (Krause-Utz, Winter,
Niedtfeld, & Schmahl, 2014; Putnam & Silk, 2005). Such findings are of
interest because prefrontal and limbic circuits are thought to be
involved in emotion and emotion regulation (Davidson, 2002; LeDoux,
1996).

Structural Approaches Structural imaging studies have shown a 13% to 21%
reduction in the volume of the hippocampus and an 8% to 25% reduction in
the volume of the amygdala in patients with BPD compared to controls
(see Driessen et al., 2000; Nunes et al., 2009; Schmahl, Vermetten,
Elzinga, & Bremner, 2003; Tebartz van Elst et al., 2003; O'Neill et al.,
2013). In addition,

576

Borderline Personality Disorder

some regions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC), including the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), have also been found to be reduced in volume.
Tebartz van Elst et al. (2003) reported a 24% reduction in the left OFC
and a 26% reduction in the right ACC in eight unmedicated female
patients with BPD when compared to eight matched healthy controls (see
also Chanen et al., 2008). Reduced volume of gray matter in the anterior
cingulate cortex in 50 patients with BPD compared to 50 controls has
also been reported by Hazlett and colleagues (2005). Moreover, reduced
ACC volume appears to be correlated with self-injurious behaviors,
impulsivity, and fears of abandonment (Whittle et al., 2009).
Adolescents with BPD have also been shown to have a reduction in ACC
volume, suggesting that it is present at an early stage of the disorder.
It is important to mention that decreased hippocampal volume is not a
structural brain abnormality that is specific to BPD. Volume loss in the
hippocampus has also been reported in other disorders, including
unipolar and bipolar depression, schizophrenia, and PTSD (see Putnam &
Silk, 2005). Decreased hippocampal volume in BPD may also, at least in
part, be explained by comorbid PTSD (Rodrigues et al., 2011; Schmahl et
al., 2009). Reductions in the volume of the DLPFC and OFC may also not
be specific to BPD (Brunner et al., 2010). Researchers have observed a
decrease in the volume of the orbitofrontal cortex in people with
depression (Bremner, 2002) and obsessive-compulsive disorder (Szeszko et
al., 1999). Although it is possible that reliable abnormalities in
specific brain areas might eventually be linked to BPD, the data at this
time are more suggestive than conclusive. Most likely is that the
overall pattern of findings will prove to be more important than any
particular abnormality in a given brain region. White Matter
Abnormalities. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is an imaging technique
that can be used to examine the structure of white matter tracts in the
brain. One tract that has been linked to emotion dysregulation is the
uncinate fasciculus. This is the major white matter tract connecting the
amygdala to the ACC and the PFC. In a recent study, individuals with BPD
have been shown to have decreased structural integrity in the uncinate
fasciculus (Lischke et al., 2015). Although it is tempting to conclude
that this might explain the emotional dysregulation that is
characteristic of BPD, in the study just described, no significant
correlations between structural alterations in the uncinate fasciculus
and self-reported measures of depression, anxiety, or borderline
symptoms were found. Nonetheless, these early findings are of
considerable interest. White matter changes of the type reported are
thought to result from myelin loss. Demyelination has been linked to
inflammation, and inflammation often follows stressful life events.
Stressful environmental events in early life are thought to play a major
role in the development of BPD. It is also the case that BPD-specific
differences in white matter tracts upon which emotion regulation relies
have been identified as early as in adolescence (Maier-Hein et al.,
2014). Taken together, findings such as these therefore provide some
tantalizing clues about how environmental factors might set the stage
for changes in brain structure and function that could later result in
borderline pathology.

Functional Imaging Positron-emission tomography (PET) approaches can be
used to examine differences in resting brain activation in people with
BPD compared to healthy controls or people with

Biological Factors

577

other forms of psychopathology. Several research groups have now
reported that BPD is associated with lower metabolic activity in the OFC
relative to comparison subjects (see Putnam & Silk, 2005). This is
interesting because the OFC is a brain area thought to play a role in
the regulation of emotion and responses to stress. It is also involved
in impulse control (Berlin, Rolls, & Iversen, 2005) and may facilitate
the inhibition of responses to external stimuli (Davidson, Putnam, &
Larson, 2000). Particularly interesting is the finding that when people
with BPD are treated with fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor (SSRI) that is helpful in the treatment of depression and BPD,
there is a significant increase in OFC metabolism at 12 weeks
posttreatment (New et al., 2004). Treatment with fluoxetine (Prozac)
also led BPD patients to report reduced levels of aggressive feelings
and irritability. We have already noted the role of serotonin with
respect to impulsivity, aggression, and suicidality (Oquendo & Mann,
2000). Taken together, these findings suggest that reduced serotonergic
activity in brain areas such as the OFC may help us understand why high
levels of impulsiveness and aggression may be commonly found in those
who suffer from BPD. Finally, we note that investigations that have used
imaging methods to study the brain at work (i.e., PET and functional
magnetic resonance imaging \[fMRI\] studies) have implicated some of the
same brain regions identified in structural and resting brain
investigations. For example, when people with BPD are exposed to
aversive and neutral pictures they show increased activation in the
amygdala compared to healthy controls (Herpertz et al., 2001). Following
an aversive stimulus, patients with BPD also show temporally prolonged
activation in the amygdala relative to healthy controls (Kamphausen et
al., 2013). Increased amygdala activation relative to controls is also
apparent when people with BPD view pictures of fearful, sad, or neutral
faces (Donegan et al., 2003). Findings of increased amygdala activation
are not entirely consistent, however. A meta-analysis by Ruocco,
Amirthavasagam, Choi-Kain, and McMain (2013) suggests that, compared to
controls, individuals with BPD may actually activate the amygdala to a
lesser extent when exposed to negative stimuli. This could perhaps be
due to the fact that amygdala volumes tend to be reduced by
approximately 13% in people with BPD relative to controls (Ruocco,
Amirthavasagam, & Zakzanis, 2012). Other studies suggest differences in
activation in such areas as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and
anterior cingulate cortex in patients with BPD relative to controls when
exposed to personalized abandonment scripts (Schmahl, Elzinga, et al.,
2003) or during recall of personal memories of abandonment (Schmahl,
Vermetten, et al., 2003). Overall, although results of individual
studies are often inconsistent (possibly reflecting sample differences
or differences in the task employed), they generally tend to support the
idea that abnormalities in frontolimbic circuitry may underlie many of
the key clinical features of BPD (Brendel, Stern, & Silbersweig, 2005;
Salvador et al., 2014; Schmahl & Bremner, 2006). More specifically, a
major problem in BPD may be that there is a disconnection between
activity in the prefrontal cortex and activity in the amygdala. This
could be related to the white matter abnormalities we highlighted
earlier. Although metabolic activity in these areas appears to be
tightly coupled in healthy controls, the same degree of metabolic
linkage is not found in people with BPD (New et al., 2007). This lack of
functional connectivity may be one reason why emotion regulation is such
a problem for those with this disorder.

578

Borderline Personality Disorder

Finally, we note that many of the brain regions and neural circuits that
are implicated in BPD are also implicated in a broad range of other
disorders. In other words, it would be unwise to assume that problems
with frontolimbic connectivity are specific to BPD. Comorbidity issues
also make it challenging to draw clear conclusions from the data in many
studies. For these reasons, we can say little at the present time about
unique ways in which brain structure and brain functioning are
compromised in people with BPD.

Psychosocial Factors Trauma and early life adversity are often reported
by patients with BPD. Problems with attachment in close relationships
are also common. These factors likely contribute to the disturbances in
interpersonal functioning that are so characteristic of people with this
disorder.

Childhood Maltreatment The early lives of people with BPD are often
characterized by high levels of trauma and adversity. Several studies
have demonstrated that, compared to patients with other disorders,
patients with BPD are significantly more likely to report experiencing
physical abuse, sexual abuse, or neglect during childhood (Ogata et al.,
1990; Weaver & Clum, 1993; Zanarini et al., 2000). Indeed, in a sample
of 69 outpatients with BPD, only 4 (6.1%) reported that they had
experienced no traumatic events in their childhoods, although this was
true for the majority (61.5%) of the 109 psychiatrically healthy
controls (Bandelow et al., 2005). Compared to the healthy controls, the
early lives of the BPD patients involved significantly more maternal and
paternal absences (i.e., mother in the hospital; father in jail), more
discord between the parents, more experiences of being raised by other
relatives or in a foster home, more physical violence in the family, and
more sexual abuse during childhood. One problem with almost all of the
studies on the early life experiences of BPD patients is that they rely
on retrospective reporting. Such data may be unreliable due to problems
with recall or reporting biases. However, in an important longitudinal
study, Johnson and colleagues (Johnson, Cohen, Brown, Smailes, &
Bernstein, 1999) used records from the State of New York to collect data
on documented cases of abuse or neglect in the lives of children from a
representative sample of 639 families. Consistent with the findings of
other studies, childhood maltreatment was significantly associated with
increased levels of BPD symptoms later in life. More specifically, those
who experienced early abuse or neglect were 7.73 times more likely to be
diagnosed with BPD at a follow-up assessment than were those who did not
experience such maltreatment. With its longitudinal design and its focus
on verified cases of abuse, Johnson et al.'s study provides strong
support for the link between traumatic or abusive experiences in early
life and the subsequent development of BPD. A more recent study of
children who were abused or neglected before the age of 11 (again
documented by court records) provides additional support for this
conclusion (Widom, Czaja, & Paris, 2009).

Psychosocial Factors

579

Attachment Relationships are extremely problematic for people with BPD.
Not only do they have problems in their relationships with others but
they also have problems in their relationships with themselves. BPD is
characterized by high levels of interpersonal impairment and extreme
concern about abandonment. Also prominent are chronic feelings of
emptiness, a lack of a sense of identity, self-harming behaviors, and an
inability to self-soothe appropriately during times of distress.
Attachment theory provides a useful approach for conceptualizing this
disorder (see Levy, 2005). Bowlby (1973) proposed that through the
relationships and transactions that they have with their caregivers,
infants develop mental representations of themselves and others and
develop "internal working models" about interpersonal relationships.
These are, essentially, sets of expectations about relationships that
function to both organize personality development and shape the nature
of relationships that are developed in the future (Levy, 2005). When an
infant's needs are reliably met by an attentive and nurturing caretaker,
he or she will come to regard others as reliable, responsive, and
trustworthy. When an infant is raised by an abusive, neglectful, or
emotionally disengaged caretaker, however, the working model of
relationships that he or she develops is likely to be different, and may
involve expectations of lack of care, unreliability, and
unresponsiveness. Our internal working models may also shape how we
perceive our social environments, influencing what we attend to and
consider salient. In young children, secure attachment is characterized
by using the mother as a "secure base" from which to explore the world
and return to in times of stress. Attachment style is thought to have
some continuity from childhood to adulthood, with securely attached
children being more likely to create and maintain securely attached
relationships in later life. According to Bowlby (1977, p. 206),
childhood attachment influences the "later capacity to make affectional
bonds as well as a whole range of adult dysfunctions." These
dysfunctions include marital problems, difficulties with parenting, and
personality disorders. Given the apparent link between early life
adversity and BPD, it should come as no surprise that people with this
disorder show low rates of secure attachment when this is measured in
adulthood. The vast majority of people with BPD are assessed (using
interview-based or self-report methods) as insecurely attached, with
only a minority (approximately 6% to 8%) being rated as having secure
attachment patterns (see Levy, 2005). Although there is no specific
style of insecure attachment that appears linked to BPD in empirical
studies, problems with attachment may underlie many of the fundamental
aspects of BPD. These problems may also help to explain why people with
BPD are often extremely emotionally attached to safe and stable
attachment objects such as stuffed animals, even in adulthood (Hooley &
Wilson-Murphy, 2012). It also warrants mention that real or misperceived
rejection or invalidation in interpersonal events often serve as
triggers for the emotional outbursts, impulsivity, and selfdamaging
behaviors that are so central to the BPD syndrome (Gurvits, Koenigsberg,
& Siever, 2000; Yeomans & Levy, 2002). Bateman and Fonagy (2003)
consider an inability to "mentalize" (i.e., to understand and interpret
one's own mental states as well as those of others) to be fundamental to
BPD and to be linked to failures in early attachment relationships.
Finally, even when they are in therapy, patients with BPD find it much
harder

580

Borderline Personality Disorder

than other patients to sustain a mental representation of the therapist
as helpful and the treatment relationship as caring and supportive
(Bender et al., 2003). Simply stated, problems in early attachment
relationships may set the stage for a broad range of relationship
problems in later life.

Cognitive Factors Trying to summarize the results of different studies
of neurocognitive function in patients with borderline personality
disorder is far from easy. Because of the polythetic nature of the DSM-5
criteria, patients with the same diagnosis can show quite different
clinical presentations. The interpretation of findings is further
complicated by issues of comorbidity. As we have noted, many patients
with BPD have a concurrent diagnosis of major depressive disorder. The
extent to which the empirical findings are linked to BPD or simply
reflect cognitive processing deficits associated with depression is
therefore a source of concern. A third difficulty is that, in the
typical research study, the majority of participants are taking
medications. Although researchers usually try to control for this by
noting the presence or absence of medications in a particular
participant, it is rare that more detailed information about the class
of medication, number of different medications, dosages, and duration of
medication usage is provided (see Fertuck, Lenzenweger, Clarkin,
Hoermann, & Stanley, 2006). Finally, the majority of these research
studies have either involved only females or included very few males in
their samples. We therefore know little about cognition in men with BPD.
There are many reasons to suspect that basic executive cognition and
memory processes might be disrupted in BPD. The disorder itself involves
unstable and dysregulated inhibitory control. This is readily apparent
in the behavior, emotions, and cognitions of the BPD patient. Moreover,
individuals with BPD and family members of these individuals report
subjective difficulties with attention and memory (Ruocco, Lam, &
McMain, 2014). Also, as we have already discussed, the results of
neuroimaging studies have implicated abnormalities in the frontolimbic
neurocircuitry in patients with the disorder. Reviews of executive
neurocognitive functioning, memory, and BPD can be found elsewhere (see
Fertuck et al., 2006; Unoka & Richman, 2016). In the sections below, we
highlight some of the most important findings.

Executive Neurocognition Executive neurocognition involves being able to
delay or terminate a given response (cognitive or motor) for the purpose
of achieving another goal or reward that is less immediate. There are
several types of executive neurocognition. For example, when we make a
conscious and deliberate effort to control our attention or motor
behavior, we are engaging what is referred to as interference control
(see Nigg, 2000). This method of control uses a neural system that
relies on the connection between cortical (dorsolateral and
orbitofrontal cortex) and subcortical (anterior cingulate) structures
(see Fertuck et al., 2006). The Stroop task (Stroop, 1935) is an example
of a test that taps this aspect of neuroexecutive function. It requires
a person to name the color of the ink used to print a color word (e.g.,
saying

Cognitive Factors

581

the word "red" when the word "blue" is printed in red ink), and to
suppress the tendency to simply read the word as printed. Another form
of executive neurocognition is cognitive inhibition. This is the ability
to suppress information from working memory. An example of a task that
requires effortful suppression is the "directed forgetting" task (see
Bjork, 1989). In this task, subjects are presented with a list of words.
After each word is presented, subjects see either an F (for forget) or
an R (for remember). Subjects are instructed to remember words followed
by an R and forget words followed by an F. However, at the end of the
task, subjects are asked to recall all the words that were presented to
them. Problems in cognitive inhibition can also be measured using
implicit (unconscious) approaches involving negative priming tasks.
Here, reaction times are assessed following negative or neutral primes
(see Tipper, 1985). It is assumed that individuals who have more
difficulty inhibiting negative information will be slower to respond
after being exposed to negative primes. A third type of executive
neurocognition requires the person to inhibit an expected motor behavior
or cognitive response in order to follow a different direction. This is
termed behavioral inhibition. For example, in the go/no-go task (Casey
et al., 1997), the subject is required to press a button when a
particular (and frequent) stimulus such as an "X" appears. This is the
"go" response. However, when another, less frequent stimulus is shown
(e.g., the letter "Y"), the subject must refrain from pressing the
button. The final form of executive neurocognition is motivational or
affective inhibition. This requires the purposeful interruption of a
tendency or a behavior that results from a particular
motivational-emotional state. For example, some forms of the Stroop task
involve the use of emotional words (e.g., "angry"). In the emotional
Stroop test, subjects typically take longer to name the ink color of
emotional words than they do to name the color of ink used to print
nonemotional words, such as "table." The emotional Stroop test is
therefore thought to measure how well the subject can engage in
affective inhibition. An example of a task that requires motivational
inhibition is the passive avoidance task (Newman & Kosson, 1986). Here,
subjects have to learn by trial and error whether responding to stimuli
will lead to gaining or losing money. If the subject responds to a
losing stimulus, this is considered to reflect a passive avoidance error
(i.e., doing something that leads to a negative outcome). Failures to
respond to a winning stimulus are considered to be errors of omission,
where the subject misses out on a good outcome. Inhibitory deficits are
involved in inattention, impulsivity, and problems with affect
regulation. The clinical presentation of BPD therefore makes it
reasonable to expect that people with this disorder would show
impairments on neurocognitive tasks requiring inhibition. Research
suggests that patients with BPD do indeed show impairments on tasks that
challenge inhibitory processes. Posner et al. (2002) compared 39 BPD
patients without comorbid mood disorder to 30 healthy controls on the
Attention Network Task (ANT; Fan, McCandliss, Sommer, Raz, & Posner,
2002). This cognitive task, which measures interference control, taps
three different aspects of attention. The first (alerting) is the
ability to sustain an alert cognitive state, the second (orienting) is
the ability to focus attention and select stimuli, and the third
(conflict) is the capacity to decide among competing responses based on
a predetermined organizing principle. Although the subjects with BPD
performed similarly to the controls

582

Borderline Personality Disorder

on the alerting and orienting components of the task, they showed
impairments, relative to the controls, on the conflict task. Impairments
have also been found on tasks that require cognitive inhibition. Korfine
and Hooley (2000) administered a directed forgetting task to healthy
controls, and people diagnosed with BPD. Some of the BPD participants
were hospital outpatients; others were drawn from a community sample.
Participants were then exposed to borderline-salient words (e.g.,
"abandon," "enraged," "alone," "suicidal") as well as positive and
neutral words. Even when they were specifically instructed to forget
them, the BPD participants remembered more of the borderline-salient
words than the controls did, suggesting that they were unable to inhibit
material that was emotionally salient to them. In a subsequent
replication of this general finding, Domes and colleagues (2006) have
reported that, compared to healthy controls, unmedicated patients with
BPD showed poorer inhibition of negative material on the directed
forgetting task. This was true even though the negative words that they
were exposed to were not so borderline specific. These findings suggest
that one problem people with BPD have is that it is hard for them to
suppress aversive material---even when they wish to do so. As Korfine
and Hooley (2000) note, it remains unclear whether findings such as
these are driven by borderline pathology or by depression. Certainly,
when level of depression is statistically controlled, main effects of
BPD tend to become nonsignificant. However, main effects of depression
are also rendered nonsignificant by the statistical control of BPD
symptoms. Because mood disturbance is so fundamental to BPD, and because
there is a strong relationship between depression and BPD in most people
with the disorder, it may make little sense to covary depression out in
studies of this kind. Nonetheless, there is a pressing need for this
issue to be resolved through the use of comparison groups comprised of
depressed (but non-BPD) participants. BPD patients are also impaired on
measures of behavioral inhibition. As we noted earlier, behavioral
inhibition involves inhibiting a cognitive expectancy or motor behavior
in order to follow a different directive or goal. Lenzenweger, Clarkin,
Fertuck, and Kernberg (2004) have reported that BPD patients (without
concurrent mood disorders) exhibit deficits in cognitive planning and
set-shifting on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST; Heaton, 1981).
Problems in motivational inhibition (poorer performance on a
decision-making task) have also been found in BPD subjects when compared
to healthy controls (see Bazanis et al., 2002). People with BPD also
show deficits on the go/no-go task, showing that they have difficulty
learning when to respond (or not respond) to a stimulus (Leyton et al.,
2001). This may be driven not by motor inhibition deficits but by
decision-related deficits. There is evidence that the former may be
dissociable from the latter, and that motor inhibition is intact in BPD
(Barker et al., 2015). Decision making is, moreover, an area of major
impairment in patients with BPD (Unoka & Richman, 2016). Impairments on
the passive avoidance task (described above) have also been reported
(Hochhausen, Lorenz, & Newman, 2002). Finally, some (but not all)
researchers have reported differences between healthy controls and
participants with BPD on the emotional Stroop test (Arntz, Appels, &
Sieswerda, 2000; Domes et al., 2006). These findings suggest that people
with BPD may sometimes be less able than controls to inhibit
interference from emotional words. Indeed, an emerging area of research
involves the effect of affective context on cognitive processing.
Growing evidence now suggests that negative information interferes with
cognitive processes

Cognitive Factors

583

to a greater extent for individuals with BPD than it does for controls
(e.g., Soloff, White, Omari, Ramaseshan, & Diwadkar, 2015). Taken
together, the pattern of results across domains is highly consistent
with the idea that BPD is associated with deficits in executive
cognition. More specifically, people with BPD often perform relatively
poorly when they are engaged in tasks that make demands on inhibitory
processes (see Fertuck et al., 2006). The more symptomatic patients are
(e.g., having more severe symptoms, meeting more DSM criteria) and the
more comorbid disorders they have, the less well they tend to do on
these tasks (Fertuck, Lenzenweger, & Clarkin, 2005; Unoka & Richman,
2016).

Memory Systems People with BPD appear to have some difficulties on
conventional tests of memory. A recent meta-analysis has shown that BPD
patients perform worse than controls on measures of both verbal and
nonverbal memory (Unoka & Richman, 2016; see also Ruocco, 2005).
Moreover, impairments in immediate and delayed memory have been linked
to increased impulsivity (Seres, Unoka, Bodi, Aspan, & Keri, 2009). The
topic of autobiographical memory has been a focus of interest. The
Autobiographical Memory Test (AMT; Williams & Broadbent, 1986) requires
subjects to generate precise and specific memories to prompted words
(e.g., "birthday"). A memory is considered to be specific if it
references an occasion or an event and involves a time or a place (e.g.,
"for my birthday last year my friend and I went to dinner at Mario's").
Overgeneralized memories, which are characteristic of depressed
patients, are hypothesized to occur as a way of avoiding the emotional
turmoil that could result from more specific recall of negatively
valenced emotional memories (see Renneberg, Theobald, Nobs, & Weisbrod,
2005). Jones and colleagues (1999) initially reported that patients with
BPD recalled more overgeneral (i.e., fewer specific) memories compared
to controls. However, other investigators have failed to replicate this
finding (Arntz, Meeren, & Wessell, 2002; Renneberg et al., 2005). Worthy
of comment though, is that the BPD patients in the Renneberg et al.
(2005) study retrieved more negative memories when prompted by the cue
words than the controls did. This was also true of the depressed
participants who were studied. Unlike the depressed participants,
however, the BPD patients retrieved these more negative memories with a
speed and a level of specificity that was comparable to that of the
healthy controls. In other words, the BPD patients were rapidly able to
access memories that were both specific and negative. Although the
implications of this finding remain unclear, it is interesting to
speculate whether such a retrieval style could play a role in the
emotional turmoil that is so characteristic of BPD. Staying on an even
keel emotionally may be much more difficult when negative memories are
easily triggered and rapidly accessible.

Social Cognition Social cognition is concerned with how we recognize,
think about, and respond to social information in a variety of contexts.
In other words, the focus is on stimuli that are related to social
functioning. In light of the interpersonal difficulties that
characterize people with BPD, it is hardly surprising that social
cognition is now a topic of active research interest.

584

Borderline Personality Disorder

Neuroimaging research has revealed that, compared to healthy controls,
female patients with BPD showed evidence of cortical thinning in
specific brain regions related to social cognition (Bøen et al., 2014).
Given this, and in light of the importance of early attachment
experiences for developing the capacity for social cognition (see
Bateman & Fonagy, 2003; Beeney et al., 2015), it is perhaps not
surprising that a number of disturbances in social cognition have been
observed in BPD. Individuals with BPD attend more to negative cues
during interactions with others (Lumsden, 1993). This may explain why,
in young couples who are dating, the presence of BPD features predicts
greater negative impact and more feelings of emotional loss in response
to the behavior of romantic partners. This is the case whether the
experience the partner initiates is positive or negative (Bhatia,
Davila, Eubanks-Carter, & Burckell, 2013). The tendency to appraise
social interactions more negatively may be due in part to negative
biases in facial emotion recognition. Although consistent results have
been elusive, a recent meta-analysis finds no clear evidence to suggest
that people with BPD differ from healthy controls in their ability to
identify negative emotions (Mitchell, Dickens, & Picchioni, 2014).
However, people with BPD do show a negative response bias. In other
words, they tend to report negativity in neutral faces or in ambiguous
facial stimuli. Some of the inconsistency in the findings overall may
stem from a lack of consideration of such factors as IQ and trauma
history. Another variable that has not received appropriate
consideration to date is the gender of the target face that is being
viewed. Veague and Hooley (2014) have reported that, compared to healthy
controls and women with trauma histories, women with BPD took longer to
recognize the presence of happiness in male but not in female faces. BPD
pathology was also linked to having a lower detection threshold for
recognizing anger in male faces, although, again, no differences were
noted when female faces were viewed. Finally, and consistent with the
response bias findings reported by others (see Mitchell et al., 2014),
participants with BPD were more likely to misidentify anger in male
faces, seeing anger in completely neutral male faces or in male faces
that contained no anger cues. This tendency was independent of
participant's histories of abuse, and there was no similar
misidentification when female faces were presented. Findings such as
these suggest that enhanced or impaired emotion recognition may be
moderated by whether the face being viewed is male or female. This is a
variable that should be explored more fully in future research. A new
research direction centers on trait appraisal. Implicit trait appraisal
is a primary shortcut allowing us to make quick, complex judgments about
the traits or personality of others. Based entirely on facial
characteristics, we make enduring judgments about a range of traits
including dominance, likability, and competence (Todorov, Mandisodza,
Goren, & Hall, 2005). Trait appraisal differs from emotion recognition
in that it is concerned with how an individual ascribes personality
characteristics, rather than emotional states, to a target individual.
Clinicians have long noted how difficult it is for individuals with BPD
to trust others. Reflecting this, researchers have now begun to evaluate
the process of trust or trustworthiness appraisal in BPD. Two types of
paradigms are typically used: visual appraisal paradigms and trust
games. Visual appraisal paradigms require the individual to view
pictures of faces or videos and to judge, based only on limited
information, how trustworthy the person is. Fertuck, Grinband, and
Stanley (2013) showed individuals a series of faces that varied on
either a fear or trust dimension. Respondents were simply asked to rate

Diagnosis and Assessment

585

the trustworthiness of each face. Compared to controls, the BPD group
rated the faces as less trustworthy. Importantly, this trust bias
occurred independently of fear appraisal, indicating that less
trustworthy faces are not simply those that evoke greater fear response.
Similar results have been found in individuals with subclinical
borderline features (Miano, Fertuck, Arntz, & Stanley, 2013). Nicol,
Pope, Sprengelmeyer, Young, and Hall (2013) found that relative to
healthy controls, individuals with BPD rated faces as less trustworthy
and less approachable. Approachability ratings were significantly
correlated with childhood trauma within the BPD group, but
trustworthiness ratings were not. Using a paradigm similar to that of
Fertuck et al. (2013), with both facial and limited behavioral
information available to subjects, Arntz and Veen (2001) found that
individuals with BPD rated others more negatively in general when
viewing short movie clips. Compared to healthy controls or to depressed
patients, people with BPD also tend to rate others as more aggressive
(Barnow et al., 2009). What are the behavioral consequences of such
negative impression formation? To explore this issue, researchers have
used trust game paradigms. These require individuals not only to form
initial impressions of others but then to cooperate with those others in
the service of a common monetary goal. For example, Unoka, Seres, Aspan,
Bodi, and Keri (2009) used a monetary investment paradigm in which
individuals with BPD acted as investors who could choose to invest money
in a trustee via the Internet. In this type of game, the investor and
trustee are able to earn more money together through cooperative
exchange than they would through conservative investment. Compared to
control and depressed groups, the BPD group made smaller investments
overall during the course of five trials, indicating less trust in the
trustee. BPD participants also reported having less optimism about the
outcome of the investment game right from the outset. Similar findings
were observed when the roles were reversed. Participants with BPD,
acting as trustees rather than as investors, ruptured cooperation and
trust by sending less money back to the investors (King-Casas et al.,
2008). This shows that not only are individuals with BPD less trusting
in these types of economic games but they are also less able to
cooperate. In another, similar study, BPD participants rated their own
behavior as less fair when a virtual trustee (an automated computer
program displaying standardized images of the "trustee") played the
trust game with a consistently neutral face, whereas control
participants rated themselves as comparably fair regardless of the
trustee's emotional facial cues (Franzen et al., 2011). Biases in facial
emotion perception as well as problems with trust appraisal may
radically change how people with BPD experience their social worlds.
Both are also likely to have important negative behavioral consequences.
By approaching the world as if others are less trustworthy, people with
PBD may set the stage for some of the interpersonal dysfunction that is
so characteristic of their disorder.

Diagnosis and Assessment The current DSM definition of BPD combines
theoretical perspectives that are often quite different. There are also
no required symptoms that must be present for the diagnosis to be made.
This means that all nine symptoms are assumed to be of equal importance
in the diagnosis of BPD. This clearly does not reflect the current
debate about the "core aspects" of BPD.

586

Borderline Personality Disorder

Beyond this, however, many clinicians and researchers have reservations
about whether personality disorders (including BPD) can even be
classified in a categorical (e.g., DSM-like) fashion. Most personality
researchers favor a dimensional (rather than categorical) view of
personality disorders. Within this perspective, disorders of personality
are theorized to occur along a continuum that includes normal
personality functioning. Some empirical evidence is consistent with this
view. Using taxometric statistical procedures to analyze data from a
clinical sample, Rothschild, Cleland, Haslam, and Zimmerman (2003)
failed to find evidence of a distinct "borderline taxon" or categorical
entity. Instead, the data suggested that BPD is better considered as a
dimensional concept. To the extent that this is true, differences
between people with and without the BPD diagnosis might therefore be
more quantitative than qualitative, with people with BPD simply
exhibiting more extreme forms of normal personality traits. In terms of
the five-factor model of personality (Costa & McCrae, 1992), BPD can be
viewed as reflecting high neuroticism and high openness, and low levels
of both agreeableness and conscientiousness (see Few et al., 2016). Not
surprisingly, these issues have led to the development of a variety of
different methods and techniques used to assess and diagnose BPD. In the
following sections, we consider some of the most widely used approaches.

Diagnostic Interviews Clinical approaches to assessment are based on the
fundamental assumption that there is a known and accepted concept that
exists to be assessed. Because of this, their form directly reflects the
current definitions of the disorders that they assess. For BPD, the two
most widely used clinical interviews are the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders (SCID-II; First, Gibbon,
Spitzer, Williams, & Benjamin, 1997) and the Diagnostic Interview for
Borderlines--Revised (DIB-R; Zanarini, Gunderson, Frankenburg, &
Chauncey, 1989). The SCID-II is an interview based on the current DSM
criteria. Designed to be used by a trained interviewer, it can be used
to assess all 11 of the personality disorders included in the DSM. The
SCID-II has good sensitivity, specificity, validity, and interrater
reliability (Jacobsberg, Perry, & Frances, 1995). Although the SCID-II
does assess for the presence of all personality disorders, the subset of
questions specific to BPD is often used on its own. Discriminant and
criterion validity are fairly well established for the BPD section of
the SCID-II, although this is not the case for diagnoses of all the
disorders (Carcone, Tokarz, & Ruocco, 2015). Unlike the SCID-II, the
DIB-R (and its predecessor, the DIB) is focused solely on BPD. The
original Diagnostic Interview for Borderlines (Gunderson, Kolb, &
Austin, 1981) was developed to distinguish BPD from schizophrenia and
major depressive disorder. Accordingly, the questions covered such
domains as social adaptation, impulse action patterns, affects,
psychosis, and interpersonal relations. The goal of the revision of the
instrument was to improve its power to discriminate BPD from other
personality disorders. To this end, questions about such symptoms as
anxiety, odd thinking, quasi-psychotic thoughts, and concerns of
abandonment were included. Indeed, these are the items that are more
likely to discriminate BPD (Zanarini, Gunderson, & Frankenburg, 1990).
The authors also

Diagnosis and Assessment

587

adopted a standard duration of 2 years for all symptoms and established
a predetermined scoring algorithm. One measure of the success of this
approach is that the DIB-R is now considered the best assessment
instrument for distinguishing BPD from other personality disorders
(Skodol et al., 2002). This semistructured interview produces scores on
each of four scales: affect, cognition, impulsivity, and interpersonal
relationships. The presence of BPD is then determined by a score of 8 or
more on a 10-point scale. The DIB-R subscales map well onto the major
behavioral patterns associated with BPD, including abandonment fears,
demandingness and entitlement, treatment regressions, and the ability to
arouse inappropriately close or hostile relationships during treatment.
Perhaps the most important difference between the DIB-R and any of the
measures based solely on DSM criteria is that the DIB-R, far from
overidentifying cases of BPD, seems to identify a more homogeneous and
severe subset of patients (Zanarini, Frankenburg, & Vujanovic, 2002).
There are several other interviews that, like the SCID-II, assess BPD
according to the DSM diagnostic criteria. The Structured Interview for
DSM-IV Personality Disorders (SIDP-IV: Pfohl, Blum, & Zimmerman, 1997)
is popular because it incorporates both the DSM-IV-TR criteria and the
ICD-10 criteria for personality disorders. This is also true of the
International Personality Disorder Examination (IPDE; Loranger, 1999).
However, a disadvantage of the IPDE is that it is the longest of all the
semistructured interviews, and its criterion validity has not been well
established empirically (Carcone et al., 2015). Finally, there are two
other assessment interviews that are reliable, based on DSM criteria,
and can be used to provide a BPD diagnosis. The Personality Disorder
Interview (PDI-IV; Widiger, Mangine, Corbitt, Ellis, & Thomas, 1995) and
the Diagnostic Interview for Personality Disorders (DIPD-IV; Zanarini,
Frankenburg, Chauncey, & Gunderson, 1987) both have good empirical
support. However, they tend not to be used as often as the SCID-II,
SIDP-IV, or IPDE.

Self-Report Questionnaires The Personality Disorders Questionnaire
(PDQ-4; Hurt, Hyler, Frances, Clarkin, & Brent, 1984) is a 99-item
self-report instrument based on the DSM-IV criteria (which, as pointed
out earlier, are the same as the DSM-5 criteria). It contains items to
assess each DSM personality disorder. Because it is brief, the PDQ is
commonly used. It has shown good diagnostic agreement with the DIPD-IV
(Zanarini et al., 2003). However, some have questioned its predictive
and discriminant validity (de Reus, van den Berg, & Emmelkamp, 2013;
Fossati et al., 1998).

Measuring Change in BPD The Zanarini Rating Scale for Borderline
Personality Disorder (ZAN-BPD; Zanarini et al., 2003) is the only
presently available measure that can be used to assess severity and
change in borderline pathology. The items for this rating scale were
adapted from the BPD module of the DIPD-IV, and converted so that each
criterion is rated on a 0 to 4 scale and covers a 1-week time period.
The rating points (0--4) in the scale were designed and anchored to
consider both the severity and frequency of symptoms. The ZAN-BPD

588

Borderline Personality Disorder

culminates in four sector scores that reflect the primary areas of
dysfunction in BPD: affective (anger, emptiness, mood stability),
cognitive (stress-related dissociation or paranoia, identity
disturbance), impulsive (self-mutilation, suicide attempts, and other
forms of impulsivity), and interpersonal (abandonment, unstable
relationships). This clinician rating scale has achieved good convergent
validity (scores correlate with the DIB-R, for example), discriminant
validity (it accurately discriminates BPD from other disorders), and
interrater reliability.

Psychometric Assessment Approaches to BPD A different approach to
assessing borderline symptomatology is found in symptom and personality
inventories that inquire about a broad range of possible pathology. Such
measures can be used to help to determine what actually "makes up" the
borderline construct. When people with BPD complete such measures,
researchers can gain insight into the basic aspects of the disorder. One
such inventory is the Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI; Morey,
1991). This 344-question inventory, which is based on an interpersonal
model of psychopathology, covers all DSM personality disorders. There
are four BPD "feature" subscales in this measure; they probe affective
instability, identity problems, negative relationships, and self-harming
behavior. The PAI has shown good reliability and validity. It can also
be used for diagnosing BPD because the BPD subscales incorporate all the
DSM criteria. The Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive
Personality--Second Edition (SNAP-2; Clark, 2009) is a 390-item
self-report measure based on a dimensional model of personality
disorders. Within this perspective, personality disorders are
characterized as extreme forms of otherwise normal personality
functioning. The SNAP has 10 diagnostic scales corresponding to the
DSM-IV and DSM-5 personality disorder diagnoses (including BPD), which
are scored three ways: dimensionally, by number of criteria met, and
dichotomously (whether or not the threshold for diagnosis was reached).
Additionally, the SNAP-2 has 15 trait dimensional scales forming a
three-factor structure of (1) negative emotionality (e.g., mistrust,
aggression, self-harm), (2) positive emotionality (e.g., exhibitionism,
entitlement), and (3) disinhibition (e.g., impulsivity versus
workaholism/propriety). These trait scales have obvious relevance for
researchers interested in BPD. Like the SNAP, the Revised NEO
Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992) is based on a
dimensional view of personality disorders, although in the case of the
NEO the underlying basis is five-factor theory. Rather than being solely
concerned with the abnormal traits characteristic of personality
disorders, the NEO is designed to cover both normal and abnormal traits.
The scores of patients with borderline personality disorder differ from
community norms on all five factors (neuroticism, extraversion,
openness, conscientiousness, and agreeableness) of the NEO.
Problematically, the dimensions assessed by the NEO may not fully
capture the clinical symptomatology seen in diagnosed patients with
borderline personality disorder (Zweig-Frank & Paris, 1995). However,
recent work has shown a high correlation between SCID-II derived
borderline personality features and NEO PI-R traits, providing at least
some initial evidence that the five-factor model may be useful for
measuring the same underlying constructs as more specialized BPD
assessment tools (Miller, Few, Lynam, & MacKillop, 2015). Changes in
normal personality as conceptualized using a five-factor model also
appear to

Diagnosis and Assessment

589

track well with changes in borderline pathology over time (Wright,
Hopwood, & Zanarini, 2015). Furthermore, a five-factor approach to
borderline personality was recently shown to converge well with a
variety of other measures of BPD, including the Personality Assessment
Inventory--Borderline Features (PAI-BOR) scale. Bivariate twin modeling
further suggested that assessment of BPD based on the five-factor model
captures significant genetic variance in BPD liability (Few et al.,
2016). Because five-factor measures of personality are typically easy to
use and are widely available, they may hold promise for large
epidemiological and genetic studies (Few et al., 2016). Finally, it is
appropriate to mention one psychometric measure that is specific to BPD.
The Borderline Personality Inventory (BPI; Leichsenring, 1999) is based
on Kernberg's psychodynamic formulation of the borderline diagnosis.
Accordingly, the measure probes patient functioning in four discrete
areas: identity diffusion, primitive defense mechanisms, reality
testing, and fear of closeness. The BPI combines both categorical and
dimensional aspects of personality; although it is dimensionally based,
it is compatible with the DSM-5 criteria for a BPD diagnosis. The
construction of the scales in the BPI is rooted in factor analysis, and
cutoff scores based on previous research are proposed.

Challenges in the Assessment of BPD Clinical interviews were once
thought to be the gold standard for diagnosing BPD (McDermut &
Zimmerman, 2005), for several reasons. First, clinicians and researchers
assumed that individuals with BPD might lack the insight or
perspective-taking ability to accurately judge their own symptoms.
Additionally, research has shown that many patients with BPD display
certain "response styles that are associated with a distorted
presentation of their psychological functioning" (Hopwood et al., 2008,
p. 81; see also Lloyd, Overall, Kimsey, & Click, 1983). A previous study
found agreement between clinical interviews and self-report measures to
be low (Zimmerman, 1994). This is thought to occur because concordance
between BPD interviews is low (Hyler, Skodol, Oldham, Kellman, & Doidge,
1992), and because self-report methods usually yield higher base rates
(e.g., Hunt & Andrews, 1992). It is thought that questionnaires in
general tend to overdiagnose, and thus they are more typically
recommended as screening tools, with clinical interviews remaining the
standard for diagnosis (McDermut & Zimmerman, 2005). However, a recent
study (Hopwood et al., 2008) assessed the relative validity of a
selfreport measure of BPD (the PDQ-4, described earlier) and an
interview measure of BPD (DIPD-IV, also described earlier) at the level
of both diagnosis and individual criteria. The results supported the use
of multiple methods (converging lines of evidence) in diagnosing BPD as
being superior to each type of assessment used alone. For specific
symptoms, sometimes one method performed better than the other; for
example, the self-report measure better assessed experiential
(nonobservable) symptoms such as identity disturbance or a feeling of
chronic emptiness. However, the clinical interview performed better at
assessing observable symptoms such as self-harm or impulsivity. It may
be important, then, to weight the contributions of self-report and
interview assessments differently, depending on the type of symptom a
clinician is investigating. One problem in the clinical or research
assessment of BPD is that, as mentioned previously, BPD constitutes a
pattern of comorbidity and symptom presentation that can be

590

Borderline Personality Disorder

unstable (McGlashan et al., 2000, 2005). Additionally, the large number
of measures that exist to assess BPD is inherently problematic and
creates serious obstacles with respect to interpreting research
findings. When different measures are used, different results are likely
to be obtained. For this reason, some researchers (Pilknois, 1997;
Regier et al., 1998; Shea, 1997) have advocated for the adoption of a
common clinical interview. Additionally, it has been suggested that a
uniform assessment battery be adopted to measure treatment outcome.
Although such an approach would make it easier to compare findings
across studies, it is still unclear which of the current instruments
might be most valuable for this purpose.

Clinical Course and Treatment Treating patients who suffer from BPD is
not easy. Patients often enact their interpersonal issues in the
therapeutic relationship, leading to complicated impasses and emotional
storms. Self-harming behaviors are common (60% to 80% of cases; see
Bateman & Fonagy, 2003) and the mean number of lifetime suicide attempts
in patients with BPD is 3.4 (Soloff, Lis, Kelly, Cornelius, & Ulrich,
1994). Moreover, as we have already noted, the 10% rate of completed
suicide in BPD is alarmingly high (see Oldham, 2006). When all this is
considered along with the tendency of BPD patients to drop out of
treatment (Percudani et al., 2002), it is easy to see why the treatment
of BPD patients is among the most challenging tasks that clinicians
face.

Clinical Outcome Despite the profound emotional pain that characterizes
BPD sufferers and the turbulent nature of the treatment process, the
long-term outcome of the disorder may be more benign than was previously
assumed. Zanarini, Frankenburg, Reich, and Fitzmaurice (2012) conducted
a 16-year follow-up study of a carefully diagnosed group of 290 patients
with BPD who had initially received inpatient treatment. The researchers
interviewed the patients every 2 years and collected data on their
symptoms and levels of functioning. Dropout rates were remarkably low,
with 231 participants from the original sample still remaining at the
time of the 16-year follow up assessment. Importantly, the results
showed that over the 16-year follow-up almost all (99%) of the patients
with BPD showed significant reductions in their symptoms and entered
remission for at least a 2-year period. What this means is that they no
longer met criteria for a diagnosis of BPD during that time. It is also
encouraging to note that the vast majority (78%) of patients had
achieved lasting remissions (8 years or more) by the time of the 16-year
follow-up. Perhaps unsurprisingly, given these high rates of remission,
individuals with BPD also show decreasing rates of treatment utilization
over time (Zanarini, Frankenburg, Reich, Conkey, & Fitzmaurice, 2015).
Compared to patients with other personality disorders, patients with BPD
tend to be slower to achieve remission. By the time of the first
follow-up assessment (conducted 2 years after hospitalization), only 35%
were experiencing remission versus 88% of a comparison group of patients
with other personality disorders. This may be because BPD represents
such a severe form of personality disturbance. Predictors of a more
rapid time to clinical remission included being younger, not having a
history of childhood sexual

Clinical Course and Treatment

591

abuse, and not having a family history of substance abuse disorders.
Having a good recent work history, as well as having an agreeable
temperament, scoring low on measures of neuroticism, and not having an
anxious personality were also associated with patients getting better
more rapidly (Zanarini, Frankenburg, Hennen, Reich, & Silk, 2006). As
might be expected, the number of patients who met criteria for recovery
from BPD was lower than the number of patients who showed clinical
remission. As defined in the Zanarini et al. studies (Zanarini,
Frankenburg, Reich, & Fitzmaurice, 2010, 2012), recovery required good
overall social or occupational functioning and only mild symptoms.
Overall, 60% of patients were considered to have had at least a 2-year
period of recovery and 40% to have had at least an 8-year recovery.
Although these numbers are encouraging, they do suggest that sustained
recovery from BPD is much less common than sustained remission
(approximately 78%). In other words, for the majority of patients,
having a lengthy period without clinically significant symptoms is a
more likely outcome than having a lengthy period of generally good
overall functioning (e.g., full-time work or school, or at least one
emotionally sustaining close relationship). This is reflected in a
recent review showing that although symptoms may improve over time,
functional impairment may be more enduring (Biskin, 2015). Other work
also suggests that interpersonal dysfunction may endure over time
(Wright, Hallquist, Beeney, & Pilkonis, 2013). There is also one
characteristic of the family environment that warrants mention with
regard to clinical outcome in BPD. Expressed emotion (EE) is a measure
of the family environment that has been reliably linked to higher rates
of relapse and poor clinical outcome in patients with schizophrenia,
mood disorders, and other psychiatric conditions as well (see Hooley,
2007). Accordingly, when Hooley and Hoffman (1999) examined the clinical
outcomes of patients with BPD over the course of a 1-year follow-up,
they expected to find that EE was again predictive of a more unfavorable
course of illness. However, this was not the case. The key elements of
expressed emotion (criticism, hostility) did not predict worse outcomes
in patients with BPD. Even more unexpected was the finding that patients
with BPD fared better when their family members showed high levels of
emotional overinvolvement (EOI), a component of EE that reflects high
levels of overprotective attitudes, emotional concern, and anxiety, as
well as self-sacrificing behavior on the part of family members. In
patients diagnosed with schizophrenia or mood disorders, EOI predicts
worse clinical outcomes. This is thought to be because the intrusiveness
of relatives high on EOI is stressful and overstimulating for these
patients. Hooley and Hoffman (1999) hypothesized that, because of their
fears of abandonment, people with BPD might process emotional
overinvolvement in a different way, interpreting it as a positive rather
than a negative stimulus. In a specific test of this hypothesis, Hooley
et al. (2010) subsequently used fMRI to examine brain activation in
participants with BPD, participants with dysthymia, and healthy controls
during exposure to comments reflecting high levels of EOI. Specifically,
they predicted that, compared to the other two groups, participants with
BPD would show increased activation in the left prefrontal cortex when
listening to EOI. This prediction was based on research showing that
left prefrontal activation is associated with approach-related positive
experiences and with reward processing (Pizzagalli, Sherwood, Henriques,
& Davidson, 2005; Schaefer, Putnam, Benca, & Davidson, 2006). Consistent
with this prediction, participants with BPD showed elevated left
prefrontal activation to EOI relative to the controls and to the
dysthymic participants. This is especially interesting

592

Borderline Personality Disorder

in light of the finding that self-reports of the BPD participants
suggested that they did not like hearing the EOI remarks. Nonetheless,
below the radar, their brains were responding in a positive manner.
Taken together, these results suggest that even though people with BPD
may not overtly welcome expressions of concern or worry on the part of
their family members, hearing comments of this type may actually be
quite helpful for them.

Treatment Time clearly plays a major role in helping to heal the
emotional wounds of the patient with BPD. However, time alone is not a
sufficient treatment. Clinical interventions are thought to speed up the
process of natural recovery (Paris, 2005). In the next two sections, we
briefly consider the major clinical interventions that are currently
used to help patients with this disorder. These involve pharmacological
treatments and various kinds of psychotherapy.

Pharmacological Approaches Medications are routinely used in the
treatment of BPD. In a study of over 2,000 inpatients, Bridler et
al. (2015) found that 90% were treated with some form of pharmacological
intervention. Overall, 70% were treated with antipsychotics and/or
antidepressants, 33% were treated with anticonvulsants, 30% with
benzodiazepines, and 4% with lithium. More than half of these patients
were treated with three or more concurrent medications. Despite the
widespread use of medications, there is a surprising paucity of
randomized controlled trials attesting to their efficacy, and there is
no routinely recommended medication. This is not to say that medications
do not help some patients. However, their benefits are far more modest
than would be expected, particularly in light of how often they are
prescribed. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are commonly
used to treat BPD. One rationale for using these medications is that
many people with BPD are also depressed and these medications have
demonstrated efficacy for depression. SSRIs also make sense when we
consider the data linking aggression and suicide to low levels of
serotonin (Åsberg, 1997). Open trial studies with small samples of
patients have suggested that SSRIs may be helpful for patients with BPD
(e.g., Cornelius, Soloff, Perel, & Ulrich, 1991). However, in efficacy
studies, their benefits are often quite modest. In a double-blind study,
Rinne, van den Brink, Wouters, and van Dyck (2002) randomly assigned 38
women with BPD to either 6 weeks of SSRI treatment (fluvoxamine) or 6
weeks of treatment with placebo. At the end of the 6-week trial, half of
the patients who had been given a placebo were switched to fluvoxamine
(Luvox). All the patients (who were still blind to the type of treatment
they were receiving) were then followed for a further 6 weeks. All the
patients showed some clinical improvements after they entered the study.
At the end of the 6-week period, patients in both the SSRI and the
placebo condition showed improvements in anger and impulsivity, and
there were no significant differences between the groups. However,
patients who had been treated with fluvoxamine showed significantly more
improvement in mood stability than did the patients who had received a
placebo. These results suggest that treatment with an SSRI may help BPD
patients experience fewer rapid mood shifts. However, even when they
received the placebo, the patients with BPD still experienced clinical
improvement.

Treatment

593

Other medications in widespread use in the treatment of BPD include
atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine, clozapine, and risperidone.
Again, most of these have been studied in the context of open trials, so
more placebo-controlled studies are needed (see Markovitz, 2004).
However, as a class, antipsychotic medications have been shown to have a
beneficial effect on impulsivity and aggression (Nose, Cipriani,
Biancosino, Grassi, & Barbui, 2006). Moreover, in a double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial of olanzapine (Zyprexa), Zanarini and
Frankenburg (2001) reported that the 19 female patients who were
randomly assigned to receive olanzapine reported decreases in their
levels of anxiety, paranoia, and interpersonal sensitivity, as well as
anger/hostility, compared to the nine women who received a placebo. A
placebo-controlled trial of the antipsychotic agent, aripiprazole, has
also yielded promising preliminary results (Nickel et al., 2006). Given
that quetiapine is frequently prescribed, results of a recent
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial are also encouraging. Black and
colleagues (2014) randomly assigned 95 patients to one of three groups:
low-dose quetiapine, moderate-dose quetiapine, or placebo. After 8 weeks
of treatment and regardless of dose, patients who received quetiapine
experienced more symptom improvement and faster treatment response.
Overall, responders comprised 82% of individuals in the low-dose group,
74% in the moderate-dose group, and 48% in the placebo group. Finally,
we note that antiepileptic drugs are also now being used in the
treatment of BPD. Mood stabilizers such as divalproex sodium have been
shown to have beneficial effects on anger and mood instability in
randomized controlled trials (Nose et al., 2006). However, they do not
appear to alleviate such problems as impulsivity and aggression, or
suicidality. Lithium has also been used in one small randomized clinical
trial, although it was not associated with any improvements in mood or
impulsivity (Links, Steiner, Boiago, & Irwin, 1990). There is also some
evidence that lamotrigine may have beneficial effects for reducing
affective lability, but more rigorous study in the context of BPD is
needed (Bowen, Balbuena, & Baetz, 2014). Considered together, these
studies make it clear that medications do offer some benefits for
patients. However, there is no medication that can be considered an
adequate treatment for BPD. Medications help with some but not all of
the symptoms of BPD. Recognizing this, we now turn our attention to some
of the psychological approaches that are important in the treatment of
this disorder.

Psychological Approaches Perhaps the best-known treatment for BPD is
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT). Developed by Marsha Linehan, this
cognitive-behavioral approach involves weekly individual psychotherapy
sessions as well as weekly skills training administered in a group
format. Patients are also permitted to call their therapists for
telephone consultations. The therapists attend weekly team consultation
meetings to help them stay motivated and provide them with additional
treatment skills (see Linehan et al., 2006). DBT was specifically
designed to treat patients with BPD, and research to date supports its
efficacy for this disorder (Linehan, Armstrong, Suarez, Allman, & Heard,
1991; Linehan et al., 2006). In the most recent controlled trial,
Linehan et al. (2006) randomly assigned patients either to DBT or to
treatment with experts who had been nominated

594

Borderline Personality Disorder

by community health leaders as being particularly skilled in the
treatment of difficult patients. Patients in both groups received 1 full
year of treatment and were then followed up for another year. Both
groups of patients showed significant improvements in suicidal ideation
and motivation to live. Both treatments were also successful in reducing
patients' self-injurious behaviors. However, at the end of the 2 years
the rate of suicide attempts in the patients who received DBT was
significantly lower than the rate of suicide attempts in the patients
who received treatment by the expert therapists (23.1% versus 46.0%).
Patients assigned to DBT were also less likely to drop out of treatment,
and less likely to require hospitalization than were the patients who
did not receive DBT. These findings support the value of DBT, and
highlight its particular benefits with regard to reducing suicide
attempts (see also Panos, Jackson, Hasan, & Panos, 2014). Although DBT
is an extremely popular treatment, it is no longer the only empirically
validated psychological approach. In recent years, several other
treatment approaches have been developed, all of which are showing great
promise. Working from a psychodynamic perspective, Bateman and Fonagy
(2010) developed a new therapeutic approach called mentalization-based
therapy (MBT). Based on attachment theory, mentalization uses the
therapeutic relationship to help patients develop the skills they need
to accurately understand their own feelings and emotions, as well as the
feelings and emotions of others. Randomized controlled trials of
mentalization-based therapy for BPD (Bateman & Fonagy, 1999, 2001, 2009)
have revealed it to be an efficacious treatment. Moreover, many clinical
improvements seem to be maintained even after an 8-year follow-up
(Bateman & Fonagy, 2008). A randomized trial of MBT with self-harming
adolescents (the majority of whom had BPD) has also demonstrated clear
benefits compared to treatment as usual for both depression and
self-harming behaviors over 1 year (Rossouw & Fonagy, 2012).
Importantly, these clinical benefits were mediated by changes in
mentalization. Further work by researchers who are unaffiliated with the
treatment developers is now needed to more fully examine the
effectiveness of this therapeutic approach. Another promising,
psychodynamically-oriented therapy is transference-focused
psychotherapy, or TFP. Developed by Kernberg and his colleagues, this
treatment approach uses the therapeutic relationship to help the patient
understand and correct the distortions that occur in his or her
perceptions of other people. Clarification, confrontation, and
interpretation are key techniques here, with the transference
relationship between the patient and the therapist being a central focus
of interest (see Clarkin, Levy, Lenzenweger, & Kernberg, 2004). In a
clinical trial, 90 patients with BPD were randomly assigned to receive
either TFP, DBT, or supportive psychotherapy (Clarkin, Levy,
Lenzenweger, & Kernberg, 2007). After 1 year of treatment, patients in
all three groups showed significant clinical improvements in their
levels of depression, anxiety, social adjustment, and overall
functioning. Patients who received TFP and DBT also showed decreases in
suicidality. One additional advantage of TFP relative to the other forms
of treatment, however, was that it was also associated with a reduction
in anger. Other work has suggested a potential mechanism for the
benefits that BPD patients experience in the course of TFP. In a small
study of BPD patients, TFP was associated with increased activation in
areas of the brain that putatively support cognitive control and
decreases in areas thought to influence emotional reactivity (Perez et
al., 2015). The same study also found that affective lability correlated
with changes in frontolimbic function during a go/no-go task. Although
limited by the small sample size of 10 patients, as well

Treatment

595

as by the lack of a comparison group, this is a promising development.
This approach also highlights the importance of combining treatment
studies with neuroimaging to better identify and understand mechanisms
of change. Other studies, while also supporting the clinical benefits of
TFP, are further showing that schema-focused therapy (SFT) may be a
valuable treatment for patients with BPD. Schema-focused cognitive
therapy uses cognitive, behavioral, and also experiential techniques to
explore and modify four schema modes (organized sets of schemas, or
constellations, of underlying beliefs) that are thought to occur in BPD.
These are the detached protector, punitive parent, abandoned/abused
child, and angry/impulsive child modes. Patient and therapist work
together in an effort to stop these dysfunctional schemas from
controlling the patient's life. In a randomized trial, Giesen-Bloo et
al. (2006) compared the effectiveness of TFP and SFT for 88 patients in
community mental health centers. After 3 years of therapy, patients in
both groups showed clinical improvement. More specifically, both
treatments were associated with reductions in BPD symptoms, improvements
in quality of life, and decreases in dysfunctional behaviors. In many
cases, clinical improvements began to appear after 1 year of treatment.
Of note, however, is that patients who received SFT showed significantly
more clinical improvements on all measures (including borderline
symptomatology, personality pathology, and quality of life) than did
patients who received TFP. They were also significantly less likely to
drop out of treatment and significantly more likely to recover.
Cognitive analytic therapy (CAT; Ryle, 2005), a newer therapy that
resembles SFT, has shown some initial promise (Clarke, Thomas, & James,
2013), and is worthy of further study. Many of the treatments we have
just described, including DBT, require significant and specialized
clinical training to administer. However, a new approach called general
psychiatric management (GPM; Gunderson & Links, 2014) may offer a more
accessible alternative. GPM relies on six general principles (e.g., an
active and nonreactive clinician style, support and validation, case
management, and a collaborative agreement to monitor change and
effectiveness of treatment) and can be learned fairly easily by
individuals who are already clinically trained (Links, Ross, &
Gunderson, 2015). Although research on GPM is still in its infancy, in a
randomized, year-long, single-blind trial, results for GPM were
comparable to DBT across several indices, including general measures of
borderline symptoms, care utilization, depression, and distress (McMain
et al., 2009). Improvements in self-injury, care utilization,
depression, and borderline symptoms were also maintained at 2-year
follow-up (McMain, Guimond, Streiner, Cardish, & Links, 2012).
Similarly, Systems Training for Emotional Predictability and Problem
Solving (STEPPS; Blum, Bartels, St. John, & Pfohl, 2002) provides an
easily-disseminated group addition to treatment as usual (TAU). STEPPS
incorporates skills training (like DBT) and cognitive-behavioral
therapy, as well as a systems approach. Although not designed to be used
as a stand-alone treatment, STEPPS has been shown to provide incremental
benefits when added to regular care (Blum et al., 2008). It is unclear
how STEPPS might fare when compared to specialized treatments for BPD.
However, most specialized treatments for BPD are difficult to
disseminate and have significant training burdens. STEPPS may provide a
way to reach a greater number of patients. Reflecting this, STEPPS is
now widely used in the Netherlands (van Wel et al., 2006). Within this
climate of optimism, we wish to caution readers that not all therapeutic
approaches have been found to provide significant benefits to patients
with BPD.

596

Borderline Personality Disorder

Davidson et al. (2006) randomly assigned 106 patients with BPD to either
TAU or TAU plus cognitive-behavioral therapy. In CBT, patients were
helped to develop new and more adaptive beliefs about themselves as well
as behavioral strategies that would improve their social and emotional
well-being. Major targets of clinical intervention were patients' core
beliefs as well as typical behaviors that got in the way of adaptive
functioning. At the end of the 12-month treatment period (during which
patients attended an average of 16 sessions), patients who had received
CBT in addition to TAU were no better off than patients who had received
only TAU on a broad range of outcomes measures. These included the
presence or absence of suicide attempts, self-harming behaviors,
depressed mood, and interpersonal and social functioning. Overall, the
findings from this rigorously conducted trial are disappointing. They
attest to the difficulties inherent in getting patients to engage in
treatment, and suggest that for many patients, long-term intensive
treatment may need to be provided for any real clinical gains to occur.
The increasing number of specific treatment interventions (each with its
own acronym) makes treatment decisions inherently complex. Such
diversity may also hinder coherence in our understanding of why and how
treatments for BPD work. Paris (2015) argues that many of these
treatments share important commonalities (e.g., most focus on emotion
regulation and behavioral and interpersonal skills), and that an
integrated treatment approach may be warranted. Ironically, the fact
that we now have so many cooks in the kitchen may actually be limiting
the development of more effective treatments for BPD.

Summary and Future Directions Despite BPD being the most researched form
of personality disorder, a full understanding of it remains elusive.
Although we can reliably diagnose it, its core aspects are still the
subject of debate. We also know little about its etiology, although it
is almost certainly the result of the interaction of genetic,
neurophysiological, psychological, and environmental factors. Finally,
although medications and psychological treatments offer a great deal of
help for BPD sufferers, we still have much to learn. BPD is
characterized by disturbances in a broad range of systems. This makes a
full understanding of its nature both difficult and challenging. Genetic
factors are likely to play an important role in the etiology of the
disorder; early life experiences of abuse and trauma are also
implicated. Yet many people who suffer from BPD do not have childhood
histories of maltreatment. In some cases, it may simply be that genetic
factors render patients especially sensitive to other, less malevolent
(and common) forms of parental failure, such as invalidation or lack of
empathic attunement. It is also possible that there is a pathway to BPD
that is based primarily on genetic vulnerability and in which
environmental factors play a more limited role. Because biological and
environmental factors are so inextricably linked, the clinical
heterogeneity of BPD may actually be illustrating the range of outcomes
that can result when temperamentally vulnerable individuals sustain
damage from the psychosocial environment. Animal research has made it
clear that adverse circumstances occurring during early development can
have a permanent effect on the HPA axis, neurotransmitter systems, and
cognitive functioning, as well as on attachment relationships and social
adjustment (Fish et al., 2004; Oitzl, Workel, Fluttert, Frosch, & de
Kloet, 2000). We need to learn

Summary and Future Directions

597

more about the consequences of trauma and other forms of psychosocial
damage on the developing brain. We also need to use genomic methods to
further identify which genetic polymorphisms might be associated with
differential reactivity to aversive early environments. We believe that
even the most complicated of clinical pictures can be assessed and
connected back to basic psychological systems and processes (Lenzenweger
& Hooley, 2003). Studying endophenotypes may be especially valuable in
this endeavor. An endophenotype is a variable that can be measured or
indexed and that is thought to lie along the pathway between the
genotype and the disease (see Gottesman & Gould, 2003; Lenzenweger &
Cicchetti, 2005). This could be a neurobiological, endocrinological,
neuroanatomical, neuropsychological, or cognitive process. The rationale
for studying endophenotypes (e.g., people who show problems with
inhibitory processes on neuropsychological tests or people who have
chronic high negative affect) rather than people with the disorder
itself is that the endophenotype (because it is a simpler clue) may lead
researchers closer to the genetic underpinnings of the disorder. Quite
commonly used in schizophrenia research, the endophenotype concept, as
Lenzenweger and Cicchetti (2005) note, may have much to offer those who
wish to understand BPD. We would like to end by making a call for more
research in two key areas. The fact that our field knows so little about
men with BPD is a major source of concern. Going forward, much more
attention must be devoted to learning about the influence of gender on
the disorder. Future research efforts also need to explore BPD in its
earliest stages and identify the prodromal signs of the disorder. In all
probability, the events that set the stage for the development of BPD
happen early. If we can study these events and their biological and
psychological sequelae closer in time to when they occur, we may gain
much leverage in the research process. In so doing, we may also be
better placed to reduce the years of suffering that people with BPD have
to endure.

References Adler, G., & Buie, D. H., Jr. (1979). Aloneness and
borderline psychopathology: The possible relevance of child development
issues. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 60, 83--96. Akiskal, H.
S. (2002). The bipolar spectrum---the shaping of a new paradigm in
psychiatry. Current Psychiatry Reports, 4, 1--3. Akiskal, H. S., Chen,
S. E., Davis, G. C., Puzantian, V. R., Kashgarian, M., & Bolinger, J. M.
(1985). Borderline: An adjective in search of a noun. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 46, 41--48. Amad, A., Ramoz, N., Thomas, P.,
Jardri, R., & Gorwood, P. (2014). Genetics of borderline personality
disorder: Systematic review and proposal of an integrative model.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 40, 6--19. American Psychiatric
Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric
Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author. American
Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Arntz, A., Appels,
C., & Sieswerda, S. (2000). Hypervigilance in borderline personality
disorder: A test with the emotional Stroop paradigm. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 14(4), 366--373. Arntz, A., Meeren, M., & Wessel,
I. (2002). No evidence for overgeneral memories in borderline
personality disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40(9), 1063--1068.
Arntz, A., & Veen, G. (2001). Evaluations of others by borderline
patients. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 189, 513--521. Åsberg,
M. (1997). Neurotransmitters and suicidal behavior: The evidence from
cerebrospinal fluid studies. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
836, 158--181. Asnaani, A., Chelminski, I., Young, D., & Zimmerman, M.
(2007). Heterogeneity of borderline personality disorder: Do the number
of criteria met make

a difference? Journal of Personality Disorders, 21, 615--625. Bandelow,
B., Broocks, A., Hajak, G., Krause, J., Wedekind, D., & Rüther, E.
(2005). Early traumatic life events, parental attitudes, family history,
and birth risk factors in patients with borderline personality disorder
and healthy controls. Psychiatry Research, 134(2), 169--179. Barker, V.,
Romaniuk, L., Cardinal, R. N., Pope, M., Nicol, K., & Hall, K. (2015).
Impulsivity in borderline personality disorder. Psychological Medicine,
45(9), 1955--1964. Barnow, S., Stopsack, M., Grabe, H. J., Meinke, C.,
Spitzer, C., Kronmuller, K., & Sieswerda, S. (2009). Interpersonal
evaluation bias in borderline personality disorder. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 47, 359--365. Bartz, J., Simeon, D., Hamilton, H., Kim, S.,
Crystal, S., Braun, A., ... Hollander, E. (2010). Oxytocin can hinder
trust and cooperation in borderline personality disorder. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience. Advance online publication. doi:
10.1093/ scan/nsq085 Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (1999). Effectiveness
of partial hospitalization in the treatment of borderline personality
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry,
156, 1563--1569. Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2001). Treatment of
borderline personality disorder with psychoanalytically oriented partial
hospitalization: An 18-month follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry,
158, 36--42. Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2003). The development of an
attachment-based treatment program for borderline personality disorder.
Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 67, 187--211. Bateman, A., & Fonagy,
P. (2008). 8-year follow-up of patients treated for borderline
personality disorder: Mentalization-based treatment versus treatment as
usual. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 631--638. Bateman, A. W., &
Fonagy, P. (2009). Randomized controlled trial of outpatient
mentalization-based treatment versus structured clinical management for
borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166,
1355--1364.

598

References Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2010). Mentalization based
treatment for borderline personality disorder. World Psychiatry, 9,
11--15. Bazanis, E., Rogers, R. D., Dowson, J. H., Taylor, P., Meux, C.,
Staley, C., ... Sahakian, B. J. (2002). Neurocognitive deficits in
decision-making and planning of patients with DSM-III-R borderline
personality disorder. Psychological Medicine, 32, 1395--1405. Beeney, J.
E., Stepp, S. D., Hallquist, M. N., Scott, L. N., Wright, A. G. C.,
Ellison, W. D., ... Pilkonis, A. (2015). Attachment and social cognition
in borderline personality disorder: Specificity in relation to
antisocial and avoidant personality disorders. Personality Disorders:
Theory, Research, and Treatment, 6(3), 207--215. Bender, D. S., Dolan,
R. T., Skodol, A. E., Sanislow, C. A., Dyck, I. R., McGlashan, T. H.,
... Gunderson, J. G. (2001). Treatment utilization by patients with
personality disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 295--302.
Bender, D. S., Farber, B. A., Sanislow, C. A., Dyck, I. R., Geller, J.
D., & Skodol, A. E. (2003). Representations of therapists by patients
with personality disorders. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 57,
219--236. Bennett, A. J., Lesch, K. P., Heils, A., Long, J. C., Lorenz,
J. G., Shoaf, S. E., ... Higley, J. D. (2002). Early experience and
serotonin transporter gene variation interact to influence primate CNS
function. Molecular Psychiatry, 7, 118--122. Berlin, H. A., Rolls, E.
T., & Iversen, S. D. (2005). Borderline personality disorder:
Impulsivity and the orbitofrontal cortex. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 162, 2360--2373. Bertsch, K., Gamer, M., Schmidt, B.,
Schmidinger, I., Walther, S., Kastel, T., ... Herpertz, S. C. (2013).
Oxytocin and reduction of social threat hypersensitivity in women with
borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
170(10), 1169--1177. Bertsch, K., Schmidinger, I., Neumann, I. D., &
Herpertz, S. C. (2013). Reduced plasma oxytocin levels in female
patients with borderline personality disorder. Hormones and Behavior,
63(3), 424--429. Bhatia, V., Davila, J., Eubanks-Carter, C., & Burckell,
L. A. (2013). Appraisals of daily romantic relationship experiences in
individuals with borderline personality disorder features. Journal of
Family Psychology, 27(3), 519--524.

599

Biskin, R. S. (2015). The lifetime course of personality disorder.
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 60(7), 303--308. Bjork, R. A. (1989).
Retrieval inhibition as an adaptive mechanism in human memory. In H. L.
Roediger & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and consciousness:
Essays in honor of Endel Tulving (pp. 309--330). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Black, D. W., Zanarini, M. C., Romine, A., Shaw, M., Allen, J., &
Schulz, S. C. (2014). Comparison of low and moderate dosages of
extended-release quetiapine in borderline personality disorder: A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 171(11), 1174--1182. Blum, N., Bartels, N., St. John, D., &
Pfohl, B. (2002). STEPPS: Systems Training for Emotional Predictability
and Problem Solving: Group treatment for borderline personality
disorder. Coralville, IA: Blum's Books. Blum, N., St. John, D., Pfohl,
B., Stuart, S., McCormick, B., Allen, J., ... Black, D. W. (2008).
Systems Training for Emotional Predictability and Problem Solving
(STEPPS) for outpatients with borderline personality disorder: A
randomized controlled trial and 1-year follow-up. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 165(4), 468--478. Bøen, E., Westlye, L. T., Elvsashagen, T.,
Hummelen, B., Hol, P. K., Boye, B., ... Malt, U. F. (2014). Regional
cortical thinning may be a biological marker for borderline personality
disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 130(3), 193--204. Boggs, C.
D., Morey, L. C., Skodol, A. E., Shea, M. T., Sanislow, C. A., Grilo, C.
M., ... Gunderson, J. G. (2009). Differential impairment as an indicator
of sex bias in DSM-IV criteria for four personality disorders.
Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, S(1), 61--68.
Bondy, B., Erfurth, A., deJonge, S., Kruger, M., & Meyer, H. (2000).
Possible association of the short allele of the serotonin transporter
promoter gene polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) with violent suicide. Molecular
Psychiatry, 5, 193--195. Bowen, R. C., Balbuena, L., & Baetz, M. (2014).
Lamotrigine reduces affective instability in depressed patients with
mixed mood and anxiety disorders. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 34(6), 747--749. Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and
loss: Vol. 2. Separation. New York, NY: Basic Books.

600

Borderline Personality Disorder

Bowlby, J. (1977). The making and breaking of affectional bonds: I.
Aetiology and psychopathology in the light of attachment theory. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 130, 201--210. Bremner, J. D. (2002). Structural
changes in the brain in depression and relationship to symptom
recurrence. CNS Spectrums, 7, 129--130, 135--139. Brendel, G. R., Stern,
E., & Silbersweig, D. A. (2005). Defining the neurocircuitry of
borderline personality disorder: Functional neuroimaging approaches.
Developmental Psychopathology, 17, 1197--1206. Bridler, R., Haberle, A.,
Muller, S. T., Cattapan, K., Grohmann, R., Toto, S., ... Greil, W.
(2015). Psychopharmacological treatment of 2195 in-patients with
borderline personality disorder: A comparison with other psychiatric
approaches. Neuropsychopharmacology, 25(6), 763--772. Brune, M., Ebert,
A., Kolb, M., Tas, C., Edel, M. A., & Roser, P. (2013). Oxytocin
influences avoidant reactions to social threat in adults with borderline
personality disorder. Human Psychopharmacology, Clinical and
Experimental, 28(6), 552--561. Brunner, R., Henze, R., Parzer, P.,
Kramer, J., Feigl, N., Lutz, K., ... Stieltjes, B. (2010). Reduced
prefrontal and orbitofrontal gray matter in female adolescents with
borderline personality disorder: Is it disorder specific? NeuroImage,
49, 114--120. Buie, D. H., & Adler, G. (1982). Definitive treatment of
the borderline personality. International Journal of Psychoanalytic
Psychotherapy, 9, 51--87. Calati, R., Gressier, F., Balestri, M, &
Serretti, A. (2013). Genetic modulation of borderline personality
disorder: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 47(10), 1275--1287. Carcone, D., Tokarz, V. L., & Ruocco, A.
C. (2015). A systematic review on the reliability and validity of
semistructured diagnostic interviews for borderline personality
disorder. Canadian Psychology, 56(2), 208--226. Casey, B. J.,
Castellanos, F. X., Giedd, J. N., Marsh, W. L., Hamburger, S. D.,
Schubert, A. B., ... Rapoport, J. L. (1997). Implication of right
frontostriatal circuitry in response inhibition and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 374--383. Caspi, A.,
McClay, J., Moffitt, T. E., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W., ...
Poulton, R. (2002). Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in
maltreated children. Science, 297, 851--854.

Chanen, A. M., Velakoulis, D., Carison, K., Gaunson, K., Wood, S. J.,
Yuen, H. P., ... Pantelis, C. (2008). Orbitofrontal, amygdala and
hippocampal volumes in teenagers with first-presentation borderline
personality disorder. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 163, 116--125.
Choi-Kain, L. W., & Gunderson, J. G. (Eds.). (2015). Borderline
personality disorders and mood disorders: Comorbidity and controversy.
New York, NY: Springer. Cicchetti, D., Rogosch, F. A., Hecht, K. F.,
Crick, N. R., & Hetzel, S. (2014). Moderation of maltreatment effects on
childhood borderline personality symptoms by gender and oxytocin
receptor and FK506 binding protein 5 genes. Development and
Psychopathology, 26(3), 831--849. Clark, L. A. (2009). Schedule for
Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality--Second Edition (SNAP-2) (2nd ed.).
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Clarke, S., Thomas, P., &
James, K. (2013). Cognitive analytic therapy for personality disorders:
Randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 202(2),
129--134. Clarkin, J. F., Levy, K. N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kernberg,
O. F. (2004). The Personality Disorders Institute/Borderline Personality
Disorder Research Foundation randomized control trial for borderline
personality disorder: Rationale, methods, and patient characteristics.
Journal of Personality Disorders, 18, 52--72. Clarkin, J. F., Levy, K.
N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kernberg, O. F. (2007). Evaluating three
treatments for borderline personality disorder: A multiwave study.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 922--928. Cloninger, C. R. (2000).
Biology of personality dimensions. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 13,
611--616. Coccaro, E. F., Lee, R., & McClosky, M. (2003). Norepinephrine
function in personality disorder: Plasma free MHPG correlates inversely
with a life history of aggression. CNS Spectrums, 8, 731--736. Coccaro,
E. F., Siever, L. J., Klar, H. M., & Maurer, G. (1989). Serotonergic
studies in patients with affective and personality disorders: Correlates
with suicidal and impulsive aggressive behavior. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 46, 587--599. Coid, J., Yang, M., Tyrer, P. T., Roberts, A.,
& Ullrich, S. (2006). Prevalence and correlates of personality disorder
in Great Britain. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188, 423--431.

References Cornelius, J. R., Soloff, P. H., Perel, J. M., & Ulrich, R.
F. (1991). A preliminary trial of fluoxetine in refractory borderline
patients. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 11(2), 116--120.
Corruble, E., Ginestet, D., & Guelfi, J. D. (1996). Comorbidity of
personality disorders and unipolar major depression: A review. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 37, 157--170. Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R.
(1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R) and NEO FiveFactor
Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources. Davidson, K., Norrie, J., Tyrer, P., Gumley, A.,
Tata, P., Murray, H., & Palmer, S. (2006). The effectiveness of
cognitive behavior therapy for borderline personality disorder: Results
from the borderline personality disorder study of cognitive therapy.
Journal of Personality Disorders, 20, 450--465. Davidson, R. J. (2002).
Anxiety and affective style: Role of prefrontal cortex and amygdala.
Biological Psychiatry, 51, 68--80. Davidson, R. J., Putnam, K. M., &
Larson, C. L. (2000). Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotion
regulation---a possible prelude to violence. Science, 289, 591--594. De
Dreu, C. K. W. (2012). Oxytocin modulates the link between adult
attachment and cooperation through reduced betrayal aversion.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 32, 871--880. de Reus, R. J. M., van den Berg,
J. F., & Emmelkamp, P. M. G. (2013). Personality Diagnostic
Questionnaire 4+ is not useful as a screener in clinical practice.
Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 20, 49--54. Depue, R. A., &
Lenzenweger, M. F. (2005). A neurobehavioral model of personality
disturbance. In J. F. Clarkin & M. F. Lenzenweger (Eds.), Major theories
of personality disorder (2nd ed., pp. 391--453). New York, NY: Guilford
Press. Distel, M. A., Rebollo-Mesa, I., Willemsen, G., Derom, C. A.,
Trull, T. J., Martin, N. G., & Boomsma, D. I. (2009). Familial
resemblance of borderline personality disorder features: Genetic or
cultural transmission? PLoS ONE, 4(4). Domes, G., Winter, B., Schnell,
K., Vohs, K., Fast, K., & Herpertz, S. C. (2006). The influence of
emotions on inhibitory functioning in borderline personality disorder.
Psychological Medicine, 36, 1163--1172. Donegan, N. H., Sanislow, C. A.,
Blumberg, H. P., Fulbright, R. K., Lacadie, C., Skudlarski, P., ...
Wexler, B. E. (2003). Amygdala hyperreactivity

601

in borderline personality disorder: Implications for emotional
dysregulation. Biological Psychiatry, 54, 1284--1293. Driessen, M.,
Herrmann, J., Stahl, K., Zwaan, M., Meier, S., Hill, A., ... Petersen,
D. (2000). Magnetic resonance imaging volume of the hippocampus and the
amygdala in women with borderline personality disorder and early
traumatization. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 1115--1122. Eaton,
N. R., Krueger, R. F., Keyes, K. M., Skodol, A. E., Markon, K. E., &
Grant., B. F. (2010). Borderline personality disorder comorbidity:
Relationship to the internalizing-externalizing structure of common
mental disorders. Psychological Medicine, 41, 1041--1050. Ebert, A.,
Kolbe, M., Heller, J., Edel, M. A., Roser, P., & Brune, M. (2013).
Modulation of interpersonal trust in borderline personality disorder by
intranasal oxytocin and childhood trauma. Social Neuroscience, 8(4),
305--313. Ebstein, R. P., Benjamin, J., & Belmaker, R. H. (2000).
Personality and polymorphisms of genes involved in aminergic
neurotransmission. European Journal of Pharmacology, 410, 205--214. Fan,
J., McCandliss, B. D., Sommer, T., Raz, M., & Posner, M. I. (2002).
Testing the efficiency and independence of attentional networks. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3(14), 340--347. Feldman, R., Gordon, I.,
Influs, M., Gutbir, T., & Ebstein, R. P. (2013). Parental oxytocin and
early caregiving jointly shape children's oxytocin response and social
reciprocity. Neuropharmacology, 38(7), 1154--1162. Fertuck, E. A.,
Grinband, J., & Stanley, B. (2013). Facial trust appraisal negatively
biased in borderline personality disorder. Psychiatry Research, 207(3),
195--202. Fertuck, E., Lenzenweger, M., & Clarkin, J. (2005) The
association between attentional and executive controls in the expression
of borderline personality disorder features: A preliminary study.
Psychopathology, 38(2), 75--81. Fertuck, E. A., Lenzenweger, M. F.,
Clarkin, J. F., Hoermann, S., & Stanley, B. (2006). Executive
neurocognition, memory systems, and borderline personality disorder.
Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 346--375. Few, L. R., Miller, J. D.,
Grant, J. D., Maples, J., Trull, T. J., Nelson, E. C., ... Agrawal, A.
(2016). Traitbased assessment of borderline personality disorder

602

Borderline Personality Disorder

using the NEO Five-Factor Inventory: Phenotypic and genetic support.
Psychological Assessment, 1, 39--50. First, M., Gibbon, M., Spitzer, R.
L., Williams, J. B. W., & Benjamin, L. S. (1997). User's guide for the
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Fish, E. W., Shahrokh, D.,
Bagot, R., Caldji, C., Bredy, T., Szyf, M., & Meaney, M. J. (2004).
Epigenetic programming of stress responses through variations in
maternal care. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1036,
167--180. Fossati, A., Maffei, C., Bagnato, M., Donati, D., Donini, M.,
Fiorilli, M., ... Ansoldi, M. (1998). Brief communication: Criterion
validity of the Personality Diagnostic Questionnaire--4+ (PDQ-4+) in a
mixed psychiatric sample. Journal of Personality Disorders, 12(2),
172--178. Francis, D. D., & Meaney, M. J. (1999). Maternal care and the
development of stress responses. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 9,
128--134. Frankle, W. G., Lombardo, I., New, A. S., Goodman, M., Talbot,
P. S., Huang, Y., ... Siever, L. J. (2005). Brain serotonin transporter
distribution in subjects with impulsive aggressivity: A positron
emission study with \[11 C\]McN 5652. American Journal of Psychiatry,
162, 915--923. Franzen, N., Hagenhoff, M., Baer, N., Schmidt, A., Mier,
D., Sammer, G., ... Lis, S. (2011). Superior "theory of mind" in
borderline personality disorder: An analysis of interaction behavior in
a virtual trust game. Psychiatry Research, 187, 224--233. Friedel, R. O.
(2004). Dopamine dysfunction in borderline personality disorder: A
hypothesis. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 1029--1039. Fruzzetti, A. E.,
Shenk, C., & Hoffman, P. D. (2005). Family interaction and the
development of borderline personality disorder: A transitional model.
Development Psychopathology, 17, 1007--1030. Gabbard, G. O. (2005).
Mind, brain, and personality disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry,
162, 648--655. Giesen-Bloo, J., van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van
Tilberg, W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., ... Arntz, A. (2006).
Outpatient psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Randomized
trial of schemafocused therapy vs transference focused psychotherapy.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 649--658.

Glaser, J. P., Van Os, J., Thewissen, V., & Myin-Germeys, I. (2010).
Psychotic reactivity in borderline personality disorder. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 121, 125--134. Goodman, M., New, A., &
Siever, L. (2004). Trauma, genes, and the neurobiology of personality
disorders. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1032, 104--116.
Gottesman, I. I., & Gould, T. D. (2003). The endophenotype concept in
psychiatry: Etymology and strategic intentions. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 160, 636--645. Grinker, R., Werble, B., & Drye, R. (1968).
The borderline syndrome: A behavioral study of ego functions. New York,
NY: Basic Books. Gunderson, J. G. (1996). The borderline patient's
intolerance of aloneness: Insecure attachments and therapist
availability. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153(6), 752--758.
Gunderson, J. G. (2001). Borderline personality disorder: A clinical
guide. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing. Gunderson, J. G.
(2010). Revising the borderline diagnosis for DSM-V: An alternative
proposal. Journal of Personality Disorders, 24, 694--708. Gunderson, J.
G., Kolb, J. E., & Austin, V. (1981). The diagnostic interview for
borderline patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 138, 896--903.
Gunderson, J. G., & Links, P. (2014). Handbook of good psychiatric
management for borderline personality disorder. Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Publishing. Gunderson, J. G., & Phillips, K. A. (1991). A
current view of the interface between borderline personality disorder
and depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 48, 967--975. Gunderson,
J. G., & Sabo, A. N. (1993). The phenomenological and conceptual
interface between borderline personality and PTSD. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 150, 19--27. Gunderson, J. G., & Singer, M. (1975). Defining
borderline patients: An overview. American Journal of Psychiatry, 132,
1--10. Gunderson, J. G., Stout, R. L., McGlashan, T. H., Shea, M. T.,
Morey, L. C., Grilo, C. M., ... Skodol, A. E. (2011). Ten-year course of
borderline personality disorder: Psychopathology and function from the
Collaborative Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 68(8), 827--837.

References Gurvits, I. G., Koenigsberg, H. W., & Siever, L. J. (2000).
Neurotransmitter dysfunction in patients with borderline personality
disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 23(1), 27--40. Hammen,
C., Bower, J. E., & Cole, S. W. (2015). Oxytocin receptor gene variation
and differential susceptibility to family environment in predicting
youth borderline symptoms. Journal of Personality Disorders, 29(2),
177--192. Hazlett, E. A., New, A. S., Newmark, R., Haznedar, M. M., Lo,
J. N., Speiser, L. J., ... Buchsbaum, M. S. (2005). Reduced anterior and
posterior cingulated gray matter in borderline personality disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 58, 614--623. Heaton, R. K. (1981). Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment
Resources. Heim, C., Newport, C. J., Heit, S., Graham, Y. P., Wilcox,
M., Bonsall, R., ... Nemeroff, C. B. (2000). Pituitary, adrenal and
autonomic responses to stress in women after sexual and physical abuse
in childhood. JAMA, 284, 592--597. Herman, J., Perry, J., & van der
Kolk, B. (1989). Childhood trauma in borderline personality disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 490--495. Herpertz, S. C., &
Bertsch, K. (2015). A new perspective on the pathophysiology of
borderline personality disorder: A model of the role of oxytocin.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 172(9), 840--851. Herpertz, S. C.,
Dietrich, T. M., Wenning, B., Krings, T., Erberich, S. G., Willmes, K.,
... Sass, H. (2001). Evidence of abnormal amygdala functioning in
borderline personality disorder: A functional MRI study. Biological
Psychiatry, 50, 292--298. Higley, J. D., Suomi, S. J., & Linnoila, M.
(1991). CSF monoamine metabolite concentrations vary according to age,
rearing, and sex, and are influenced by the stressor of social
separation in rhesus monkeys. Psychopharmacology, 103, 551--556. Hoch,
P., & Polantin, P. (1949). Pseudo neurotic forms of schizophrenia.
Psychiatric Quarterly, 23, 248--276. Hochhausen, N., Lorenz, A., &
Newman, J. (2002) Specifying the impulsivity of female inmates with
borderline personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111(3),
495--501. Hoefgen, B., Schulze, T. G., Ohlraun, S., von Widdern, O.,
Hofels, S., Gross, M., ... Rietschel, M. (2005). The power of sample
size and homogenous sampling:

603

Association between the 5-HTTLPR serotonin transporter polymorphism and
major depressive disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 247--251. Hooley,
J. M. (2007). Expressed emotion and relapse of psychopathology. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 3, 329--352. doi: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy
.2.022305.095236 Hooley, J. M., Gruber, S. A., Parker, H. A.,
Guillaumot, J., Rogowska, J., & Yurgelun-Todd, D. A. (2010). Neural
processing of emotional overinvolvement in borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71, 1017--1024. Hooley, J. M.,
& Hoffman, P. D. (1999). Expressed emotion and clinical outcome in
borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156,
1557--1562. Hooley, J. M., & Wilson-Murphy, M. (2012). Adult attachment
to transitional objects and borderline personality disorder. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 26, 179--191. Hopwood, C. J., Morey, L. C.,
Edelen, M. O., Shea, M. T., Grilo, C. M., Sanislow, C. A., ... Skodol,
A. E. (2008). A comparison of interview and selfreport methods for the
assessment of borderline personality disorder criteria. Psychological
Assessment, 20, 81--85. Hunt, C., & Andrews, G. (1992). Measuring
personality disorder: The use of self-report questionnaires. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 6, 125--133. Hurt, S. W., Hyler, S. E., Frances,
A., Clarkin, J. F., & Brent, R. (1984). Assessing borderline
personality-disorder with self-report, clinical interview, or
semistructured interview. American Journal of Psychiatry, 141(10),
1228--1231. Hyler, S. E., Skodol, A. E., Oldham, J. M., Kellman, H. D.,
& Doidge, N. (1992). Validity of the Personality Diagnostic
Questionnaire--Revised: A replication in an outpatient sample.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 33, 73--77. Hyman, S. E. (2002). A new
beginning for research on borderline personality disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 51, 933--935. Jacobsberg, L., Perry, S., & Frances, A.
(1995). Diagnostic agreement between the SCID-II screening questionnaire
and the Personality Disorder Examination. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 65(3), 428--433. Jane, J. S., Oltmanns, T. F., South, S. C.,
& Turkheimer, E. (2007). Gender bias in diagnostic criteria for

604

Borderline Personality Disorder

personality disorders: An item response theory analysis. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 116, 166 --175. Jang, K. L., Livesley, W. J.,
Vernon, P. A., & Jackson, D. N. (1996). Heritability of personality
disorder traits: A twin study. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 94,
438--444. Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Brown, J., Smailes, E. M., &
Bernstein, D. P. (1999). Childhood maltreatment increases risk for
personality disorders during early adulthood. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 56, 600--606. Jones, B., Heard, H., Startup, M., Swales, M.,
Williams, J., & Jones, R. (1999). Autobiographical memory and
dissociation in borderline personality disorder. Psychological Medicine,
29(6), 1397--1404. Joyce, P. R., McHugh, P. C., Light, K. J., Rowe, S.,
Miller, A. L., & Kennedy, M. A. (2009). Relationships between
angry-impulsive personality traits and genetic polymorphisms of the
dopamine transporter. Biological Psychiatry, 66, 717--721. Joyce, P. R.,
Stephenson, J., Kennedy, M., Mulder, R. T., & McHugh, P. C. (2014). The
presence of both serotonin 1A reception (HTR1A) and dopamine transporter
(DAD1) gene variants increase the risk of borderline personality
disorder. Frontiers in Genetics, 4. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00313.
Kamphausen, S., Schroder, P., Maier, S., Bader, K., Feige, B., Kaller,
C., ... Tuscher, O. (2013). Medial prefrontal dysfunction and prolonged
amygdala response during instructed fear processing in borderline
personality disorder. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 14(4),
307--318. Keri, S., & Kiss, I. (2011). Oxytocin response in a trust game
and habituation of arousal. Physiology and Behavior, 102, 221--224.
Kernberg, O. (1967). Borderline personality organization. Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association, 15, 641--675. Kernberg, O. (1975).
Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism. New York, NY:
Aronson. King-Casas, B., Sharp, C., Lomax-Bream, L., Lohrenz, T.,
Fonagy, P., & Montague, P. R. (2008). The rupture and repair of
cooperation in borderline personality disorder. Science, 321, 806--810.
Knight, R. (1953). Borderline states. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic,
17, 1--12. Kohut, H. (1971). The analysis of the self: A systematic
approach to the treatment of narcissistic personality disorders. New
York, NY: International Universities Press.

Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self . New York, NY:
International Universities Press. Korfine, L., & Hooley, J. (2000).
Directed forgetting of emotional stimuli in borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109(2), 214--221. Kosfeld, M.,
Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005). Oxytocin
increases trust in humans. Nature, 435(2), 673--676. Krause-Utz, A.,
Winter, D., Niedtfeld, & Schmahl, C. (2014). The latest neuroimaging
findings in borderline personality disorder. Current Psychiatry Reports,
16, 438. LeDoux, J. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious
underpinnings of emotional life. New York, NY: Touchstone. Leichsenring,
F. (1999). Development and first results of the Borderline Personality
Inventory: A self-report instrument for assessing borderline personality
organization. Journal of Personality Assessment, 73, 45--63.
Lenzenweger, M. F., & Cicchetti, D. (2005). Toward a developmental
psychopathology approach to borderline personality disorder. Development
and Psychopathology, 17, 893--898. Lenzenweger, M. F., Clarkin, J. F.,
Fertuck, E. A., & Kernberg, O. F. (2004). Executive neurocognitive
functioning and neurobehavioral systems indicators in borderline
personality disorder: A preliminary study. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 18(5), 421--438. Lenzenweger, M. F., & Hooley, J. M. (Eds.).
(2003). Principles of experimental psychopathology: Essays in honor of
Brendan A. Maher. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lenzenweger, M. F., Lane, M. C., Loranger, A. W., & Kessler, R. C.
(2007). DSM-IV personality disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 62(6), 553--564. Levy, K. N. (2005).
The implications of attachment theory and research for understanding
borderline personality disorder. Development and Psychopathology, 17,
959--986. Leyton, M., Okazawa, H., Diksic, D., Paris, J., Rosa, P.,
Mzengeza, S., ... Benkelfat, C. (2001). Brain regional α-\[11
C\]methyl-L-tryptophan trapping in impulsive subjects with borderline
personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 775--782.
Lieb, K., Rexhausen, J. E., Kahl, K. G., Schweiger, U., Philipsen, A.,
Hellhammer, D. M., & Bohus, M. (2004). Increased diurnal salivary
cortisol in women

References with borderline personality disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 38, 559--565. Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral
treatment of borderline personality disorder: The dialectics of
effective treatment. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Linehan, M. M.,
Armstrong, H. E., Suarez, A., Allman, D. A., & Heard, H. L. (1991).
Cognitive-behavioral treatment of chronically parasuicidal borderline
patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1060--1064. Linehan, M.
M., Comtois, C. A., Murray, A. M., Brown, M. Z., Gallop, R. J., Heard,
H. L., ... Lindenboim, N. (2006). Two-year randomized controlled trial
and follow-up of dialectical behavior therapy vs therapy by experts for
suicidal behaviors and borderline personality disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 63, 757--766. Links, P. S., Ross, J., & Gunderson,
J. G. (2015). Promoting good psychiatric management for patients with
borderline personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 71(8),
753--763. Links, P., Steiner, M., Boiago, I., & Irwin, D. (1990).
Lithium therapy for borderline patients: Preliminary findings. Journal
of Personality Disorders, 2, 14--20. Lischke, A., Domin, M., Freyberger,
H. J., Grabe, H. J., Mentel, R., Berhnheim, D., & Lotze, M. (2015).
Structural alterations in white-matter tracts connecting (para-)limbic
and prefrontal brain regions in borderline personality disorder.
Psychological Medicine, 45(15), 3171--3180. Livesley, W. J., Jang, K.
L., Jackson, D. N., & Vernon, P. A. (1993). Genetic and environmental
contributions to dimensions of personality disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 150, 1826--1831. Lloyd, C., Overall, J. E., Kimsey, L. R., &
Click, M. (1983). A comparison of the MMPI-168 profiles of borderline
and nonborderline outpatients. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
171, 207--215. Loranger, A. W. (1999). International Personality
Disorder Examination (IPDE). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment
Resources. Loranger, A. W., Sartorius, N., Andreoli, A., Berger, P.,
Buckheim, P., & Channabasavanna, S., ... Regier, D. A. (1994). The
International Personality Disorders Examination: The World Health
Organization/ Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration
international pilot study of personality disorders. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 51, 215--224. Lubke, G. H., Laurin, C., Amin, N., Hottenga,
J. J., Willemson, G., van Grootheest, G., ... Boomsma,

605

D. I. (2014). Genome-wide analysis of borderline personality features.
Molecular Psychiatry, 19(8), 923--929. Lumsden, E. A. (1993). Borderline
personality disorder: A consequence of experiencing affect within a
truncated time frame? Journal of Personality Disorders, 7, 265--274.
Maier-Hein, K. H., Brunner, R., Lutz, K., Henze, R., Parzer, P., Feigl,
N., ... Stieltjes, B. (2014). Disorderspecific white matter alterations
in adolescent borderline personality disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
75(1), 81--88. Markovitz, P. J. (2004). Recent trends in the
pharmacotherapy of personality disorders. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 18, 90--101. Maurex, L., Zaboli, G., Öhman, A., Åsberg, M., &
Leopardi, R. (2010). The serotonin transporter gene polymorphism
(5-HTTLPR) and affective symptoms among women diagnosed with borderline
personality disorder. European Psychiatry, 25(1), 19--25. McDermut, W.,
& Zimmerman, M. (2005). Assessment instruments and standardized
evaluation. In J. M. Oldham, A. E. Skodol, & D. S. Bender (Eds.),
Textbook of personality disorders (pp. 89--101). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press. McGlashan, T. H., Grilo, C. M., Sanislow, C.
A., Ravelski, E., Morey, L. C., Gunderson, J. G., ... Pagano, M. (2005).
Two-year prevalence and stability of individual DSM-IV criteria for
schizotypal, borderline, avoidant, and obsessive-compulsive personality
disorders: Toward a hybrid model of Axis II disorders. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 162, 883--889. McGlashan, T. H., Grilo, C. M., Skodol, A.
E., Gunderson, J. G., Shea, M. T., Morey, L. C., ... Stout, R. L.
(2000). The Collaborative Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study:
Baseline Axis I/II and II/II diagnostic co-occurrence. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 102, 256--264. McMain, S. F., Guimond, T., Streiner, D.
L., Cardish, R. J., & Links, P. S. (2012). Dialectical behavior therapy
compared with general psychiatric management for borderline personality
disorder: Clinical outcomes and functioning over a 2-year follow-up.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(6), 650--661. McMain, S. F., Links,
P. S., Gnam, W. H., Guimond, T., Cardish, R. J., Korman, L., & Streiner,
D. L. (2009). A randomized trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus
general psychiatric management for borderline personality disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(12), 1365--1374.

606

Borderline Personality Disorder

Miano, A., Fertuck, E. A., Arntz, A., & Stanley, B. (2013). Rejection
sensitivity is a mediator between borderline personality disorder
features and facial trust appraisal. Journal of Personality Disorders,
27, 442--456. Miller, J. D., Few, L. R., Lynam, D. R., & MacKillop, J.
(2015). Pathological personality traits can capture DSM-IV personality
disorder types. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment,
6(1), 32--40. Mitchell, A. E., Dickens, G. L., & Picchioni, M. M.
(2014). Facial emotion processing in borderline personality disorder: A
systematic review and metaanalysis. Neuropsychology Review, 24(2),
166--184. Morey, L. C. (1991). The Personality Assessment Inventory
professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Nemoda, Z., Lyons-Ruth, K., Szekely, A., Bertha, E., Faludi, G., &
Sasvari-Szekely, M. (2010). Association between dopaminergic
polymorphisms and borderline personality traits among at-risk young
adults and psychiatric inpatients. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 6,
1--11. New, A. S., Buchsbaum, M. S., Hazlett, E. A., Goodman, M.,
Koenigsberg, H. W., Lo, J., ... Siever, L. J. (2004). Fluoxetine
increases metabolic rate in prefrontal cortex in impulsive aggression.
Psychopharmacology, 176, 451--458. New, A. S., Hazlett, E. A.,
Buchsbaum, M. S., Goodman, M., Mitelman, S. A., Newmark, R., ... Siever,
L. J. (2007). Amygdala-prefrontal disconnection in borderline
personality disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 32, 1629--1640. Newman,
J. P., & Kosson, D. S. (1986). Passive avoidance learning in
psychopathic and nonpsychopathic offenders. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 95, 257--263. Ni, X., Chan, K., Bulgin, N., Sicad, T.,
Bismil, R., McMain, S., & Kennedy, J. L. (2006). Association between
serotonin transporter gene and borderline personality disorder. Journal
of Psychiatric Research, 40, 448--453. Nickel, M. K., Muehlbacher, M.,
Nickel, C., Kettler, C., Pedrosa Gil, F., Bachler, E., ... Kaplan, P.
(2006). Aripiprazole in the treatment of patients with borderline
personality disorder: A double-blind, placebocontrolled study. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 833--838. Nicol, K., Pope, M.,
Sprengelmeyer, R., Young, A., & Hall, J. (2013). Social judgment in
borderline personality disorder. PLoS ONE, 8(11).

Nigg, J. T. (2000). On inhibition/disinhibition in developmental
psychopathology: Views from cognitive and personality psychology and a
working inhibition taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 220--246.
Nose, M., Cipriani, A., Biancosino, B., Grassi, L., & Barbui, C. (2006).
Efficacy of pharmacotherapy against core traits of borderline
personality disorder: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 21(6), 345--353. Nunes, P.
M., Wenzel, A., Borges, K. T., Porto, C. R., Caminha, R. M., & Reis, D.
O. (2009). Volumes of the hippocampus and amygdala in patients with
borderline personality disorder: A meta-analysis. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 23(4), 333--345. Ogata, S. N., Silk, K. R., Goodrich, S.,
Lohr, N. E., Westen, D., & Hill, E. M. (1990). Childhood sexual and
physical abuse in adult patients with borderline personality disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 1008--1013. Oitzl, M. S., Workel,
J. O., Fluttert, M., Frosch, F., & de Kloet, E. R. (2000). Maternal
deprivation affects behavior from youth to senescence: Amplification of
individual differences in spatial learning and memory in senescent Brown
Norway rats. European Journal of Neuroscience, 12, 3771--3780. Oldham,
J. M. (2006). Borderline personality disorder and suicidality. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 20--26. O'Neill, A., D'Souza, A.,
Carballedo, A., Joseph, S., Kerskens, C., & Frodl, T. (2013). Magnetic
resonance imaging in patients with borderline personality disorder: A
study of volumetric abnormalities. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging,
213(1), 1--10. Oquendo, M. A., & Mann, J. J. (2000). The biology of
impulsivity and suicidality. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 23,
11--25. Panos, P. T., Jackson, J. W., Hasan, O., & Panos, A. (2014).
Meta-analysis and systematic review assessing the efficacy of
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT). Research on Social Work Practice,
24(2), 213--223. Paris, J. (1999). Borderline personality disorder. In
T. Millon, P. H. Blaney, & R. G. Davis (Eds.), Oxford textbook of
psychopathology (628--652). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Paris, J. (2004). Borderline or bipolar? Distinguishing borderline
personality disorder from bipolar spectrum disorders. Harvard Review of
Psychiatry, 12, 140--145.

References Paris, J. (2005). Recent advances in the treatment of
borderline personality disorder. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 50,
435--441. Paris, J. (2015). Applying the principles of psychotherapy
integration to the treatment of borderline personality disorder. Journal
of Psychotherapy Integration, 25(1), 13--19. Pascual, J. P., Soler, J.,
Barrachina, J., Campins, M. J., Alvarez, E., & Pérez, V. (2008). Failure
to detect an association between the serotonin transporter gene and
borderline personality disorder. Journal of Psychiatry Research, 42,
87--88. Percudani, M., Belloni, G., Conti, A., & Barbui, C. (2002).
Monitoring community psychiatric services in Italy: Differences between
patients who leave care and those who stay in treatment. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 180, 254--259. Perez, D. L., Vago, D. R., Pan, H., Root,
J., Tuescher, O., Fuchs, B. H., ... Stern, E. (2015). Frontolimbic
neural circuit changes in emotional processing and inhibitory control
associated with clinical improvement following transference-focused
psychotherapy in borderline personality disorder. Psychiatry and
Clinical Neurosciences, 70(1), 51--61. Pfohl, B., Blum, N., & Zimmerman,
M. (1997). Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press. Pilknois, P. A. (1997). Measurement issues
relevant to personality disorders. In H. H. Strupp, M. J. Lambert, & L.
M. Horowitz (Eds.), Measuring patient change in mood, anxiety, and
personality disorders: Toward a core battery (pp. 371--388). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association. Pizzagalli, D. A., Sherwood, R.
J., Henriques, J. B., & Davidson, R. J. (2005). Frontal brain asymmetry
and reward responsiveness: A source-localization study. Psychological
Science, 16, 805--813. Posner, M. I., Rothbart, M. K., Vizueta, N.,
Levy, K., Evans, D. E., Thomas, K. M., ... Kernberg, O. (2002).
Mechanisms of borderline personality disorder. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99,
16366--16370. Putnam, K. M., & Silk, K. R. (2005). Emotion dysregulation
and the development of borderline personality disorder. Developmental
Psychopathology, 17, 899--925. Regier, D. A., Kaelber, C. T., Rae, D.
S., Farmer, M. E., Knauper, B., Kessler, R. C., & Norquist, G. S.
(1998). Limitations of diagnostic criteria and assessment instruments
for mental disorders: Implications

607

for research and policy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 109--115.
Renneberg, B., Theobald, E., Nobs, M., & Weisbrod, M. (2005).
Autobiographical memory in borderline personality disorder and
depression. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29, 343--358. Rinne, T., de
Kloet, R., Wouters, L., Goekoop, J. G., DeRijk, R. H., & van den Brink,
W. (2002). Hyperresponsiveness of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis to
combined dexamethasone/corticotrophin-releasing hormone challenge in
female borderline personality disorder subjects with a history of
sustained childhood abuse. Biological Psychiatry, 52, 1102--1112. Rinne,
T., van den Brink, W., Wouters, L., & van Dyck, R. (2002). SSRI
treatment of borderline personality disorder: A randomized,
placebo-controlled clinical trial for female patients with borderline
personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 2048--2054.
Rinne, T., Westenberg, H. G. M., den Boer, J. A., & van den Brink, W.
(2000). Serotonergic blunting to meta-chlorophenylpiperazine (m-CPP)
highly correlates with sustained childhood abuse in impulsive and
autoaggressive female borderline patients. Biological Psychiatry, 47,
548--556. Rodrigues, E., Wenzel, A., Ribeiro, M. P., Quarantini, L. C.,
Miranda-Scippa, A., de Sena, E. P., & de Oliveira, I. R. (2011).
Hippocampal volume in borderline personality disorder with and without
comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder: A meta-analysis. European
Psychiatry, 26, 452--456. Rossi, R., Pievani, M., Lorenzi, M., Boccardi,
M., Beneduce, R., Bignotti, S., ... Frisoni, G. B. (2013). Structural
brain features of borderline personality and bipolar disorders.
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 213(2), 83--91 Rossouw, T. I., &
Fonagy, P. (2012). Mentalizationbased treatment for self-harm in
adolescents: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 51(12), 1304--1313.
Rothschild, L., Cleland, C., Haslam, N., & Zimmerman, M. (2003). A
taxometric study of borderline personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 112, 657--666. Ruocco, A. C. (2005). The neuropsychology of
borderline personality disorder: A meta-analysis and review. Psychiatry
Research, 137, 191--202. Ruocco, A. C., Amirthavasagam, S., Choi-Kain,
L. W., & McMain, S. F. (2013). Neural correlates of

608

Borderline Personality Disorder

negative emotionality in borderline personality disorder: An
activation-likelihood-estimation metaanalysis. Biological Psychiatry,
73(2), 153--160. Ruocco, A. C., Amirthavasagam, S., & Zakzanis, K. K.
(2012). Amygdala and hippocampal volume reductions as candidate
endophenotypes for borderline personality disorder: A meta-analysis of
magnetic resonance imaging studies. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging,
201(3), 245--252. Ruocco, A. C., Lam, J., & McMain, S. F. (2014).
Subjective cognitive complaints and functional disability in patients
with borderline personality disorder and their nonaffected first-degree
relatives. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 59(6), 335--344. Ryle, A.
(2005). Cognitive analytic therapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried
(Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., pp. 196--217).
New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Salvador, R., Vega, D., Pascual,
J. C., Marco, J., Canales-Rodriquez, E. J., Aguilar, S., ...
PomarolClotet, E. (2014). Converging medial frontal resting state and
diffusion-based abnormalities in borderline personality disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 79(2), 107--116. Salzman, J., Salzman, C.,
Wolfson, A., Albanese, A., Looper, J., Ostacher, M., ... Miyawaki, E.
(1993). Association between borderline personality structure and history
of childhood abuse in adult volunteers. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 34,
254--257. Sauer-Zavala, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2014). The case for
borderline personality disorder as an emotional disorder: Implications
for treatment. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 21(2),
118--138. Schaefer, H. S., Putnam, K. M., Benca, R. M., & Davidson, R.
J. (2006). Event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging measures
of neural activity to positive social stimuli in pre- and post-treatment
for depression. Biological Psychiatry, 60, 974--986. Schmahl, C., Berne,
K., Krause, A., Kleindienst, N., Valerius, G., Vermetten, E., & Bohus,
M. (2009). Hippocampus and amygdala volumes in patients with borderline
personality disorder with or without posttraumatic stress disorder.
Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience, 34(4), 289--295. Schmahl, C., &
Bremner, J. D. (2006). Neuroimaging in borderline personality disorder.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40, 419--427. Schmahl, C. G., Elzinga,
B. M., Vermetten, E., Sanislow, C., McGlashan, T. H., & Bremner, J. D.

(2003). Neural correlates of memories of abandonment in women with and
without borderline personality disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 54,
142--151. Schmahl, C. G., Vermetten, E., Elzinga, B. M., & Bremner, J.
D. (2003). Magnetic resonance imaging of hippocampal and amygdala volume
in women with childhood abuse and borderline personality disorder.
Psychiatry Research, 122, 193--198. Seres, I., Unoka, Z., Bodi, N.,
Aspan, N., & Keri, S. (2009). The neuropsychology of borderline
personality disorder: Relationship with clinical dimensions and
comparison with other personality disorders. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 23(6), 555--562. Sharp, C., Michonski, J., Steinberg, L.,
Fowler, J. C., Frueh, B. C., & Oldham, J. M. (2014). An investigation of
differential item functioning across gender of BPD criteria. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 123(1), 231--236. Shea, M. T. (1997). Core battery
conference: Assessment of change in personality disorders. In H. H.
Strupp, L. M. Horowitz, & M. J. Lambert (Eds.), Measuring patient
changes in mood, anxiety, and personality disorders: Toward a core
battery (pp. 389--400). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Siever, L. J., & Davis, K. L. (1991). A psychobiological
perspective on the personality disorders. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 148, 1647--1658. Simeon, D., Bartz, J., Hamilton, H.,
Crystal, S., Braun, A., Ketay, S., & Hollander, E. (2011). Oxytocin
administration attenuates stress reactivity in borderline personality
disorder: A pilot study. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 36(9), 1418--1421.
Simeon, D., Knutelska, M., Smith, L., Baker, B. R., & Hollander, E.
(2007). A preliminary study of cortisol and norepinephrine reactivity to
psychosocial stress in borderline personality disorder with high and low
dissociation. Psychiatry Research, 149, 177--184. Skodol, A. E., &
Bender, D. S. (2003). Why are women diagnosed borderline more than men?
Psychiatric Quarterly, 74, 349--360. Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G.,
Pfohl, B., Widiger, T. A., Livesley, W. J., & Siever, L. J. (2002). The
borderline diagnosis I: Psychopathology, co-morbidity, and personality
structure. Biological Psychiatry, 51(12), 936. Soloff, P. H., Lis, J.
A., Kelly, T., Cornelius, J., & Ulrich, R. (1994). Risk factors for
suicidal behavior in borderline personality disorder. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 151, 1316--1323.

References Soloff, P. H., White, R., Omari, A., Ramaseshan, K., &
Diwadkar, V. A. (2015). Affective context interferes with brain
responses during cognitive processing in borderline personality
disorder: fMRI evidence. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 233(1),
23--35. Spitzer, R. L., Endicott, J., & Gibbon, M. (1979). Crossing the
border into borderline personality and borderline schizophrenia: The
development of criteria. Archives of General Psychiatry, 36, 17--34.
Spitzer, R. L., Forman, J. B. W., & Nee, J. (1979). DSM-III field
trials: I. Initial inter-rater diagnostic reliability. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 136, 815--817. Stanley, B., & Brodsky, B. S. (2005).
Suicidal and self-injurious behavior in borderline personality disorder:
A self-regulation model. In J. G. Gunderson & P. D. Hoffman (Eds.),
Understanding and treating borderline personality disorder: A guide for
professionals and families (pp. 43--63). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Publishing. Stern, A. (1938). Psychoanalytic investigation
of and therapy in the borderline group of neuroses. Psychoanalytical
Quarterly, 7, 467--489. Stiglmayr, C. E., Ebner-Priemer, U. W., Bretz,
J., Behm, R., Mohse, M., Lammers, C. H., ... Bohus, M. (2008).
Dissociative symptoms are positively related to stress in borderline
personality disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 117, 139--147.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643--662. Suomi, S.
J. (2003). Social and biological mechanisms underlying impulsive
aggressiveness in rhesus monkeys. In B. B. Lahey, T. Moffitt, & A. Caspi
(Eds.), The causes of conduct disorder and severe juvenile delinquency
(pp. 345--362). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Szeszko, P. R., Robinson,
D., Alvir, J. M., Bilder, R. M., Lencz, T., Ashtari, M., ... Bogerts, B.
(1999). Orbitofrontal and amygdala volume reductions in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56,
913--919. Tebartz van Elst, L., Hesslinger, B., Thiel, T., Geiger, E.,
Haegele, K., Lemieux, L., ... Ebert, D. (2003). Frontolimbic brain
abnormalities in patients with borderline personality disorder: A
volumetric magnetic resonance imaging study. Biological Psychiatry, 54,
163--171. Thase, M. E., Jindal, R., & Howland, R. H. (2002). Biological
aspects of depression. In I. H. Gotlib &

609

C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (pp. 192--218). New York,
NY: Guilford Press. Tipper, S. P. (1985). The negative priming effect:
Inhibitory priming by ignored objects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Section A, Human Experimental Psychology, 37, 571--590.
Todorov, A., Mandisodza, A., Goren, A., & Hall, C. (2005). Inferences of
competence from faces predict election outcomes. Science, 308,
1623--1626. Tomko, R. L., Trull, T. T., Wood, P. K., & Sher, K. J.
(2014). Characteristics of borderline personality disorder in a
community sample: Comorbidity, treatment utilization, and general
functioning. Journal of Personality Disorders, 28(5), 734--750.
Torgersen, S., Kringlen, E., & Cramer, V. (2001). The prevalence of
personality disorders in a community sample. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 58, 590--596. Torgersen, S., Lygren, S., Oien, P. A., Skre,
I., Onstad, S., Edvardsen, J., ... Kringlen, E. (2000). A twin study of
personality disorders. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 41, 416--425. Trull, T.
J. (2001). Structural relations between borderline personality disorder
features and putative etiological correlates. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 110, 471--481. Tyrer, P. (1999). Borderline personality
disorder: A motley diagnosis in need of reform. Lancet, 354(9196),
2095--2096. Unoka, Z., & Richman, M. J. (2016). Neuropsychological
deficits in BPD patients and the moderator effects of co-occurring
mental disorders: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 44,
1--12. Unoka, Z., Seres, I., Aspan, N., Bodi, N., & Keri, S. (2009).
Trust game reveals restricted interpersonal transactions in patients
with borderline personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders,
23(4), 399--409. van Wel, B., Kockmann, I., Blum, N., Pfohl, B., Black,
D. W., & Heesterman, W. (2006). STEPPS group treatment for borderline
personality disorder in the Netherlands. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry,
18(1), 63--67. Veague, H. B., & Hooley, J. M. (2014). Enhanced
sensitivity and response bias for male anger in women with borderline
personality disorder. Psychiatry Research, 215(3), 687--693. Wagner, S.,
Baskaya, Ö., Lieb, K., Dahmen, N., & Tadíc, A. (2009). The 5-HTTLPR
polymorphism modulates the association of serious life events (SLE)

610

Borderline Personality Disorder

and impulsivity in patients with borderline personality disorder.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 43, 1067--1072. Weaver, T. L., & Clum,
G. A. (1993). Early family environments and traumatic experiences
associated with borderline personality disorder. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 61, 1068--1075. Westen, D., Bradley, R., &
Shedler, J. (2005). Refining the borderline construct: Diagnostic
criteria and endophenotypes. Unpublished manuscript. White, C. N.,
Gunderson, J. G., Zanarini, M. C., & Hudson, J. I. (2003). Family
studies of borderline personality disorder: A review. Harvard Review of
Psychiatry, 11, 8--19. Whittle, S., Chanen, A. M., Fornito, A., McGorry,
P. D., Pantelis, C., & Yücel, M. (2009). Anterior cingulate volume in
adolescents with first-presentation borderline personality disorder.
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 172, 155--160. Widiger, T. A., &
Frances, A. (1989). Epidemiology, diagnosis, and co-morbidity of
borderline personality disorder. In A. Tasman, R. E. Hales, & A. Frances
(Eds.), American Psychiatric Press review of psychiatry (Vol. 8,
pp. 8--24). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Widiger, T. A.,
Mangine, S., Corbitt, E., Ellis, C., & Thomas, G. (1995). Personality
Disorder InterviewIV: A semi-structured interview for the assessment of
personality disorders, professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological
Assessment Resources. Widom, C. S., Czaja, S. J., & Paris, J. (2009). A
prospective investigation of borderline personality disorder in abused
and neglected children followed up into adulthood. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 23, 433--446. Williams, J. M. G., & Broadbent, K.
(1986). Autobiographical memory in suicide attempters. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 95, 144--149. Winnicott, D. W. (1953). Transitional
objects and transitional phenomena: A study of the first not-me
possession. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 34, 89--97. Witt,
S. H., Kleindienst, N., Frank, J., Treutlein, J., Muhleisen, T.,
Degenhardt, F., ... Bohus, M. (2014). Analysis of genome-wide
significant bipolar disorder genes in borderline personality disorder.
Psychiatric Genetics, 24, 262--265. Wright, A. G. C., Hallquist, M. N.,
Beeney, J. E., & Pilkonis, P. A. (2013). Borderline personality

pathology and the stability of interpersonal problems. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 122(4), 1094--1100. Wright, A. G. C., Hopwood, C.
J., & Zanarini, M. C. (2015). Associations between changes in normal
personality traits and borderline personality disorder symptoms over 16
years. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 6(1),
1--11. Yeomans, F. E., & Levy, K. N. (2002). An object relations
perspective on borderline personality. Acta Neuropsychiatrica, 14,
76--80. Zanarini, M. C., Barison, L. K., Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D.
B., & Hudson, J. I. (2009). Family history study of the familial
coaggregation of borderline personality disorder with Axis I and
nonborderline dramatic cluster Axis II disorders. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 23, 357--369. Zanarini, M. C., & Frankenburg, F. R. (1997).
Pathways to the development of borderline personality disorder. Journal
of Personality Disorders, 11, 93--104. Zanarini, M. C., & Frankenburg,
F. R. (2001). Olanzapine treatment of female borderline personality
disorder patients: A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 849--854. Zanarini, M. C.,
Frankenburg, F. R., Chauncey, D. L., & Gunderson, J. G. (1987). The
Diagnostic Interview for Personality Disorders: Inter-rater and
test-retest reliability. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 28, 467--480.
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Dubo, E. D., Sickel, A. E., Trikha,
A., Levin, A., & Reynolds, V. (1998). Axis I co-morbidity of borderline
personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 1733--1739.
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Hennen, J., Reich, D. B., & Silk,
K. S. (2006). Prediction of the 10-year course of borderline personality
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 827. Zanarini, M. C.,
Frankenburg, F. R., Hennen, J., & Silk, K. R. (2003). The longitudinal
course of borderline psychopathology: 6-year prospective follow-up of
the phenomenology of borderline personality disorders. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 160, 274--283. Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R.,
Khera, G. S., & Bleichmar, J., (2001). Treatment histories of borderline
inpatients. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 42, 144--150. Zanarini, M. C.,
Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., Conkey, L. C., & Fitzmaurice, G. M.
(2015). Treatment rates for patients with borderline personality

References disorder and other personality disorders: A 16-year study.
Psychiatric Services, 66(1), 15--20. Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F.
R., Reich, D. B., & Fitzmaurice, G. (2010). Time to attainment of
recovery from borderline personality disorder and stability of recovery:
A 10-year prospective follow-up study. American Journal of Psychiatry,
167, 663--667. Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., &
Fitzmaurice, G. (2012). Attainment and stability of sustained
symptomatic remission and recovery among patients with borderline
personality disorder and Axis II comparison subjects: A 16-year
prospective follow-up study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(5),
476--483. Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., Marino, M.
F., Lewis, R. E., Williams, A. A., & Khera, G. S. (2000). Biparental
failure in the childhood experiences of borderline patients. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 14, 264--273. Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F.
R., & Vujanovic, A. A. (2002). Inter-rater and test-retest reliability
of the Revised Diagnostic Interview for Borderlines. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 16, 270--276. Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F.
R., Yong, L., Raviola, G., Bradford Reich, D., Hennen, J., ...
Gunderson, J. G. (2004). Borderline psychopathology in the

611

first-degree relatives of borderline and Axis II comparison probands.
Journal of Personality Disorders, 18, 439--447. Zanarini, M. C.,
Gunderson, J. G., & Frankenburg, F. R. (1990). Cognitive features of
borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147(1),
57--63. Zanarini, M. C., Gunderson, J. G., Frankenburg, F. R., &
Chauncey, D. L. (1989). The Revised Diagnostic Interview for
Borderlines: Discriminating BPD from other Axis II disorders. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 3, 10--18. Zimmerman, D. J., & Choi-Kain, L. W.
(2009). The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in borderline
personality disorder: A review. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 17,
167--183. Zimmerman, M. (1994). Diagnosing personality disorders: A
review of issues and research methods. Archives of General Psychiatry,
51, 225--245. Zimmerman, M., & Mattia, J. I. (1999). Axis I diagnostic
co-morbidity and borderline personality disorder. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 40, 245--251. Zweig-Frank, H., & Paris, J. (1995). The
five-factor model of personality in borderline and nonborderline
personality disorders. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 40, 523--526.

Chapter 15 Psychopathy as Psychopathology Key Developments in
Assessment, Etiology, and Treatment Jennifer E. Vitale and Joseph P.
Newman

T

he psychopathic individual is characterized by limited affective
experiences, is known to act impulsively and often antisocially, but
nevertheless seems calm and at ease in the presence of others. Although
psychopathic individuals are clinically intriguing figures in their own
right, their overrepresentation in criminal samples and their tendency
toward impulsive and deviant behaviors provide strong and pragmatic
motivation to understand the factors that underlie the psychopathy
syndrome. In this chapter, we describe the traits associated with the
syndrome, discuss developments in the measurement of the syndrome, and
then consider the most prominent findings relevant to etiological models
of psychopathy. Finally, we provide an overview of research on the
treatment of psychopathy.

Diagnostic Criteria Psychopathy has been referred to as "the elusive
category" (Lewis, 1974), a clinical syndrome that is still often
mentioned synonymously with general criminal behavior, sociopathy, and
antisocial personality disorder. The personality style we now know as
psychopathy appears throughout psychiatric history, under different
labels, often as a subtype of other disorders. For example, today's
psychopathic person would have been classified as one of Kraepelin's
"morbid personalities," who were impulsive and antisocial as well as
predisposed to deception; as one of Schneider's "affectionless"
personalities, who lacked compassion and acted in a callous manner
toward other individuals; or as one of Millon's (1981) "aggressive"
personalities, who have a "faith only in themselves and ... \[are\]
secure only when they are independent of those whom they fear may undo,
harm, or humiliate them" (p. 181). Historically, individuals in the
field often trace the evolution of the concept of psychopathy to Pinel's
manie sans delire, a syndrome characterized by an individual's repeated

612

Diagnostic Criteria

613

engagement in impulsive, destructive actions, in spite of intact
reasoning (Pinel, 1806). This early, relatively objective
conceptualization would later give way to conceptualizations of the
syndrome that placed greater emphasis on moral considerations--- hence
Rush's (1812) "innate, preternatural moral depravity" (p. 112) and
Prichard's (1835) "moral insanity." Although the labels have varied,
what has been constant is nosologists' desire to classify this syndrome
in such a way that it could be distinguished from other forms of mental
illness and from general criminality. It was such a desire that
motivated Cleckley's (1941/1988) work The Mask of Sanity, which is now
viewed as the seminal clinical description of the psychopathy syndrome.
The Mask of Sanity provided detailed case histories and a set of
specific criteria meant to distinguish the syndrome from the number of
other disorders that had come to be included under the "psychopathy"
label. Thus, through this work, Cleckley (1988) provided a means for
distinguishing the "psychopath" from the "psychotic," the
"psychoneurotic," the "mental defective," the "criminal," and the
"alcoholic." The Mask of Sanity provided case descriptions of 15
psychopathic individuals and outlined 16 core traits of psychopathy
formulated on the basis of these cases (see Table 15.1). Although later
conceptualizations of the syndrome have, to different extents, attempted
to encapsulate each of the criteria, the following six have most
strongly influenced modern conceptualizations of the syndrome. First,
Cleckley (1988) described the "psychopath" as exhibiting "superficial
charm and good intelligence" (p. 337). In his words, "The typical
psychopath will seem particularly agreeable and make a distinctly
positive impression when he is first encountered. . . . There TABLE 15.1

Cleckley's Criteria for Psychopathy

Superficial charm and good "intelligence." Absence of delusions and
other signs of irrational thinking. Absence of "nervousness" or
psychoneurotic manifestations. Unreliability. Untruthfulness and
insincerity. Lack of remorse or shame. Inadequately motivated antisocial
behavior. Poor judgment and failure to learn by experience. Pathological
egocentricity and incapacity for love. General poverty in major
affective reactions. Specific loss of insight. Unresponsiveness in
general interpersonal relations. Fantastic and uninviting behavior with
drink and sometimes without. Suicide rarely carried out. Sex life
impersonal, trivial, and poorly integrated. Failure to follow any life
plan. Source: Cleckley, 1941/1988.

614

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

is nothing at all odd or queer about him and in every respect he tends
to embody the concept of a well adjusted, happy person. . . . Sign of
affectation or excessive affability are not characteristic. He looks
like the real thing" (p. 338). Second, the psychopathic individual is
"lacking in remorse or shame" (p. 337). The psychopathic person does not
express genuine contrition for the antisocial acts he or she commits,
and often cannot even see the purpose in feeling such remorse. When
remorse is expressed, it is often hollow, and rings false. As Cleckley
wrote: "Usually he denies emphatically all responsibility and directly
accuses others as responsible, but often he will go through an idle
ritual of saying that much of his trouble is his own fault. . . . More
detailed questioning about just what he blames himself for and why may
show that a serious attitude is not only absent but altogether
inconceivable to him" (p. 343). Third, the psychopathic person engages
in "inadequately motivated antisocial behavior" (p. 337). Among the
behaviors Cleckley included in this category were minor infractions such
as lies, cheating, and brawling, and also more serious offenses, such as
theft, fraud, and forgery. According to Cleckley, however, the crucial
factor was not necessarily the type or severity of the behavior itself,
but the tendency to "commit such deeds in the absence of any apparent
goal at all" (p. 343). Fourth, the psychopathic person shows "poor
judgment and failure to learn by experience" (p. 337). Despite the fact
that these individuals are characterized by average intelligence, they
nevertheless repeatedly make poor choices and evince poor judgment in
their attempts at goal attainment. Further, although the individual may
be able to explain "what went wrong" in a particular situation (i.e.,
what he did that may have led to the poor outcome), he seems incapable
of using this knowledge in future situations, thereby exhibiting an
inability to use prior experience to guide future behavior. Fifth, the
psychopathic person is characterized by "incapacity for love" (p. 337).
Although he or she may be "capable of fondness, of likes, of dislikes
... \[t\]hese affective reactions are, however, always strictly limited
in degree" (p. 348). This apparent inability to experience deep emotion
or to connect emotionally with others is an important criterion for
distinguishing the psychopathic individual from other antisocial
individuals (e.g., Cooke, Michie, & Hart, 2006; Lykken, 1995). The sixth
characteristic is related to the fifth, and is the tendency for the
psychopathic person to exhibit "general poverty in major affective
reactions." Although the person may express himself in ways that suggest
that he is experiencing affective reactions (e.g., a short temper, a
declaration of affection), these expressions do not convey a sense of
long-lasting, deep emotional experience. There is no "mature,
wholehearted anger, true or consistent indignation, honest, solid grief,
sustaining pride, deep joy, and genuine despair" (p. 348). Like
Cleckley, McCord and McCord (1964) provided rich descriptions of the
psychopathic individual. Harkening back to figures such as Billy the Kid
as early examples of a prototypical "psychopath," McCord and McCord
placed great emphasis on defining characteristics such as aggression,
impulsivity, excitement-seeking, guiltlessness, and "warped capacity for
love." This last, also a core component of this syndrome described by
Cleckley, receives particular emphasis. "Psychopaths," as Maslow (1951)
writes, "have no love identifications with other human beings and can
therefore hurt them or even kill them casually, without hate, and
without pleasure" (p. 173). Early versions of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) (e.g., American Psychiatric
Association \[APA\], 1968) listed criteria for sociopathy

Diagnostic Criteria

615

and antisocial personality disorder that included characteristics such
as selfishness, guiltlessness, callousness, and impulsivity, which
overlapped in many ways with the Cleckley criteria. Despite this
overlap, the DSM criteria were not meant to reflect the psychopathy
syndrome described by Cleckley, and they were developed separately from
the psychopathy literature. Thus, although psychopathy has often been
used synonymously with sociopathy and antisocial personality disorder,
this is a mistake. Most importantly, recent editions of the DSM,
including the DSM-5 (APA, 2013), have limited the criteria for
antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) to more specific behavioral
criteria (e.g., conduct disorder present before age 15, repeatedly
performing acts that are grounds for arrest), thereby excluding many of
the individuals who would be considered psychopathic using Cleckley's
criteria. Second, emerging research suggests that the correlates of
psychopathy and the correlates of ASPD are different in important ways
(e.g., Verona, Sprague, & Sadeh, 2012).

Assessment of Psychopathy Like many psychological disorders, the
assessment of psychopathy has had a complicated history, up to and
including the present time. Although there has long been a consensus
regarding certain core features of the syndrome, there has been less
agreement regarding the best methods for assessing these features. Since
the publication of Cleckley's book, the field has seen a number of
measures developed to assess psychopathy. In the earliest years,
clinicians relied on either case-based "psychopathy prototype"
assessments (e.g., Hare, Frazelle, & Cox, 1978) or the use of
self-report measures selected to capture the personality traits
associated with the syndrome, such as the Socialization (So) subscale of
the California Personality Inventory and the Psychopathic Deviate (Pd)
scale of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI).
However, these methods had definite limitations. In addition to poor
diagnostic reliability, there was also a lack of uniformity in the
field, as psychopathy findings based on one method were not necessarily
generalizable to people assessed as psychopathic using another method.
Beginning in the 1980s and continuing into the present, the field has
experienced two major developments in the assessment arena. The first is
the development of Hare's psychopathy checklist and its many progeny
(i.e., the Psychopathy Checklist--Revised, the Psychopathy Checklist:
Screening Version, and the Psychopathy Checklist: Youth Version). The
second is the increasing emphasis on the development of self-report
measures that focus on psychopathy specifically (as opposed to more
general personality traits) and that can be used with
noninstitutionalized populations. Interestingly, in recent years many
research investigators have returned to a conceptualization of
psychopathy based on basic personality traits, and have begun to explore
assessment tools reflecting this perspective (e.g., Widiger & Lynam,
1998).

The Psychopathy Checklist In 1980, Hare developed the Research Scale for
the Assessment of Psychopathy (also known as the Hare Psychopathy
Checklist; Hare, 1980). Designed to capture the prototypical
psychopathic person as conceptualized by Cleckley, the measure
transformed

616

Psychopathy as Psychopathology TABLE 15.2

Items on the Psychopathy Checklist--Revised

Glibness/superficial charm. Grandiose sense of self-worth. Need for
stimulation. Proneness to boredom. Pathological lying.
Conning/manipulative. Lack of remorse or guilt. Shallow affect.
Callous/lack of empathy. Parasitic lifestyle. Poor behavioral controls.
Promiscuous sexual behavior. Early behavior problems. Lack of realistic,
long-term goals. Impulsivity. Irresponsibility. Failure to accept
responsibility. Many short-term marital relationships. Juvenile
delinquency. Revocation of conditional release. Criminal versatility.
Source: Hare, 1991, 2003.

Cleckley's 16 criteria into 22 items that could be scored using a
semistructured interview and institutional file review. A revised
version of the checklist, that deleted two items from the original
scale, was published in 1991 (see Table 15.2). This Psychopathy
Checklist--Revised (PCL-R) (Hare, 2003) quickly moved to the forefront
of psychopathy assessment. Each item on the 20-item checklist can be
scored, using an interview and file review, as 0, "not applicable to the
individual"; 1, "applicable only to a certain extent"; or 2, "applicable
to the individual." Scores range from 0 to 40, and although there is
some taxometric evidence suggesting the scale indexes a continuous
construct (e.g., Walters, Duncan, & Mitchell-Perez, 2007; Walters,
Ermer, Knight, & Kiehl, 2015), a diagnostic cutoff of 30 is often used
to define someone as a psychopathic individual in North American, male
samples. The development of the PCL-R provided a reliable method for
assessing the psychopathy syndrome, and by providing a common metric for
researchers and clinicians, it also facilitated much of the psychopathy
research conducted from about 1990 to 2005. During this time period,
researchers and clinicians were more likely to be called on to justify
not using the PCL-R as their primary measure of psychopathy than vice
versa. In the past decade, however, the assessment landscape has
changed.

Diagnostic Criteria

617

Although still at the forefront of psychopathy assessment, the PCL-R has
been the subject of criticism. In response to certain of these
limitations, the field has seen a new expansion in the development of
alternative measures of the syndrome. Three interrelated controversies
associated with use of the PCL-R can be identified as having been
particularly influential in the development of alternative assessments.
The first relates to the factor structure of the instrument and the
related question of whether violence is a "core" feature of the
psychopathy syndrome (e.g., Bishopp & Hare, 2008; Cooke et al., 2006).
The second relates to the generalizability of the instrument to
alternative samples, including incarcerated women and delinquent
juveniles (e.g., Cooke & Michie, 1999; Kosson, Smith, & Newman, 1990;
Verona & Vitale, 2005). The third is the concern that a focus on
psychopathy as assessed by the PCL-R has kept researchers from
developing measures of psychopathy for noninstitutionalized populations
(e.g., Skeem, Polaschek, Patrick, & Lilienfeld, 2011), along with the
related issue of the importance of studying the "successful"
psychopathic individual.

PCL-R, Violence, and the Question of "Factors" One of the PCL-R's
clinical strengths is its power in predicting future dangerousness. High
PCL-R scorers commit more violent criminal offenses than individuals
with low scores and are more likely to recidivate in a violent manner
than low scorers (see Hemphill, Templeman, Wong, & Hare, 1998; Olver &
Wong, 2015, for reviews). In fact, on the basis of its associations with
criminal recidivism and behavior, Hare (1998) has argued that PCL-R
assessed psychopathy is "the single most important clinical construct in
the criminal justice system," citing its usefulness in both risk
assessments and treatment placements (see also Fulero, 1995).
Importantly, the crucial role that the PCL-R plays in the criminal
justice system also highlights the ways in which PCL-R psychopathy
departs from the construct first described by Cleckley. For example,
although Cleckley (1988) included "inadequately motivated antisocial
behavior" among his 16 criteria, criminal behavior (and specifically
violent criminal behavior) was not viewed as a necessary component of
the syndrome. Rather, Cleckley (1988) argued that "many persons showing
the characteristics of those described here do commit major crimes and
sometimes crimes of maximal violence. There are so many, however, who do
not, that such tendencies should be regarded as the exception rather
than as the rule" (p. 262). The debate surrounding the association
between psychopathy and violence is not new. In 1974, Lewis wrote:
"reviews of the state of opinion about psychopathic personality ...
reveal a preoccupation with the nosological status of the concept ...
its forensic implications, its subdivisions, limits, \[and\] the
propriety of identifying psychopathic personality with antisocial
behavior" (pp. 137--138). Similarly, in 1981, Millon wrote: "50 years
ago the same issues were in the forefront, notably whether the
psychopathic personality was or was not synonymous with overt antisocial
behavior" (p. 184). This question continues to be among the most
divisive arguments in the field today, as researchers and clinicians
argue over the PCL-R's emphasis on antisocial behaviors and its
inclusion of items assessing specific forms of criminal behavior (e.g.,
juvenile delinquency, criminal versatility, and revocation of
conditional release). Critics of the measure have argued that such items
are not necessary for diagnosing the syndrome originally conceptualized
by Cleckley (Cooke et al., 2006), and they believe that the reliance on

618

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

specific criminal behaviors overemphasizes this aspect of the syndrome
at the expense of the personality traits theorized to lie at its core
(Lilienfeld, 1994; Skeem et al., 2011). This debate played out, in part,
through a series of articles surrounding the analysis and interpretation
of the PCL-R's factor structure. Initial exploratory factor analysis of
the PCL-R revealed two correlated (.50) factors (Harpur, Hakstian, &
Hare, 1988). The first, Factor 1, was dubbed the affective/interpersonal
factor, as it included those items representing many of the deficient
emotional and interpersonally manipulative characteristics of the
syndrome (e.g., glib/superficial charm, manipulative, callous, shallow
affect). The second, Factor 2, became known as the social deviance or
impulsive/antisocial lifestyle factor on the basis of its inclusion of
items measuring antisocial and criminal behavior (e.g., poor behavioral
controls, impulsivity, and early behavioral problems). In recent years,
the two-factor conceptualization of the PCL-R has been repeatedly called
into question. For example, Cooke and colleagues (2006) argued that
analyses suggest that the two-factor solution represents a poor fit to
the data, and they campaigned for a reconceptualization of the measure
as comprising three factors: Factor 1 (interpersonal), Factor 2
(affective), and Factor 3 (lifestyle). The first two factors essentially
divide the original Factor 1 into two components, interpersonal and
affective. Importantly, this three-factor solution, although a
significantly better fit to existing data than the traditional
two-factor model (Cooke, Michie, Hart, & Clark, 2004), also excludes 7
PCL-R items. Cooke and colleagues have argued that this exclusion is
necessary to purge the instrument of the specifically criminal behavior
items that they believe are not core features of the syndrome (Cooke et
al., 2006), an argument strongly refuted by Hare and colleagues (Hare,
2003; Neumann, Hare, & Newman, 2007). Researchers continue to look for
ways to address the concerns raised by the PCL-R's inclusion of overtly
antisocial items. For example, researchers routinely conduct analyses to
examine separately the contributions of those items associated with the
interpersonal/ affective components of the syndrome (i.e., Factor 1)
versus the impulsive/antisocial items (i.e., Factor 2) when
investigating the deficits underlying the syndrome (e.g., Patrick,
Bradley, & Lang, 1993); this practice has revealed that external
criteria often relate differentially to these factors (e.g., Hansen,
Johnsen, Thornton, Waage, & Thayer, 2007; Vaidyanathan, Hall, Patrick, &
Bernat, 2011). Despite the existence of unique correlates of Factors 1
and 2, there are those who argue there is no good evidence to suggest
that any one component of psychopathy is primary over any other
component (e.g., Hare, 2003; Neumann et al., 2007), and that psychopathy
is best conceptualized as a unidimensional construct. Essentially, this
argument holds that the PCL-R as a whole best captures the syndrome
originally described by Cleckley (1988), and that this "'whole' may be
greater than the sum of the 'parts'" (Neumann et al., 2007). Thus,
although psychopathy may have several components, it is best
conceptualized as a "super-factor" (Neumann et al., 2007). The factor
debate reflects the larger disagreement regarding the nature of
psychopathy and questions regarding the "core" features of the syndrome.
It is clear that some in the field would like to separate serious
criminal behaviors, worried that these items maintain a definition of
psychopathy that excludes individuals with many of the same features who
have not committed an explicitly criminal act (Lilienfeld & Andrews,
1996). Such individuals may actually be "commended and reinforced in a
competitive society where tough hard-headed realism is admired as an
attribute necessary for survival," and they

Diagnostic Criteria

619

may live on "the rugged side of the business, military, or political
world" (Millon, 1981, pp. 181--182). It is a key debate because
understanding the core features of the disorder is crucial, not only for
improving the ability to assess the syndrome reliably, and increasing
understanding of the etiology of the syndrome, but also for clarifying
how the syndrome may be expressed across populations. This debate is
directly relevant to the next controversy, which involves the
generalizability of psychopathy assessment, and the PCL-R especially,
across groups.

Generalizability Across Groups Much of the early PCL-R psychopathy
research was limited by a reliance on samples of institutionalized,
Caucasian, North American adult males. Fortunately, there has been more
recent work that examines the expression and correlates of psychopathy
in other specific groups, particularly female offenders and African
American offenders (see Beryl, Chou, & Völlm, 2014; Verona & Vitale,
2005; and Sullivan & Kosson, 2006, for reviews). The results in this
area have not always been clear-cut. Specifically, although evidence
supports the reliability of psychopathy assessments among female
populations (e.g., Miller, Watts, & Jones, 2011; Salekin, Rogers, &
Sewell, 1997; Vitale, Smith, Brinkley, & Newman, 2002) and across racial
groups (e.g., Vachon, Lynam, Loeber, & Stouthamer-Loeber, 2012), the
evidence for the generalizability of behavioral and etiologically
relevant correlates of psychopathy across gender and race is more
limited. For example, several key deficits in emotion-related responding
have not been demonstrated among African American offenders (e.g.,
Baskin-Sommers, Newman, Sathasivam, & Curtin, 2011) nor among female
offenders (e.g., Anton, Baskin-Sommers, Vitale, Curtin, & Newman, 2012;
Vitale, MacCoon, & Newman, 2011). Similarly, maladaptive response
perseveration and poor passive avoidance learning, both well documented
among psychopathic males, have not been reliably demonstrated by
psychopathic females (e.g., Vitale & Newman, 2001). In addition,
differences across gender in laboratory-based assessments have been
found in studies of adolescents with high levels of psychopathy traits
(e.g., Isen et al., 2010; Vitale et al., 2005; Wang, Baker, Gao, Raine,
& Lozano, 2012). Finally, research suggests that psychopathy may be a
less powerful predictor of recidivism in incarcerated female samples
(Weizmann-Henelius, Virkkunen, Gammelgard, Eronen, & Putkonen, 2015) The
desire of the field to generalize psychopathy findings to alternate
samples leads directly to the final challenge to the PCL-R, which is the
inability to use the measure to assess psychopathy in
noninstitutionalized populations. As a result of this key limitation, as
well as the concerns surrounding the instrument's reliance on overt
antisociality, there is a strong emphasis in the field on developing
alternative measures of the psychopathy construct. The next section
provides a brief overview of these alternative measures.

Alternative Measures of Psychopathy Although the PCL-R has been the most
commonly used assessment of psychopathy, other measures---some designed
specifically to address limitations in the use of the PCL-R---have been
developed over the past two decades. Some of these measures, such as the
PCL: Screening Version (PCL:SV; Forth, Brown, Hart, & Hare, 1996), PCL:
Youth

620

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

Version (PCL:YV; Forth, Kosson, & Hare, 2003), and the Self-Report
Psychopathy scale (SRP, SRP-II, and SRP-III; e.g., Williams & Paulhus,
2004) are direct descendants of the PCL-R, designed to be used with
specialized groups or in noninstitutional contexts. For example, the
PCL:SV was created as a way to assess psychopathy using less information
and without formal criminal records; this increases its utility in
psychiatric and noninstitutional settings (Forth et al., 1996).
Generally, research suggests that the PCL:SV captures a syndrome similar
to that identified by the PCL-R. The two measures are highly correlated
(average correlation of .8) (Cooke, Michie, Hart, & Hare, 1999). The
PCL:SV exhibits a factor structure and item functioning similar to that
of the PCL-R (Hill, Neumann, & Rogers, 2004), and the PCL:SV is a good
predictor of violent behavior (e.g., Douglas, Ogloff, Nicholls, & Grant,
1999; Skeem & Mulvey, 2001). The PCL:YV is based on the assumption that
the psychopathy syndrome observed among adults can be extended downward
into adolescence. Although the items in the PCL:YV are based on the
adult PCL-R, they have been modified to capture the syndrome as it might
appear in adolescents aged 12 to 18 (Forth et al., 2003). Although there
is some evidence for differential item functioning across gender (Tsang
et al., 2015) and ethnicity (Tsang, Piquero, & Cauffman, 2014), other
research using the PCL:YV has demonstrated reliability in both male and
female samples (e.g., Bauer, Whitman, & Kosson, 2011). Research has also
shown that the measure relates to criterion variables in ways that would
be predicted based on PCL-R research with adults. For example, relative
to adolescents with low scores, adolescents with high scores on the
instrument commit a higher number of crimes and more violent crimes
(Kosson, Cyterski, Steuerwald, Neumann, & Walker-Matthews, 2002). PCL:YV
scores are also significantly inversely associated with familial
attachment (Kosson et al., 2002). Because the PCL:YV, like the PCL-R,
requires a lengthy interview procedure, alternative measures of
psychopathy for youth have been developed. For example, the Antisocial
Process Screening Device (APSD; Frick & Hare, 2001) is a 20-item rating
scale that can be used as a self-report measure or as a teacher and
parent report measure. Research has shown that the APSD is associated
with many of the personality traits and laboratory deficits exhibited by
psychopathic adults. For example, high scores on the APSD delineate a
group of individuals who exhibit higher rates of conduct problems and
police contacts, and stronger family histories of antisocial behavior
than groups characterized by lower scores do (Christian, Frick, Hill,
Tyler, & Frazer, 1997; Fung, Gao, & Raine, 2010; Munoz & Frick, 2007;
Pechorro et al., 2014). Higher scores on the APSD are also associated
with decreased empathy, perspective taking, and fearfulness (Blair,
Monson, & Frederickson, 2001). Although items on the APSD tap the
interpersonal (e.g., superficial charm, lack of empathy), emotional
(e.g., shallow affect), and behavioral (e.g., reckless antisocial
behaviors, impulsivity) characteristics of psychopathy, particular
interest has emerged in the callous and unemotional traits assessed by
the measure, because these appear to correlate most strongly with
indices of psychopathy. For example, laboratory studies have
demonstrated that adolescents characterized by the callous-unemotional
traits, as assessed by the APSD, exhibit abnormal neural responses
(e.g., Sebastian et al., 2012 ); performance deficits on a task
requiring them to modify an initial reward-oriented response strategy in
light of increasing rates of punishment (e.g., O'Brien & Frick, 1996);
reduced interference

Diagnostic Criteria

621

on a picture-word Stroop test; and deficits in passive avoidance on a
go/no-go task (Vitale et al., 2005)---although this latter finding was
specific to male participants. The Youth Psychopathic Traits Inventory
(YPI; Andershed, Kerr, Statin, & Levander, 2002) and YPI--Child Version
(YPI-CV) have been shown in some studies to relate to key correlates of
psychopathy, including conduct problems and proactive aggression
(Ručević, 2010; van Baardewijk, Vermeiren, Stegge, & Doreleijers, 2011),
as well as self-reported antisocial attitudes and impulsivity (Campbell,
Doucette, & French, 2009). However, the results are mixed, with other
studies failing to find expected associations with criminal behavior or
substance use (Colins, Andershed, & Pardini, 2015; Shepherd & Strand,
2015), and only weak evidence for the measure's ability to tap key
features of psychopathy (i.e., callous-unemotional traits) (Oshukova et
al., 2015). The scale shows moderate correlations with factors of the
PCL:YV (Andershed, Hodgins, & Tengstrom, 2007), and correlates with
other self-report measures of psychopathy (Cambell et al., 2009).
Although there appears to be good evidence, especially among males, that
measures such as the PCL:YV, the APSD, and perhaps, the YPI-CV can
assess a syndrome in adolescents similar to the psychopathy syndrome
assessed in adults, there is considerable controversy regarding the
assessment of psychopathy in youth. For example, there is not clear
evidence that psychopathy assessments of adolescents have the same
forensic utility as those made for adults (Cauffman, Kimonis, Dmitrieva,
& Monahan, 2009). Others hold that a psychopathy label has become
synonymous with increased dangerousness and poor treatment response
(e.g., Edens, 2006; Lykken, 1995), beliefs that might hinder
intervention attempts for youth. Further, because the psychopathy-like
syndrome assessed among children and adolescents may reflect transient
developmental processes, some have argued that it is inappropriate to
use such a label in this group (e.g., Edens, Skeem, Cruise, & Cauffman,
2001; Skeem & Cauffman, 2003). Nevertheless, there is clear evidence
that many of the behaviors and performance abnormalities associated with
adult psychopathy are apparent in youth, and there is emerging evidence
for stability in psychopathic traits across childhood and adolescence
(Lopez-Romero, Romero, & Villar, 2014). Further, those who use these
measures note that ratings of items are based on the frequency,
duration, and intensity of the attitudes and behaviors exhibited by the
individual (Gretton, Hare, & Catchpole, 2004; Lynam, 1996), thereby
decreasing the likelihood that scores will represent normal, transitory
developmental processes. Consistent with this assertion, in community
samples the mean PCL:YV score is low (i.e., a score of 5 out of a
possible 40) (Forth et al., 2003), and assessments of juvenile
psychopathy appear to be relatively stable across adolescence (e.g.,
Lynam et al., 2009; Neumann, Wampler, Taylor, Blonigen, & Iacono, 2011).
On this basis, the counterargument is made that, by neglecting to
examine psychopathy in adolescents, researchers, and clinicians may be
giving up an important opportunity for examining the development of the
syndrome across time and for designing interventions that might prevent
the adolescent with psychopathic traits from becoming the adult with
psychopathy (Frick, 1998; Lynam, 1996). Just as investigators have
sought new, more efficient ways to assess the psychopathy syndrome among
adolescents, the field has developed more efficient alternative measures
of the syndrome in adults. Thus, in addition to the PCL:SV and PCL:YV,
Hare and colleagues (e.g., Hare, Harpur, & Hemphill, 1989; Williams,
Paulhus, & Hare, 2007)

622

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

have developed the Self-Report Psychopathy scale (SRP, SRP-II, SRP-III)
as a self-report measure of the syndrome in adult samples. The SRP-II
and SRP-III are reliable (Neal & Sellbom, 2012) and relate in expected
ways with correlates of the psychopathy syndrome, including scores on
the PCL as well as measures of alcohol abuse, narcissism, empathy,
Machiavellianism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness (e.g., Paulhus &
Williams, 2002; Tew, Harkins, & Dixon, 2015; Zagon & Jackson, 1994; Watt
& Brooks, 2012). In addition to the direct progeny of the PCL-R, a
number of self-report measures have developed relatively independently,
in order to provide a means of assessing psychopathy in
noninstitutionalized samples. These measures emphasize the traits
associated with the syndrome, rather than emphasizing the numbers of
disinhibited behaviors or criminal acts. Chief among these are the
primary and secondary scales of Levenson's Self-Report Psychopathy Scale
(SRPS; Levenson, Kiehl, & Fitzpatrick, 1995) and the Psychopathic
Personality Inventory (PPI; Lilienfeld & Andrews, 1996). The SRPS is a
26-item, self-report measure developed by Levenson et al. (1995). The
scale has two components: the "primary" scale, which is positively
correlated with disinhibition and boredom susceptibility and negatively
correlated with harm avoidance on the Multidimensional Personality
Questionnaire, and the "secondary" scale, which is associated with
stress reactions. In a test of the validity of the SRPS, Brinkley,
Schmitt, Smith, and Newman (2001) compared scores on the measure to
PCL-R scores in an institutional sample. Results showed that the PCL-R
was associated with the SRPS, and, more importantly, that the SRPS
related in predictable ways to substance abuse, criminal versatility,
and passive avoidance task performance. Similarly, additional research
has found that SRPS scores relate in expected ways with a number of
psychopathy correlates, including self-reported delinquency, low
agreeableness, and performance on a go/no-go passive avoidance task
(e.g., Lynam, Whiteside, and Jones, 1999; Sellbom, 2011). Like the SRPS,
the PPI was developed to emphasize the traits associated with
psychopathy (Lilienfeld & Andrews, 1996). The PPI is a 187-item
self-report measure with 8 subscales: Machiavellian Egocentricity,
Coldheartedness, Social Potency, Carefree Nonplanfulness, Fearlessness,
Impulsive Nonconformity, Blame Externalization, and Stress Immunity.
Research shows that the PPI correlates with PCL-R total scores
(Poythress, Edens, & Lilienfeld, 1998), and also with adult and
childhood antisocial behavior, institutional misconduct (Edens,
Poythress, Lilienfeld, & Patrick, 2008; Edens, Poythress, Lilienfeld,
Patrick, & Test, 2008), measures of emotional empathy (Sandoval,
Hancock, Poythress, Edens, & Lilienfeld, 2000), and self-report
aggression and dominance (Edens, Poythress, & Watkins, 2001). The PPI
has also been associated with abnormalities in affective startle
responses (Anderson, Stanford, Wan, & Young, 2011) and in behavioral and
neurological responses to incentives (Bjork, Chen, & Hommer, 2012). Some
have argued that these measures designed specifically to assess
psychopathy are preferable to traditional self-report personality
measures that may not fully capture the psychopathy syndrome
(Lilienfeld, 2006). Others have held that traditional measures are
entirely appropriate in the assessment of psychopathy. This argument
reflects the emergence of alternative conceptualizations of psychopathy
that are rooted strongly in personality traits. Lynam and colleagues
(e.g., Miller & Lynam, 2015; Lynam & Derefinko, 2006) have argued that
psychopathy is best conceptualized according to the traditional
five-factor

Diagnostic Criteria

623

model (FFM) of personality, and that psychopathy is easily captured by
the traits and facets of personality measures like the NEO PI-R.
According to the proponents of this approach, conceptualizing
psychopathy in accordance with existing personality traits places the
syndrome within the context of well-validated personality theory that is
already strongly connected to research in diverse areas, including
genetics, development, and neurobiology (Lynam & Derefinko, 2006).
Widiger and Lynam (1998) have suggested that each item of the PCL-R can
be easily represented by facets within the FFM. For example, according
to the authors, "glibness/ superficial charm" is represented by low
self-consciousness, and "shallow affect" by low warmth, low positive
emotionality, low altruism, and low tender-mindedness. To test the
validity of this profile, Miller, Lynam, Widiger, and Leukefeld (2001)
asked psychopathy experts to generate a FFM profile of the prototypical
psychopath on the basis of their understanding and knowledge of the
syndrome. Importantly, the profile generated by these experts was
similar to that generated by the theorists. Similarly, Derefinko and
Lynam (2007) found support for conceptualizing psychopathy according to
the FFM in a sample of drug abusers. In subsequent research, Lynam and
colleagues (Lynam & Widiger, 2001; Miller & Lynam, 2003) were able to
calculate the Psychopathy Resemblance Index (PRI), which is a measure of
the extent to which an individual resembles the FFM prototype. Research
supports the argument that scores on the PRI do capture many of the
qualities associated with psychopathy, as these scores are associated
with an earlier age of onset of delinquency, greater criminal
versatility, earlier drug use, and low internalizing problems (Miller et
al., 2001). Among college students, PRI scores are associated with
higher rates of substance abuse, aggression, riskier sex, and criminal
versatility and are also predictive of performance on
psychopathy-related laboratory tasks (i.e., the use of aggressive
responses on a social-information task, and less willingness to delay
gratification on a time-discounting task) (Miller & Lynam, 2003). More
recently, Lynam and colleagues (Lynam, Gaughan, et al., 2011; Lynam &
Widiger, 2001; Miller & Lynam, 2003) have developed the Elemental
Psychopathy Assessment (EPA), a self-report measure based on the
five-factor personality model. The EPA scales assess the 18 traits that
have been demonstrated to be associated with psychopathy, and in both
forensic and college samples, scores on the EPA have been shown to
correlate with existing psychopathy measures (i.e., SRP-III, PPI-R).
They show expected associations with correlates of psychopathy,
including aggressive social cognitions, antisocial personality features,
and romantic infidelity (Miller, Gaughan, et al., 2011; Wilson, Miller,
Zeichner, Lynam, & Widiger, 2011), and also alcohol use and antisocial
behavior (Lynam et al., 2011). Other researchers have put less emphasis
on the five-factor personality model in their trait-based
conceptualizations of psychopathy. For example, the triarchic
personality model of psychopathy (Patrick, Fowles, & Krueger, 2009;
Brislin, Drislane, Smith, Edens, & Patrick, 2015) places the three
traits of meanness, disinhibition, and boldness at the core of the
syndrome. Further, the Triarchic Psychopathy Measure (TriPM) was
developed to assess these traits. Research using the triarchic
conceptualization of psychopathy has found expected associations between
measures of the core personality features and other measures of
psychopathy and measures of psychopathy-related

624

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

criteria, including antisocial behavior and self-reported empathy
(Sellbom, Wygant, & Drislane, 2015), structural differences in the
amygdala (Vieira et al., 2015), and deficits in emotion responses
(Somma, Borroni, Drislane, & Fossati, 2015). In recent years, the field
has also been impacted by the conceptualization of psychopathy as part
of the "Dark Triad" of personality: that is, narcissism,
Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. Initially introduced in the early
2000s by Paulhus & Williams (2002), this domain has been the subject of
a steady increase in research, reflecting the growing influence of this
conceptualization (see Furnham, Richards, & Paulhus, 2013, for a
review). In addition to exploring the negative consequences of these
personality styles for those who exhibit them and for those around them
(e.g., Crysel, Crosier, & Webster, 2013; Jones & Neria, 2015), Dark
Triad researchers have also placed increasing emphasis on the ways in
which the characteristics of the Dark Triad may have adaptive value in
certain situations or contexts (e.g., Jonason, Duineveld, & Middleton,
2015). Although there are significant concerns regarding both the
overall utility of the Dark Triad construct (Glenn & Sellbom, 2015) and
the methods used to assess Dark Triad traits (Carter, Campbell, Muncer,
& Carter, 2015), the Dark Triad will likely continue to influence
personality-based discussions of the psychopathy syndrome.

Assessment Conclusions One of the most advantageous outcomes of the
development of the PCL-R and its progeny has been the unification of the
field. Although some have cautioned that this unification may have come
at the expense of the development of alternative measures, the benefit
to clinical work and laboratory research of having a shared
conceptualization of the psychopathy syndrome should not be
underestimated (Hare, 1996). Further, the PCL-R has not entirely
inhibited the development of alternative, non-PCL-based measures. In
fact, in recent years alternative measures of the syndrome have
proliferated, along with changes in many researchers' basic
conceptualization of the construct. One of the most obvious results of
these changes is a renewed interest in "defining" psychopathy as a
construct, and the accompanying efforts to reconcile emerging
theoretical and statistical inconsistencies across conceptualizations
(e.g., Miller, Maples-Keller, & Lynam, 2015; Sellbom, Cooke, & Hart,
2015). In the absence of such analysis, it is unclear whether
differences across samples and studies are the result of differences in
the conceptualization of the construct or represent differences in the
expression of the construct. This distinction may be particularly
important depending upon whether a researcher is examining
deviance-related correlates of the syndrome---which may be less likely
to vary across diverse conceptualizations---or etiologically relevant
correlates---the prediction of which may differ in important ways across
the different conceptualizations being employed.

Prevalence of Psychopathy Because much of the research on psychopathy
has been conducted in institutional settings, scientific understanding
of the rates of the disorder in these samples is more advanced. For
example, among samples of North American male offenders, the rates of
psychopathy range from 15% to 49% (e.g., Herve, Mitchell, & Cooper,
2004; Salekin, Rogers,

Psychological Models and Somatic Factors

625

Ustad, & Sewell, 1998). Similar rates have been found among forensic
populations in Sweden (i.e., 23% to 32%) and Spain (18% to 38%). There
does appear to be some variation within and between international
samples. For example, rates in Scottish samples have been as low as 3%
(Cooke & Michie, 1999), whereas among British samples, they have ranged
from 4.5% in a prison sample to 47% in a psychiatric sample (see
Sullivan & Kosson, 2006, for a review). Rates tend to be lower in
incarcerated female samples, with rates among incarcerated females as
low as 9% to 20% (Lehman & Ittel, 2012; Salekin et al., 1997; Vitale et
al., 2002). This range does not change much even when a lower diagnostic
cutoff score of 25 is used (e.g., Lehman & Ittel, 2012). More and more
researchers are moving away from a diagnostic model that emphasizes
cutoff scores and prevalence rates. Rather, the use of many of the
alternative measures discussed in the previous section has shifted the
emphasis toward the conceptualization of psychopathy as a continuous
construct wherein individuals who might otherwise be categorized as
"subclinical" for psychopathy are found to exhibit many of the
underlying personality, affective, and behavioral characteristics of the
traditional psychopathic individual. Nevertheless, for many in applied
settings, the conceptualization of psychopathy as a discrete diagnostic
entity is still common and likely has high practical utility.

Psychological Models and Somatic Factors Conceptual and causal models of
psychopathy emphasize both the emotional and cognitive characteristics
associated with the syndrome. Although some approaches emphasize
psychopathic individuals' deficits in fear and focus on associated
abnormalities in amygdala functioning (e.g., Blair, 2006), an
alternative approach is to consider the behavioral abnormalities
associated with psychopathy as reflecting a response modulation deficit
associated with abnormalities in attention processes (e.g., Gorenstein &
Newman, 1980). Emerging findings in neuroimaging and genetics have
further informed our understanding of the syndrome.

Fearlessness, Fear Conditioning, and Amygdala Abnormalities Several
theoretical formulations have emphasized fearlessness or insensitivity
to punishment as underlying causes of the psychopathy syndrome (e.g.,
Fowles, 1980; Lykken, 1995). Early theories of psychopathy embraced
Gray's (e.g., Gray & McNaughten, 2000) model of BIS/BAS functioning,
which proposed three systems that served to regulate behavior: the
fight/flight system (FFS), which responds to unconditioned or innately
aversive stimuli; the behavioral activation system (BAS), described as
sensitive to reward stimuli and likely to activate responses in the face
of cues or conditioned stimuli signaling reward; and the behavioral
inhibition system (BIS), described as sensitive to punishment stimuli
and likely to inhibit ongoing responses in response to cues or
conditioned stimuli signaling punishment or frustrative nonreward.
Importantly, recent formulations of the model have deemphasized the idea
that the BIS reflects generalized sensitivity to threat, and instead
have suggested that the BIS is activated specifically under conditions
of goal conflict (Gray & McNaughten, 2000).

626

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

Working from Gray's original model, Fowles (1980) proposed that the
psychopathy syndrome, characterized as it was by impulsivity,
callousness, and an absence of neurosis, was associated with deficits in
the BIS. According to this formulation, a hyporeactive BIS, in
conjunction with a normal BAS response, could result in the types of
symptoms observed among psychopathic people. Specifically, these
individuals would show the poor punishment learning and weak behavioral
inhibition characteristic of the psychopathic individual (Fowles, 1980).
Self-report data have supported this proposition, with those
psychopathic individuals characterized by low levels of neurotic anxiety
or those categorized as "primary" psychopathic individuals showing
significantly lower scores on self-report measures of BIS functioning
and punishment sensitivity (e.g., Broerman, Ross, & Corr, 2014; Newman,
MacCoon, Vaughn, & Sadeh, 2005; Ross et al., 2007). Conversely, it was
found that those individuals whose psychopathy symptoms were combined
with high levels of trait anxiety or neuroticism (so-called secondary
psychopathic individuals) were characterized not by deficits in the BIS
but by hyperresponsivity of the BAS (Newman et al., 2005). Early and
current experimental data support the weak BIS formulation. For example,
passive avoidance tasks, which require the individual to inhibit
responses to previously punished stimuli, have reliably differentiated
people with psychopathy from controls, with psychopathic individuals
committing significantly more passive avoidance errors (e.g., Lykken,
1957; Newman & Kosson, 1986; Newman & Schmitt, 1998; Thornquist &
Zuckerman, 1995). Similarly, on a card-playing task that requires the
ability to modulate responses in the context of increasing punishment
contingencies, psychopathic individuals play significantly more cards
and lose significantly more money than controls (e.g., Newman,
Patterson, & Kosson, 1987). Physiological data also support the BIS
hypothesis. For example, both psychopathic offenders and nonincarcerated
individuals with high levels of psychopathic traits show decreased
electrodermal responsivity in anticipation of an aversive event (Arnett,
Howland, Smith, & Newman, 1993; Dindo & Fowles, 2011; Wang et al., 2012)
and show abnormalities in eye-blink startle responses (Anderson et al.,
2011; Levenston, Patrick, Bradley, & Lang, 2000; Patrick et al., 1993;
Sutton, Vitale, & Newman, 2002). Specifically, research has demonstrated
that exposure to aversive or unpleasant stimuli will potentiate an
eye-blink startle response in controls. Psychopathic participants,
however, show significantly reduced startle potentiation in response to
these stimuli, although their startle response to pleasant stimuli does
not differ from that of controls. Importantly, this finding has been
linked most closely to the affective/interpersonal (i.e., Factor 1)
features of psychopathy (Vaidyanathan et al., 2011). Taken together,
these self-report and laboratory data provide some evidence for
deficient BIS functioning. However, other theorists have focused more on
fearlessness as a trait and less on BIS functioning. For example,
although Lykken's (1957, 1995) low-fear hypothesis dovetailed well with
Fowles's (1980) emphasis on deficient BIS functioning, Lykken placed
less emphasis on the particulars of Gray's model. Rather, Lykken (1995)
proposed that the psychopathic individual is characterized by
fearlessness, which impedes normal socialization and results in the
cluster of symptoms characteristic of the syndrome (e.g., failure to
learn from experience, lack of empathy, irresponsibility,
manipulativeness). This proposal is based, in part, on the results of
Lykken's highly influential 1957 study of conditioning and psychopathy.
The results of this seminal study showed that the

Psychological Models and Somatic Factors

627

psychopathic individuals (designated on the basis of their similarity to
Cleckley's prototype) had lower scores on a self-report measure of
fearfulness (i.e., the Activity Preference Questionnaire), showed poor
electrodermal conditioning relative to controls in a paradigm wherein
electric shock served as the unconditioned stimulus (UCS), and also
exhibited deficient passive avoidance performance (Lykken, 1957). Taken
together, these data suggested deficient fear conditioning among
psychopathic individuals, and served as the basis for Lykken's
"low-fear" hypothesis. Although there are data to support the weak-BIS
and low-fear theories, Blair (2006) has criticized these traditional
low-fear formulations on the basis of increasing specificity in the
neurocognitive literature. Consequently, Blair (2006) emphasized the
role of the amygdala in psychopathy and has focused primarily on
punishment-based learning associated with this structure. Blair (2006)
argued that psychopathic individuals should show abnormalities only on
those tasks that involve the formation of associations between a
conditioned stimulus and an unconditioned response (CS-UR) (e.g., a
galvanic skin response to a stimulus previously associated with a
shock); between a conditioned stimulus and an affect representation; and
between a conditioned stimulus and the valenced sensory properties of
the unconditioned stimulus associations (e.g., the visual appearance or
smell of the unconditioned stimulus). Consistent with Blair's proposal,
psychopathic individuals have demonstrated deficits on tasks that
preferentially involve these types of learning. For example, they show
impairment on aversive conditioning tasks, which involve
amygdala-specific learning (i.e., CS-UR and CS--affect representation
associations) (Lykken, 1957; Rothemund et al., 2012). Further, there is
evidence that, relative to controls, psychopathic participants show
reduced amygdala activation during such aversive conditioning tasks
(e.g., Veit et al., 2002), and that adolescents with high levels of
psychopathic traits show relatively less amygdala responsiveness than
controls on a passive avoidance task (Finger et al., 2011). Differences
in amygdala activation have also been noted in studies of both adults
and juveniles with high versus low psychopathic traits (Glenn, Raine, &
Schug, 2009; Jones, Laurens, Herba, Barker, & Viding, 2009; Marsh et
al., 2008; White et al., 2012). Additionally, reductions in amygdala
volume in both institutionalized and noninstitutionalized psychopathic
individuals (e.g., Ermer, Cope, Nyalakanti, Calhoun, & Kiehl, 2012;
Yang, Raine, Colletti, Toga, & Narr, 2010; Yang, Raine, Narr, Colletti,
& Toga, 2009) and abnormalities in amygdala structure among psychopathic
individuals (Boccardi et al., 2011) have been reported. Paradigms using
the fear-potentiated startle response to differentiate psychopathic
individuals and controls also provide support for Blair's hypothesis.
Because the amygdala is influential in the modulation of the startle
response on such tasks (e.g., Davis, 2000), psychopathic individuals'
deficient performance implicates this structure, providing further
support that amygdala functioning is associated with the psychopathy
syndrome. Blair (2006) was also able to explain why psychopathic
individuals show performance deficits on some tasks but not on others.
For example, the low-fear and punishment insensitivity models for
psychopathy have been criticized on the basis of psychopathic
individuals' normal performance on punishment-only versions of the
passive avoidance task. On this version of the task, participants are
punished for responding to some stimuli and punished for not responding
to other stimuli. Psychopathic participants' typical performance on such
tasks suggests that, contrary to the punishment- and

628

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

fear-based theories, psychopathic individuals do demonstrate adequate
passive avoidance of punishment-related stimuli under certain
conditions. To explain this discrepancy, Blair (2006) incorporated the
theoretical formulations of Baxter and Murray (2002) that distinguished
instrumental tasks that involve the amygdala (e.g., passive avoidance
learning) from those instrumental learning tasks that do not (e.g.,
conditional learning and object discrimination). Specifically, according
to Blair (2006), psychopathic individuals are not affected on the
punishment-only task because this task requires the formation of
stimulus-response associations, rather than CS--affect representation
associations. In other words, because the punishment-only version of the
passive avoidance task does not involve learning that requires the
amygdala, psychopathic individuals are able to perform normally.
Although there is much evidence to support the low-fear and
punishment-learning theories of psychopathy, this emphasis on emotion
may result in an overly narrow focus. For example, the amygdala-based
models of psychopathy have placed considerable emphasis on results
showing differences in the activation and morphology of the amygdala
between psychopathic individuals and individuals high in psychopathy
traits relative to controls. However, it is important to recognize that
differences in brain structure activation and morphology in psychopathy
are not limited to the amygdala. For example, Finger and colleagues
(2011) also noted decreased responsiveness in the orbitofrontal cortex
and caudate, a finding consistent with that of Marsh et al. (2011).
Similarly, Boccardi and colleagues (2011) found not only significant
differences in amygdala structure between psychopathic individuals and
controls but also significant reduction in orbitofrontal regions.
Finally, research has found evidence for abnormal activation among both
psychopathic and subclinical psychopathic individuals in several brain
regions implicated in empathic responses to others' pain, including the
anterior insula, inferior frontal gyrus, and mid- and anterior cingulate
cortex (Decety, Skelley, & Kiehl, 2013; Seara-Cardosa, Viding, Lickley,
& Sebastian, 2015). This suggestion of more general abnormality is
consistent with studies showing differences across psychopathic
individuals and nonpsychopathic individuals in a variety of regions,
including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC; e.g., LaPierre,
Braun, & Hodgins, 1995; Mitchell, Colledge, Leonard, & Blair, 2002), the
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC; e.g., Ermer et al., 2012; LaPierre et al.,
1995; Mitchell et al., 2002), and the medial frontal or anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC; Ly et al., 2012; Munro et al., 2007; Veit et al.,
2002). These findings are consistent with results showing that
psychopathic individuals show deficits in performance on tasks involving
OFC and ACC functioning (Blair et al., 2006). Further, beyond structural
abnormalities, additional research is suggesting that abnormal
connectivity between regions may be associated with psychopathy (Cohn et
al., 2015; Ly et al., 2012; Motzkin, Newman, Kiehl, & Keonigs, 2011;
Philippi et al., 2015). Recently, Hamilton, Hiatt-Racer, and Newman
(2015) have attempted to organize and reconcile these disparate findings
within the framework of their proposed impaired integration (II) theory.
According to the II theory, abnormalities in psychopathic individuals'
neural connectivity interfere with their information integration.
Specifically, the authors propose that psychopathy is characterized by
decreased functioning of the salience and default mode networks, normal
functioning in executive control networks, and less coordination between
networks. Although further empirical evidence is needed to support the
theory, it capitalizes on recent advancements in behavioral and
neuroimaging

Psychological Models and Somatic Factors

629

data to present a coherent model for linking existing affective and
cognitive models of psychopathy and offers a useful starting point for
future research.

Response Modulation and Attention In addition to a focus on results
specific to the amygdala, the traditional, amygdala-based models of
psychopathy rely on laboratory tasks that emphasize valenced stimuli
(e.g., the positive and negative visual stimuli presented as part of the
acoustic startle paradigm, the punishment and reward stimuli used in
passive avoidance tasks) as opposed to neutral stimuli. In an
alternative line of investigation, Newman and colleagues (e.g., Hiatt,
Schmitt, & Newman, 2004; Newman, Schmitt, & Voss, 1997; Vitale, Hiatt,
Brinkley, & Newman, 2007) have used affectively and motivationally
neutral tasks designed to examine attention processing among
psychopathic people. On such tasks, psychopathic participants have
reliably exhibited abnormalities in attention processing, particularly
when stimuli are secondary or peripheral to their primary focus of
selective attention (e.g., Hare & Jutai, 1988; Hiatt et al., 2004;
Newman et al., 1997; Vitale et al., 2007). Consistent with this
emphasis, the response modulation hypothesis (RMH; Gorenstein & Newman,
1980; Newman & Baskin-Sommers, 2011) holds that abnormalities in
selective attention undermine the ability of psychopathic individuals to
consider contextual information that modulates the goal-directed
behavior of others. In the most recent version of this model, Newman and
Baskin-Sommers (2011) characterize the problem as an "attention
bottleneck," which hampers the simultaneous processing of multiple
channels of information. Thus, once attention is allocated to a specific
goal, psychopathic individuals are less able to process the full range
of affective and nonaffective stimuli, and their associated meanings,
that normally provide an evaluative context for goal-directed behavior
(MacCoon, Wallace, & Newman, 2004). This focus on attention processing
distinguishes the RMH from the low-fear and punishment-learning based
models of psychopathy (e.g., Blair, 2006; Fowles, 1980; Lykken, 1995).
Specifically, although the RMH predicts a situation-specific deficit,
rather than a general deficit, in processing threat and other emotion
cues, psychopathic individuals' failure to consider contextual
information is not limited to affective information (Hiatt et al., 2004;
Newman et al., 1997; Vitale et al., 2005; Wolf et al., 2011; Zeier,
Maxwell, & Newman, 2009). To evaluate the specificity of that aspect of
the RMH, Newman and colleagues have conducted a series of studies that
manipulate participants' focus of attention while measuring performance
on tasks that are strongly associated with psychopathic behavior,
including passive avoidance, electrodermal activity, fear-potentiated
startle, and amygdala activation (see Newman & Baskin-Sommers, 2011, for
a review). With regard to passive avoidance learning, for instance, the
RMH predicts that psychopathic individuals will be relatively oblivious
to inhibitory punishment cues when they are focused on responding to
reward, but that they will use punishment cues to inhibit responding as
well as nonpsychopathic individuals do when avoiding punishment is their
primary goal. Consistent with these predictions, psychopathic offenders
committed more passive avoidance errors than controls when avoiding
punishment-involved learning to inhibit responses for reward, but their
passive avoidance was as good or better than controls' avoidance was in
a punishment-only version of the same task (i.e., when punishment cues
were goal-relevant

630

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

rather than peripheral to the primary focus of goal-directed behavior)
(Newman & Kosson, 1986; Newman, Patterson, Howland, & Nichols, 1990;
Newman & Schmitt, 1998). Thus, like Blair (2006), Newman and colleagues
are able to reconcile the discrepant passive avoidance literature,
although with an emphasis on the attentional demands of the task, rather
than on the associations that must be formed. Parallel findings have
been obtained using fear-potentiated startle (FPS). Newman and
colleagues (Baskin-Sommers, Curtin, & Newman, 2011; Newman, Curtin,
Bertsch, & Baskin-Sommers, 2010) have used an instructed fear
conditioning paradigm in which participants may receive electric shocks
to their fingers when a red stimulus appears but not when a green
stimulus appears. Further, participants' focus of attention is
manipulated, such that participants are instructed to focus either on
the color of each stimulus (red versus green) or on a characteristic of
the stimulus unrelated to the shock (i.e., the presence of an uppercase
or lowercase letter). Across diverse experiments, when FPS is measured
in psychopathic versus nonpsychopathic participants, psychopathic
offenders display significantly weaker FPS than controls, but only under
the condition that directs their attention to the uppercase versus
lowercase letters. When participants were instructed to focus on the red
versus green color of the stimuli and respond accordingly, psychopathic
offenders displayed as much or more FPS as controls. In other words,
psychopathic participants' fear-related deficit in startle responding
appeared and disappeared according to their focus of attention: when
focused on threat-relevant information (i.e., the color associated with
an electric shock) they displayed normal fear responses, but they
displayed what appeared to be a profound fear deficit when the threat
cues were peripheral to their goal-directed focus of attention
(Baskin-Sommers et al., 2011; Newman et al., 2010). According to the
RMH, psychopathic individuals' insensitivity to punishment and other
affectively significant cues is relatively specific to conditions in
which the cues are peripheral to their goal-directed focus of attention.
The RMH further predicts that these individuals should show
insensitivity to potentially relevant but affectively neutral
information under the same circumstances. To test this proposal, Newman
and colleagues conducted a series of studies utilizing modified Stroop
and flanker (e.g., Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974) tasks. In these tasks,
participants are instructed to attend to a particular target stimulus
and to make a response on the basis of the target. However, on each
trial, the target stimulus appears with another stimulus that may be
congruent (i.e., elicits the same response as the one associated with
the target), incongruent (i.e., elicits a different response than the
target), or neutral (has no implications for response selection). These
characteristics allow researchers to measure the extent to which
distracting peripheral cues interfere with goal-directed responses
(i.e., engender interference). Interference is typically computed by
subtracting response speed on neutral trials from response speed on
incongruent trials. In contrast to most laboratory studies of
psychopathology, which predict a performance deficit, the RMH predicts
that psychopathic individuals will display superior performance (i.e.,
less interference), particularly on tasks that enable participants to
readily distinguish between targets and distractors on the basis of
spatial location or salient stimulus features. In the first study to
evaluate this hypothesis, Newman et al. (1997) used a computerized
picture-word task. On this task, participants were presented with two
consecutive pictures or words, and instructed to indicate whether the
two pictures (or words) were conceptually related. On word trials, the
first word was presented with a superimposed picture.

Psychological Models and Somatic Factors

631

On picture trials, the first picture was presented with a superimposed
word. On all trials, participants were instructed to ignore the
superimposed (i.e., secondary context) stimulus. However, on half of the
trials when the consecutively presented stimuli were conceptually
unrelated, the superimposed picture (or word) was conceptually related
to the second stimulus. In these trials, the correct response was
"unrelated," but the response indicated by the secondary stimulus was
incongruent with this response (e.g., the word "sweep" superimposed over
a picture of a hat, followed by a picture of a broom). Among healthy
participants, responses on these incongruent trials were reliably slower
than responses to congruent trials (see Gernsbacher & Faust, 1991).
Consistent with the performance of healthy participants, nonpsychopathic
male offenders responded significantly more slowly on incongruent versus
congruent trials (i.e., they showed interference). However, interference
was virtually nonexistent in psychopathic male offenders, thus
demonstrating significantly less sensitivity to the secondary stimulus
among this group. This effect was subsequently replicated (e.g., Hiatt
et al., 2004; Vitale et al., 2007). Zeier and colleagues (2009) provided
a conceptual replication of this study and, moreover, demonstrated the
importance of attentional focus in determining the effect. In this
study, participants viewed numbers (5, 8), letters (G, H), and neutral
stimuli (#) within displays that always involved two of these stimuli
(e.g., G and 5). Participants were instructed to press a button to
indicate whether the target stimulus was a number or letter. The two
stimuli were always presented to the left and right of a central
fixation point that ultimately transformed into an arrow (\< or \>)
designating the target location. In order to evaluate the importance of
selective attention on psychopathy-related differences in sensitivity to
incongruent information, the authors employed a cuing procedure that
either allowed participants to predict the spatial location of the
target before the target and distracter appeared or highlighted both
stimulus locations. For instance, in one condition a rectangular box
surrounded the location where the target would ultimately appear or
appeared at both locations 100 milliseconds before the experimental
display. Consistent with RMH, when the boxes appeared at both locations,
drawing attention to the target as well as the potentially distracting
flanker stimulus, psychopathic offenders and controls displayed
comparable amounts of interference. However, when the box cued the
target location specifically, psychopathic offenders displayed
significantly less interference than controls. Such findings again
highlight that the hypothesized attention bottleneck associated with
psychopathy may limit these individuals' processing of peripheral
information. Though this characteristic may have enhanced their ability
to ignore distraction, this advantage was counterbalanced by their
failure to process peripheral information that may be crucial for
regulating maladaptive responses. Recent research using alternative
measures of attention allocation (e.g., box Stroop, gaze detection
tasks) continues to provide support for the RMH (Baskin-Sommers &
Newman, 2014; Dawel et al., 2015; Sethi et al., 2015). An important
consideration in evaluating the response modulation model is that many
of the studies involved comparing low-anxious psychopathic individuals
with a group of comparably low-anxious controls in order to test
hypotheses concerning so-called primary psychopathy. Such distinctions
have a long history in psychopathy research (e.g., Lykken, 1957) and
continue to be emphasized today (e.g., Hicks, Markon, Patrick, Krueger,
& Newman, 2004; Skeem et al., 2011). However, when interpreting such
findings, it is important to bear in mind that not all individuals
assessed as psychopathic using the

632

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

Psychopathy Checklist--Revised will fall into this group. It is also
worth noting that the core evidence for the RMH, including abnormalities
on the modified Stroop task (Hiatt et al., 2004), passive avoidance task
(Newman & Kosson, 1986), and fear-potentiated startle tasks
(Baskin-Sommers et al., 2011, Newman et al., 2010), has been found
without restricting analyses to the low-anxious groups. Further research
is needed to determine whether individuals categorized into the low- and
high-anxious psychopathic subtypes should be conceptualized as having
different disorders with distinct psychobiological correlates or as
sharing a core psychobiological predisposition, the manifestation of
which is importantly influenced by their levels of comorbid anxiety (see
Brinkley, Newman, & Widiger, 2004; Lake, Baskin-Sommers, Li, Curtin, &
Newman, 2011).

Genetics There are more than 100 studies examining the relative
contributions of genetic and environmental factors to antisocial
behavior. Generally, evidence supports a moderate contribution of each
factor. For example, in a meta-analysis, Waldman and Rhee (2006) found
moderate additive genetic (a2 = .32), nonadditive genetic (c2 = .09),
shared environmental (d2 = .16), and nonshared environmental (e2 = .43)
influences on antisocial behavior, and the best-fitting model included
each of these four components (𝜒 2 = 1, 394.46, df = 146, p \< .001; AIC
= 1, 102.46). Importantly, the studies included in this analysis focused
primarily on antisocial behavior, and used diagnoses of ASPD or conduct
disorder, criminal activity and delinquency, or self-reports of
aggression as outcome variables. Although antisocial behavior is a
component of psychopathy, the psychopathy syndrome is distinct from
general criminality or antisociality (Cleckley, 1988). As a result, the
meta-analysis only indirectly addresses the genetic basis of
psychopathy. Fortunately, there is an emerging literature focused on
examining the relative contribution of genetics to traits more
specifically associated with the psychopathy syndrome. In one study of
adolescent monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs, Larsson, Andershed, and
Lichtenstein (2006) used the YPI to assess the affective, interpersonal,
and behavioral components of the psychopathy syndrome. Their results
indicated that for each of these three components of psychopathy,
genetic1 and nonshared environmental factors accounted for the majority
of variance, with little or no influence from shared environmental
factors. Further, because their sample included both males and females,
the authors were able to test for gender differences in the relative
influences of the factors. None were found, suggesting that there may
not be significant differences in the heritability of psychopathic
traits across gender (Larsson et al., 2006). These data from Larsson et
al. (2006) are consistent with Blonigen, Hicks, Kreuger, Patrick, and
Iacono's (2006) analysis of 626 twin pairs from the Minnesota Twin
Family Study. In this study, psychopathy was represented by the Fearless
Dominance (representing a combination of the interpersonal and affective
components of psychopathy) and Impulsive Antisociality (representing the
behavioral component of psychopathy) subscales of the Multidimensional
Personality Questionnaire (MPQ; Tellegen, 2000). 1 The authors did not
analyze additive and nonadditive genetic factors separately. Thus, these
"genetic" contributions include

both components.

Psychological Models and Somatic Factors

633

As Larsson and colleagues (2006) had found, a model including additive
genetic and nonshared environmental factors provided the best fit to the
data, and there appeared to be no significant differences in the model
fit across gender (Blonigen et al., 2006). Using the Detachment and
Antisocial subscales from the Minnesota Temperament Inventory to assess
the affective and behavioral components of psychopathy, Taylor, Loney,
Bobadilla, Iacono, and McGue (2003) examined the influence of genetic
and shared and nonshared environmental factors in two samples of
adolescent male twins (aged 16 to 18). As both Larsson et al. (2006) and
Blonigen et al. (2006) found, the best-fitting model for both the
affective and behavioral dimensions included additive genetic factors
and nonshared environmental factors; there was little contribution from
shared environmental factors (Taylor et al., 2003). This pattern of
results has also been replicated by Bezdjian, Raine, Baker, and Lynam
(2011), who used the Child Psychopathy Scale and found that genetic
factors and nonshared environmental factors influenced psychopathy trait
levels in males and females; as in previous research, shared
environmental influences showed no influence. Each of the preceding
studies supports the importance of both genetic and nonshared
environmental factors and the negligible influence of shared
environmental factors. In this light, the distinction between shared and
nonshared environmental influences becomes crucial for later
investigation of the factors associated with psychopathy. Nonshared
environmental factors are represented by the divergence of monozygotic
twins whose shared environments are identical. One potentially potent
nonshared environmental factor is peer relationships (Manke, McGuire,
Reiss, Hetherington, & Plomin, 1995), which play an important role in
adolescent development. Their importance to psychopathic personality, in
particular, is highlighted by the finding that the level of psychopathic
traits exhibited by an individual adolescent appears to be correlated
with the levels of psychopathic traits exhibited by members of his or
her peer friendship group (Andershed, Kerr, Stattin, & Engels, 2003,
cited in Larsson et al., 2006). The key role of genetic and nonshared
environmental factors is further emphasized by a second meta-analysis of
psychopathy-related studies, conducted by Waldman and Rhee (2006). Using
only studies that included self-report measures of the interpersonal and
affective traits associated with the psychopathy syndrome (e.g., the
Psychopathic Deviate (Pd) subscale of the MMPI and MMPI-2) (Butcher,
1979; Butcher et al., 2001), the Minnesota Temperament Inventory (Taylor
et al., 2003), and the Psychopathic Personality Inventory (Lilienfeld &
Andrews, 1996) the authors found that a model including only additive
genetic and nonshared environmental influences represented the best data
fit (𝜒 2 = 45.77, df = 20, p \< .001; AIC = 5.77), with each component
acting as a moderate influence (a2 = .49, e2 = .51). Taken together, the
preceding data provide good evidence for the roles of genetic and
nonshared environmental factors in the development of the psychopathy
syndrome. Further, these studies have also provided a means for
examining the independence of the genetic contribution to each component
of the syndrome. For example, Larsson and colleagues (2006) found that
additive genetic and nonshared environmental factors were more important
to the affective and impulsivity components than to the interpersonal
component. Specifically, genetic factors accounted for 22% of the
variance in the affective and impulsivity components of psychopathy, but
only 1% of the variance in the interpersonal component. Similarly,
nonshared environmental factors accounted for a greater proportion

634

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

of the variance in the affective (45%) and impulsivity (28%) components
compared to the interpersonal component (17%). In their study using the
MPQ subscales Fearless Dominance (FD) and Impulsive Antisociality (IA),
Blonigen and colleagues (2006) examined the relative contributions of
environmental and genetic factors to the separate development of these
dimensions. To this end, the authors used data from two time points
(ages 17 and 24). The authors partitioned the variance at age 24 into
the variance contributed from the first time point (age 17) and the
variance unique to this second time point. Thus, they were able to
differentiate the influences of genetic and environmental factors on the
stable proportion of variance and the genetic and environmental factors
influencing the variance associated with change. Consistent with
expectations for both dimensions, the stable proportion of variance in
the traits was due primarily to additive genetic (FD a2 = .25; IA a2 =
.23) rather than nonshared environmental factors (FD e2 = .12; IA e2 =
.07); whereas, the proportion of variance associated with change was
influenced by nonshared environmental factors (FD e2 = .45; AI e2 = .44)
more than by additive genetic factors (FD a2 = .17; IA a2 = .26).
Research focusing on callous-unemotional traits in adolescents and
children provides strong evidence for a genetic influence in the
development of these traits, with an estimated 40% to 78% of the
variation in CU traits attributable to genetic variation (see Viding &
McCrory, 2012, for a review). Taken together, these data provide
considerable evidence that psychopathy as it has been assessed in the
preceding studies includes an additive genetic component. These data
have opened new areas of investigation that attempt to characterize the
precise nature of this influence. Some lines of investigation appear
promising: for example, specificity of father-to-child transmission
(Beaver, Rowland, Schwartz, & Nedelec, 2011); dopamine genes theorized
to underlie attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (Waldman & Gizer,
2006), serotonergic genes associated with aggression and violence
(Berman, Kavoussi, & Coccaro, 1997) and impulsivity (Sadeh et al.,
2010); the MAOA gene, which is implicated in antisocial behavior,
associated with childhood abuse (Tikkanen et al., 2011); and dopamine
receptor gene variants associated with fear conditioning (Huertas et
al., 2010). Yet, it is still too early to know which of these
avenues---if any---will provide the best explanation for the psychopathy
syndrome. In the meanwhile, alternative theories of psychopathy continue
to flourish.

Treatment of Psychopathy Historically, the prognosis for psychopathy has
been poor, and most individuals in the field considered the syndrome to
be relatively untreatable (e.g., Hare & Hart, 1993; Lykken, 1995). In
recent years, however, research investigators have begun to look more
critically at this issue, with many noting that the claim that
psychopathy is "untreatable" may have been overstated. Further,
researchers have argued that the potential for significant developments
in the treatment of psychopathy exists, particularly as we increase our
knowledge of the etiological factors that underlie the syndrome. This is
particularly evident among younger samples and when alternative
approaches to intervention and prevention are considered (Reidy et al.,
2015; Viding & McCrory, 2012).

Treatment of Psychopathy

635

Ogloff, Wong, and Greenwood (1990) conducted one of the early and most
influential treatment studies. They assessed psychopathic individuals'
performance in a therapeutic community setting, and they found that
these individuals were more likely to experience early discharge from
the program, were less motivated, and showed less overall improvement
(Ogloff et al., 1990). This study is particularly important because the
authors used the early version of the Psychopathy Checklist to classify
participants as psychopathic. As a result, in addition to ensuring a
homogeneous psychopathic group for comparison purposes, the study is
also directly relevant to current practice in the field, where the PCL-R
is the clinical standard for assessment. In a similar study, Rice,
Harris, and Cormier (1992) examined psychopathic offenders' performance
in an intensive therapeutic community contained within a maximum
security prison. The treatment program was geared toward increasing
empathy and responsibility for peers, and thus was primarily
peer-operated. In a follow-up comparison, the authors compared 146
treated offenders with a matched comparison group of 146 untreated
offenders on measures of recidivism. The results were consistent with
those of Ogloff et al. (1990), in that psychopathic offenders did not
appear to benefit from the therapeutic community program. Other studies
provide similar evidence that psychopathic individuals may be resistant
to treatment. Compared to nonpsychopathic participants, psychopathic
participants in treatment demonstrate poor program adjustment and higher
attrition (e.g., Berger, Rotermund, Vieth, & Hohnhorst, 2012; Hobson,
Shine, & Roberts, 2000; Richards, Casey, & Lucente, 2003; Ogloff et al.,
1990; Olver & Wong, 2009; Rice et al., 1992) and lower levels of
therapeutic gain (Chakhssi, de Ruiter, & Berstein, 2010; Hughes, Hogue,
Hollin, & Champion, 1997; Roche, Shoss, Pincus, & Ménard, 2011).
Although a number of studies point to the difficulty of treating
psychopathy, the results of a meta-analysis conducted by Salekin (2002)
suggested more reason for optimism than previously expected. In this
analysis, when the proportion of treatment participants who would have
been expected to improve without treatment was subtracted from the
proportion of treatment participants who were judged to have improved,
the mean rate of successful intervention was .62 across 42 treatment
studies. There were several important limitations in this study: For
example, the PCL-R was used to assess psychopathy in only four of the
studies; several of the studies were also conducted in juvenile samples;
and only a minority of the studies included aggressive or criminal
behavior as one of the outcome variables. Nevertheless, the conclusion
is consistent with the following subsequent research. There are recent
studies that suggest a potential for therapeutic gain, particularly
among adolescents characterized by high levels of psychopathic traits.
For example, Salekin, Tippey, and Allen (2012) found that a program
designed to increase motivation, increase positive emotion, and decrease
callousness in youth with conduct problems in a secure facility led to a
significant decrease in psychopathy scores. Further, this finding held
across all three psychopathy trait domains---callous/interpersonal,
affective, and impulsivity. Similarly, in another study of children and
adolescents, McDonald, Dodson, Rosenfield, and Jouriles (2011) found
that an intervention aimed at altering mothers' harsh and inconsistent
parenting led to a decrease in psychopathy trait scores in a sample of
children experiencing high levels of conduct problems. Caldwell (2011)
showed that changes in PCL:YV scores associated with treatment in a
secure facility for adolescents

636

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

were also associated with decreased general and violent reoffending.
Finally, in a large study of civil psychiatric patients that included 72
individuals designated as psychopathic, Skeem, Monahan, and Mulvey
(2002) found that psychopathy did not moderate the effects of treatment;
that is, when reductions in violence were examined, psychopathic
patients showed responses to treatment similar to nonpsychopathic
patients. In light of these findings, there are several alternatives.
One is to de-emphasize treatments for psychopathic individuals that are
geared toward building social skills or empathy, and instead to create
behavior modification programs with the goal of reducing harm (i.e.,
criminal recidivism) caused by these individuals (Harris & Rice, 2006).
A second possibility is to expand interventions for children and
adolescents with psychopathic traits. Given the possibility that this
group may be more likely to exhibit treatment gains, this would be a
strategic use of resources. A third alternative is to turn to research
on the etiology of psychopathy to devise treatment strategies better
suited to the particular deficits demonstrated by this group (Wallace,
Schmitt, Vitale, & Newman, 2000). For example, Newman and colleagues
(e.g., Newman, 1998; Wallace et al., 2000) have proposed that
psychopathic individuals are characterized by a deficit in response
modulation. Specifically, psychopathic individuals are proposed to be
deficient in their ability to automatically redirect attention from the
primary focus of their goal-directed behavior to the evaluation of
secondary stimuli. Wallace and colleagues (2000) have argued that, on
the basis of such a deficit, it would be unlikely that simply changing
the content of psychopathic thought (e.g., teaching social skills and
anger management, as in traditional cognitive therapy) would result in
significant improvement in these individuals' behavior. This is because
psychopathic individuals would be unable to benefit from changes in
their thinking, that they could not subsequently access automatically in
key situations, due to their response modulation deficit. Instead, the
primary emphasis should be on developing and teaching strategies for
compensating for the basic information processing deficit that makes
accessing these cognitions so challenging (Wallace et al., 2000). In
theory, such an approach would provide a means for psychopathic
individuals to benefit more fully from other interventions they receive,
thereby helping to "close the gap" in treatment response between
individuals with and without psychopathy. Consistent with the preceding
suggestions, Baskin-Sommers, Curtin, and Newman (2015) examined the
utility of taking a cognitive remediation approach to the treatment of
psychopathy. In a cognitive remediation intervention, the emphasis is on
training individuals in the particular cognitive skills---such as paying
attention to contextual cues, sustained attention, and working
memory---that underlie behavior (Klingberg, 2010; Wykes & van der Gaag,
2001). For example, in healthy adults, Klingberg and colleagues have
shown that working memory training not only improves overall working
memory capacity but also changes the functioning of dopamine
neurotransmission and brain plasticity (McNab et al., 2009). Research
examining the effects of cognitive remediation for disorders with known
cognitive abnormalities, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder and schizophrenia, has been promising (Stevenson, Whitmont,
Bornholt, Livesey, & Stevenson; 2002). In their study, Baskin-Sommers,
Curtin, and Newman (2015) designed a cognitive intervention that
targeted the response modulation deficit associated with psychopathy,
and they examined the efficacy of this intervention in a sample of
incarcerated, adult

Summary and Future Directions

637

male offenders. Participants in the study were 124 substance-dependent
inmates who were classified as psychopathic or nonpsychopathic.
Following pretesting on a set of tasks that assessed both response
modulation--related and unrelated skills, participants were randomly
assigned to one of two treatment conditions. In the psychopathy-specific
"attention to context" condition, inmates participated in a 1-hour,
computer-based training session once a week for 6 weeks that used three
tasks targeting the RM deficit. Each task provided the participants with
opportunities to practice attending to peripheral or nonsalient cues and
noticing changes in contextual information (e.g., rule changes). In the
non-psychopathy-specific control condition, participants also completed
a 1-hour, computer-based training session once a week. However, in this
control condition, the tasks were not selected to address specifically
the RM deficit but were focused instead on providing practice in
inhibiting behavior and regulating emotion reactions more generally.
Consistent with a cognitive remediation model, after 6 weeks of
computerized training, psychopathic individuals in the attention to
context (i.e., the psychopathy-specific) training group demonstrated
significant improvement not only on the three training tasks but also on
the RM-related tasks that had been used at pretesting. Conversely,
psychopathic participants in the control condition showed no significant
improvement over the course of training on the non-psychopathy-specific
training tasks and showed significantly less improvement on the
post-training RM tasks than those in the attention to context group.
Although these data represent only the first test of the efficacy of a
cognitive remediation approach to psychopathy, given the apparently
intractable nature of the deficits and the long-standing pessimism
regarding treatability of psychopathy, these results represent a major
step forward in the area of psychopathy treatment. Further, this study
highlights the value of identifying, developing, and testing
mechanism-based intervention, and the substantial potential for
addressing psychopathic individuals' disinhibited and costly behavior by
identifying and targeting the specific response modulation dysfunctions
that characterize the disorder.

Summary and Future Directions Societies throughout history have
recognized the existence of the psychopathic personality. These
individuals were distinguished by their fleeting, shallow interpersonal
ties, their casual antisociality, and their sometimes explosive
violence. Although a reliable classification system was a long time
coming, the understanding that these individuals needed to be identified
in order to prevent or at least limit their effects on society has also
been long-standing. Today little is different. The individual commonly
referred to as the "psychopath" is a drain on society's financial and
emotional resources; psychopathic individuals commit a disproportionate
number of crimes and comprise a significant proportion of our inmate
populations. Clinical descriptions of psychopathy have resulted in the
development of reliable and valid measures of the syndrome across
different populations. Early, disparate assessments gave way in the
1990s to more unified assessment relying on the PCL-R (Hare, 1991) and
conceptually related measures (e.g., the PCL:YV and PCL:SV). More
recently, the field has again seen the emergence of greater diversity in
psychopathy

638

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

assessments, as self-report measures such as the PPI (Lilienfeld &
Andrews, 1996), the SRPS (Levenson et al., 1995), and the EPA (Miller et
al., 2011) have been increasingly used and personality-based models have
been emphasized. Greater unification in the assessment of psychopathy
has allowed research on the etiology of the syndrome to flourish and to
enhance knowledge of the factors associated with this syndrome. Research
has reliably demonstrated that there is a genetic component to the
psychopathic personality (e.g., Waldman & Rhee, 2006). Research has also
indicated that these individuals exhibit performance deficits that could
be explained in terms of dispositional "fearlessness" (e.g., Lykken,
1995) or poor behavioral inhibition (e.g., Fowles & Dindo, 2006), or in
terms of abnormalities in the functioning of the amygdala and associated
structures (e.g., Blair, 2006). Still other lines of investigation have
examined the attention processing of psychopathic individuals and have
shown that these individuals appear deficient in their ability to
initiate the relatively automatic shift in attention from the ongoing
enactment of goal-directed behavior to contextual cues that would
indicate that a behavior requires modulation (e.g., Hiatt & Newman,
2006). Understanding the causal factors that underlie psychopathy may
prove invaluable to the prevention and treatment of the syndrome.
Currently, limited empirical data exists to suggest that psychopathic
individuals will benefit from treatment (e.g., Harris & Rice, 2006).
However, this conclusion may be challenged in the future, as
interventions are expanded to new populations (i.e., adolescents). As
etiological processes begin to inform interventions (e.g., Wallace et
al., 2000), we may become better able to address the specific deficits
associated with the psychopathy syndrome. Moving forward in the field,
research focused on the existing controversies and currently popular
etiological theories will likely continue to dominate. Reliable
assessment measures will be developed and applied in a variety of
populations in order to reach a better understanding of the nature of
the syndrome. We will better understand how the psychobiological
processes associated with the characteristics of psychopathy develop
into the full-blown syndrome. However, several new areas are also
emerging, and they are likely to become increasingly important with the
passage of time. First, on the assessment front, researchers will be
trying to determine whether it is best to conceptualize psychopathy as a
discrete taxon or as a dimensional construct. Currently, there are
competing claims regarding the best way to conceptualize the construct.
In practice, this distinction may be made on the basis of anything from
practical concerns to theoretical considerations. For example, when the
PCL-R is used in clinical risk assessment, the designation
"psychopathic" versus "nonpsychopathic" may be required, whereas in a
study of the genetic contributions to psychopathy, the syndrome may be
conceptualized in a dimensional, traitlike manner. The answer to the
question of whether psychopathy is best conceptualized as a discrete
category or as an extreme variation on normal personality may depend on
whether the emphasis is on the behaviors, the traits, or the underlying
psychobiological mechanisms associated with the syndrome (Brinkley et
al., 2004). Second, as a resolution is sought to the category-dimension
question, we will likely see the emergence of subtypes of psychopathy.
This would not be an altogether new development. Researchers and
clinicians have long differentiated the "primary" from the "secondary,"
or "neurotic," psychopathic individual (e.g., Cleckley, 1941/1988;
Karpman, 1941; Lykken, 1957), the latter being characterized by
relatively higher levels

Summary and Future Directions

639

of neuroticism or anxiety. Further, researchers have already moved
forward by proposing and beginning to test the ways in which psychopathy
might be usefully divided on the basis of symptom profile, etiological
mechanism, or the presence of criminal behavior (e.g., Brinkley et al.,
2004; Newman et al., 2005; Olver, Sewall, Sarty, Lewis, & Wong, 2015;
Poythress & Skeem, 2006; Yildirim & Derksen, 2015). Such a development
is consistent with the practice among other clinical disorders (e.g.,
schizophrenia), where subtypes representing different symptom profiles,
different prognoses, and potentially different underlying
psychobiological mechanisms have been differentiated from each other for
clinical or research purposes. Although such a development may help to
resolve many of the current controversies, it will inevitably lead to
the question of whether each subtype can reasonably be considered
"psychopathy." This fragmented future is near, as researchers and
clinicians are already grappling with the challenge of understanding the
complexities of research that has been generated using a variety of
assessment measures, emphasizing disparate conceptualizations of the
syndrome and applied across a multitude of samples. As consistencies in
patterns of results accrue, these differences in assessment and
conceptualization will become less problematic. However, in the presence
of inconsistency and disagreement, such a diversity of measurement and
conceptualization currently make it more difficult to reconcile
discrepant findings. Fortunately, recent research has demonstrated that
certain treatments may be beneficial to individuals diagnosed as
psychopathic. Among the most effective of these new interventions is
cognitive remediation, which derives nicely from the basic evidence on
the deficit processes associated with psychopathy. There is potential
for the use of technology in applying cognitive remediation to possibly
alleviate some of the primary deficiencies of psychopathy, a finding
which bodes well for future dissemination of treatment results, provided
the current findings are found to be robust.

References American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.). Washington, DC:
Author. American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC:
Author. Andershed, H., Hodgins, S., & Tengstrom, A. (2007). Convergent
validity of the Youth Psychopathic Traits Inventory (YPI): Association
with the Psychopathy Checklist: Youth Version (PCL:YV). Assessment, 14,
144--154. Andershed, H., Kerr, M., Stattin, H., & Levander, S. (2002).
Psychopathic traits in non-referred youths: A new assessment tool. In E.
Blaauw & L. Sheridan (Eds.), Psychopaths: Current international
perspectives (pp. 131--158). The Hague, Netherlands: Elsevier. Anderson,
N. E., Stanford, M. S., Wan, L., & Young, K. A. (2011). High
psychopathic trait females exhibit reduced startle potentiation and
increased P3 amplitude. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 29, 649--666.
Anton, M., Baskin-Sommers, A. R., Vitale, J., Curtin, J. J., & Newman,
J. P. (2012). Differential effects of psychopathy and antisocial
personality disorder symptoms on cognitive and fear processing in female
offenders. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 12(4),
761--776. Arnett, P. A., Howland, E. W., Smith, S. S., & Newman, J. P.
(1993). Autonomic responsivity during passive avoidance in incarcerated
psychopaths. Personality and Individual Differences, 14, 173--184.
Baskin-Sommers, A. R., Curtin, J. J., & Newman, J. P. (2011). Specifying
the attentional selection that moderates the fearlessness of
psychopathic offenders. Psychological Science, 22, 226--234.
Baskin-Sommers, A. R., Curtin, J. J., & Newman, J. P. (2015). Altering
the cognitive-affective dysfunctions of psychopathic and externalizing
offender subtypes with cognitive remediation. Clinical Psychological
Science, 3, 45--57. Baskin-Sommers, A. R., & Newman, J. P. (2014).
Psychopathic and externalizing offenders display dissociable
dysfunctions when responding to facial affect. Personality Disorders:
Theory, Research, and Treatment, 5, 369--379.

Baskin-Sommers, A. R., Newman, J. P., Sathasivam, N., & Curtin, J. J.
(2011). Evaluating the generalizability of a fear deficit in
psychopathic African American offenders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
120, 71--78. Bauer, D. L., Whitman, L. A., & Kosson, D. S. (2011).
Reliability and construct validity of Psychopathy Checklist: Youth
Version scores among incarcerated adolescent girls. Criminal Justice and
Behavior, 38, 965--987. Baxter, M. G., & Murray, E. A. (2002). The
amygdala and reward. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 563--573. Beaver,
K. M., Rowland, M. W., Schwartz, J. A., & Nedelec, J. L. (2011). The
genetic origins of psychopathic personality traits in adult males and
females: Results from an adoption-based study. Journal of Criminal
Justice, 39, 426--432. Berger, K., Rotermund, P., Vieth, E. R., &
Hohnhorst, A. (2012). The prognostic value of the PCL-R in relation to
the SUD treatment ending. International Journal of Law and Psychiatry,
35, 198--201. Berman, M. E., Kavoussi, R. J., & Coccaro, E. F. (1997).
Neurotransmitter correlates of human aggression. In D. M. Stoff, J.
Breiling, & J. D. Masur (Eds.), Handbook of antisocial behavior
(pp. 305--313). New York, NY: Wiley. Beryl, R., Chou, S., & Völlm, B.
(2014). A systematic review of psychopathy in women within secure
settings. Personality and Individual Differences, 71, 185--195.
Bezdjian, S., Raine, A., Baker, L. A., & Lynam, D. R. (2011).
Psychopathic personality in children: Genetic and environmental
contributions. Psychological Medicine, 41, 589--600. Bishopp, D., &
Hare, R. D. (2008). A multidimensional scaling analysis of the Hare
PCL-R: Unfolding the structure of psychopathy. Psychology, Crime & Law,
14, 117--132. Bjork, J. M., Chen, G., & Hommer, D. W. (2012).
Psychopathic tendencies and mesolimbic recruitment by cues for
instrumental and passively obtained rewards. Biological Psychology, 89,
408--415. Blair, K. S., Newman, C., Mitchell, D. G. V., Richell, R. A.,
Leonard, A., Morton, J., & Blair, R. J. R.

640

References (2006). Differentiating among prefrontal substrates in
psychopathy: Neuropsychological findings. Neuropsychology, 20, 153--165.
Blair, R. J. R. (2006). Subcortical brain systems in psychopathy: The
amygdala and associated structures. In C. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of
psychopathy (pp. 296--312). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Blair, R. J.
R., Monson, J., & Frederickson, N. (2001). Moral reasoning and conduct
problems in children with emotional and behavioural difficulties.
Personality and Individual Differences, 31, 799--811. Blonigen, D. M.,
Hicks, B. M., Krueger, R. F., Patrick, C. J., & Iacono, W. G. (2006).
Continuity and change in psychopathic traits as measured via
normal-range personality: A longitudinal-biometric study. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 115, 85--95. Boccardi, M., Frisoni, G. B., Hare, R.
D., Cavedo, E., Najt, P., Pievani, M., ... Tiihonen, J. (2011). Cortex
and amygdala morphology in psychopathy. Psychiatry Research:
Neuroimaging, 193, 85--92. Brinkley, C. A., Newman, J. P., & Widiger, T.
A. (2004). Two approaches to parsing the heterogeneity of psychopathy.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11, 69--94. Brinkley, C. A.,
Schmitt, W. A., Smith, S. S., & Newman, J. P. (2001).
Construct-validation of a self report psychopathy scale: Does Levenson's
SRPS measure the same construct as Hare's PCL-R? Personality and
Individual Differences, 31, 1021--1038. Brislin, S. J., Drislane, L. E.,
Smith, S. T., Edens, J. F., & Patrick, C. J. (2015). Development and
validation of triarchic psychopathy scales from the Multidimensional
Personality Questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 27, 838--851.
Broerman, R. L., Ross, S. R., & Corr, P. J. (2014). Throwing more light
on the dark side of psychopathy: An extension of previous findings for
the revised reinforcement sensitivity theory. Personality and Individual
Differences, 68, 165--169. Butcher, J. N. (Ed.). (1979). New
developments in the use of the MMPI. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press. Butcher, J. N., Graham, J. R., Ben-Porath, Y. S.,
Tellegen, A., Dahlstrom, W. G., & Kaemmer, B. (2001). Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory--2 (MMPI-2): Manual for
administration, scoring, and interpretation (rev. ed.). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.

641

Caldwell, M. F. (2011). Treatment-related changes in behavioral outcomes
of psychopathy facets in adolescent offenders. Law and Human Behavior,
35, 275--287. Campbell, M. A., Doucette, N. L., & French, S. (2009).
Validity and stability of the Youth Psychopathic Traits Inventory in a
nonforensic sample of young adults. Journal of Personality Assessment,
91, 584--592. Carter, G. L., Campbell, A. C., Muncer, S., & Carter, K.
A. (2015). A Mokken analysis of the Dark Triad "Dirty Dozen": Sex and
age differences in scale structures, and issues with individual items.
Personality and Individual Differences, 83, 185--191. Cauffman, E.,
Kimonis, E. R., Dmitrieva, J., & Monahan, K. C. (2009). A multimethod
assessment of juvenile psychopathy: Comparing the predictive utility of
the PCL:YV, YPI, and the NEO PRI. Psychological Assessment, 21,
528--542. Chakhssi, F., de Ruiter, C., & Berstein, D. (2010). Change
during forensic treatment in psychopathic versus nonpsychopathic
offenders. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology, 21, 660--682.
Christian, R. E., Frick, P. J., Hill, N. L., Tyler, A. L., & Frazer, D.
(1997). Psychopathy and conduct problems in children: II. Implications
for subtyping children with conduct problems. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 233--241. Cleckley, H.
(1988). The Mask of Sanity. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. (Original work
published 1941) Cohn, M. D., Pape, L. E., Schmaal, L., van den Brink,
W., van Wingen, D., Vermeiren, R. R. J. M., ... Popma, A. (2015).
Differential relations between juvenile psychopathic traits and resting
state network connectivity. Human Brain Mapping, 36, 2396-- 2405.
Colins, O. F., Andershed, H., & Pardini, D. A. (2015). Psychopathic
traits as predictors of future criminality, intimate partner aggression,
and substance use in young adult men. Law and Human Behavior, 39,
547--558. Cooke, D., & Michie, C. (1999). Psychopathy across cultures:
North America and Scotland compared. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
108, 58--68. Cooke, D. J., Michie, C., & Hart, S. D. (2006). Facets of
clinical psychopathy: Towards clearer measurement. In C. Patrick (Ed.),
Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 91--106). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

642

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

Cooke, D. J., Michie, C., Hart, S. D., & Clark, D. (2004).
Reconstructing psychopathy: Clarifying the significance of antisocial
and socially deviant behavior in the diagnosis of psychopathic
personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorder, 18, 337--357.
Cooke, D. J., Michie, C., Hart, S. D., & Hare, R. D. (1999). Evaluating
the Screening Version of the Hare Psychopathy Checklist--Revised: An
item response theory analysis. Psychological Assessment, 11, 3--13.
Crysel, L. C., Crosier, B. S., & Webster, G. D. (2013). The Dark Triad
and risk behavior. Personality and Individual Differences, 54, 35--40.
Davis, M. (2000). The role of the amygdala in conditioned and
unconditioned fear and anxiety. In J. P. Aggleton (Ed.), The amygdala: A
functional analysis (pp. 289--310). Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press. Dawel, A., McKone, E., O'Kearney, R., Sellbom, M., Irons, J., &
Palermo, R. (2015). Elevated levels of callous unemotional traits are
associated with reduced attentional cueing, with no specificity for fear
or eyes. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 6,
216--228. Decety, J., Skelly, L. R., & Kiehl, K. A. (2013). Brain
response to empathy-eliciting scenarios involving pain in incarcerated
individuals with psychopathy. JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 638--645. Derefinko,
K. J., & Lynam, D. R. (2007). Using the FFM to conceptualize
psychopathy: A test using a drug abusing sample. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 21, 638--656. Dindo, L., & Fowles, D. (2011). Dual
temperamental risk factors for psychopathic personality: Evidence from
self-report and skin conductance. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 100, 557--566. Douglas, K. S., Ogloff, J. R. P., Nicholls,
T. L., & Grant, I. (1999). Assessing risk for violence among psychiatric
patients: The HCR-20 violence risk assessment scheme and the Psychopathy
Checklist: Screening Version. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 67, 917--930. Edens, J. F. (2006). Unresolved controversies
concerning psychopathy: Implications for clinical and forensic decision
making. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 37, 59--65.
Edens, J. F., Poythress, N. G., Lilienfeld, S. O., & Patrick, C. J.
(2008). A prospective comparison of two measures of psychopathy in the
prediction of

institutional misconduct. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 26, 529--541.
Edens, J. F., Poythress, N. G., Lilienfeld, S. O., Patrick, C. J., &
Test, A. (2008). Further evidence of the divergent correlates of the
Psychopathic Personality Inventory factors: Prediction of institutional
misconduct among male prisoners. Psychological Assessment, 20, 86--91.
Edens, J. F., Poythress, N. G., & Watkins, M. M. (2001). Further
validation of the Psychopathic Personality Inventory among offenders:
Personality and behavioral correlates. Journal of Personality Disorders,
15, 403--415. Edens, J. F., Skeem, J. L., Cruise, K. R., & Cauffman, E.
(2001). Assessment of "juvenile psychopathy" and its association with
violence: A critical review. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 19, 53--80.
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise letters upon
the identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task. Perception &
Psychophysics, 16, 143--149. Ermer, E., Cope, L. M., Nyalakanti, P. K.,
Calhoun, V. D., & Kiehl, K. A. (2012). Aberrant paralimbic gray matter
in criminal psychopathy. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121, 649--658.
Finger, E. A., Marsh, A. A., Blaire, K. S., Reid, M. E., Sims, C., Ng,
P., ... Blaire, R. J. (2011). Disrupted reinforcement signaling in the
orbitofrontal cortex and caudate in youths with conduct disorder or
oppositional defiant disorder and a high level of psychopathic traits.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 152--162. Forth, A. E., Brown, S.
L., Hart, S. D., & Hare, R. D. (1996). The assessment of psychopathy in
male and female noncriminals: Reliability and validity. Personality and
Individual Differences, 20, 531--543. Forth, A. E., Kosson, D. S., &
Hare, R. D. (2003). The Psychopathy Checklist: Youth Version. Toronto,
ON: Multi-Health Systems. Fowles, D. C. (1980). The three-arousal model:
Implications of Gray's two-factor learning theory for heart rate,
electrodermal activity, and psychopathy. Psychophysiology, 17, 87--104.
Fowles, D. C., & Dindo, L. (2006). A dual-deficit model of psychopathy.
In C. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 14--34). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Frick, P. J. (1998). Conduct disorders. In T. H.
Ollendick & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of child

References psychopathology (3rd ed., pp. 213--237). New York, NY: Plenum
Press. Frick, P. J., & Hare, R. D. (2001). The Antisocial Process
Screening Device. Toronto, ON: Multi-Health Systems. Fulero, S. M.
(1995). Review of the Hare Psychopathy Checklist--Revised. In J. C.
Conoley & J. C. Impara (Eds.), Twelfth mental measurements yearbook
(pp. 453--454). Lincoln, NE: Buros Institute. Fung, A. L., Gao, Y., &
Raine, A. (2010). The utility of the child and adolescent psychopathy
construct in Hong Kong, China. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent
Psychology, 39, 134--140. Furnham, A., Richards, S. C., & Paulhus, D. L.
(2013). The dark triad of personality: A 10 year review. Social and
Personality Psychology Compass, 7, 199--216. Gernsbacher, M. A., &
Faust, M. E. (1991). The mechanism of suppression: A component of
general comprehension skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 245--262. Glenn, A. L., Raine, A.,
& Schug, R. A. (2009). The neural correlates of moral decision-making in
psychopathy. Molecular Psychiatry, 14, 5--6. Glenn, A. L., & Sellbom, M.
(2015). Theoretical and empirical concerns regarding the Dark Triad as a
construct. Journal of Personality Disorders, 29, 360--377. Gorenstein,
E. E., & Newman, J. P. (1980). Disinhibitory psychopathology: A new
perspective and a model for research. Psychological Review, 87,
301--315. Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (2000). The neuropsychology of
anxiety (2nd ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. Gretton, H.
M., Hare, R. D., & Catchpole, R. E. H. (2004). Psychopathy and offending
from adolescence to adulthood: A 10-year follow-up. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 636--645. Hamilton, R. K. B.,
Hiatt Racer, K., & Newman, J. P. (2015). Impaired integration in
psychopathy: A unified theory of psychopathic dysfunction. Psychological
Review, 122, 770--791. Hansen, A. L., Johnsen, B. H., Thornton, D.,
Waage, L., & Thayer, J. F. (2007). Facets of psychopathy, heart rate
variability and cognitive function. Journal of Personality Disorders,
21, 568--582. Hare, R. D. (1980). A research scale for the assessment of
psychopathy in criminal populations. Personality and Individual
Differences, 1, 111--119.

643

Hare, R. D. (1991). Manual for the Hare Psychopathy Checklist--Revised.
Toronto, ON: Multi-Health Systems. Hare, R. D. (1996). Psychopathy: A
clinical construct whose time has come. Criminal Justice and Behavior,
23, 25--54. Hare, R. D. (1998). Psychopaths and their nature:
Implications for the mental health and criminal justice systems. In T.
Millon, E. Simonsen, M. Birket-Smith, & R. Davis (Eds.), Psychopathy:
Antisocial, criminal, and violent behavior (pp. 188--212). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Hare, R. D. (2003). Manual for the Hare Psychopathy
Checklist--Revised (2nd ed.). Toronto, ON: MultiHealth Systems. Hare, R.
D., Frazelle, J., & Cox, D. N. (1978). Psychopathy and physiological
responses to threat of an aversive stimulus. Psychophysiology, 15,
165--172. Hare, R. D., Harpur, T. J., & Hemphill, J. D. (1989). Scoring
pamphlet for the Self-Report Psychopathy scale: SRP-II. Unpublished
manuscript, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, BC. Hare, R. D., & Hart,
S. D. (1993). Psychopathy, mental disorder, and crime. In S. Hodgins
(Ed.), Mental disorder and crime (pp. 104--115). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hare, R. D., & Jutai, J. W. (1988). Psychopathy and cerebral asymmetry
in semantic processing. Personality and Individual Differences, 9,
329--337. Harpur, T. J., Hakstian, A. R., & Hare, R. D. (1988). Factor
structure of the Psychopathy Checklist. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 56, 741--747. Harris, G. T., & Rice, M. E. (2006).
Treatment of psychopathy: A review of empirical findings. In C. Patrick
(Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 555--572). New York, NY: Guilford
Press. Hemphill, J. F., Templeman, R., Wong, S., & Hare, R. D. (1998).
Psychopathy and crime: Recidivism and criminal careers. In D. J. Cooke,
A. E. Forth, & R. D. Hare (Eds.), Psychopathy: Theory, research and
implications for society (pp. 375--399). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic.
Herve, H., Mitchell, D., & Cooper, B. S. (2004). Psychopathy and
unlawful confinement: An examination of perpetrator and event
characteristics. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 36, 137--145.
Hiatt, K. D., & Newman, J. P. (2006). Understanding psychopathy: The
cognitive side. In C. Patrick (Ed.),

644

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 334--352). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Hiatt, K. D., Schmitt, W. A., & Newman, J. P. (2004). Stroop tasks
reveal abnormal selective attention among psychopathic offenders.
Neuropsychology, 18, 50--59. Hicks, B. M., Markon, K. E., Patrick, C.
J., Krueger, R. F., & Newman, J. P. (2004). Identifying psychopathy
subtypes on the basis of personality structure. Psychological
Assessment, 16, 276--288. Hill, C. D., Neumann, C. S., & Rogers, R.
(2004). Confirmatory factor analysis of the Psychopathy Checklist:
Screening Version in offenders with Axis I disorders. Psychological
Assessment, 16, 90--95. Hobson, J., Shine, J., & Roberts, R. (2000). How
do psychopaths behave in a prison therapeutic community? Psychology,
Crime & Law, 6, 139--154. Huertas, E., Ponce, G., Koeneke, M. A., Poch,
C., España-Serrano, L., Palomo, T., ... Hoenicka, J. (2010). The D2
dopamine receptor gene variant C957T affects human fear conditioning and
aversive priming. Genes, Brain, & Behavior, 9, 103--109. Hughes, G.,
Hogue, T., Hollin, C., & Champion, H. (1997). First stage evaluation of
a treatment programme for personality disordered offenders. Journal of
Forensic Psychiatry, 8, 515--527. Isen, J., Raine, A., Baker, L.,
Dawson, M., Bezdjian, S., & Lozano, D. I. (2010). Sex-specific
association between psychopathic traits and electrodermal reactivity in
children. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119, 216--225. Jonason, P. K.,
Duineveld, J. J., & Middleton, J. P. (2015). Pathology, pseudopathology,
and the Dark Triad of personality. Personality and Individual
Differences, 78, 43--47. Jones, A. P., Laurens, K. R., Herba, C. M.,
Barker, G. J., & Viding, E. (2009). Amygdala hyporeactivity to fearful
faces in boys with conduct problems and callous-unemotional traits.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 95--102. Jones, D. N., & Neria, A.
L. (2015). The Dark Triad and dispositional aggression. Personality and
Individual Differences, 86, 360--364. Karpman, B. (1941). On the need of
separating psychopathy into two distinct clinical types: The symptomatic
and the idiopathic. Journal of Criminal Psychopathology, 3, 112--137.
Kosson, D. S., Cyterski, T. D., Steuerwald, B. L., Neumann, C. S., &
Walker-Matthews, S. (2002). The reliability and validity of the
Psychopathy Checklist:

Youth Version (PCL: YV) in nonincarcerated adolescent males.
Psychological Assessment, 14, 97--109. Kosson, D. S., Smith, S. S., &
Newman, J. P. (1990). Evaluating the construct validity of psychopathy
in black and white male inmates: Three preliminary studies. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 99, 250--259. Klingberg, T. (2010). Training and
plasticity of working memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14,
317--324. Lake, A. J., Baskin-Sommers, A. R., Li, W., Curtin, J. J., &
Newman, J. P. (2011). Evidence for unique threat-processing mechanisms
in psychopathic and anxious individuals. Cognitive, Affective, &
Behavioral Neuroscience, 11, 451--462. LaPierre, D., Braun, C. M. J., &
Hodgins, S. (1995). Ventral frontal deficits in psychopathy:
Neuropsychological test findings. Neuropsychologia, 33, 139--151.
Larsson, H., Andershed, H., & Lichtenstein, P. (2006). A genetic factor
explains most of the variation in psychopathic personality. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 115, 221--230. Lehman, A., & Ittel, A. (2012).
Aggressive behavior and measurement of psychopathy in female inmates of
German prisons---a preliminary study. International Journal of Law and
Psychiatry, 35, 190--197. Levenson, M. R., Kiehl, K. A., & Fitzpatrick,
C. M. (1995). Assessing psychopathic attributes in a
noninstitutionalized population. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 68, 151--158. Levenston, G. K., Patrick, C. J., Bradley, M.
M., & Lang, P. J. (2000). The psychopath as observer: Emotion and
attention in picture processing. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109,
373--389. Lewis, A. (1974). Psychopathic personality: A most elusive
category. Psychological Medicine, 4, 133--140. Lilienfeld, S. O. (1994).
Conceptual problems in the assessment of psychopathy. Clinical
Psychology Review, 14, 17--38. Lilienfeld, S. O. (2006). The self-report
assessment of psychopathy. In C. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy
(pp. 107--132). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Lilienfeld, S. O., &
Andrews, B. P. (1996) Development and preliminary validation of a
self-report measure of psychopathic personality traits in noncriminal
populations. Journal of Personality Assessment, 66, 488--524.
Lopez-Romero, L., Romero, E., & Villar, P. (2014). Assessing the
stability of psychopathic traits:

References Adolescent outcomes in a six-year follow-up. Spanish Journal
of Psychology, 17, E97. Ly, M., Motzkin, J. C., Philippi, C. L., Kirk,
G. R., Newman, J. P., Kiehl, K. A., & Koenigs, M. (2012). Cortical
thinning in psychopathy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 743--749.
Lykken, D. T. (1957). A study of anxiety in the sociopathic personality.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 55, 6--10. Lykken, D. T. (1995). The
antisocial personalities. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Lynam, D. R. (1996).
Early identification of chronic offenders: Who is the fledgling
psychopath? Psychological Bulletin, 120, 209--234. Lynam, D. R.,
Charnigo, R., Moffitt, T. E., Raine, A., Loeber, R., &
Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (2009). The stability of psychopathy across
adolescence. Development and Psychopathology, 21, 1133--1153. Lynam D.
R., & Derefinko, K. J. (2006). Psychopathy and personality. In C.
Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 133--155). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Lynam, D. R., Gaughan, E. R., Miller, J. D., Miller, D.
J., Mullins-Sweatt, S., & Widiger, T. A. (2011). Assessing the basic
traits associated with psychopathy: Development and validation of the
Elemental Psychopathy Assessment. Psychological Assessment, 23,
108--124. Lynam, D. R., Whiteside, S., & Jones, S. (1999). Selfreported
psychopathy: A validation study. Journal of Personality Assessment, 73,
110--132. Lynam, D. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2001). Using the five factor
model to represent the DSM-IV personality disorders: An expert consensus
approach. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 401--412. MacCoon, D.,
Wallace, J. F., & Newman, J. P. (2004). Self-regulation:
Context-appropriate balanced attention. In R. F. Baumeister & K. D. Vohs
(Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation research (pp. 422--444). New York,
NY: Guilford Press. Manke, B., McGuire, S., Reiss, D., Hetherington, E.
M., & Plomin, R. (1995). Genetic contributions to adolescents'
extrafamilial social interactions: Teachers, best friends, and peers.
Social Development, 4, 238--256. Marsh, A. A., Finger, E. C., Fowler, K.
A., Jurkowitz, I. T. N., Schechter, J. C., Yu, H. H., ... Blaire, R. J.
R. (2011). Reduced amygdala-orbitofrontal connectivity during moral
judgments in youths with disruptive behavior disorders and psychopathic
traits. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 194, 279--286.

645

Marsh, A. A., Finger, E. C., Mitchell, D. G. V., Reid, M. E., Sims, C.,
Kosson, D. S., ... Blaire, R. J. R. (2008). Reduced amygdala response to
fearful expressions in children and adolescents with callousunemotional
traits and disruptive behavior disorders. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 165, 712--720. Maslow, A. H. (1951). Principles of abnormal
psychology: The dynamics of psychic illness. New York, NY: Harper.
McCord, W., & McCord, J. (1964). The psychopath: An essay on the
criminal mind. New York, NY: Van Nostrand. McDonald, R., Dodson, M. C.,
Rosenfield, D., & Jouriles, E. N. (2011). Effects of parenting
intervention on features of psychopathy in children. Journal of Abnormal
Child Psychology, 39, 1013--1023. McNab, F., Varrone, A., Jucaite, A.,
Bystritsky, P., Forssberg, H., & Klingberg, T. (2009). Change in
cortical dopamine D1 receptor binding associated with cognitive
training. Science, 323, 800--802. Miller, J. D., Gaughan, E. T., Maples,
J., Gentile, B., Lynam, D. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2011). Examining the
construct validity of the Elemental Psychopathy Assessment. Assessment,
18, 106--114. Miller, J. D., & Lynam, D. R. (2003). Psychopathy and the
five factor model of personality: A replication and extension. Journal
of Personality Assessment, 81, 168--178. Miller, J. D., & Lynam, D. R.
(2015). Understanding psychopathy using the basic elements of
personality. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 9, 223--237.
Miller, J. D., Lynam, D. R., Widiger, T. A., & Leukefeld, C. (2001).
Personality disorders as extreme variants of common personality
dimensions: Can the five factor model adequately represent psychopathy?
Journal of Personality, 69, 253--276. Miller, J. D., Maples-Keller, J.
L., & Lynam, D. R. (2015). An examination of the three components of the
Psychopathic Personality Inventory: Profile comparisons and tests of
moderation. Psychological Assessment. Advance online publication. doi:
10.1037/pas0000221 Miller, J. D., Watts, A., & Jones, S. E. (2011). Does
psychopathy manifest divergent relations with components of its
nomological network depending on gender? Personality and Individual
Differences, 50, 564--569. Millon, T. (1981). Disorders of personality:
DSM-III, Axis II. New York, NY: Wiley.

646

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

Mitchell, D. G. V., Colledge, E., Leonard, A., & Blair, R. J. R. (2002).
Risky decisions and response reversal: Is there evidence of
orbito-frontal cortex dysfunction in psychopathic individuals?
Neuropsychologia, 40, 2013--2022. Motzkin, J. C., Newman, J. P., Kiehl,
K. A., & Koenigs, M. (2011). Reduced prefrontal connectivity in
psychopathy. Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 17348--17357. Munoz, L. C., &
Frick, P. J. (2007). The reliability, stability, and predictive validity
of the self-report version of the Antisocial Process Screening Device.
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 48, 299--312. Munro, G. E. S.,
Dywan, J., Hais, G. T., McKee, S., Unsal, A., & Segalowitz, S. J.
(2007). ERN varies with degree of psychopathy in an emotion
discrimination task. Biological Psychology, 76, 31--42. Neal, T. M. S.,
& Sellbom, A. (2012). Examining the factor structure of the Hare
Self-Report Psychopathy Scale. Journal of Personality Assessment, 94,
244--253. Neumann, C. S., Hare, R. D., & Newman, J. P. (2007). The
super-ordinate nature of psychopathy. Journal of Personality Disorders,
21, 102--117. Neumann, C. S., Wampler, M., Taylor, J., Blonigen, D. M.,
& Iacono, W. G. (2011). Stability and invariance of psychopathic traits
from late adolescence to young adulthood. Journal of Research in
Personality, 45, 145--152. Newman, J. P. (1998). Psychopathic behavior:
An information processing perspective. In D. J. Cooke, A. E. Forth, & R.
D. Hare (Eds.), Psychopathy: Theory, research and implications for
society (pp. 81--104). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic. Newman, J. P., &
Baskin-Sommers, A. R. (2011). Early selective attention abnormalities in
psychopathy: Implications for self-regulation. In M. Posner (Ed.),
Cognitive neuroscience of attention (pp. 421--440). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Newman, J. P., Curtin, J. J., Bertsch, J. D., &
Baskin-Sommers, A. R. (2010). Attention moderates the fearlessness of
psychopathic offenders. Biological Psychiatry, 67, 66--70. Newman, J.
P., & Kosson, D. S. (1986). Passive avoidance learning in psychopathic
and nonpsychopathic offenders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96,
257--263. Newman, J. P., MacCoon, D. G., Vaughn, L. J., & Sadeh, N.
(2005). Validating a distinction between

primary and secondary psychopathy with measures of Gray's BIS and BAS
constructs. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 319--323. Newman, J.
P., Patterson, C. M., Howland, E. W., & Nichols, S. L. (1990). Passive
avoidance in psychopaths: The effects of reward. Personality and
Individual Differences, 11, 1101--1114. Newman, J. P., Patterson, C. M.,
& Kosson, D. S. (1987). Response perseveration in psychopaths. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 96, 145--148. Newman, J. P., & Schmitt, W. A.
(1998). Passive avoidance in psychopathic offenders: A replication and
extension. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 527--532. Newman, J. P.,
Schmitt, W. A., & Voss, W. (1997). Processing of contextual cues in
psychopathic and nonpsychopathic offenders. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 106, 563--575. O'Brien, B. S., & Frick, P. J. (1996). Reward
dominance: Associations with anxiety, conduct problems, and psychopathy
in children. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 24, 223--240. Ogloff,
J. R., Wong, S., & Greenwood, A. (1990). Treating criminal psychopaths
in a therapeutic community program. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 8,
181--190. Olver, M. E., Sewall, L. A., Sarty, G. E., Lewis, K., & Wong,
S. C. P. (2015). A cluster analytic examination and external validation
of psychopathic offender subtypes in a multisite sample of Canadian
federal offenders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 124, 355--371. Olver,
M. E., & Wong, S. C. P. (2009). Therapeutic responses of psychopathic
sexual offenders: Treatment attrition, therapeutic change, and long-term
recidivism. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 328--336.
Olver, M. E., & Wong, S. C. P. (2015). Short- and long-term recidivism
prediction of the PCL-R and the effects of age: A 24-year follow-up.
Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 6, 97--105.
Oshukova, S., Kaltiala-Heino, R., Miettunen, K., Marttila, R., Tani, P.,
Aronen, E. T., ... Lindberg, N. (2015). Self-reported psychopathic
traits among nonreferred Finnish adolescents: Psychometric properties of
the Youth Psychopathic Traits Inventory and the Antisocial Process
Screening Device. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health, 9,
15. Patrick, C. J., Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1993). Emotion in the
criminal psychopath: Startle reflex

References modulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 82--92.
Patrick, C. J., Fowles, D. C., & Krueger, R. F. (2009). Triarchic
conceptualization of psychopathy: Developmental origins of
disinhibition, boldness, and meanness. Development and Psychopathology,
21, 913--938. Paulhus, D. L., & Williams, K. M. (2002). The dark triad
of personality: Narcissism, Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. Journal
of Research in Personality, 36, 556--563. Pechorro, P. S., Poiares, C.
A., Vieira, R. X., Maroco, J., Nunes, C., & de Jesus, S. N. (2014).
Psychological and behavioral adjustment in female youths with high or
low psychopathic traits. International Journal of Law and Psychiatry,
37, 619--627. Philippi, C. L., Pujara, M. S., Motzkin, J. C., Newman,
J., Kiehl, K. A., & Koenigs, M. (2015). Altered resting-state functional
connectivity in cortical networks in psychopathy. Journal of
Neuroscience, 35, 6068--6078. Pinel, P. (1806). A treatise on insanity
(D. Davis, Trans.). New York, NY: Hafner. Prichard, J. C. (1835). A
treatise on insanity. London, England: Sherwood, Gilbert, & Piper.
Poythress, N. G., Edens, J. F., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (1998).
Criterion-related validity of the Psychopathic Personality Inventory in
a prison sample. Psychological Assessment, 10, 426--430. Poythress, N.
G., & Skeem, J. L. (2006). Disaggregating psychopathy: Where and how to
look for subtypes. In C. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy
(pp. 172--192). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Reidy, D. E., Kearns, M.
C., DeGue, S., Lilienfeld, S. O., Massetti, G., & Kiehl, K. A. (2015).
Why psychopathy matters: Implications for public health and violence
prevention. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 24, 214--225. Richards, H.
J., Casey, J. O., & Lucente, S. W. (2003). Psychopathy and treatment
response in incarcerated female substance abusers. Criminal Justice and
Behavior, 30, 251--276. Rice, M. E., Harris, G. T., & Cormier, C.
(1992). A follow-up of rapists assessed in a maximum security
psychiatric facility. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 5, 435--448.
Roche, M. J., Shoss, N. E., Pincus, A. L., & Ménard, K. S. (2011).
Psychopathy moderates the relationship between time in treatment and
levels of empathy in incarcerated male sexual offenders. Sexual

647

Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment, 23, 171--192. Ross, S. R.,
Molto, J., Poy, R., Segarra, P., Pastor, M. C., & Montanes, S. (2007).
Gray's model and psychopathy: BIS but not BAS differentiates secondary
psychopathy in noninstitutionalized young adults. Personality and
Individual Differences, 43, 1644--1655. Rothemund, Y., Ziegler, S.,
Hermann, C., Gruesser, S. M., Foell, J., Patrick, C. J., & Flor, H.
(2012). Fear conditioning in psychopaths: Event-related potentials and
peripheral measures. Biological Psychology, 90, 50--59. Ručević, S.
(2010). Psychopathic personality traits and delinquent and risky sexual
behaviors in Croatian sample of non-referred boys and girls. Law and
Human Behavior, 34, 379--391. Rush, B. (1812). Medical inquiries and
observations, upon the diseases of the mind. Philadelphia, PA: Kimber
and Richardson. Sadeh, N., Javdani, S., Jackson, J. J., Reynolds, E. K.,
Potenza, M. N., Gelernter, J., ... Verona, E. (2010). Serotonin
transporter gene associations with psychopathic traits in youth vary as
a function of socioeconomic resources. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
119, 604--609. Salekin, R. T. (2002). Psychopathy and therapeutic
pessimisms: Clinical lore or clinical reality? Clinical Psychology
Review, 22, 79--112. Salekin, R. T., Rogers, R., & Sewell, K. W. (1997).
Construct validity of psychopathy in a female offender sample: A
multitrait-multimethod evaluation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106,
576--585. Salekin, R. T., Rogers, R., Ustad, K. L., & Sewell, K. W.
(1998). Psychopathy and recidivism among female inmates. Law and Human
Behavior, 22, 109--128. Salekin, R. T., Tippey, J. G., & Allen, A. D.
(2012). Treatment of conduct problem youth with interpersonal callous
traits using mental models: Measurement of risk and change. Behavioral
Sciences & the Law, 30, 470--486. Sandoval, A. R., Hancock, D.,
Poythress, N., Edens, J., & Lilienfeld, S. (2000). Construct validity of
the Psychopathic Personality Inventory in a correctional sample. Journal
of Personality Assessment, 74, 262--281. Seara-Cardoso, A., Viding, E.,
Lickley, R. A., & Sebastian, C. L. (2015). Neural responses to others'
pain vary with psychopathic traits in healthy

648

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

adult males. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 15,
578--588. Sebastian, C. L., McCrory, E. J. P., Cecil, C. A. M.,
Lockwood, P. L., De Brito, S. A., Fontaine, N. M. G., & Viding, E.
(2012). Neural responses to affective and cognitive theory of mind in
children with conduct problems and varying levels of callous-unemotional
traits. JAMA Psychiatry, 69, 814--822. Sellbom, M. (2011). Elaborating
on the construct validity of the Levenson Self-Report Psychopathy Scale
in incarcerated and non-incarcerated samples. Law and Human Behavior,
35, 440--451. Sellbom, M., Cook, D. J., & Hart, S. D. (2015). Construct
validity of the Comprehensive Assessment of Psychopathic Personality
(CAPP) concept map: Getting closer to the core of psychopathy.
International Journal of Forensic Mental Health, 14, 172--180. Sellbom,
M., Wygant, D. B., & Drislane, L. E. (2015). Elucidating the construct
validity of the psychopathic personality inventory triarchic scales.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 97, 374--381. Sethi, A., Gregory, S.,
Dell'Acqua, F., Thomas, E. P., Simmons, A., Murphy, D. G. M., ... Craig,
M. C. (2015). Emotional detachment in psychopathy: Involvement of dorsal
default-mode connections. Cortex, 62, 11--19. Shepherd, S. M., & Strand,
S. (2015). The utility of the Psychopathy Checklist: Youth Version
(PCL:YV) and the Youth Psychopathic Trait Inventory (YPI)--- is it
meaningful to measure psychopathy in young offenders? Psychological
Assessment. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1037/pas0000182 Skeem,
J. L., & Cauffman, E. (2003). Views of the downward extension: Comparing
the youth version of the Psychopathy Checklist with the Youth
Psychopathic Traits Inventory. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 21,
737--770. Skeem, J. L., Monahan, J., & Mulvey, E. P. (2002).
Psychopathy, treatment involvement, and subsequent violence among civil
psychiatric patients. Law and Human Behavior, 26, 577--603. Skeem, J.
L., & Mulvey, E. P. (2001). Psychopathy and community violence among
civil psychiatric patients: Results from the MacArthur Violence Risk
Assessment Study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69,
358--374. Skeem, J. L., Polaschek, D. L. L., Patrick, C. J., &
Lilienfeld, S. O. (2011). Psychopathic personality:

Bridging the gap between scientific evidence and public policy.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 12, 95--162. Somma, A.,
Borroni, S., Drislane, L. E., & Fossati, A. (2015). Assessing the
triarchic model of psychopathy in adolescence: Reliability and validity
of the Triarchic Psychopathy Measure (TriPM) in three samples of Italian
community-dwelling adolescents. Psychological Assessment. Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1037/pas0000184 Stevenson, C. S., Whitmont, S.,
Bornholt, L., Livesey, D., & Stevenson, R. J. (2002). A cognitive
remediation programme for adults with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 36,
610--616. Sullivan, E. A., & Kosson, D. S. (2006). Ethnic and cultural
variations in psychopathy. In C. Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy
(pp. 437--458). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Sutton, S. K., Vitale, J.
E., & Newman, J. P. (2002). Emotion among females with psychopathy
during picture presentation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111,
610--619. Taylor, J., Loney, B. R., Bobadilla, L. Iacono, W. G., &
McGue, M. (2003). Genetic and environmental influences on psychopathy
trait dimensions in a community sample of male twins. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 31, 633--645. Tellegen, A. (2000). Manual for
the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press. Tew, J., Harkins, L., & Dixon, L. (2015). Assessing
the reliability and validity of the Self-Report Psychopathy Scales in a
UK offender population. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology, 26,
166--184. Thornquist, M. H., & Zuckerman, M. (1995). Psychopathy,
passive avoidance learning, and basic dimensions of personality.
Personality and Individual Differences, 19, 525--534. Tikkanen, R.,
Auvinen-Lintunen, L., Ducci, F., Sjöberg, R. L., Goldman, D., Tiihonen,
J., ... Virkkunen, M. (2011). Psychopathy, PCL-R, and MAOA genotype as
predictors of violent reconvictions. Psychiatry Research, 185, 382--386.
Tsang, S., Piquero, A. R., & Cauffman, E. (2014). An examination of the
Psychopathy Checklist: Youth Version (PCL:YV) among male adolescent
offenders: An item response theory analysis. Psychological Assessment,
26, 1333--1346.

References Tsang, S., Schmidt, K. M., Vincent, G. M., Salekin, R. T.,
Moretti, M. M., & Odgers, C. L. (2015). Assessing psychopathy among
justice involved adolescents with the PCL:YV: An item response theory
examination across gender. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and
Treatment, 6, 22--31. Vachon, D. D., Lynam, D. R., Loeber, R., &
Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (2012). Generalizing the nomological network of
psychopathy across populations differing on race and conviction status.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121, 263--269. Vaidyanathan, U., Hall,
J. R., Patrick, C. J., & Bernat, E. M. (2011). Clarifying the role of
defensive reactivity deficits in psychopathy and antisocial personality
using startle reflex methodology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120,
253--258. van Baardewijk, Y., Vermeiren, R., Stegge, H., & Doreleijers,
T. (2011). Self-reported psychopathic traits in children: Their
stability and concurrent and prospective association with conduct
problems and aggression. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 33, 235--245. Veit, R., Flor, H., Erb, M., Hermann, C.,
Lotze, M., Grodd, W., & Birbaumer, N. (2002). Brain circuits involved in
emotional learning in antisocial behavior and social phobia in humans.
Neuroscience Letters, 328, 233--236. Verona, E., Sprague, J., & Sadeh,
N. (2012). Inhibitory control and negative emotion processing in
psychopathy and antisocial personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 121, 498--510. Verona, E., & Vitale, J. E. (2005).
Psychopathy in women: Assessment, manifestations, and etiology. In C.
Patrick (Ed.), Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 415--436). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Viding, E., & McCrory, E. J. (2012). Genetic and
neurocognitive contributions to the development of psychopathy.
Development and Psychopathology, 24, 969--983. Vieira, J. B.,
Ferreira-Santos, F., Almeida, P. R., Barbosa, F., Marques-Teixeira, J.,
& Marsh, A. A. (2015). Psychopathic traits are associated with cortical
and subcortical volume alterations in healthy individuals. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 10, 1693--1704. Vitale, J. E.,
Hiatt, K. D., Brinkley, C. A., & Newman, J. P. (2007). Abnormal
selective attention in psychopathic female offenders. Neuropsychology,
21, 301--312.

649

Vitale, J. E., MacCoon, G. D., & Newman, J. P.(2011). Emotion
facilitation and passive avoidance learning in psychopathic female
offenders. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 38, 641--658. Vitale, J. E., &
Newman, J. P. (2001). Response perseveration in psychopathic women.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 644--647. Vitale, J. E., Newman, J.
P., Bates, J. E., Goodnight, J., Dodge, K. A., & Petit, G. S. (2005).
Deficient behavioral inhibition and anomalous selective attention in a
community sample of adolescents with psychopathic and low-anxiety
traits. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 33, 461--470. Vitale, J.
E., Smith, S. S., Brinkley, C. A., & Newman, J. P. (2002). The
reliability and validity of the Psychopathy Checklist-Revised in a
sample of female offenders. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 29, 202--231.
Waldman, I. D., & Gizer, I. R. (2006). The genetics of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 396--432.
Waldman, I. D., & Rhee, S. H. (2006). Genetic and environmental
influences on psychopathy and antisocial behavior. In C. Patrick (Ed.),
Handbook of psychopathy (pp. 205--228). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Wallace, J. F., Schmitt, W. A., Vitale, J. E., & Newman, J. P. (2000).
Experimental investigations of information processing deficiencies and
psychopathy: Implications for diagnosis and treatment. In C. Gacono
(Ed.), Clinical and forensic assessment of psychopathy (pp. 87--110).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Walters, G. D., Duncan, S. A., & Mitchell-Perez,
K. (2007). The latent structure of psychopathy: A taxometric
investigation of the Psychopathy Checklist-- Revised in a heterogeneous
sample of male inmates. Assessment, 14, 270--278. Walters, G. D., Ermer,
E., Knight, R. A., & Kiehl, K. A. (2015). Paralimbic biomarkers in
taxometric analyses of psychopathy: Does changing the indicators change
the conclusion? Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment,
6, 41--52. Wang, P., Baker, L. A., Gao, Y., Raine, A., & Lozano, D. I.
(2012). Psychopathic traits and physiological responses to aversive
stimuli in children aged 9--11 years. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 40, 759--769. Watt, B. D., & Brooks, N. S. (2012).
Self-report psychopathy in an Australian community sample. Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law, 19, 389--401.

650

Psychopathy as Psychopathology

Weizmann-Henelius, G., Virkkunen, M., Gammelgard, M., Eronen, M., &
Putkonen, H. (2015). The PCL-R and violent recidivism in a prospective
follow-up of a nationwide sample of female offenders. Journal of
Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology, 26, 667--685. White, S. F., Marsh, A.
A., Fowler, K. A., Schechter, J. C., Adalio, C., Pope, K., ... Blair, R.
J. R. (2012). Reduced amygdala response in youths with disruptive
behavior disorders and psychopathic traits: Decreased emotional response
versus increased top-down attention to nonemotional features. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 750--758. Widiger, T. A., & Lynam, D.
(1998). Psychopathy and the five-factor model of personality. In T.
Millon, E. Simonsen, M. Birket-Smith, & R. Davis (Eds.), Psychopathy:
Antisocial, criminal, and violent behavior (pp. 171--187). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Williams, K. M., & Paulhus, D. L. (2004). Factor
structure of the Self-Report Psychopathy scale (SRP-II) in non-forensic
samples. Personality and Individual Differences, 37, 765--778. Williams,
K. M., Paulhus, D. L., & Hare, R. D. (2007). Capturing the four-factor
structure of psychopathy in college students via self-report. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 88, 205--219. Wilson, L., Miller, J. D.,
Zeichner, A. Lynam, D. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2011). An examination of
the validity of the elemental psychopathy assessment: Relations with
other psychopathy measures, aggression, and externalizing behaviors.
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 33, 315--322.

Wolf, R. C., Carpenter, R. W., Warren, C. M., Zeier, J. D.,
Baskin-Sommers, A. R., & Newman, J. P. (2012). Reduced susceptibility to
the attentional blink in psychopathic offenders: Implications for the
attention bottleneck hypothesis. Neuropsychology, 26, 102--109. Wykes,
T., & van der Gaag, M. (2001). Is it time to develop a new cognitive
therapy for psychosis--- cognitive remediation therapy (CRT)? Clinical
Psychology Review, 21, 1227--1256. Yang, Y., Raine, A., Colletti, P.
Toga, A. W., & Narr, K. L. (2010). Morphological alterations in the
prefrontal cortex and the amygdala in unsuccessful psychopaths. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 119, 546--554. Yang, Y., Raine, A., Narr, K. L.,
Colletti, P., & Toga, A. W. (2009). Localization of deformations within
the amygdala in individuals with psychopathy. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 66, 986--994. Yildirim, B. O., & Derksen, J. L. (2015).
Clarifying the heterogeneity in psychopathic samples: Towards a new
continuum of primary and secondary psychopathy. Aggression and Violent
Behavior, 24, 9--41. Zagon, I., & Jackson, H. (1994). Construct validity
of a psychopathy measure. Personality and Individual Differences, 17,
125--135. Zeier, J. D., Maxwell, J. S., & Newman, J. P. (2009).
Attention moderates the processing of inhibitory information in primary
psychopathy. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118, 554--563.

Index AA. See Alcoholics Anonymous AAT. See Appetite awareness training
Abandonment, fear of, 563 Abbott, M. J., 160--161 Abelson, J. L., 106,
108 Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS), 414, 415 Abraham, K.,
263 Abramowitz, J. S., 202 Abramson, L. Y., 57, 276, 281 Abstinence, 431
Acalculia, 2 Acamprosate, 451, 453 Acarturk, C., 42 ACC. See Anterior
cingulate cortex Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT), 118--119, 245
Acculturation, 439 ACT. See Acceptance and commitment therapy; Assertive
community treatment ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone Actigraphy,
332, 376 Adenosine receptor gene, 104 Aderka, I. M., 64 ADHD. See
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder ADIS. See Anxiety Disorders
Interview Schedule ADIS-5. See Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview
Schedule for DSM-5 ADIS-IV. See Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview
Schedule for DSM-IV Adler, G., 568 Adolescent Focused Therapy (AFT), 496
Adolescent Longitudinal Interval Follow-up Evaluation (A-LIFE), 337
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 224, 287, 288, 574 ADS. See Alcohol
dependence syndrome AFT. See Adolescent Focused Therapy Agomelatine, 523
Agoraphobia Agoraphobic Cognitions Questionnaire, 113 avoidance with, 91
cognitive-behavioral therapy for, 117 in DSM-5, 87 epidemiology, 89, 90
genetics, 100 in National Comorbidity Survey Replication, 89 panic
disorder and, 85--86, 87, 89, 91 Agoraphobic Cognitions Questionnaire,
113 Agraphia, 2 AIMS. See Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale Akathisia,
415 Akiskal, H. S., 565

Albany Panic and Phobia Questionnaire, 113 Alcohol, 42--43 Alcohol
dependence syndrome (ADS), 432 Alcohol expectancy, 439 Alcohol use
disorder diagnosis, 433--436 in DSM-5, 433--435 gender differences, 440
history, 429--433 precursors to, in DSM-IV, 432, 434, 436--437
prevalence, 436 cross-culturally, 437--440 developmental considerations,
440--441 social anxiety disorder with, 43--44 summary and future
directions, 453--454 theory, 441 biological factors, 446--449
psychosocial factors, 442--446 treatment pharmacological treatment,
451--453 psychosocial treatment, 449 Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test, 61 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), 430 Alda, M., 325
Alden, L. E., 40 A-LIFE. See Adolescent Longitudinal Interval Follow-up
Evaluation Allen, A. D., 635 Alliance of Psychoanalytic Organizations,
16 Allostatic model of dependence, 447--448 Alloy, L. B., 276--277, 281
Alogia, 395 Alprazolam, 65 Alprostadil, 536 Althof, S. E., 544, 547, 548
Altshuler, L. L., 329 Alvarenga, M. E., 108 Alves, M. R., 95 Amad, A.,
571 Amenorrhea, 467, 471 American Congress of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, Committee on Gynecologic Practice, 539--540 American
Psychiatric Association (APA), 12, 16, 17, 27, 433 American
Psychological Association, 378 Amirthavasagam, S., 577 Amphetamine, 327,
407 AMT. See Autobiographical Memory Test Amygdala with bipolar
disorder, 329 with borderline personality disorder, 575, 576, 577
function of, 105 with generalized anxiety disorder, 155 with panic
disorder, 105

651

with posttraumatic stress disorder, 225--226 with psychopathy, 627, 628
with social anxiety disorder, 46 AN. See Anorexia nervosa Andershed, H.,
632 Anderson, P. L., 50--51 Andreasen, N. C., 5 Andrews, B., 233
Androgens, 522, 523, 526 Angst, F., 322 Angst, J., 322 Anhedonia, 395
Anorexia nervosa (AN), 465 amenorrhea, 467, 471 body-image disturbance,
470--471 case example, 471--472 clinical presentation, 467--471
cognitive-behavioral therapy for, 496 comorbidity, 483 compulsive
exercise, 469 course, 481--482 delusional beliefs with, 398--399
diagnostic criteria, 466--467, 468, 469 in DSM-5, 468, 470, 471 in
DSM-IV, 467 history of, 466--467 malnutrition, 471 neurobiology,
484--485 prevalence, 480 relapse, 482 restrictive behaviors, 469
treatments Adolescent Focused Therapy, 496 CBT for eating disorders, 493
dialectical behavior therapy, 497 family-based treatment, 495--496
in-patient, day hospital, and residential treatments, 500, 501
psychopharmacological and biological interventions, 501--502 Radically
Open DBT, 494 specialist supported individual therapy, 496 weight
phobia, 465, 467, 468--469, 470 weight-loss behaviors, 470 Anosognosia,
13 ANT. See Attention Network Task Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 225,
226, 329, 576, 628 AnTI. See Anxious Thoughts Inventory Anticonvulsants,
65, 339 Antidepressants. See also Monoamine oxidase inhibitors;
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; Serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors agomelatine, 523 bupropion, 338, 523, 527, 532

652 Antidepressants (Continued) desipramine, 285 lithium, 322--323, 325,
328, 337, 338, 339, 593 quetiapine, 65, 174 338, 339, 344, 593
reboxetine, 523 Antiepileptics, 593 Antipsychotics, atypical
aripiprazole, 593 for bipolar disorder, 338, 339, 344 for borderline
personality disorder, 593 clozapine, 416, 593 for generalized anxiety
disorder, 174 metabolic syndrome from, 416 olanzapine, 65, 338, 339, 593
quetiapine, 65, 174, 338, 339, 344, 593 risperidone, 65, 244, 338, 593
for schizophrenia, 415, 416 for social anxiety disorder, 65 ziprasidone,
338 Antipsychotics, typical, 415--416 Antisocial personality disorder
(ASPD), 2, 25, 615 Antisocial Process Screening Device (APSD), 620--621
Anxiety Freud's view of, x parental, 55--56 physical symptoms of, 62
sensitivity, 109 Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for
DSM-5 (ADIS-5) for generalized anxiety disorder, 167 for panic disorder,
112 for social anxiety disorder, 58 Anxiety and Related Disorders
Interview Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV), 58, 112, 167 Anxiety Disorders
Interview Schedule (ADIS), 113 Anxiety sensitivity, 109 Anxiety
Sensitivity Index, 110, 113, 114 Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3, 113
Anxious Thoughts Inventory (AnTI), 168 APA. See American Psychiatric
Association APD. See Avoidant personality disorder Appetite awareness
training (AAT), 494 APSD. See Antisocial Process Screening Device Arand,
D. L., 370 Arapesh, of Papua New Guinea, 541 Arch, J. J., 118
Aripiprazole, 593 ARMS. See At-risk mental states Arnow, B. A., 282
Arntz, A., 171, 585 Arora, R., 225 Ashby, M., 108 Asnaani, A., 41 Aspan,
N., 585 ASPD. See Antisocial personality disorder Asperger's syndrome,
46 Assertive community treatment (ACT), 417 Assessments, of
intelligence, x Astin, M. C., 239

Index At-risk mental states (ARMS), 411 Attachment with panic disorder,
97--98 with social anxiety disorder, 56 theory, 579 Attention
bottleneck, 629 Attention Network Task (ANT), 581--582 Attentional bias,
49--51 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 322, 323
Attention-intention-effort pathway, 372 Attenuation paradox, 24--25
Autism spectrum disorder, 23 Autobiographical Memory Test (AMT), 583
Automatic thoughts, 273--274 Autonomic nervous system, 106--108
Autonomic rigidity, 156 Avoidance with agoraphobia, 91 assessment of,
204 cognitive avoidance model, 160--161 contrast avoidance model, 161
experiential, 93--94 interoceptive, 91--92 with major depressive
disorder, 272--273 with obsessive-compulsive disorder, 190--191 with
panic disorder, 91--92 passive avoidance task, 581 with posttraumatic
stress disorder, 231--232 with social anxiety disorder, 62 theories of
worry, 160--161 Avoidant personality disorder (APD), 45 Avolition,
394--395 BA. See Behavioral activation therapy Babor, T. F., 444 BABS.
See Brown Assessment of Beliefs Scale Baker, B. R., 573 Baker, I., 467
Baker, L. A., 633 BALANCE study, 338 Bancroft, J., 521, 525 Bandura, A.,
289--290, 445 Barlow, D. H., 90, 109, 115, 534 Bartholome, L. T., 473
BAS. See Behavioral activation system Basal ganglia, 329 Baskin-Sommers,
A. R., 629, 630, 636--637 Basson, R., 526 Bateman, A. W., 566--567, 579,
594 Bauer, M. S., 340--341 Baxter, M. G., 628 BCT. See Behavioral
marital therapy BD. See Bipolar disorder BDD. See Body dysmorphic
disorder BDNF. See Brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene Beard, Amanda,
262 Beck, A. T., 196, 273, 275, 279

Beck Depression Inventory-II, 61, 291--292 Beck Hopelessness Scale, 292
Beck's cognitive model automatic thoughts, 273--274 cognitive
distortions, 274--275 core beliefs, 275 BED. See Binge eating disorder
Behavior therapy (BT), 477 Behavioral activation system (BAS), 22, 625,
626 Behavioral activation (BA) therapy, 245, 294 Behavioral genetics,
448 Behavioral inhibition, 55, 581 Behavioral inhibition system (BIS),
272, 273, 625--626, 627 Behavioral marital therapy (BCT), 450 Behavioral
sensitization, 327 Behavioral weight loss (BWL), 499 Beliefs,
dysfunctional, 197 Benoit, K., 55 Benzodiazepine receptor agonists
(BzRAs), 380--381 Benzodiazepines alprazolam, 65 bromazepam, 65
clonazepam, 65 for generalized anxiety disorder, 154, 172, 173 Klonopin,
88 for panic disorder, 120, 121 for posttraumatic stress disorder, 244
sensitivity to, 106 for sleep-wake disorders, 381 for social anxiety
disorder, 65 BEP. See Brief eclectic psychotherapy Berksonian bias, 22
Bernardy, Friedman, 244 Bertsch, K., 575 Bezdjian, S., 633 BFNE. See
Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation scale BFNE-S, 60 Biedert, E., 499
Binge eating disorder (BED), 465 appetite awareness training for, 494
bulimia nervosa and, 478 case example, 479--480 comorbidity, 483 course,
482--483 cultural norms supporting, 476 diagnostic criteria, 477--478 in
DSM-5, 468, 477 emotional regulation, 477, 499 medical problems with,
479 neurobiology, 484, 485 objective binge episodes, 478 prevalence, 481
transdiagnostic model, 477 treatment, 498 CBT for eating disorders, 493
cognitive-behavioral therapy, 499 in-patient, day hospital, and
residential treatments, 500--501 interpersonal psychotherapy, 499

Index psychopharmacological and biological interventions, 501--502
self-help, 499--500 weight, 478, 487, 499 Binik, Y. M., 549, 550
Biofeedback, 367 Biological model, 13 BIOS. See Pittsburgh Bipolar
Offspring Study Biosocial theory, 568--569 Bipolar disorder (BD) age at
onset, 317, 321, 322 assessment longitudinal outcome, 336--337
questionnaire measures of risk, 335--336 structured interviews, 334--335
biopsychosocial perspective depression and schizophrenia, 325--326
genetic studies, 324--325 neural correlates, 328--329 neurotransmitter
dysregulation, 326--328, 331 case example, 320--321 comorbidity, 323,
372--373, 385 description, 318 epidemiology, 321 genetic and
neurobiological risk markers, 346 mania and creativity, 324 onset
prevention, 347--348 optimum treatment regimens, 346--347
pharmacotherapy treatment acute mania and long-term prophylaxis,
337--338 depression, 338--339 medication nonadherence, 339--340
phenomenology of the manic syndrome, 320 psychosocial functional
impairment, 323--324 psychosocial predictors of, 329, 346 childhood
adversity, 330--331 goal dysregulation, 333--334 negative life events
and depression, 332--333 sleep and schedule disruption, 331--332
psychotherapy treatment cognitive-behavioral therapy, 343--344 family
intervention, 341--343 interpersonal and social rhythm therapy, 344--345
psychoeducational approaches, 340--341 STEP-BD study, 345 subtypes,
319--320 suicidality, 322--323 suicide prevention, 348 symptoms and DSM
criteria, 318--319 Bipolar disorder not elsewhere classified, 319--320
BIS. See Behavioral inhibition system Biuckians, A., 332--333 Bjure, J.,
485 Black, D. W., 593 Black Death, 13 Blain, B. M., 240

Blair, K. S., 627, 628 Blanco, C., 269 Blashfield, R., 3 Blechert, J.,
110 Blonigen, D. M., 632, 633, 634 BMI. See Body mass index BN. See
Bulimia nervosa Bobadilla, L., 633 Boccardi, M., 628 Bodell, L. P., 466
Bodi, N., 585 Body Checking Questionnaire, 491 Body dysmorphic disorder
(BDD), 193, 398 Body mass index (BMI), 469, 471, 486, 487 Body
Sensations Questionnaire, 113 Body surveillance, 486 den Boer, J. A.,
572--573 Bögels, S. M., 56, 281 Bonnet, M. H., 370 Bootzin, R. R., 377
Borderline personality disorder (BPD) biological factors, genetics,
570--572 case example, 563--564 clinical outcomes, 590--592 cognitive
factors executive neurocognition, 580--583 memory systems, 583 social
cognition, 583--585 diagnosis and assessment, 585 challenges, 589--590
diagnostic interviews, 586--587 measuring change, 587--588 psychometric
approaches to, 588--589 self-report questionnaires, 587 in DSM-5, 562,
563, 565--566 in DSM-III, 564, 565 gender differences, 566 history,
564--566 neurobiology hormonal systems, 573--574 neurotransmitters, 571,
572--573, 575, 577 neuroimaging studies functional imaging, 576--578
structural approaches, 575--576 white matter abnormalities, 576
prevalence and epidemiological factors comorbidity, 567, 574
heterogeneity, 566--567 psychosocial factors attachment, 579--580
childhood maltreatment, 578 summary and future directions, 596--597
symptoms and diagnostic criteria, 562--563 theories behavioral
approaches, 568--569 psychodynamic approaches, 568 treatment
pharmacological approaches, 592--593 psychological approaches, 593--596
Borderline Personality Inventory (BPI), 589 Borkovec, T. D., 163, 166
Boskind-Lodahl, M., 472 Boulimos (hunger), 472 Bouton, M. E., 101, 110,
111

653 Bowlby, J., 97, 579 Bozarth, M. A., 447 BPD. See Borderline
personality disorder BPI. See Borderline Personality Inventory
Bradykinesia, 415 Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene, 283,
284, 286 Brandsma, L. L., 59 Bremner, J. D., 225 Brewin, C. R., 227, 233
Bridler, R., 592 Brief eclectic psychotherapy (BEP), 241--242 Brief Fear
of Negative Evaluation scale (BFNE), 59, 60 Brief psychotic disorder,
398 Brietzke, E., 328 Brink, D., 381--382 van den Brink, W., 572--573
Brinkley, C. A., 622 Bromazepam, 65 Bromet, E., 220 Brown, G., 330
Brown, T. A., 58, 221--222, 466 Brown Assessment of Beliefs Scale
(BABS), 200 Bruch, Hilde, 467 Bryant, R. A., 240 BT. See Behavior
therapy; Individual behavior therapy Buhr, K., 161 Buie, D. H., Jr., 568
Bulimia nervosa (BN), 465 appetite awareness training for, 494 binge
eating disorder and, 478 binge/purge episodes, 473--474, 475 case
example, 479--480 comorbidity, 478, 483 course, 482--483 diagnostic
models of, 473 in DSM-5, 468 in DSM-III-R, 472 in DSM-IV, 473 history
of, 472--473 laxative abuse with, 475 medical complications, 475
prevalence, 480--481 relapse, 482 treatments CBT for eating disorders,
493, 497 cognitive-behavioral therapy, 473, 497 family-based treatment,
497--498 in-patient, day hospital, and residential treatments, 500--501
Integrative Cognitive-Affective Therapy, 497 interpersonal
psychotherapy, 497 psychopharmacological and biological interventions,
501--502 triggers, 474 weight with, 475 Bulimia Test-Revised, 491
Bupropion, 338, 523, 527, 532 Bureau of the Census, U.S., 15--16
Burgess, D., 3

654 Burns, D. D., 282 Burt, A. S., 489 Buspirone, 173 Butler, G., 278
Buysse, D., 374 BWL. See Behavioral weight loss Byrne, G. J., 269 BzRAs.
See Benzodiazepine receptor agonists CAARMS. See Comprehensive
Assessment of At-Risk Mental States Calabrese, J. R., 339 Caldwell, M.
F., 635--636 Calhoun, E. A., 550 California Personality Inventory, 615
Campbell, L. A., 58, 221--222 Cannabis, 44, 400 Capnometry-assisted
respiratory training (CART), 120 Cappell, H., 443 CAPS. See
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale Capuzzo, N., 163 Carani, C., 547
Carbon dioxide (CO2 ), inhalation of, 110 Carey, Drew, 262 Carleton, R.
N., 162 Carney, C. E., 375 Carrier, S., 550 CART. See
Capnometry-assisted respiratory training Cartwright-Hatton, S., 163
Caruso, L. S., 369 CASP. See Combined Alcohol Social Phobia Trial
Protocol CAT. See Cognitive analytic therapy; Computerized axial
tomography Catatonia, 394 Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) Val158Met
polymorphism, 104 CBASP. See Cognitive behavioral analysis system of
psychotherapy CBCT. See Cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy CBGT. See
Cognitive-behavioral group therapy CBI. See Combined behavioral
intervention CBM-A. See Cognitive bias modification of attention CBM-I.
See Cognitive bias modification of interpretations CBT. See
Cognitive-behavioral therapy CBT for eating disorders (CBT-E), 466, 473,
492, 493, 497 CBT-I. See Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia CCK.
See Cholecystokinin CCM. See Collaborative care management CE. See
Cue-exposure therapy Celexa. See Citalopram The Center Cannot Hold
(Saks), 394 Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D),
292 Cerebrospinal fluid (CRF), 224, 285, 572

Index CES-D. See Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale cGMP.
See Cyclic guanosine monophosphate Chambless, D. L., 110 Champoux, M.,
98 Chang, K., 347 Chard, K. M., 230--231 Ch-EAT. See Children's Eating
Attitudes Test Chesson, A. L., 367 Child Psychopathy Scale, 633
Children's Binge Eating Disorder Scale, 492 Children's Eating Attitudes
Test (Ch-EAT), 492 Chlorpromazine, 415 Choi-Kain, L. W., 577
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 154, 475 Chowdhury, U., 485 CHR. See Clinical
high-risk state Chronic depression. See Persistent depressive disorder
Churchill, Winston, 21n2 Cicchetti, D., 572 Circadian rhythm disorder,
382--383 Citalopram, 46 Clark, D. M., 49, 54, 55, 63, 110, 115, 227, 230
Clark, L. A., 21n2 Clarkin, J. F., 582 Classification, definition of, 2
Cleckley, H., 25, 613--616, 617, 618 Cleland, C., 586 Clemens, J. Q.,
550 Clinical high-risk (CHR) state, 411, 416 Clinical neuroscience of
addiction, 448 Clinical Psychology Review, 446 Clinical Severity Rating
(CSR), 58, 112 Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), 230
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5 (CAPS-5), 235--236
Clomipramine, 209 Clonazepam, 65 Clonidine, 108, 524 Cloninger, C. R.,
444, 571 Clozapine, 416, 593 CM. See Contingency management CO2 . See
Carbon dioxide, inhalation of COBY. See Course and Outcome of Bipolar
Youth Cocaine, 407 Coccaro, E. F., 573 Cochran, C., 53 Cognitive
analytic therapy (CAT), 595 Cognitive arousal, 370 Cognitive avoidance
model, 160--161 Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy
(CBASP), 297, 298, 299 Cognitive bias modification of attention (CBM-A),
50 Cognitive bias modification of interpretations (CBM-I), 52 Cognitive
distortions, 274--275 Cognitive inhibition, 581

Cognitive processing therapy (CPT), 239--241 Cognitive remediation, 418,
636--637 Cognitive restructuring, 62--63 Cognitive therapy (CT), 63--64,
208--209, 379 Cognitive-Affective-Behavioral Therapy, 532
Cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy (CBCT), 242, 245
Cognitive-behavioral group therapy (CBGT), 63, 64 Cognitive-behavioral
therapy (CBT) acceptance and commitment therapy and, 119 for
agoraphobia, 117 for alcohol use disorders, 449, 450--451 for anorexia
nervosa, 496 for anxiety disorders, 92 for binge eating disorder, 499
for bipolar disorder, 343--344 for borderline personality disorder, 596
for bulimia nervosa, 473, 497 for generalized anxiety disorder, 163,
170--172 for major depressive disorder, 290, 295 medication and, 121,
123, 170 mindfulness-based stress reduction and, 119 motivational
interviewing and, 172 for obsessive compulsive disorder, 205--209 for
panic disorder, 115--120, 121, 122 physical exercise and, 120 for
posttraumatic stress disorder, 238--241 for schizophrenia, 418 for
sexual dysfunctions, 553, 554 for sleep-wake disorder, 367, 379 for
social anxiety disorder, 44, 47, 62--63, 64, 65--66 Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) for adults, 376--378, 379, 380, 381--382
for children and adolescents, 383--384 patients not improved following,
384 Cohen, H., 12 Cold, common, 13 Colecchi, C., 381--382 Collaborative
care management (CCM), 340 Colorado Treatment Outcome study, 341--342
Combat Exposure Scale, 235 COMBINE Study Research Group, 453 Combined
Alcohol Social Phobia (CASP) Trial Protocol, 44 Combined behavioral
intervention (CBI), 453 Comer, J. S., 165 Community reinforcement
approach (CRA), 450 Comorbidity, 21--22, 26 Comprehensive Assessment of
At-Risk Mental States (CAARMS), 414 Computerized axial tomography (CAT),
406 COMT. See Catechol-O-methyltransferase Val158Met polymorphism
Conelea, C. A., 200 Conflict resolution, 532--533

Index Connors, G. J., 446 Consequences of Worrying Scale, 169
Conservation of resources (COR), 234 Construct validation, 6, 10
Contingency management (CM), 450 Contrast avoidance model, 161 Cooke, D.
J., 618 Cooke, M., 98 COR. See Conservation of resources Core beliefs,
275 Cormier, C., 635 Cornell Dysthymia Rating Scale, 293 Cortical
arousal, 370 Corticotrophin. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF), 224, 283, 287, 448 Cortisol, 413
with borderline personality disorder, 573--574 with generalized anxiety
disorder, 154--155 with posttraumatic stress disorder, 224 Courbasson,
C. M., 44 Course and Outcome of Bipolar Youth (COBY), 320, 337 CPT. See
Cognitive processing therapy CRA. See Community reinforcement approach
Craighead, L. W., 477, 495, 498 Craighead, W. E., 278 Cranford, J. A.,
443 Craske, M. G., 115, 119, 122, 208 Craving, 433, 447 Crayton, J., 225
CRF. See Cerebrospinal fluid; Corticotrophin-releasing factor CRHR1. See
Type 1 corticotrophin-releasing hormone receptor gene Crick, N. R., 572
Crisp, A. H., 467 Crits-Christoph, P., 166 Cronbach, L. J., 6 Cronbach's
alpha, 9 CSR. SeeClinical Severity Rating CT. See Cognitive therapy
Cue-exposure (CE) therapy, 450 Cuijpers, P., 297 Curtin, J. J., 636--637
CVD. See Temple-Wisconsin Cognitive Vulnerabilities to Depression Cyclic
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), 535 Cyclothymia, 319, 335 Cymbalta. See
Duloxetine Cyproheptadine, 539 Cytokines, 328 Dalrymple, K., 44
Dapoxetine, 549 Dare, C., 495 Dark Triad, 624 DAT1. See Dopamine
transporter gene Davey, G. C., 171 Davey, G. C. L., 157, 163, 164
Davidson, K., 596

Davidson, R. J., 272 Davis, S. N., 550 DBT. See Dialectical behavior
therapy DCS. See D-cycloserine D-cycloserine (DCS) for posttraumatic
stress disorder, 244--245 for social anxiety disorder, 65 DE. See
Delayed ejaculation de Carvalho, M. R., 105 De novo mutations, 404 Deep
brain stimulation, 296, 502 Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), 224 Delayed
ejaculation (DE) assessment, 544--545 biological factors, 543--544
definition, diagnosis, and prevalence, 542--543 in DSM-5, 542--543
psychological factors, 544 treatment, 545 Delayed sleep phase type
(DSPT), 384 Delusional disorder, 397--398 Delusions, 393--394 Dement, W.
C., 382 Dependent personality disorder, 10 Depressive Disorders. See
also Major depressive disorder; Persistent depressive disorder
behavioral models of depression, 270--271 chronic and nonchronic,
267--268 cognitive models of depression attentional deficits, 280--281
Beck's cognitive model, 273--275 cognitive deficits in chronic
depression, 282 hopelessness theory of depression, 276--277 information
processing, learning, and memory, 277--279 learned helplessness model,
276 negative cognitive style, 281 rumination, 279--280, 525 history,
262--263 psychological models of depression, 269--270 summary and future
directions, 299--300 Depressive realism, 279n1 DEQ. See Distressing
Event Questionnaire Derefinko, K. J., 623 Desipramine, 285 Desire
receptive, 526 suppression of, 531 Dexamethasone suppression test (DST),
287--288, 573--574 DHEA. See Dehydroepiandrosterone Di Nardo, P. A., 58,
221--222 Diabetes, 476, 536 Diagnosis. See Psychiatric diagnosis
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-I), x, 15--16
alcoholism, 432 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-II), 16

655 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III),
17--18, 19, 25 agoraphobia, 87 alcohol abuse, 432 alcohol dependence,
432 borderline personality disorder, 564, 565 female orgasmic disorder,
537 generalized anxiety disorder, 150 panic disorder, 87 Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III-R), 19--20 alcohol
dependence, 432 bulimia nervosa, 472 generalized anxiety disorder, 149,
150--151 panic attacks, 87 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-IV), 19--20, 21 alcohol abuse, 434, 436--437 alcohol
dependence, 432, 434 anorexia nervosa, 467 binge eating disorder, 477
bipolar disorder, 319 borderline personality disorder, 564 bulimia
nervosa, 473 posttraumatic stress disorder, 217--218, 221 Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR) binge eating
disorder, 477 bipolar disorder, 318 dyspareunia, 549--550 sexual
dysfunctions, 521, 529, 549--550 sleep disorders, 366 vaginismus, 549
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-5) agoraphobia, 87 alcohol use disorder, 433--435 anorexia nervosa,
468, 470, 471 antisocial personality disorder, 25, 615 Anxiety Disorders
Subgroup, 112 autism spectrum disorder, 23 binge eating disorder, 468,
477 bipolar disorder, 318--319 borderline personality disorder, 562,
563, 565--566 bulimia nervosa, 468 cannabis use disorder, 435
comorbidity, 21 delayed ejaculation, 542--543 diagnoses in, 1
dimensionality in, 25, 26, 27, 28 eating disorders, 465--466 erectile
dysfunction, 533 female orgasmic disorder, 537 generalized anxiety
disorder, 149--150 genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, 549--550
major depressive disorder, 264--266, 270 medicalization of normality,
23--24 opioid use disorder, 435 Other Specified Feeding or Eating
Disorder, 465 panic attacks, 86, 87 persistent depressive disorder,
266--267

656 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-5) (Continued) posttraumatic stress disorder, 217--218, 221
premature (early) ejaculation, 545--546 schizophrenia, 396--397 sexual
dysfunctions, 520, 521, 529, 542--543, 549--550 sleep disorders, 366
social anxiety disorder, 39--40 sociopathy, 614--615 stimulant use
disorder, 435 tobacco use disorder, 435 Diagnostic Interview for
Personality Disorders (DIPD-IV), 587 Diagnostic Interview Schedule
(DIS), 236 Diagnostic overshadowing, 22 Dialectical behavior therapy
(DBT), 494, 497, 593--594 Diathesis-stress model definition of, 289 with
depression, 275, 287 with panic disorder, 101, 102, 103 for
schizophrenia, 412--413 DIB-R. See Revised Diagnostic Interview for
Borderlines Dicker, S., 498 Dickstein, B. D., 230--231 Dieting, 486
Differential diagnosis, 4 Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 406, 576
Dimensional approach, 25--28 Dimensional Obsessive-Compulsive Scale
(DOCS), 202 Dimidjian, S., 294 Dinges, D. F., 372 DIPD-IV. See
Diagnostic Interview for Personality Disorders Directed forgetting task,
581 Directed masturbation (DM), 541--542 DIS. See Diagnostic Interview
Schedule Diseases, 3 Disorientation, left-right, 2 Disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder, 23 Distraction, 93 Distressing Event
Questionnaire (DEQ), 236 Disulfiram, 451 Divalproex with bipolar
disorder, 322, 337--338 with borderline personality disorder, 593 with
posttraumatic stress disorder, 244 Dizygotic (DZ) twins, 402, 405 DLPFC.
See Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex DM. See Directed masturbation DOCS.
See Dimensional Obsessive-Compulsive Scale Dodson, M. C., 635 Doehrmann,
O., 61 Domes, G., 582 Dopamine with bipolar disorder, 327, 331 with
borderline personality disorder, 571, 573 with eating disorders, 484

Index with posttraumatic stress disorder, 225, 413 with schizophrenia,
407--408, 410, 413, 415, 446, 447 with social anxiety disorder, 47
Dopamine transporter gene (DAT1), 571 Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC), 576 Dot-probe task, 49--50, 159 Drinking cultures, 439 Drug,
concept of, 15 Drye, R., 565 DSPT. See Delayed sleep phase type DST. See
Dexamethasone suppression test DTI. See Diffusion tensor imaging Duffy,
A., 325 Dugas, M. J., 161, 162 Duloxetine, 173, 532 Dunmore, E., 230 van
Dyck, R., 592 DZ. See Dizygotic twins EAPs. See Employee Assistance
Programs Eating Disorder Examination (EDE), 490--491 Eating Disorder
Inventory (EDI-3), 491 Eating disorders (EDs). See also Anorexia
nervosa; Binge eating disorder; Bulimia nervosa; Night-eating syndrome
assessment, 490--492 comorbidity, 483--484 differential diagnosis, 469
in DSM-5, 465--466 epidemiology course, 481--483 prevalence, 480--481
interventions, 492 outpatient: transdiagnostic treatments, 493--495
neurobiology, 484--485 neurotransmitters with, 484 overview, 465--466
personality disorders with, 483--484 risk factors, 485 body
dissatisfaction, 486 childhood abuse, 488 dieting, 486 family, 487--488
genetic risk factors, 488--490 interoceptive awareness, 486
sociocultural pressure to be thin, 487 weight, 487 summary and future
directions, 502--503 transdiagnostic theory, 466, 473 Eating Disorders
Assessment for DSM-5 (EDA-5), 491 Eating Pathology Symptoms Inventory
(EPSI), 491--492 Ecological momentary assessment (EMA), 446 ECT. See
Electroconvulsive therapy ED. See Erectile disorder EDA-5. See Eating
Disorders Assessment for DSM-5 EDE. See Eating Disorder Examination
EDE-Q, 491

EDI-3. See Eating Disorder Inventory Edronax. See Reboxetine EDs.See
Eating disorders EE. See Expressed emotion EEG. See Electroencephalogram
Effexor. See Venlafaxine Effort syndrome, 87 Ego-dystonic, 13, 194
Ego-syntonic, 13, 194 Ehlers, A., 227, 230 Ehlers, C. L., 331 Eifert, G.
H., 118 Eisler, I., 495 Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 296
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 95--96, 401 Electromyographic biofeedback,
553 Elemental Psychopathy Assessment (EPA), 623 Ellicott, A., 330
Elwood, L. S., 240 EMA. See Ecological momentary assessment EMDR. See
Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing Emotional overinvolvement
(EOI), 591--592 Emotional reasoning, 275 Emotionally unstable disorder,
565 Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs), 430--431 Employment, impairment
in, 41 Endicott, J., 565 Endocrines, 523 Endophenotype approach, 28--29
Endophenotypes, 5, 448 Eng, W., 152 EOI. See Emotional overinvolvement
EPA. See Elemental Psychopathy Assessment Epigenetics, 404--405
Epinephrine challenge, 94, 95 EPSI. See Eating Pathology Symptoms
Inventory Epstein, D., 377 Erectile disorder (ED) assessment, 535
biological factors, 533--534 definition, diagnosis, and prevalence, 533
in DSM-5, 533 psychological factors, 534--535 treatment, 535--537 EROS
clitoral therapy device, 528 ERP. See Exposure and response prevention
Erwin, B. A., 43, 54 Escitalopram, 173 ESEMeD. See European Study of the
Epidemiology of Mental Disorders Espie, C. A., 372, 378 Estrogen, 489,
490, 522, 523, 526--527, 553 European Medicines Agency, 527 European
Study of the Epidemiology of Mental Disorders (ESEMeD), 41 Evaluation,
fear of, 48 Ex juvantibus reasoning (reasoning backward from what
works), 4--5 Exercise, compulsive, 469 Exercise anorexia, 470
Exophenotypes, 5

Index Expectancy theory, 442--443 Experiental avoidance, 93--94 Exposure
and response prevention (ERP), 205--208, 209 Expressed emotion (EE),
330, 591 Extrapyramidal symptoms, 415 Eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR), 241 Eysenck, H. J., 110 FA. See Functional
anisotropy Facial masking, 415 Factorial validity, 6 Fairburn, C. G.,
473, 499 Family-based treatment (FBT), 495--496, 497--498 Family-focused
treatment (FFT), 341--343, 347 Fava, G. A., 117 FBT. See Family-based
treatment FBT for adolescent BN (FBT-BN), 498 FDA. See Food and Drug
Administration Fearlessness, 625, 626--627 Fear-potentiated startle
(FPS), 630 Feighner criteria, 17, 432 Feinstein, A. R., 22 Female
orgasmic disorder (FOD) assessment, 541 biological factors, 538--539
definition, diagnosis, and prevalence, 537--538 in DSM-5, 537
psychological factors, 540--541 treatment, 541--542 Female sexual
arousal disorder (FSAD), 521 Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI), 523
Female sexual interest/arousal disorder (FSIAD) assessment, 526
biological factors, 522--524 definition, diagnosis, and prevalence of,
521 EROS clitoral therapy device for, 528 psychological factors,
524--525 treatment, 526--528 Fergus, T. A., 157 Fernandez, K. C., 59
Ferster, C. B., 271 Fertuck, E. A., 582, 584--585 Feuer, C. A., 239 FFM.
See Five-factor model FFS. See Fight/flight system FFT. See
Family-focused treatment Fichtner, C., 225 Field, A. P., 171
Fight/flight system (FFS), 625 Finger, E. A., 628 Finger agnosia, 2
Fischer, L., 59 Fitzgerald, H. E., 443 Fitzmaurice, G., 590, 591 5-HIAA.
See 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid 5-HT. See Serotonin 5-HTTLPR. See
Serotonergic gene polymorphism

5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), 285, 572 Five-factor model (FFM),
26--28, 586, 588--589, 622--623 FKBP5. See Glucocorticoid receptor
chaperone protein gene Flibanserin, 527 Fluoxetine with bipolar
disorder, 339 with borderline personality disorder, 577 with bulimia
nervosa, 501, 502 with posttraumatic stress disorder, 245 with sexual
dysfunctions, 539, 548 with social anxiety disorder, 64--65 Fluvoxamine,
64, 592 fMRI. See Functional magnetic resonance imaging Foa, E. B.,
107--108, 229, 232, 238 FOD. See Female orgasmic disorder Fonagy, P.,
566--567, 579, 594 Food and Drug Administration (FDA), U.S., 451, 526
Ford, D. E., 368 Fowles, D. C., 626 FPS. See Fear-potentiated startle
Frances, Allen, 23 Frank, E., 344 Frankenburg, F. R., 562, 567, 590,
591, 593 Franklin, M. E., 165 Freeman, A., 470 Freeman, J. B., 200
Freeston, M. H., 165 Freud, Sigmund, x, 194, 263 Friedel, R. O., 573
Friedman, B. H., 156 FSAD. See Female sexual arousal disorder FSFI, 523
FSIAD. See Female sexual interest/arousal disorder Functional anisotropy
(FA), 406 Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) with anorexia
nervosa, 484 with panic disorder, 328, 406, 443 Furmark, T., 46 Fusiform
cortex, 46 GABA. See Gamma-aminobutyric acid Gabapentin, 65 GAD. See
Generalized anxiety disorder GAD-7. See Generalized Anxiety Disorder
7-Item Scale GADQ-IV. See Generalized Anxiety Disorder Questionnaire for
DSM-IV Galen, 263, 472 Gallagher, M. W., 230 Gallelli, K., 347 Gallop,
R., 166 Galovski, T. E., 232, 240 Gamma, A., 322 Gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) with alcohol use disorder, 447, 452 with generalized anxiety
disorder, 154 with panic disorder, 105--106

657 with posttraumatic stress disorder, 225 with sleep-wake disorder,
380 Gaos, S. Y., 550 Garber, A. K., 500 Garcia, A. M., 200 Gardenswartz,
C. A., 122 GBI. See General Behavior Inventory Geddes, J. R., 339
General Behavior Inventory (GBI), 293, 336 General psychiatric
management (GPM), 595 Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) assessment
ADIS-5, 167 criteria, 166 ongoing and follow-up, 169 SCID-5, 167
cognitive and behavioral correlates avoidance theories of worry,
160--161 information processing biases in worry, 158--160 intolerance of
uncertainty, 161--162 life events, 156--157 metacognition, 162--164
probability overestimation and catastrophizing, 158 problem-solving
ability, 157--158 comorbidity, 152, 153 in DSM-5, 149--150 in DSM-III-R,
149, 150--151 emotional correlates, 164--165 environmental and family
factors, 165--166 gender differences, 152 historical perspectives on,
150--151 neurobiology, 153--155 prevalence and epidemiological factors,
151--153 prevention, 175 psychopathology, 155--156 self-report measures
Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-Item Scale, 168 Generalized Anxiety
Disorder Questionnaire, 168 purposes of, 167 theoretical constructs,
168--169 worry, severity and content, 168 summary and new directions,
174--175 symptoms and diagnostic criteria, 149--150 treatment biological
interventions, 172--174 cognitive-behavioral therapy for, 163, 170--172
psychological interventions, 169--172 Generalized Anxiety Disorder
7-Item Scale (GAD-7), 168 Generalized Anxiety Disorder Questionnaire for
DSM-IV (GADQ-IV), 168 Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder (GPPPD)
assessment, 552--553 biological factors, 550--551 definition, diagnosis,
and prevalence, 549--550 in DSM-5, 549--550

658 Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder (Continued) psychological
factors, 551--552 treatment, 553--554 Genome-wide association studies
(GWAS), 283, 489, 572 Gerber-Werder, R., 322 Gerstmann's syndrome, 2
GES. See Good Enough Sex model Gibbon, M., 565 Gibbons, M. B. C., 166
Giesen-Bloo, J., 595 Gilman, R., 230 Gitlin, M., 330 Glazer, H. I., 553
Globulin, 523 Gloster, A. T., 119 Glovinsky, P. B., 369 Glucocorticoid
receptor chaperone protein gene (FKBP5), 283 Glutamate, 327--328, 408
Goldin, P. R., 46, 61 Goldstein, A. J., 110 Goldstein, M. J., 99, 330,
341 Good Enough Sex (GES) model, 533 Goodwin, D. W., 4 Goodwin, G. M.,
339 Gordon, D., 167 Gordon, E. A., 48 Gordon, I., 485 Gorenstein, E. E.,
15 Gorwood, P., 571 Götestam, K. G., 209 Gotlib, I. H., 280 GPM. See
General psychiatric management GPPPD. See Genito-pelvic pain/penetration
disorder Grace, W. J., 476 Gradus, J. L., 240--241 Graham, C. A., 538
Grandi, S., 117 Grant, B. F., 438, 439 Gray, J. A., 272, 625, 626
Greeley, J., 443 Greenberg, J., 271 Greenwood, A., 635 Griffin, M. G.,
232 Grilo, C. M., 499 Grinband, J., 584--585 Grinker, R., 565 Grof, P.,
325 Gross, J. J., 46 Gross, M. M., 432 Grosscup, S. J., 294 G-spot
augmentation, 539 Guanfacine, 244 Gueorguieva, R., 499 Gull, W.,
466--467 Gunderson, J. G., 565, 567 Gunnar, M., 98 Gupta, B. P., 537
Guze, S. B., 4, 5, 6, 24 GWAS. See Genome-wide association studies

Index Hackmann, A., 53, 54 Hajek, T., 325 Hall, J., 585 Hallucinations,
393 HAM-D. See Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression Hamilton, R. K. B.,
628--629 Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D), 292, 293 Hammen,
C., 330 Hanrahan, F., 171 Hare, R. D., 615, 617, 621--622 Harkness, A.
R., 26 Harlow, B. L., 552 Harm-reduction models, 431 Harris, G. T., 635
Harte, C. B., 534--535 Harvey, A. G., 383 Haslam, N., 586 Hautzinger,
M., 343--344 Hay, P., 480 Hayes, S. A., 61 Hayes, S. C., 119, 172
Hazlett, E. A., 576 Heart rate, variability of, 107, 156, 524 Hecht, K.
F., 572 Hedges, D. W., 226 Heimberg, R., 46 Heimberg, R. G., 48, 49,
59--60, 63, 152, 167 Hengeveld, M. W., 547 Hennen, J., 567 Herbert, J.
D., 59 Herman, C. P., 443 Herpertz, S. C., 575 Hertz, R., 553 Herzog, D.
B., 482 Hettema, J. M., 155 Hetzel, S., 572 Hiatt-Racer, K., 628--629
Hicks, B. M., 632 Highly behavioral exposure therapy, 495 Hinckley,
John, 9 Hinton, D., 41 Hippocampus, 225, 226, 406, 575, 576 Hippocrates,
263, 318 Hirsch, C., 55 Hoarding, 193--194 Hobfoll, S. E., 234 Hoffman,
P. D., 591 Hofmann, S., 41, 42 Hofmann, S. G., 43 Hoge, C. W., 221
Holland, L. A., 466 Hollander, E., 573 Homosexuality, 12 Hong, L. K.,
546 Hooley, J., 582 Hooley, J. M., 584, 591 Hopelessness theory of
depression, 276--277 Hormones adrenocorticotropic hormone, 224, 287,
288, 574 androgens, 522, 523, 526 cortisol, 154--155, 224, 413, 573--574

estrogen, 489, 490, 522, 523, 526--527, 553 oxytocin, 47, 539, 545,
571--572, 575 testosterone, 489 thyrotropin, 547 Hovland, A., 120 Howe,
M., 347 HPS. See Hypomanic Personality Scale HSDD. See Hypoactive sexual
desire disorder Hudson, J., 99 Hudson, J. L., 165 Hughes, M., 220
Hymenoplasty, 539 Hyperprolactinemia, 530, 532 Hypersomnia, 383
Hyperthyroidism, 532, 547 Hypervigilance, 51 Hypnotics, 380 Hypoactive
sexual desire disorder (HSDD), 521 Hypochondriasis, 96 Hypogonadism,
530, 531 Hypomanic episodes, 318 Hypomanic Personality Scale (HPS), 336
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis with borderline personality
disorder, 573--574 functional organization, 287 with generalized anxiety
disorder, 154, 155 with major depressive disorder, 286--288 with panic
disorder, 106--108 pathophysiology, 287--288 with posttraumatic stress
disorder, 224--225 with schizophrenia, 413 Hypothalamo-hypophyseal
portal system, 287 Hypothyroidism, 530, 532 Iacono, W. G., 632, 633
ICAT. See Integrative Cognitive-Affective Therapy ICD-10. See
International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition ICL. See
Individual clinical management ICSD-3. See International Classification
of Sleep Disorders Identity disturbance, 563 IES-R. See Impact of Event
Scale-Revised IFN-y. See Interferon gamma III. See Interpretations of
Intrusions Inventory IIT. See Impaired integration theory IL-4. See
Interleukin-4 Imagery rescripting, 245 Immigrant paradox, 438 Impact of
Event Scale-Revised (IES-R), 236 Impaired integration theory (IIT),
628--629 Implicit memory, 53, 159 Improving Access to Psychological
Therapies, 300 Impulsivity, 445, 563, 570 In-Albon, T., 43 Incentive
salience, 448 Individual behavior therapy (BT), 379 Individual clinical
management (ICL), 344

659

Index Inflammation, 288--289, 328, 576 Influenza (flu), 14 Information
retrieval, 3 Inhibitory deficits, 196 Insel, Thomas, 10 Insomnia. See
Sleep-wake disorders Insula, 46 Integrative Cognitive-Affective Therapy
(ICAT), 497 Intelligence, assessment of, x Intensive outpatient programs
(IOPs), 501 Interapy, 245 Interference control, 580--581 Interferon
gamma (IFN-y), 328 Interleukin-4 (IL-4), 328 Intermediate phenotypes,
283--284 Internal consistency, 9 Internal validation, 6 International
Classification of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10), 20--21 diagnoses in,
1, 433 emotionally unstable disorder in, 565 International
Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD-3), 365--366 International
Consultation on Urological Diseases in Official Relationship with the
World Health Organization, 538 International Personality Disorder
Examination (IPDE), 587 International Research Group on Gender and
Alcohol, 438--439 Interoceptive awareness, 486 Interoceptive
conditioning, 110--111 Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT),
344, 384 Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), 295, 298, 496, 497
Interpretation bias. See Judgment and interpretation bias
Interpretations of Intrusions Inventory (II), 203 Interrater
reliability, 9--10, 16, 17, 18 Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale, 169
Intracavernosal injections, 536 Intraclass correlation coefficient, 9
Invalidation, 569 Involuntary memory, 53 IOPs. See Intensive outpatient
programs IPDE. See International Personality Disorder Examination
Ipecac, 476 Iproniazid, 284 IPSRT. See Interpersonal and social rhythm
therapy IPT. See Interpersonal psychotherapy Ivers, H., 373 Iverson, K.
M., 240 Jacobson, N. S., 294 James, P., 472 James, William, 262 Jamison,
K., 330 Janssen, E., 525 Jardri, R., 571 Jester, J. M., 443

Jimenez, S., 241 Johnson, J. G., 578 Johnson, S. L., 334 Johnson, V. E.,
528, 536--537, 546, 547 Jones, B., 583 Jones, C., 229 Jones, F., 171
Joormann, J., 280 Jouriles, E. N., 635 Joyce, P. R., 571 Judgment and
interpretation bias, 51--53, 55 Kabat-Zinn, J., 119 Kamerow, D. B., 368
Kaplan, H. S., 547 Kaplan, K. A., 383 Kaplan, M. H., 22 Kappa
coefficient, 9 Karpman, B., 25 Kazdin, A. E., 2 Kean, Y., 41 Keane-PTSD
Scale (PK), 237 Keel, P. K., 466, 489 Kegel exercises, 541, 542 Kendall,
P. C., 165 Kennedy, R., 278 Keough, M. E., 122 Keri, S., 585 Kernberg,
Otto, 565, 568, 582, 594 Kessing, L. V., 341 Kessler, R. C., 220, 232,
321 Ketamine, 246, 408 Khalifé, S., 550 "Kiddie" Schedule for Affective
Disorders and Schizophrenia, Present and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL),
335 Kilpatrick, D. G., 235 Kim, E. Y., 328, 332--333 Kindling, 333
Kingsberg, S. A., 549 Klein, D. F., 87 Klein, D. N., 268, 282, 299
Klingberg, T., 636 de Kloet, R., 574 Klonopin, 88 Klump, K. L., 489
Knight, R., 564--565 Knudson, G., 549 Knutelska, M., 573 Koerner, N.,
162 Kohut, Heinz, 568, 569 Koplik's spots, 19--20 Korfine, L., 582 Koro,
20 Kotov, R., 268 Kozak, M. J., 107--108, 229 Kraepelin, Emil, x, 17,
263, 612 Kreuger, R. F., 632 Kronovall, P., 492 Kryger, M. H., 382
K-SADS-PL. See "Kiddie" Schedule for Affective Disorders and
Schizophrenia, Present and Lifetime Version Kubany, E. S., 230

Kupfer, David, 20 Kushner, M. G., 44 Labeling theory, 11--12 Labels, 10
Labiaplasty, 539 Ladouceur, R., 161, 165 Lam, D. H., 343, 344
Lamotrigine, 244, 339, 593 Lang, P. J., 232 Langlois, F., 165 Larsson,
H., 632, 633 Lask, B., 485 Latuda. See Lurasidone Laumann, E. O., 540,
546 Lautenbacher, S., 95 Laxatives, abuse of, 475 LDX. See
Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate Learned helplessness theory, 276 LEC-5. See
Life Events Checklist for DSM-5 Leckman, J. F., 99 Ledley, D. R., 63
Lee, R., 573 Lee, S. S., 473 Lehman, C. L., 58, 221--222 Leiblum, S. R.,
528 Lenzenweger, M. F., 582 Lesions, 7--8 Leukefeld, C., 623 Levenson.
M. R., 622 Levine, H. G., 439 Lewinsohn, P. M., 271, 294 Lewis, A., 617
LHPA. See Limbic-hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal axis Lichtenstein, P.,
632 Lidell, H. G., 472 Lidocaine, 548 Lieb, K., 574 Liebowitz Social
Anxiety Scale (LSAS), 58--59 LIFE. See Longitudinal Interval Follow-up
Evaluation Life Events Checklist for DSM-5 (LEC-5), 235 Limb, K., 341
Limbic-hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (LHPA) axis, 154 Lincoln, Abraham,
262 Linehan, M. M., 172, 566, 568--569, 593 Linnaeus, Carl, 1
Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (LDX), 502 Lithium for bipolar disorder,
322--323, 325, 328, 337, 338, 339 for borderline personality disorder,
593 Llera, S. G., 161 Lock, J., 494 Loevinger, J., 23 Loftus, J., 521
Loney, B. R., 633 Long, J. S., 521 Longitudinal Interval Follow-up
Evaluation (LIFE), 291, 336--337 Lorenz, T. A., 524

660 LSAS. See Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale Lubrication, vaginal, 521,
522, 523--524, 527 Ludman, E. J., 340--341 Lumping, 23, 24 Lundh, L. G.,
53 Lundh, L.-G., 372 Lung cancer, 413 Lurasidone, 339 Luvox. See
Fluvoxamine Lykken, D. T., 626--627 Lynam, D., 623 Lynam, D. R.,
622--623, 633 Lytle, R., 166 MacLeod, C., 159 Maddock, R. J., 96 MADRS.
See Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), 226, 405. See also Functional magnetic resonance imaging Magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (MRS), 199 Magnification/minimization, 276 Maher,
B., x Maisto, S. A., 446 Majewski, M., 492 Major depressive disorder
(MDD), 262 assessment of clinical interviews, 291 clinical rating scales
of severity, 292 self-report measures, 291--292 behavioral deficits in,
271 amotivation and anhedonia, 272 avoidance and passivity, 272--273
behavioral treatments, 294 cognitive-behavioral therapy, 295 chronic,
298 diagnostic criteria, 264--266, 270 in DSM-5, 264--266, 270 gender
differences, 268 genetics of, 282--283 integrative model of, 289--290
neurochemistry of brain-derived neurotrophic factor, 286 norepinephrine,
285--287 serotonin, 284--285 neuroendocrinology of depression and
pathophysiology of the HPA axis, 287--288 functional organization of the
HPA axis, 287 hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, 286--288 prevalence
of, 268--269 psychoimmunology of, 288--289 social anxiety disorder with,
42--43 specifiers for, 265--266 treatment behavioral, 294
cognitive-behavioral therapy, 290, 295 interpersonal psychotherapy, 295
somatic, 295--297 Major depressive episode (MDE), 17

Index Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder (MHSDD) assessment, 531
biological factors, 530 definition, diagnosis, and prevalence, 529
psychological factors, 530 treatment, 531--533 Malkoff-Schwartz, S., 331
Malnutrition, 471 Manber-Ball, T., 46 Mangaians, of the Cook Islands,
541 Mania, 320, 324 Manie sans delire, 612--613 MAOIs. See Monoamine
oxidase inhibitors Marcus, M. D., 473 Marijuana, 44, 400 Marlatt, G. A.,
446 Marlatt-Witkiewitz model, 446 Marsh, A. A., 628 Marten, P. A., 151
Martinez, M. A., 495 Masheb, R. M., 499 The Mask of Sanity (Cleckley),
613--614 Maslow, A. H., 614 Mason, B. J., 293 Massie, E. D., 232
Masters, W. H., 528, 536--537, 546, 547 Masturbation, 522, 543 Mathews,
A., 55, 278 Mattia, J. I., 567 Maudsley method, 495--496 Mayo-Wilson,
E., 64 MBSR. See Mindfulness-based stress reduction MBT. See
Mentalization-based therapy McCabe, R. E., 56 McCall, K. M., 523, 525
McCarthy, E., 341 McClosky, M., 573 McCord, J., 614 McCord, W., 614
McCrady, B. S., 432 McCullough, J. P., 282 McDonald, R., 635 McGrath, P.
B., 157 McGue, M., 448--449, 633 McIntosh, V. W., 496 McLaughlin, K.,
159 McMain, S. F., 577 McManus, F., 54 m-CPP. See
Meta-chlorophenylpoperazine MCQ. See Metacognitions Questionnaire
MCQ-30. See Metacognitions Questionnaire 30 MDD. See Major depressive
disorder MDE. See Major depressive episode MDQ. See Mood Disorders
Questionnaire Meana, M., 532 Medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC), 226
Medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), 225, 226 Medical management (MM), 453
Medicalization, of normality, 23--24 Meehl, P. E., 1, 6, 25 Meenan, R.
T., 550 Meesters, C., 281

Memory with borderline personality disorder, 583 with obsessive
compulsive disorder, 195--196 with posttraumatic stress disorder, 227
Memory bias, 53--55, 95, 159 Mendel, Gregor Johann, 283 Mendeleev,
Dmitri, 1 Mennin, D. S., 164 Menopause, 522 Mental disorder biological
model of, 13 definition of, 2, 12 harmful dysfunction model of, 14 need
for treatment, 14 Roschian analysis, 15 as social construct, 12
statistical model of, 12--13 subjective distress model of, 13
Mentalization, 579 Mentalization-based therapy (MBT), 594 Meston, C. M.,
523, 524, 534--535 MET. See Motivational enhancement therapy Metabolic
syndrome, 416, 532 Meta-chlorophenylpoperazine (m-CPP), 573
Metacognition, 162--164, 171 Meta-Cognitions Questionnaire (MCQ), 163,
168--169 Meta-Cognitions Questionnaire 30 (MCQ-30), 168--169 Metalsky,
G. I., 276--277 Meulenbeek, P., 122 Meuret, A. E., 119, 120 Meyer, A.
H., 499 Meyer, Adolf, 16, 263 Meyer, T. D., 343--344 MFT. See Monitoring
the Future MHPG. See 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol MHSDD. See Male
hypoactive sexual desire disorder MI. See Motivational interviewing
MicroRNAs, 105 Middleton, H. C., 108 Mifepristone (RU-486), 246
Miklowitz, D., 347 Miklowitz, D. J., 330, 332--333, 341, 342 Milhausen,
R. R., 524 Miller, J. D., 623 Miller, M. W., 221 Millon, T., 10, 612,
617 Mindfulness, 119, 119n3, 450 Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention,
450 Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), 119 Mineka, S., 98, 111
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview, 335 Mini-SPIN, 60
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), 237, 615 Minnesota
Temperament Inventory, 633 Minnesota Twin Family Study, 632 Minor
neurocognitive disorder, 23 Mintz, J., 330

Index Minuchin, S., 467 Mirtazapine, 532 Misappraisal model, 110
Misconceptions, about diagnosis, 7--12 Mississippi Scale for
Combat-Related PTSD, 236 Mitral valve collapse, 115 MM. See Medical
management MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
Mobility Inventory for Agoraphobia, 113 Moclobemide, 523 mOFC. See
Medial orbitofrontal cortex Monahan, J., 636 Monitoring the Future
(MFT), 440 Monk, C. S., 155 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
iproniazid, 284 for major depressive disorder, 284, 296 phenelzine, 65
for posttraumatic stress disorder, 243 for social anxiety disorder, 65
Monoamine theory of depression, 284 Monothetic approach, 19 Monozygotic
(MZ) twins, 402, 403, 405, 408 Monroe, L. J., 370 Montgomery-Asberg
Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), 292 Mood Disorders Questionnaire (MDQ),
336 Mood-as-input approach, 164--165 Morey, L. C., 5 Morgan, C. A., III,
224 Morin, C. M., 371, 373, 378, 381--382, 384 Morin, M., 550 Morland,
L. A., 240 Morrell, W., 470 Morriss, R., 341 Morrow, J., 279 Moscovitch,
D. A., 43 Mothers Against Drunk Driving, 429 Motivational enhancement
therapy (MET), 44, 449, 451 Motivational interviewing (MI), 172, 449
Motivational or affective inhibition, 581 Motor vehicle accidents
(MVAs), 220 Mowrer, O., 195 mPFC. See Medial prefrontal cortex MPQ. See
Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire MRI. See Magnetic resonance
imaging MRS. See Magnetic resonance spectroscopy Mullen, K., 332--333
Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ), 622, 632, 634 Mulvey,
E. P., 636 Mulvogue, M. K., 162 Mundugumor, of Papua New Guinea, 541
Munsch, S., 499 Mu-opioid receptor (OPRM1) gene, 453 Murphy, J. A., 269
Murray, E. A., 628 Murray, S. H., 524 MVAs. See Motor vehicle accidents
MZ. See Monozygotic twins

NAC. See Nucleus accumbens Naltrexone, 447, 451--452, 453 Narcolepsy,
383 Narducci, J., 166 Narrative exposure therapy (NET), 242 Nash, John,
393, 396 National Comorbidity Survey (NCS), 101, 151, 153, 220, 232
National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R) agoraphobia in, 89
bipolar disorder in, 319, 321, 323 generalized anxiety disorder in, 151
panic attacks in, 86 panic disorder in, 89, 101 social anxiety disorder
in, 41 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alchohol and Related
Conditions-III (NESARC-III), 437 National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions-I (NESARC-I), 41, 330, 436, 449 National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions-II (NESARC-II),
437 National Health Interview Survey, 437 National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence, 64 National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of
Depression Collaborative Research (TDCRP), 295 National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), 436, 441, 453 National Stressful
Events Survey, 220--221 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH),
436, 449 Native Americans, 438 NCS. See National Comorbidity Survey
NCS-R. See National Comorbidity Survey Replication NE. See
Norepinephrine Need, for treatment, 14 Nefazadone, 539 Negative
affectivity, 96 Negative expressed emotion, 402 Negative symptoms,
394--395 Nelles, W. B., 90 Nelson, C. B., 220 Nemeroff, C. B., 298 NEO
PI-R. See Revised NEO Personality Inventory NES. See Night-eating
syndrome NESARC-I. See National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions-I NESARC-II. See National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alchohol and Related Conditions-II NESARC-III. See National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alchohol and Related Conditions-III NESDA. See
Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety NET. See Narrative exposure
therapy; Norepinephrine transporter

661 Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA), 89--90
Neurocirculatory asthenia, 87 Neuropeptide S receptor, 104 Neuropeptide
Y (NPY), 224, 448 Neuroticism, 96, 97, 102, 109 Neurotransmitters. See
also Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors with alcohol use disorder,
447, 452 with bipolar disorder, 326--328, 327--328, 331 with borderline
personality disorder, 571, 572--573, 575, 577 cholecystokinin, 154, 474
dopamine, 47, 225, 327, 331, 407--408, 410, 413, 415, 446, 447, 484,
571, 573 with eating disorders, 484 gamma-aminobutyric acid, 105--106,
154, 225, 380, 447, 452 with generalized anxiety disorder, 154
glutamate, 327--328, 408 norepinephrine, 154, 284, 285--286, 326,
523--524, 573 oxytocin, 47, 539, 545, 571--572, 575 with panic disorder,
105--106 with posttraumatic stress disorder, 225, 413 with
schizophrenia, 407--408, 410, 413, 415, 446, 447 serotonin, 46, 47, 154,
198, 225, 283, 284--285, 346, 369, 484, 571, 572--573, 577 with sexual
dysfunctions, 539, 545 with sleep-wake disorder, 380 with social anxiety
disorder, 47 Newman, J. P., 622, 628--629, 630, 636--637 Newman, M. G.,
161, 166 NIAAA. See National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
Nicol, K., 585 Night-eating syndrome (NES), 465, 476--477 Nijland, E.
A., 527 Nishikawa, Y., 44 Nishith, P., 239 Nitric oxide, 535 NMDA
antagonists, 408 N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor, 408 Nobre, P.
J., 534 Nocturnal panic, 86--87 Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 279 Nomological
network, 6 Noncognitive panic, 86 Nonrapid eye movement (NREM),
364--365, 370, 371 Noradrenaline transporter, 108 Norepinephrine (NE).
See also Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor with bipolar
disorder, 326 with borderline personality disorder, 573 with generalized
anxiety disorder, 154 with major depressive disorder, 284, 285--286 with
sexual dysfunctions, 523--524

662 Norepinephrine transporter (NET), 285 Norris, F. H., 220
Northwestern/UCLA Youth Emotion Project, 97 Nosology, 3--4 Nothen, M.
M., 547 NPY. See Neuropeptide Y NREM. See Nonrapid eye movement NSDUH.
See National Survey on Drug Use and Health Nucleus accumbens (NAC),
446--447 Nuechterlein, K. H., 330 Number of awakenings after sleep onset
(NWAKE), 374 OBEs. See Objective binge episodes Obesity, parental,
487--488 Objective binge episodes (OBEs), 473, 478 Obsessive Beliefs
Questionnaire (OBQ), 203 Obsessive Compulsive Inventory (OCI), 201
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 2 assessment clinician-rated
severity scales, 200 diagnostic interviews, 200 parameters of, 199
self-report measures, 201--202 biological treatment neurosurgical
treatment, 210 serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 209--210 DSM-5 diagnostic
criteria, 187--188 functional assessment assessment of avoidance and
compulsive rituals, 204 assessment of obsessional stimuli, 202--204 case
conceptualization, 205 self-monitoring, 204--205 neurobiological models
evaluation, 199 serotonin hypothesis, 198 structural models, 198--199
prevalence and epidemiology, 194--195 psychological models cognitive
deficit models, 195--196 cognitive-behavioral models, 196--198 learning
models, 195 psychological treatment cognitive therapy, 205--209 exposure
and response prevention, 205--208, 209 related disorders body dysmorphic
disorder, 193 hoarding, 193--194 obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder, 194 signs and symptoms accommodation, 192 avoidance, 190--191
compulsions, 189--190 interpersonal, 191--193 obsessions, 188--189 poor
insight, 191 relationship conflict, 192--193

Index subtypes, 191 tic-related, 191 summary and future directions,
210--211 Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (OCPD), 194 OCD.See
Obsessive-compulsive disorder OCI. See Obsessive Compulsive Inventory
O'Connor, F., 225 OCPD. See Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
Oei, T., 443 OFC, 339. See Orbitofrontal cortex Ogloff, J. R., 635
Öhman, A., 111 Olanzapine for bipolar disorder, 338, 339 for borderline
personality disorder, 593 with social anxiety disorder, 65 Olivier, B.,
547 Ollendick, T. H., 55 Ondansetron, 452, 542 Oophorectomy, 522 Open
concepts, 5 Operskalski, B., 340--341 Opioid use disorder, 435 OPRM. See
Mu-opioid receptor gene Oral contraceptives, 522--523 Oral impregnation,
fear of, 467 Orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), 339, 576, 577, 628 Orgasm,
definition of, 537--538 Orgasm disorders delayed ejaculation, 542--545
female orgasmic disorder, 537--542 premature ejaculation, 545--549
OSFED. See Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorder Öst, L.-G., 53
Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorder (OSFED), 465 Ovarian
hormones, 488 Overcoming Binge Eating (Fairburn), 499 Overeating. See
Eating disorders Overgeneralization, 276 Owens, G. P., 230--231 OXTR
rs53576. See Oxytocin receptor gene Oxytocin with borderline personality
disorder, 575 receptor genes, 571--572 with sexual dysfunctions, 539,
545 with social anxiety disorder, 47 Oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR
rs53576), 571--572 P50 waveform, 401 P300, 29 PADIS. See Panic Disorder
Screener Padua Inventory (PI), 201 PAI. See Personality Assessment
Inventory PAI-BOR. See Personality Assessment Inventory-Borderline
Features Palazzoli, Selvini, 467 Panic attacks, 14 description of, 85 in
DSM-5, 86, 87

neuroticism and, 97 with social anxiety disorder, 39 symptoms of, 87
Panic control treatment (PCT), 115 Panic disorder agoraphobia and,
85--86, 87, 89, 91 assessment behavioral test, 113--114 clinical rating
scales, 112 interviews, 111--112 neurobiological assessment, 114--115
ongoing assessment, 114 self-report and behavioral measures, 113
behavioral features avoidance of situations, 91 experiential avoidance,
93--94 interoceptive avoidance, 91--92 safety behaviors, 92--93
biological features genetics, 102--105 neurocircuitry, 105--108 case
example, 87--89 cognitive features, 94--96 comorbidity, 89, 90, 116--117
description of, 85--87 in DSM-III, 87 emotional features, 96--97
environmental factors childhood illness and abuse, 100--101 early
caregiving and infant attachment, 97--99 parenting, 98--100 stress,
101--102 etiological models, 109--111 gender differences, 90 history of,
87 prevalence and epidemiology, 89--90 prevention, 121--122, 124--125
summary and future directions, 122--125 treatment biological, 120--121
psychological, 115--120, 121 Panic Disorder Screener (PADIS), 113 Panic
Disorder Self-Report (PDSR), 113 Panic Disorder Severity Scale (PDSS),
112 PANSS. See Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale Papaverine, 535, 536
Paradoxical intention, 378 Paranoid delusions, 393 Paranoid personality
disorder, 397 Parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), 523 Paraventricular
nucleus (PVN), 287, 539 Parent-child interaction therapy (PCIT), 243
Parenting, style of, 57 Paris, J., 565, 596 Parkinson's disease, 47, 415
Parotid glands, 475 Paroxetine with bipolar disorder, 338 with
generalized anxiety disorder, 173 with posttraumatic stress disorder,
243 with sexual dysfunctions, 539, 548 with social anxiety disorder, 64
Partanen, J., 439

Index Passive avoidance task, 581 Paterson, L. Q., 550 Pathogenetic
comorbidity, 22 Pathognomonic indicator, 19 Patient Health Questionnaire
(PHQ-9), 292 Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT), 417 Patrick, C. J.,
632 Paulhus, D. L., 624 Pauli, P., 96 Pause technique, 548 Paxil. See
Paroxetine PBRS. See Personal Beliefs and Reactions Scale PCIT. See
Parent-child interaction therapy PCL: Screening Version (PCL:SV), 619,
620 PCL: Youth Version (PCL:YV), 619--620 PCL-5. See PTSD Checklist for
DSM-5 PCL-R. See Psychopathy Checklist-Revised PCL:SV. See PCL:
Screening Version PCL:YV. See PCL: Youth Version PCP. See Phencyclidine
PCT. See Panic control treatment; Present-centered therapy PDD. See
Persistent depressive disorder PDE-5 inhibitors, 527, 535, 536, 537, 548
PDEs. See Phosphodiesterases PDI-IV. See Personality Disorder Interview
PDQ-4. See Personality Disorders Questionnaire PDS-5. See Posttraumatic
Diagnostic Scale for DSM-5 PDSR. See Panic Disorder Self-Report PDSS.
See Panic Disorder Severity Scale PE. See Premature (early) ejaculation;
Prolonged exposure Pearson correlation coefficient, 9 Peer
victimization, 56--57 Penile implants, 536 Penn State Worry
Questionnaire, 168 PEP. See Post-event processing PER 3. See Period
circadian clock 3 Perelman, M. A., 534 Performance anxiety, 535
Periactin. See cyproheptadine Perineoplasty, 539 Period circadian clock
3 (PER3), 368--369 Periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD), 382 Perry,
A., 341 Persistent depressive disorder (PDD), 262 assessment of,
292--293 diagnostic criteria for, 264, 266--267, 270 in DSM-5, 266--267
prevalence, 269 treatment acute-phase treatment, 297--298 continuation
and maintenance, 298--299 Personal Beliefs and Reactions Scale (PBRS),
230 Personality and Personality Disorders Work Group, 565 Personality
Assessment Inventory (PAI), 588 Personality Assessment
Inventory-Borderline Features (PAI-BOR), 589

Personality Disorder Interview (PDI-IV), 587 Personality disorders. See
also specific personality disorders comorbidity with, 21--22 interrater
reliability of, 10, 16 Personality Disorders Questionnaire (PDQ-4), 587
Personality Inventory for DSM-5 (PID-5), 27 Personality theory, 444--445
Personalization, 275 PET. See Positron-emission tomography Peterson, C.
B., 473 Phencyclidine (PCP), 408 Phenelzine, 65 Phentolamine, 536
Phosphodiesterases (PDEs), 535--536 PHQ-9. See Patient Health
Questionnaire Physical exercise, 120 PI. See Padua Inventory Piccirillo,
M. L., 59 PID-5. See Personality Inventory for DSM-5 Pimentel, S. S.,
165 Pincus, A. L., 166 Pinel, P., 612--613 Pinto-Gouveia, J., 534
Pittsburgh Bipolar Offspring Study (BIOS), 322, 325 Pittsburgh
Maintenance Therapies study, 344 Pituitary glands, 107 PK. See
Keane-PTSD Scale PLMD. See Periodic limb movement disorder PMBS. See
Posttraumatic Maladaptive Beliefs Scale PNS. See Parasympathetic nervous
system Polysomnography (PSG), 376 Polythetic approach, 19 Pope, M., 585
PORT. See Patient Outcomes Research Team Positive and Negative Syndrome
Scale (PANSS), 414 Positive symptoms, 393, 396 Positron-emission
tomography (PET) with alcohol use, 446--447 with bipolar disorder, 328
with borderline personality disorder, 576--577 with obsessive-compulsive
disorder, 199 wtih eating disorders, 484 Posner, M. I., 581 Post-event
processing (PEP), 49 Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale for DSM-5 (PDS-5),
236 Posttraumatic Maladaptive Beliefs Scale (PMBS), 230 Posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), x, 54 assessment diagnostic interviews, 235--236
physiological assessment, 237 self-report measures, 236--237 traumatic
events, 234--235 behavioral factors, 231--232 biological factors brain
structures, 225--226 dopamine, 225, 413 GABA, 225

663 HPA axis, 224--225 noradrenergic system, 223--224 serotonin, 225
borderline personality disorder with, 574 case example, 218--219
cognitive and environmental factors cognitive disruption, 226--228
research on cognitive content, 229--231 research on cognitive processes,
228--229 comorbidity and personality, 221--223 in DSM-5, 217--218, 221
environmental factors conservation of resources, 233--234 intimate
relationships, 233 personally directed, 232--233 social support and
additional life stress, 233 gender differences, 221 mood stabilizers and
anticonvulsants, 244 prevalence and epidemiological factors, 219--221
psychopharmacological treatment antiadrenergics, 243--244
antidepressants, 243 augmentation with partial NMDA agonist, 244
GABA-ergic agonists, 244 psychosocial treatment brief eclectic
psychotherapy, 241--242 cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy, 242, 245
cognitive-behavioral therapy, 238--241 eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing, 241 narrative exposure therapy, 242 for younger patients,
242--243 subtypes, 218, 222--223 summary and future directions, 246--247
symptoms and diagnostic criteria, 216--218 treatment summary, 245--246
PPI. See Psychopathic Personality Inventory Prazosin, 243--244
Prefrontal cortex with bipolar personality disorder, 328, 329, 331, 347
with borderline personality disorder, 576, 591 with social anxiety
disorder, 46, 47 Pregabalin, 65, 173--174 Pregnancy, 14 Premature
(early) ejaculation (PE) assessment, 548 biological factors, 546--547
definition, diagnosis, and prevalence, 545--546 in DSM-5, 545--546
psychological factors, 547 treatment, 548--549 Present-centered therapy
(PCT), 239 PRI. See Psychopathy Resemblance Index Price, M., 50--51
Prichard, J. C., 613 Priligy. See Dapoxetine Prilocaine, 548

664 Principles of Psychopathology (Maher), x Process measures, 114
Prodrome, 399 Progressive muscle relaxation, 63--64, 367 Proinflammatory
cytokines, 288--289 Project MATCH, 45--451 Prolactin, 573 Prolonged
exposure (PE), 238, 240--241 Propranolol, 244 Provoked vestibulodynia
(PVD), 551, 552 Prozac. See Fluoxetine PSG. See Polysomnography PSSI-5.
See PTSD Symptom Scale-Interview for DSM-5 Psychiatric diagnosis basis
of, 1 classification attenuation paradox, 24--25 categorical model, 25
committee consensus, 21n2 comorbidity, 21--22, 25 culture-bound
syndromes, 20 diagnostic overshadowing, 22 dimensional approach, 25--28
DSM-5, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27 DSM-I, x, 15--16 DSM-II, 16 DSM-III,
17--18, 19, 25 DSM-III-R, 19, 20 DSM-IV, 19--20, 21 hierarchical
exclusion rules, 17--18 interrater reliability, 9--10, 16, 17, 18
linkages with, 3--4 lumping, 23, 24 medicalization of normality, 23--24
monothetic approach, 19 multiaxial approach, 18, 20 neo-Kraepelinian, 17
as open concept, 5 pathognomonic indicator, 19 polythetic approach, 19
reliability, 23 splitting, 23--24 Structured Clinical Interview for DSM,
18 theoretical agnosticism, 16, 19, 21 validity of, 4--7, 10 as
communication, 3 definition of, 2 endophenotype approach, 28--29 ICD-10,
20--21 mental disorder biological model of, 13 definition of, 2, 12
harmful dysfunction model of, 14 need for treatment, 14 Roschian
analysis, 15 as social construct, 12 statistical model of, 12--13
subjective distress model of, 13 misconceptions about, 7--12 Research
Domain Criteria, 28--29 Psychic conflict, 544 Psychodynamic Diagnostic
Manual (Alliance of Psychoanalytic Organizations), 16

Index Psychologists, role of, x Psychology, emergence of, x Psychopathic
Personality Inventory (PPI), 622 Psychopathy assessment alternative
measures, 619--624 conclusions, 624 psychopathy checklist, 615--620,
622, 623, 624 diagnostic criteria, 612--615 prevalence, 624--625
psychological models and somatic factors fearlessness, fear
conditioning, and amygdala abnormalities, 625--629 genetics, 632--634
response modulation and attention, 629--632 summary and future
directions, 637--639 treatment, 634--637 Psychopathy Checklist, 615--616
Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R), 616--620, 622, 623, 624, 635
Psychopathy Resemblance Index (PRI), 623 Psychostimulant theory of
addiction, 447 Psychotic disorders. See Schizophrenia and psychosis
spectrum PTSD. See Posttraumatic stress disorder PTSD Checklist for
DSM-5 (PCL-5), 235, 236 PTSD Symptom Scale-Interview for DSM-5 (PSSI-5),
236 Pubococcygeus muscle, 541, 542 Purdue PTSD Scale-Revised, 236
Purging, 470, 476 Purging disorder, 465, 473--474 Puttler, L. I., 443
PVD. See Provoked vestibulodynia PVN. See Paraventricular nucleus
Pyszcynski, T., 271 QIDS. See Quick Inventory Of Depression
Symptomatology QOL. See Quality of life measures Quality of Life
Inventory, 114 Quality of life (QOL) measures, 114 Quetiapine for
bipolar disorder, 338, 339, 344 for borderline personality disorder, 593
for generalized anxiety disorder, 174 for social anxiety disorder, 65
Quick Inventory Of Depression Symptomatology (QIDS), 292 Radically Open
DBT, 494 RAINBOW, 343 Raine, A., 633 Ramoz, N., 571 Rapee, R., 99 Rapee,
R. M., 48, 49, 160--161 Rapid eye movement (REM), 364--365 Rasmusson, A.
M., 224 Rastram, M., 485 Rat Man, 194

Rational Recovery (RR), 430 Raymond, N. C., 473 RDC. See Research
Diagnostic Criteria RDoC. See Research Domain Criteria Rea, M. M., 342,
344 Reality monitoring, 196 Reboxetine, 523 Receptive desire, 526
Regier, Darrel, 20 Reich, D. B., 590, 591 Relapse, 445--446 Relaxation
therapy, 378 Religiosity, 540 REM. See Rapid eye movement Renneberg, B.,
583 Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC), 17, 366 Research Domain Criteria
(RDoC), 28 Research Scale for the Assessment of Psychopathy. See
Psychopathy Checklist Resick, P. A., 230, 232, 239, 240, 241 Response
modulation hypothesis (RMH), 629--632, 637 Response styles theory (RST),
279 Restless legs syndrome (RLS), 382 Restrictive behaviors, 469, 484
Retrograde ejaculation, 543 Revised Diagnostic Interview for Borderlines
(DIB-R), 586--587 Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R), 588
Reward sensitivity, 333--334 Rhee, S. H., 632, 633 Rice, M. E., 635
Rietschel, M., 547 Riggs, D. S., 232, 238 Rinne, T., 572--573, 574, 592
Riso, L. P., 282 Risperidone for bipolar disorder, 338 for borderline
personality disorder, 593 for posttraumatic stress disorder, 244 for
social anxiety disorder, 65 Rituals, 190, 204 RLS. See Restless legs
syndrome RMH. See Response modulation hypothesis Robins, E., 4, 5, 6, 24
Rodebaugh, T. L., 59--60 Rodke, G., 553 Rodrigue, S., 373 Roelofs, J.,
281 Rogosch, F. A., 572 Rood, L., 281 Rosch, Eleanor, 15 Roschian
analysis, 15 Rose, D. T., 57 Rosen, R. C., 534, 547 Rosenfield, D., 119,
635 Rosenhan, D. L., 11 Rosenthal, N. E., 331 Rosetti, M. C. K., 550
Rosman, B., 467 Roth, T., 382 Rothschild, L., 586

Index RR. See Rational Recovery RST. See Response styles theory RU-486.
See Mifepristone Rumination, 279--280, 525 Ruocco, A. C., 577 Ruscio, A.
M., 163 Rush, B., 613 Russell, G., 472 Russell's sign, 475 SA. See
Sinoatrial node Sacco, W. P., 275 Sack, D. A., 331 SADS. See Schedule
for Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders Safety behaviors with panic
disorder, 92--93 with social anxiety disorder, 40--41, 62 Safety
signals, 92 Saks, Elyn, 394 Salekin, R. T., 635 Salkovskis, P., 197 SAM.
See Situationally accessible memories Sandrow, D., 334 Santiago, N. J.,
298, 299 Sarbin, T. R., 11 SASCI. See Social Anxiety Session Change
Index Satiety violations, 492 Savron, G., 117 SBE. See Subjective binge
episodes Schamberger, M., 166 Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive
Personality (SNAP), 27 Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive
Personality-Second Edition (SNAP-2), 588 Schedule for Schizophrenia and
Affective Disorders (SADS), 335 Schedule for Schizophrenia and Affective
Disorders-Lifetime Version, 112 Scheff, T., 11 Schema-focused therapy
(SFT), 595 Schemas, 274 Schizoaffective disorder, 397 Schizoid
personality disorder, 397 Schizophrenia, 5--6 anosognosia with, 13
atypical antipsychotics for, 415 comorbidity, 395--396 dopamine with,
407--408, 410, 413, 415, 446, 447 in DSM-5, 396--397 occurrence rate of,
12 premorbid and prodromal symptoms, 410--412 smooth pursuit eye
movement dysfunction with, 29 Schizophrenia and psychosis spectrum
abnormalities in brain structure and function, 405--406 assessment,
413--414 cognitive deficits, 401--402 course and prognosis, 399--400
differential diagnosis, 396--399

environmental and sociocultural findings, 402 genetic vulnerability,
402--405 longitudinal findings, 409--412 models of schizophrenia,
412--413 neurotransmitter abnormalities, 407--408, 410, 413, 415, 446,
447 overview, 392 prenatal and obstetrical factors, 408--409 prevalence
and epidemiological factors, 400 summary and future directions, 419
symptoms and diagnostic criteria, 393--396 symptoms preceding onset, 399
treatment, 414 antipsychotic medication, 415--417 psychosocial
treatments, 417--419 Schizophrenia spectrum disorders, 398
Schizophreniform disorder, 398 Schizotypal personality disorder, 397
Schmidt, N. B., 122 Schmitt, W. A., 622 Schneider, K., 612 Schneider,
S., 99 Schnicke, M. K., 232 Schramm, E., 298 Schroijen, M., 111 Schumm,
J. A., 230--231 Schwartz, O. S., 99 Schweitzer, D. H., 543 SCID. See
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM SCID-5. See Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-5 SCID-II. See Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM-IV SCID-I/P. See Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I
Disorders-Patient Edition SCL-90-R. See Symptom Checklist-90-R Scott, E.
L., 152 Scott, R., 472 Segraves, R. T., 544 Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) with bipolar disorder, 338, 339 with borderline
personality disorder, 592 with bulimia nervosa, 501, 502 citalopram, 46
dapoxetine, 549 escitalopram, 173 fluoxetine, 64--65, 245, 339, 501,
502, 539, 577 fluvoxamine, 64, 592 with generalized anxiety disorder,
154, 173 with male hypoactive sexual desire disorder, 530 with obsessive
compulsive disorder, 198, 199, 209--210 with panic disorder, 120
paroxetine, 64, 173, 243, 338, 539, 548 with posttraumatic stress
disorder, 173, 243, 245 with premature (early) ejaculation, 549
sertraline, 64, 173, 243, 539, 548

665 sexual dysfunctions and, 523, 530, 539, 542, 548 with social anxiety
disorder, 46, 47, 64--65 Self-beliefs, negative, 46--47 Self-harm, 563,
590 Self-help, 494 Self-image, negative, 54--55 Self-Management and
Recovery Training (SMART), 430 Self-Report Psychopathy scale (SRP), 620,
622 Seligman, M. E. P., 276 Sensate focus, 528, 536--537 Sensation
seeking, 27 Sensory gating, 401 Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to
Relieve Depression (STAR\*D), 296--297, 347 Seres, I., 585 Serotonergic
gene polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) with bipolar disorder, 326 with major
depressive disorder, 283 with panic disorder, 100--102, 103--104
Serotonin (5-HT) with anorexia nervosa, 484 with bipolar disorder, 346
with borderline personality disorder, 571, 572--573, 577 with
generalized anxiety disorder, 154 with major depressive disorder,
284--285 with posttraumatic stress disorder, 225 serotonin hypothesis,
198 with sleep-wake disorders, 369 with social anxiety disorder, 46, 47
Serotonin transporter (SERT), 284 Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs) duloxetine, 173, 532 with female orgasmic disorder,
542 with generalized anxiety disorder, 155 with male hypoactive sexual
desire disorder, 530 with posttraumatic stress disorder, 243 with social
anxiety disorder, 64 venlafaxine, 64, 65, 155, 173, 243 SERT. See
Serotonin transporter Sertraline with posttraumatic stress disorder,
173, 243 with sexual dysfunctions, 539, 548 with social anxiety
disorder, 64 Serzone. SeeNefazadone Sexual abuse, 525 Sexual
dysfunctions neurotransmitters with, 539, 545 orgasm disorders delayed
ejaculation, 542--545 female orgasmic disorder, 537--542 premature
ejaculation, 545--549 overview, 520 sexual interest/arousal disorders
erectile disorder, 533--537 female sexual interest/arousal disorder,
521--528 male hypoactive sexual desire disorder, 531--533

666 Sexual dysfunctions (Continued) sexual pain disorders, genito-pelvic
pain/penetration disorder, 549--554 summary and future directions, 554
Sexual guilt, 540 Sexual pain disorders, 549--554 Sexual tipping point
model, 534 SF-36. See 36-Item Short Form Health Survey SFT. See
Schema-focused therapy Shapiro, J. R., 492 Shnaider, P., 241 SIAS. See
Social Interaction Anxiety Scale Sickle-cell anemia, 3 SIDP-IV. See
Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders Sigman, M., 99
Sildenafil, 527, 528, 534--536 Silk, K. R., 567 Simeon, D., 573 Simon,
G. E., 340--341 Simonsen, E., 222 Sin, sex as, 540 Singer, M., 565
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 283, 453 Single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT), 199, 328, 484--485 Sinoatrial node (SA),
107n2 SIPS. See Structured Interview for Prodromal Syndromes Sisk, C.
L., 489 SIT. See Stress-Inoculation Therapy Situationally accessible
memories (SAM), 227 Skeem, J. L., 636 Skinner, B. F., 270 Skinner, H.
A., 6 Skodol, A. E., 27 Sleep, 331--332 Sleep diary, 375--376 Sleep
hygiene, 377 Sleep onset latency (SOL), 374 Sleep quality (SQ), 374
Sleep restriction therapy, 377 Sleep-wake disorders assessment, 373
assessment of subjectively perceived sleep, 374--376 clinical interview,
374 objective estimates, 376 case examples insomnia with comorbidity,
366--367 insomnia without comorbidity, 366 circadian rhythm disorder,
382--383 comorbidity, 384--385 description, symptoms and criteria,
365--366 in DSM-5, 366 emotion, role of, 372--373 environmental factors,
373--374 epidemiology, 368--369 gender differences, 368 history of
insomnia, 367--368

Index hypersomnia, 383 interventions for children and adolescents,
383--384 cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia, 376--378
pharmacological interventions, 380--381 psychological
vs. pharmacological interventions, 381--383 treatment adherence, 379
treatment of comorbid insomnia, 379--380 models of insomnia behavioral
stimulus control model, 369 cognitive model, 369--370 homeostatic and
circadian influences, 372 hybrid models, 371--372 hyperarousal models,
370 neurocognitive model, 370--371 three-factor model, 369 narcolepsy,
383 periodic limb movement disorder, 382 restless legs syndrome, 382
sleep across development, 365 sleep apnea, 382 sleep basics, 364--365
SLT. See Social learning theory SMART. See Self-Management and Recovery
Training Smith, Bob, 430 Smith, K., 241 Smith, L., 573 Smith, M. T., 380
Smith, S. S., 622 Smoking, 435 Smooth muscle relaxation, 535, 536 Smooth
pursuit eye movement dysfunction, 29 SNAP. See Schedule for Nonadaptive
and Adaptive Personality SNAP-2. See Schedule for Nonadaptive and
Adaptive Personality-Second Edition SNPs. See Single nucleotide
polymorphisms SNRI. See Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
SNS. See Sympathetic nervous system Snyder, K. S., 330 Social anxiety
disorder (SAD) assessment clinical interviews, 58 clinical rating
scales, 58--59 neurobiological, 61 self-report measures, 59--60
session-by-session, 60--61 biological factors, 45--47
cognitive-behavioral model of, 47--49, 62--64 comorbidity with, 42--45
cultural rates, 41--42 description of, 39--42 in DSM-5, 39--40
environmental and sociocultural factors, 55--57 genetics, 45--46
internet-based interventions, 67

with major depressive disorder, 42--43 neurobiology, 46--47 prevalence
and epidemiological factors, 41--45 psychological and psychosocial
dysfunction attentional bias, 49--51 employment impairment, 41 judgment
and interpretation bias, 51--53 memory and imagery bias, 53--55 panic
attacks, 39 safety behaviors, 40--41, 62 substance use with, 43--44
summary and future directions, 66--67 symptoms and criteria, 39--41
treatment biological interventions, 46, 47, 64--66 psychological
interventions, 44, 47, 61--64 Social Anxiety Session Change Index
(SASCI), 60--61 Social cognition, 395, 401--402, 583--585 Social
Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS), 59--60 Social learning theory (SLT),
445--446 Social phobia, 20 Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory (SPAI),
59, 60 Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN), 60 Social Phobia Scale (SPS), 59
Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada, Clinical Practice
Gynaecology Committee and Ethics Committee, 539--540 Sociopathy,
614--615 SOL. See Sleep onset latency Soldier's heart, 87 Somatic
arousal, 370 Sommerfield, C., 239 Sonnega, A., 220 Sood, R., 381--382
Southwick, S. M., 224 SPAI. See Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory
Spangler, D., 282 Specialist supported individual therapy (SSIT), 496
Specifiers, 265--266 SPECT. See Single-photon emission computed
tomography Spectatoring, 534 Spielman, A. J., 369, 377 SPIN. See Social
Phobia Inventory Spinal cord, injury to, 543 Spitzer, R. L., 11, 565
Spitzer, Robert, 17 Splitting, 23--24 Sprengelmeyer, R., 585 SPS. See
Social Phobia Scale SQ. See Sleep quality Squeeze technique, 548 SRD.
See Stress-response dampening SRP. See Self-Report Psychopathy scale
SSIT. See Specialist supported individual therapy

Index SSRI. See Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors St. Louis group,
at Washington University, 17 Standards of Practice Committee, of the
American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 376, 378 Stanley, B., 584--585
Stanley Foundation Bipolar Network, 323 Stapinski, L. A., 160--161
STAR\*D. See Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression
Startle response, 626 Statistical Manual for the Use of Institutions of
the Insane (U.S. Bureau of the Census), 15--16 Statistical model, 12--13
Steidtmann, D., 298 Stein, D. J., 41, 46 Steiner, E. T., 532 Steketee,
G., 209 STEP-BD. See Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for
Bipolar Disorder STEPPS. See Systems Training for Emotional
Predictability and Problem Solving Stern, Adolf, 564 Stevens-Johnson
syndrome, 339 Stewart, E. G., 552 Stewart, S. H., 109 Stice, E., 473,
480 Stigma, 11--12 Stiles, T. C., 209 Stimulant use disorder, 435
Stimulus control, 369, 377 Stomach, motility of, 475 Stone, J., 381--382
Stress-diathesis. See Diathesis-stress model Stress-Inoculation Therapy
(SIT), 239 Stress-response dampening (SRD), 443, 444 Strober, M., 470
Stroop task with borderline personality disorder, 580--581, 582 with
generalized anxiety disorder, 158 with panic disorder, 96 with social
anxiety disorder, 49--50 Strosahl, K. D., 172 Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM (SCID), 18 Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5
(SCID-5) for bipolar disorder, 335 for generalized anxiety disorder, 167
for major depressive disorder, 291 for persistent depressive disorder,
293 for posttraumatic stress disorder, 236 for schizophrenia, 414
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-II), 112, 586 Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders-Patient Edition
(SCID-I/P), 58 Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders
(SIDP-IV), 587

Structured Interview for Prodromal Syndromes (SIPS), 414 Stubbe, D. E.,
99 Stunkard, A. J., 472, 476 Subjective binge episodes (SBEs), 473
Subjective distress model, 13 Suicidality, 322--323, 348, 563 Sullivan,
J. M., 294 Suvak, M. K., 43 Swencionis, C., 553 Syal, S., 46 Symbyax,
339 Sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 108, 523 Symptom Checklist-90-R
(SCL-90-R), 237 Syndromes, definition of, 2 Systematic desensitization,
554 Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder
(STEP-BD), 338, 345 Systems Training for Emotional Predictability and
Problem Solving (STEPPS), 595 Szasz, Thomas, 7--8, 11, 14 Tadafil, 527
Taijinkyofusho (TKS), 20, 42 T-allele, 104 Tallis, F., 163 Tardive
dyskinesia, 415 Tarrier, N., 239, 341 Taxa, 25 Taylor, C. T., 40 Taylor,
J., 633 TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants TDCRP. See National
Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative
Research Teasing, 56--57 Tebartz van Elst, L., 576 Temperament, 55
Temperament Evaluation of Memphis, Pisa, Paris, and San
Diego-Autoquestionnaire Version (TEMPS-A), 336 Temple-Wisconsin
Cognitive Vulnerabilities to Depression (CVD), 281 TEMPS-A. See
Temperament Evaluation of Memphis, Pisa, Paris, and San
Diego-Autoquestionnaire Version Tension-reduction theory, 443--444 Tepe,
E., 44 Testosterone, 489, 523, 526--527, 530--532 Test-retest
reliability, 8--9 Textbook of Psychiatry (Kraepelin), 263 TFCBT. See
Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy TFP. See
Transference-focused therapy TGF-ß1. See Transforming growth factor-beta
1 Theoretical agnosticism, 16, 19 36-Item Short Form Health Survey
(SF-36), 114 Thomas, P., 571 Thorazine. See Chlorpromazine

667 THQ. See Trauma History Questionnaire
3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG), 573 Three-factor model, 369
Thyrotropin, 547 Tibolone therapy, 527 Tippey, J. G., 635 TKS.
SeeTaijinkyofusho TLEQ. See Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire Tobacco
use disorder, 435 Tone, E. B., 50--51 Topiramate, 244, 452 Torgersen,
S., 570 Total amount of time awake after sleep onset (WASO), 374 Total
sleep time (TST), 374 Trait appraisal, 584 Transcranial magnetic
stimulation, 296 TranS-C-Youth, 383, 384 Transference-focused therapy
(TFP), 594--595 Transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-ß1), 328 Trauma,
220--221 Trauma History Questionnaire (THQ), 235 Trauma Symptom
Inventory (TSI), 237 Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy
(TFCBT), 243 Traumatic Events Scale, 235 Traumatic Life Events
Questionnaire (TLEQ), 235 Traumatic Stress Schedule, 235 Tremor, 415
Triarchic Psychopathy Measure (TriPM), 623--624 Tricyclic
antidepressants (TCAs), 243, 296 Trier Social Stress Test (TSST),
106--107 TriPM. SeeTriarchic Psychopathy Measure TrkB. See Tyrosine
kinase B receptor Tromp, D. P., 155 True Colors rating System, 337 Trust
appraisal, 584--585 Trust game paradigms, 585 Tryptophan, 285 TSF. See
12-step facilitation TSI. See Trauma Symptom Inventory TSST. See Trier
Social Stress Test TST. See Total sleep time Tuberculosis, 284, 296
12-step facilitation (TSF), 451 Twelve-step therapies, 450. See also
Alcoholics Anonymous 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, 404 Twohig, M. P., 119
Type 1 corticotrophin-releasing hormone receptor gene (CRHR1), 283
Tyrosine kinase B receptor (TrkB), 286 UCPPS. See Urological chronic
pelvic pain syndrome UCS. See Unconditioned stimulus UHR. See
Ultra-high-risk state Ukraine, 89 Ultra-high-risk (UHR) state, 411

668 Uncertainty, intolerance of, 161--162 Unconditioned stimulus (UCS),
627 Unipolar mania, 319 Unoka, Z., 585 Unutzer, J., 340--341 Urological
chronic pelvic pain syndrome (UCPPS), 550 Vagal tone, 107, 107n2
Vaginismus, 549, 550, 551, 552, 554 Vaginoplasty, 539 Vagus nerve, 539
Vaiva, G., 225 Valdoxan. See Agomelatine Valentine, J. D., 233
Valentiner, D. P., 157 Validity, 4--7, 8, 10 VAM. See Verbally
accessible memories van Praag, Herman, 23--24 Vancouver Obsessive
Compulsive Inventory (VOCI), 201 Vardenafil hydrochloride, 527 Vascular
disease, 533--534, 535, 539 Vasoactive gels, 536 Veague, H. B., 584
Veen, G., 585 Venlafaxine for generalized anxiety disorder, 155, 173 for
posttraumatic stress disorder, 243 for social anxiety disorder, 64, 65
Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) with bipolar disorder, 329 with
generalized anxiety disorder, 155 with panic disorder, 105, 124 Verbally
accessible memories (VAM), 227 Vestergren, E., 485 Vestibularectomy, 553
Vietnam Era Twin Registry, 103 Virtual reality exposure, 245 Vivitrol,
451 vmPFC. See Ventromedial prefrontal cortex VO2 , 370 VOCI. See
Vancouver Obsessive Compulsive Inventory Vogel, P. A., 209 Vogt, D., 211
Vulvodynia, 551 Vulvovaginal atrophy, 527, 551

Index Wachen, J. S., 241 Wakefield, J. C., 7, 14, 23 Wakefulness after
sleep onset (WASO), 366 Waldinger, M. D., 543, 547 Waldman, I. D., 632,
633 Wallace, J. F., 636 Wallin, U., 492 Walter, K. H., 230--231 Wang,
S., 224 Warren, C. S., 473 Washington University K-SADS, 335 WASO. See
Total amount of time awake after sleep onset; Wakefulness after sleep
onset Watt, M. C., 109 Watts, B. V., 243 WCST. See Wisconsin Card
Sorting Task WDQ. See Worry Domains Questionnaire Weaver, T. L., 239
Weeks, J. W., 48 Wehr, T. A., 331 Weight phobia, 465, 467, 468--469, 470
Wellbutrin. See Bupropion Wells, A., 49, 162--163, 171 Wenzel, A., 53
Werble, B., 565 Werner, K., 46 Westenberg, H. G., 572--573 Westoxetin.
See Dapoxetine WFSBP. See World Federation of Societies of Biological
Psychiatry Whaley, S. E., 99 White, M. A., 499 White, W. C., 472 WHO.
See World Health Organization Why Worry Scale, 169 Why Worry Scale-II,
169 Widiger, T. A., 21n2, 222, 623 Wiegel, M., 528 Wilhelm, S., 209
Will, George, 9 Williams, K. M., 624 Wilsnack, R. W., 438--439 Wilson,
Bill, 430 Wilson, G. T., 473, 499 Wilson, K. G., 172 Winnicott, D. W.,
568

Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST), 582 Wise, R. A., 447 Witkiewitz, K.,
446 Wolff, H. G., 476 Wong, J, 48 Wong, S., 635 Wood, J., 99 Wood, J.
M., 377 Woods, C. M., 59--60 Woolson, S. L., 492 Woon, F. L., 226 World
Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP), 502 World
Health Organization (WHO), 321, 436, 538 World Mental Health Survey,
269, 321 Worry, 149--150, 157--158, 162--164 Worry Domains Questionnaire
(WDQ), 168 Wouters, L., 592 Wu, K. D., 157 Yale-Brown Obsessive
Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS), 200 Yarczower, M., 232 Y-BOCS. See Yale-Brown
Obsessive Compulsive Scale Yehuda, R., 224 Young, A., 585 Young, A. W.,
553 Youth Psychopathic Traits Inventory (YPI), 621, 632 YPI-Child
Version (YPI-CV), 621 Zahner, G. E. P., 99 Zanarini, M. C., 562, 567,
590, 591, 593 Zanarini Rating Scale for Borderline Personality Disorder
(ZAN-BPD), 587--588 Zeier, J. D., 631 Zielezny, M., 117 Zimmerman, M.,
44, 567, 586 Ziprasidone, 338 Zoloft. See Sertraline Zopiclone, 381
Zucker, R. A., 443

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access
Wiley's ebook EULA.


