![](cover.jpeg)

[]{#titlepage.xhtml}

<div>

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" version="1.1" width="100%" height="100%" viewbox="0 0 500 750" preserveaspectratio="none">
`<image width="500" height="750" xlink:href="cover.jpeg">`{=html}`</image>`{=html}
</svg>

</div>

[]{#part0000.html}

::: calibre1
<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" version="1.1" width="100%" height="100%" viewbox="0 0 500 750">
`<image width="500" height="750" xlink:href="../images/00007.jpeg">`{=html}`</image>`{=html}
</svg>
:::

[]{#part0001.html}

Psychoanalytic\
Diagnosis

Understanding Personality Structure in the Clinical Process

 

![image](images/00005.jpeg){.calibre5}

**Nancy McWilliams**

![logo.TIF](images/00006.jpeg){.calibre7}

T[HE]{.small} G[UILFORD]{.small} P[RESS]{.small}\
New York     London

[]{#part0002.html}

::: xsmall
Epub Edition ISBN: 9781609184988

© 2011 The Guilford Press

A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.

72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012

[www.guilford.com](http://www.guilford.com){.calibre9}

All rights reserved

No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or
otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher.

Last digit is print number:    9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

**Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data**

McWilliams, Nancy.

Psychoanalytic diagnosis : understanding personality structure in the
clinical process / Nancy McWilliams. --- 2nd ed.

     p.; cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 978-1-60918-494-0 (hardcover : alk. paper)

1\. Typology (Psychology) 2. Personality assessment. 3. Personality
development. I. Title.

\[DNLM: 1. Personality Disorders---diagnosis. 2. Personality Assessment.
3. Personality Disorders---therapy. 4. Psychoanalytic Therapy. WM
460.5.P3\]

RC489.T95M38 2011

616.89′17---dc22

2011002833
:::

[]{#part0003.html}

*In grateful memory*

Howard Gordon Riley

Millicent Wood Riley

Jane Ayers Riley

[]{#part0004.html}

About the Author

**Nancy McWilliams, PhD**, teaches in the Graduate School of Applied and
Professional Psychology at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
and has a private practice in Flemington, New Jersey. She is a former
president of the Division of Psychoanalysis (39) of the American
Psychological Association and is on the editorial board of
*Psychoanalytic Psychology*. Dr. McWilliams's books have been translated
into 14 languages, and she has lectured widely both nationally and
internationally. She is a recipient of honors including the Rosalee
Weiss Award for contributions to practice from the Division of
Independent Practitioners of the American Psychological Association;
Honorary Membership in the American Psychoanalytic Association; and the
Robert S. Wallerstein Visiting Scholar Lectureship in Psychotherapy and
Psychoanalysis at the University of California, San Francisco. A
graduate of the National Psychological Association for Psychoanalysis,
Dr. McWilliams is also affiliated with the Center for Psychoanalysis and
Psychotherapy of New Jersey and the National Training Program of the
National Institute for the Psychotherapies in New York City.

[]{#part0005.html}

Preface

[W]{.dropcap}hen I originally wrote *Psychoanalytic Diagnosis*, I knew
from my experience as a teacher that students and early-career
psychotherapists needed exposure to the inferential, dimensional,
contextual, biopsychosocial kind of diagnosis that had preceded the era
inaugurated by the 1980 publication of the third edition of the
*Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders* (DSM-III) of the
American Psychiatric Association. In particular, I wanted to keep alive
the sensibility that represented decades of clinical experience and
conversation, in which human beings have been seen as complex wholes
rather than as collections of comorbid symptoms. I also saw how
confusing it was, even to psychodynamically oriented students, to try to
master the bewildering diversity of language, metaphor, and theoretical
emphasis that comprises the psychoanalytic tradition. The need for a
synthesis of the sprawling and contentious history of analytic theory,
as it pertains to understanding one's individual patients, was evident.

In the early 1990s I was also nourishing a faint hope that the book
would have some influence on mental health policy and on our culturally
shared conception of psychotherapy, which were beginning to be
transformed in disturbing ways. No such luck: The breadth and depth of
change since then have been stunning. For a host of interacting reasons,
psychodynamic---and even broadly humanistic (see Cain, 2010)---ways of
understanding and treating people have become devalued, and the
likelihood that a patient with significant character pathology, the
hallmark of most psychodynamic treatment, will find genuine, lasting
help in the mental health system has, in my view, plummeted. As the
cognitive-behavioral movement continues to develop, some of its
practitioners have become as upset with these developments as analytic
therapists have been; my CBT-oriented colleague Milton Spett recently
complained (e-mail communication, May 28, 2010), in reaction to this
trend, "We treat patients, not disorders."

Political and economic forces account for much of this change (see Mayes
& Horwitz, 2005, for the political history of the paradigm shift in the
area of mental illness "from broad, etiologically defined entities that
were continuous with normality to symptom-based, categorical diseases"
\[p. 249\]). At least in the United States, corporate interests---most
notably those of insurance companies and the pharmaceutical
industry---have sweepingly reshaped and thus redefined psychotherapy in
line with their aims: maximized profits. In the service of short-term
cost control, there has been a reversal of decades-long progress in
helping individuals with complex personality problems---not because we
lack skill in helping them, but because insurers, having marketed their
managed-care plans to employers with the claim that they would provide
"comprehensive" mental health coverage, later declined arbitrarily to
cover Axis II conditions.

Meanwhile, drug companies have a substantial stake in construing
psychological problems as discrete, reified illnesses so that they can
market medications that treat each condition. Consequently, the emphasis
is no longer on the deep healing of pervasive personal struggles, but on
the circumscribed effort to change behaviors that interfere with smooth
functioning in work or school. When I wrote the first edition of this
book, I did not realize how much graver the prognosis for
person-oriented (as opposed to symptom-oriented) therapy would become in
the years after its publication (see McWilliams, 2005a, for a more
detailed lament).

The climate in which therapists in my country currently practice is much
more inclement than in 1994. Contemporary practitioners are besieged
with suffering people who need intensive, long-term care (Can anyone
convincingly argue that psychopathology is *decreasing* in the context
of contemporary social, political, economic, and technological
changes?). They may be expected to see patients every 2 weeks, or even
less frequently, and to carry caseloads so large that genuine connection
with and concern for one's individual clients is impossible. They are
overwhelmed with paperwork, with efforts to justify even the most
unambitious treatment to anonymous employees of insurance companies,
with translating their efforts to help clients build agentic selves into
slogans such as "progress on target behaviors." Official "diagnosis"
under such pressures can often be cynical in spirit and thus in
function, as clinicians label patients in ways that will permit
insurance coverage and yet stigmatize them as little as possible.

Ironically, the current state of affairs makes it more rather than less
important for psychotherapists to have a heuristic but scientifically
enlightened sense of the overall psychology of each patient. If one
wants to have a short-term impact, one had better have some expedited
basis for predicting whether a person will react to a sympathetic
comment with relief, with devaluation of the therapist, or with a
devastating sense of not being understood. Hence, there is an even
greater need now than in 1994 to reassert the value of personality
diagnosis that is inferential, contextual, dimensional, and appreciative
of the subjective experience of the patient. My role in developing the
*Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual* (PDM Task Force, 2006) attests to this
concern, but in that document, what could be said about any type or
level of personality organization was limited to a few paragraphs,
whereas here I can elaborate more fully.

An indirect source of the widespread contemporary devaluation of the
psychoanalytic tradition may be the expanding gulf between academics and
therapists. Some degree of tension between these two groups has always
existed, largely because of the different sensibilities of the
individuals attracted to one role or the other. But the chasm has been
greatly enlarged by increased pressures on academics to pursue grants
and quickly amass research publications. Even those professors who would
like to have a small practice would be foolish to do so in the current
academic climate, especially while seeking tenure. As a result, few
academics know what it feels like to work intensively with severely
and/or complexly troubled individuals. The researcher--practitioner gulf
has also been inadvertently widened by the growth of professional
schools of psychology, where aspiring therapists have little opportunity
for mutually enriching exchange with mentors involved in research.

One result of this wider fissure is that psychodynamic formulations of
personality and psychopathology, which emerged more from clinical
experience and naturalistic observation than from the laboratories of
academic psychologists, have too often been portrayed to university
students as archaic, irrelevant, and empirically discredited. Although
decades of research on analytic concepts are typically ignored when
current critics idealize specific evidence-based treatments---in their
1985 and 1996 books, Fisher and Greenberg reviewed over 2,500 such
studies---the paucity of randomized controlled trials of open-ended
psychodynamic therapy has cost us dearly. In addition, the arrogance of
many analysts in the heyday of psychoanalysis, especially their belief
that what they experienced with each patient was too idiosyncratic to be
researchable, contributed to negative stereotypes held by nonclinical
colleagues.

Even now, when some exemplary empirical work has shown the effectiveness
of analytic treatments (e.g., Leichsenring & Rabung, 2008; Shedler,
2010), we are left with the self-defeating political legacy of many
analysts' contempt for research on the analytic process. The increasing
shaping of clinical psychology into a positivist "science," the
cost-containment efforts by insurance companies, the economic interests
of the pharmaceutical industry, and the dismissive reaction of some
analysts to outcome research of any kind have generated the "perfect
storm" leading to the devaluation of psychodynamic psychology and
psychotherapy.

Contemporary misfortunes aside, there are additional spurs to the
revision of this book. Since its original publication, cognitive and
affective neuroscientists have begun to illuminate genetic,
physiological, and chemical bases of psychological states. Research on
infancy, especially on attachment, the conceptual baby of the
psychoanalyst John Bowlby, has added new angles of vision to our
understanding of the development of personality. The relational movement
has inspired a significant paradigm shift within large sections of the
psychoanalytic community. Cognitive and behavioral therapists, as their
movement has matured and their practitioners have worked with more
complex patients, are developing personality concepts that are
remarkably similar to older psychoanalytic ones. And my own learning
continues. I know more now about Sullivanian, neo-Kleinian, and Lacanian
theories than I knew in 1994. I have had the benefit of critiques from
teachers who have assigned *Psychoanalytic Diagnosis*, from the students
they have taught, and from fellow practitioners who have read it. And I
have had 20 more years of clinical experience since I first envisioned
the book.

I was not entirely surprised by the success in North America of the
first edition: I suspected as I was writing it that I was far from the
only person who felt the lack of such a text for students of
psychotherapy. But its international reception has astonished me,
especially its warm welcome by therapists in countries as diverse as
Romania, Korea, Denmark, Iran, Panama, China, New Zealand, and South
Africa. Its popularity in my own country has brought me invitations to
speak in unexpected mental health subcultures (e.g., to Air Force
psychiatrists, evangelical pastoral counselors, prison psychologists,
and addictions specialists), and its impact beyond North American
borders has introduced me to therapists throughout the world, who have
taught me about the personality dynamics they most commonly face. In
Russia, it was suggested to me that the national character is
masochistic; in Sweden, schizoid; in Poland, posttraumatic; in
Australia, counterdependent; in Italy, hysterical. In Turkey, therapists
working in traditional villages described patients who sound remarkably
like the sexually inhibited women treated by Freud, a version of
hysterical personality that has virtually disappeared from contemporary
Western cultures. This exposure to psychotherapy around the world has
been a heady experience, one that I hope has enriched this revision.

At the urging of colleagues working in more traditional and collectivist
cultures where emotional suffering is often expressed via the body
(e.g., with Native American groups and in East and South Asian
communities), I have expanded the section on somatization and suggested
the utility of the concept of a personality type organized around that
defense. I have revised my review of defenses, including somatizing,
acting out, and sexualization with the more primary mechanisms. For
reasons of length, and to avoid contributing to any tendency to
pathologize people from cultures where somatization is normative, I
decided against devoting a full chapter to somatizing personalities.
Readers hoping to learn more about treating those who regularly and
problematically become physically ill, and about others whose
personalities are not covered here (e.g., sadistic and sadomasochistic,
phobic and counterphobic, dependent and counterdependent,
passive--aggressive, and chronically anxious people), will find help in
the PDM.

In some parts of this second edition, I have changed very little, beyond
trying to tighten up the writing, in observance of the principle "If it
works, don't fix it." In others, there has been a more ambitious
overhaul in light of new empirical findings and new theoretical
perspectives. Psychoanalytic developmental observations have gone way
beyond Mahler, and contemporary neuroscience has begun identifying
clinically relevant brain processes that previously we could describe
only metaphorically. Researchers in attachment have extended our
understanding of relationship and have minted terms (e.g.,
"mentalization," "reflective functioning") that capture processes
central to overall mental health. Neuroscientists have corrected some of
our mistaken beliefs (e.g., that thought precedes affect or that memory
of extreme trauma is retrievable \[Solms & Turnbull, 2002\]) and have
greatly expanded our knowledge of temperament, drive, impulse, affect,
and cognition. Some randomized controlled trials have been done on
psychoanalytically informed treatments, and new meta-analyses have been
conducted on existing studies.

I have retained, however, many references to older literature, both
clinical and empirical. Personality by its nature is a fairly stable
phenomenon, and there is a wealth of disciplined and useful observations
about it from decades ago that I would rather honor than ignore. I have
never shared the typically American assumption that the "newest" thing
is self-evidently better than everything that came before it; in fact,
given realistic pressures on current intellectuals, and given the
narrowness of much professional training, it seems unlikely that current
work can always be as thoughtful and far-reaching as that of writers who
inhabited a less frantic, less driven era.

[]{#part0006.html}

Acknowledgments

[I]{.dropcap}n the first edition of *Psychoanalytic Diagnosis*, I
thanked my clients and virtually my entire community of colleagues. It
is even truer now that this book is a product of a whole "climate of
opinion" (to steal W. H. Auden's moving image of Freud). I emphasized in
that volume that my organization of personality levels and types was not
"my" taxonomy but my best effort at representing mainstream
psychoanalytic ideas. At this point, given current controversies among
analysts about whether diagnosis itself is valuable (the topic of a 2009
online colloquium of the International Association for Relational
Psychoanalysis and Psychotherapy), I cannot presume to represent the
diagnostic center of gravity of the psychoanalytic movement. And yet
this book encompasses far more than my own thinking. For several years I
have been asking practitioner audiences to e-mail me with criticisms of
any statements in the first edition that do not fit their clinical
experience. A great number of therapists, including many who practice in
other countries and in settings very different from mine, have written
to say that this conceptualization supports their own clinical
experience. Some have taken me up on the invitation to criticize, and I
have integrated many of their suggestions when rewriting various
chapters.

Beyond those I named in 1994, there are too many people to enumerate
here who have contributed to this revision. But I should single out
Richard Chefetz, who spent many hours critiquing the chapter on
dissociation and educating me about contemporary findings in
traumatology. I am also grateful to Daniel Gaztembide (and to Brenna
Bry, my department chair---a radical Skinnerian who appreciates
psychoanalysis---who astutely assigned him to me as a "work--study"
student). Daniel sent me regular briefs about relevant research and
theory. For his psychoanalytic wisdom and his fine ear for tone, I have
depended, as always, on my friend Kerry Gordon. For his eagle eye in
spotting typos, I thank Tim Paterson. Finally, for their friendship and
candor, I want to acknowledge some colleagues who have influenced me in
the years since the first edition: Neil Altman, Sandra Bem, Louis
Berger, Ghislaine Boulanger, the late Stanley Greenspan, Judith Hyde,
Deborah Luepnitz, William MacGillivray, David Pincus, Jan Resnick, Henry
Seiden, Jonathan Shedler, Mark Siegert, Joyce Slochower, Robert
Wallerstein, Bryant Welch, and Drew Westen. And thanks to the many
unacknowledged others whose ideas have found their way into this book.
My mistakes and misunderstandings are my own.

[]{#part0007.html}

**Contents**

[**Cover**](#part0000.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Title**](#part0001.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Copyright**](#part0002.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Dedication**](#part0003.html){.calibre9}

 

[**About the Author**](#part0004.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Preface**](#part0005.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Acknowledgments**](#part0006.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Introduction**](#part0008.html){.calibre9}

[A Comment on Terminology](#part0008.html_h1-1){.calibre9}

[A Comment on Tone](#part0008.html_h1-2){.calibre9}

 

[**PART I. CONCEPTUAL ISSUES**](#part0009.html){.calibre9}

 

[**1    Why Diagnose?**](#part0010.html){.calibre9}

[Psychoanalytic Diagnosis versus Descriptive Psychiatric
Diagnosis](#part0010.html_h1-3){.calibre9}

[Treatment Planning](#part0010.html_h1-4){.calibre9}

[Prognostic Implications](#part0010.html_h1-5){.calibre9}

[Consumer Protection](#part0010.html_h1-6){.calibre9}

[The Communication of Empathy](#part0010.html_h1-7){.calibre9}

[Forestalling Flights from Treatment](#part0010.html_h1-8){.calibre9}

[Fringe Benefits](#part0010.html_h1-9){.calibre9}

[Limits to the Utility of Diagnosis](#part0010.html_h1-10){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0010.html_h1-11){.calibre9}

 

[**2     Psychoanalytic Character
Diagnosis**](#part0011.html){.calibre9}

[Classical Freudian Drive Theory and Its Developmental
Tilt](#part0011.html_h1-12){.calibre9}

[Ego Psychology](#part0011.html_h1-13){.calibre9}

[The Object Relations Tradition](#part0011.html_h1-14){.calibre9}

[Self Psychology](#part0011.html_h1-15){.calibre9}

[The Contemporary Relational Movement](#part0011.html_h1-16){.calibre9}

[Other Psychoanalytic Contributions to Personality
Assessment](#part0011.html_h1-17){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0011.html_h1-18){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0011.html_h1-19){.calibre9}

 

[**3     Developmental Levels of Personality
Organization**](#part0012.html){.calibre9}

[Historical Context: Diagnosing Level of Character
Pathology](#part0012.html_h1-20){.calibre9}

[Overview of the Neurotic--Borderline--Psychotic
Spectrum](#part0012.html_h1-21){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0012.html_h1-22){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0012.html_h1-23){.calibre9}

 

[**4     Implications of Developmental Levels of
Organization**](#part0013.html){.calibre9}

[Therapy with Neurotic-Level Patients](#part0013.html_h1-24){.calibre9}

[Therapy with Patients in the Psychotic
Range](#part0013.html_h1-25){.calibre9}

[Therapy with Borderline Patients](#part0013.html_h1-26){.calibre9}

[Interaction of Maturational and Typological Dimensions of
Character](#part0013.html_h1-27){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0013.html_h1-28){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0013.html_h1-29){.calibre9}

 

[**5     Primary Defensive Processes**](#part0014.html){.calibre9}

[Extreme Withdrawal](#part0014.html_h1-30){.calibre9}

[Denial](#part0014.html_h1-31){.calibre9}

[Omnipotent Control](#part0014.html_h1-32){.calibre9}

[Extreme Idealization and Devaluation](#part0014.html_h1-33){.calibre9}

[Projection, Introjection, and Projective
Identification](#part0014.html_h1-34){.calibre9}

[Splitting of the Ego](#part0014.html_h1-35){.calibre9}

[Somatization](#part0014.html_h1-36){.calibre9}

[Acting Out (Defensive Enactment)](#part0014.html_h1-37){.calibre9}

[Sexualization (Instinctualization)](#part0014.html_h1-38){.calibre9}

[Extreme Dissociation](#part0014.html_h1-39){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0014.html_h1-40){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0014.html_h1-41){.calibre9}

 

[**6     Secondary Defensive Processes**](#part0015.html){.calibre9}

[Repression](#part0015.html_h1-42){.calibre9}

[Regression](#part0015.html_h1-43){.calibre9}

[Isolation of Affect](#part0015.html_h1-44){.calibre9}

[Intellectualization](#part0015.html_h1-45){.calibre9}

[Rationalization](#part0015.html_h1-46){.calibre9}

[Moralization](#part0015.html_h1-47){.calibre9}

[Compartmentalization](#part0015.html_h1-48){.calibre9}

[Undoing](#part0015.html_h1-49){.calibre9}

[Turning against the Self](#part0015.html_h1-50){.calibre9}

[Displacement](#part0015.html_h1-51){.calibre9}

[Reaction Formation](#part0015.html_h1-52){.calibre9}

[Reversal](#part0015.html_h1-53){.calibre9}

[Identification](#part0015.html_h1-54){.calibre9}

[Sublimation](#part0015.html_h1-55){.calibre9}

[Humor](#part0015.html_h1-56){.calibre9}

[Concluding Comments](#part0015.html_h1-57){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0015.html_h1-58){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0015.html_h1-59){.calibre9}

 

[**PART II. TYPES OF CHARACTER
ORGANIZATION**](#part0016.html){.calibre9}

 

[**7     Psychopathic (Antisocial)
Personalities**](#part0017.html){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in
Psychopathy](#part0017.html_h1-60){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in
Psychopathy](#part0017.html_h1-61){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Psychopathy](#part0017.html_h1-62){.calibre9}

[The Psychopathic Self](#part0017.html_h1-63){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Psychopathic
Patients](#part0017.html_h1-64){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of
Psychopathy](#part0017.html_h1-65){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0017.html_h1-66){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0017.html_h1-67){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0017.html_h1-68){.calibre9}

 

[**8     Narcissistic Personalities**](#part0018.html){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in
Narcissism](#part0018.html_h1-69){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in
Narcissism](#part0018.html_h1-70){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Narcissism](#part0018.html_h1-71){.calibre9}

[The Narcissistic Self](#part0018.html_h1-72){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Narcissistic
Patients](#part0018.html_h1-73){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of
Narcissism](#part0018.html_h1-74){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0018.html_h1-75){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0018.html_h1-76){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0018.html_h1-77){.calibre9}

 

[**9     Schizoid Personalities**](#part0019.html){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in Schizoid
Psychology](#part0019.html_h1-78){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in Schizoid
Psychology](#part0019.html_h1-79){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Schizoid
Psychology](#part0019.html_h1-80){.calibre9}

[The Schizoid Self](#part0019.html_h1-81){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Schizoid
Patients](#part0019.html_h1-82){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of Schizoid
Personality](#part0019.html_h1-83){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0019.html_h1-84){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0019.html_h1-85){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0019.html_h1-86){.calibre9}

 

[**10   Paranoid Personalities**](#part0020.html){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in
Paranoia](#part0020.html_h1-87){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in
Paranoia](#part0020.html_h1-88){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Paranoid
Psychology](#part0020.html_h1-89){.calibre9}

[The Paranoid Self](#part0020.html_h1-90){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Paranoid
Patients](#part0020.html_h1-91){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of Paranoid
Personality](#part0020.html_h1-92){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0020.html_h1-93){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0020.html_h1-94){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0020.html_h1-95){.calibre9}

 

[**11   Depressive and Manic Personalities**](#part0021.html){.calibre9}

[Depressive Personalities](#part0021.html_h1-96){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in
Depression](#part0021.html_h1-97){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in
Depression](#part0021.html_h1-98){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Depressive
Psychology](#part0021.html_h1-99){.calibre9}

[The Depressive Self](#part0021.html_h1-100){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Depressive
Patients](#part0021.html_h1-101){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of Depressive
Personality](#part0021.html_h1-102){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0021.html_h1-103){.calibre9}

[Hypomanic (Cyclothymic)
Personalities](#part0021.html_h1-104){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in
Mania](#part0021.html_h1-105){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in
Mania](#part0021.html_h1-106){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Manic
Psychology](#part0021.html_h1-107){.calibre9}

[The Manic Self](#part0021.html_h1-108){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Manic
Patients](#part0021.html_h1-109){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of Hypomanic
Personality](#part0021.html_h1-110){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0021.html_h1-111){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0021.html_h1-112){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0021.html_h1-113){.calibre9}

 

[**12   Masochistic (Self-Defeating)
Personalities**](#part0022.html){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in
Masochism](#part0022.html_h1-114){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in
Masochism](#part0022.html_h1-115){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Masochistic
Psychology](#part0022.html_h1-116){.calibre9}

[The Masochistic Self](#part0022.html_h1-117){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Masochistic
Patients](#part0022.html_h1-118){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of Masochistic
Personality](#part0022.html_h1-119){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0022.html_h1-120){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0022.html_h1-121){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0022.html_h1-122){.calibre9}

 

[**13   Obsessive and Compulsive
Personalities**](#part0023.html){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in Obsession and
Compulsion](#part0023.html_h1-123){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in Obsession and
Compulsion](#part0023.html_h1-124){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Obsessive and Compulsive
Psychologies](#part0023.html_h1-125){.calibre9}

[The Obsessive--Compulsive Self](#part0023.html_h1-126){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Obsessive and Compulsive
Patients](#part0023.html_h1-127){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of Obsessive or Compulsive
Personality](#part0023.html_h1-128){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0023.html_h1-129){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0023.html_h1-130){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0023.html_h1-131){.calibre9}

 

[**14   Hysterical (Histrionic)
Personalities**](#part0024.html){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in
Hysteria](#part0024.html_h1-132){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in
Hysteria](#part0024.html_h1-133){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Hysterical
Psychology](#part0024.html_h1-134){.calibre9}

[The Hysterical Self](#part0024.html_h1-135){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Hysterical
Patients](#part0024.html_h1-136){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of Hysterical
Personality](#part0024.html_h1-137){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0024.html_h1-138){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0024.html_h1-139){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0024.html_h1-140){.calibre9}

 

[**15   Dissociative Psychologies**](#part0025.html){.calibre9}

[Drive, Affect, and Temperament in Dissociative
Conditions](#part0025.html_h1-141){.calibre9}

[Defensive and Adaptive Processes in Dissociative
Conditions](#part0025.html_h1-142){.calibre9}

[Relational Patterns in Dissociative
Conditions](#part0025.html_h1-143){.calibre9}

[The Dissociative Self](#part0025.html_h1-144){.calibre9}

[Transference and Countertransference with Dissociative
Patients](#part0025.html_h1-145){.calibre9}

[Therapeutic Implications of the Diagnosis of a Dissociative
Condition](#part0025.html_h1-146){.calibre9}

[Differential Diagnosis](#part0025.html_h1-147){.calibre9}

[Summary](#part0025.html_h1-148){.calibre9}

[Suggestions for Further Reading](#part0025.html_h1-149){.calibre9}

 

[**Appendix. Suggested Diagnostic Interview
Format**](#part0026.html){.calibre9}

[Demographic Data](#part0026.html_h1-150){.calibre9}

[Current Problems and Their Onset](#part0026.html_h1-151){.calibre9}

[Personal History](#part0026.html_h1-152){.calibre9}

[Current Presentation (Mental Status)](#part0026.html_h1-153){.calibre9}

[Concluding Topics](#part0026.html_h1-154){.calibre9}

[Inferences](#part0026.html_h1-155){.calibre9}

 

[**References**](#part0027.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Author Index**](#part0028.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Subject Index**](#part0029.html){.calibre9}

 

[**About Guilford Publications**](#part0030.html){.calibre9}

 

[**Discover More Guilford Titles**](#part0031.html){.calibre9}

[]{#part0008.html}

Introduction

[M]{.dropcap}ost of what follows is accumulated psychoanalytic wisdom.
It is my own synthesis of that wisdom, however, and reflects my
idiosyncratic conclusions, interpretations, and extrapolations. The
organization of character possibilities along two axes, for example,
which seems to me so clearly inferable from psychoanalytic theories and
metaphors, may seem contrived to analysts who visualize the varieties of
human personality in other images, along other spectra. I can only
respond that this graphic depiction has been of value in my experiences
acquainting relatively unprepared students with the welter of analytic
concepts that have developed over more than a century.

The main object of this book is to enhance practice, not to resolve any
of the conceptual and philosophical problems with which the
psychoanalytic literature is replete. I am more interested in being
pedagogically useful than in being indisputably "right." A recurrent
emphasis in the chapters that follow concerns the relationship between
psychodynamic formulations and the art of psychotherapy. Beyond
conveying certain basic therapeutic attitudes, including curiosity,
respect, compassion, devotion, integrity, and the willingness to admit
mistakes and limitations (see McWilliams, 2004), I do not believe in
teaching a particular "technique" in the absence of trying to understand
the psychology of the person to whom one is applying the technique.

Readers may have encountered the argument that psychoanalytic ideas are
irrelevant to the deeply distressed, to people with crushing reality
challenges, to minorities, addicts, the poor, and others. If this book
succeeds in conveying the richness and particularity of analytically
informed therapies, it will correct that misconception, even though the
two axes on which I organize diagnostic information comprise only some
of what it is helpful to know about any client.

**A COMMENT ON TERMINOLOGY**

A strikingly cyclical effort to sanitize speech has contributed to
widespread misunderstanding of the psychoanalytic tradition. Over time,
whatever the original intentions of those people who coined any specific
psychological term, labels for certain conditions ineluctably come to
have a negative connotation. Language that was invented to be simply
descriptive---in fact, invented to replace previous value-laden
words---develops an evaluative cast and is applied, especially by lay
people, in ways that pathologize. Certain topics seem inherently
unsettling to human beings, and however carefully we try to talk about
them in nonjudgmental language, the words we use to do so attain a
pejorative tone over the years.

Today's "antisocial personality disorder," as a case in point, was in
1835 termed "moral insanity." Later it became "psychopathy," then
"sociopathy." Each change was intended to give a descriptive,
noncensorious label to a disturbing phenomenon. Yet the power of that
phenomenon to disturb eventually contaminated each word that was
invented to keep the concept out of the realm of moralization. Something
similar occurred in the successive transformations of "inversion" to
"deviation" to "homosexuality" to being "gay" to being "queer," and yet
people who are bothered by same-sex erotics still use the terms "gay"
and "queer" to devalue. It will probably happen with the shift from
"retarded" to "developmentally challenged." Any phenomenon that tends to
trouble people, for whatever reason, seems to instigate this futile
chasing after nonstigmatizing language. It occurs with nonpsychological
terms also; for example, it is endemic in controversies about political
correctness. One outcome of this doomed project to sanitize language is
that the older a psychological tradition is, the more negative,
judgmental, and quaint its terminology sounds. The swift consumption,
distortion, and prejudicial application of psychoanalytic terms, within
the mental health professions and outside them, have been a bane of the
psychodynamic tradition.

Paradoxically, another burden to the reputation of psychoanalysis has
been its appeal. As concepts get popularized, they acquire not only
judgmental meanings but also simplistic ones. I assume it would be hard
for a reader who is new to psychoanalysis to come upon the adjective
"masochistic," for instance, without reacting to the label as a judgment
that the person so depicted loves pain and suffering. Such a reaction is
understandable but ignorant; the history of the psychoanalytic concept
of masochism abounds with humane, insightful, useful, nonreductionistic
observations about why some people repeatedly involve themselves in
activities painful to them despite often heroic conscious efforts to do
otherwise. The same can be said for many other terms that have been
grabbed up by both nonanalytic clinicians and the literate public, and
then bruited about with glib or condescending conviction about their
meaning.

Concepts also get watered down as they come into common use. The term
"trauma," as popularly used, has lost its catastrophic overtones and can
frequently be heard meaning "discomfort" or "injury." "Depression" has
come to be indistinguishable from brief periods of the blues (Horowitz &
Wakefield, 2007). The term "panic disorder" had to be invented in order
to restore to our ear the connotations of the older, perfectly useful
phrases "anxiety neurosis" and "anxiety attack" once the word "anxiety"
had been applied to everything from how one feels at a business lunch to
how one would feel in front of a firing squad.

Given all this, I have struggled over how to present some of the
material in this book. On a personal level, I try to observe the current
preferences of groups as to how they should be identified and to respect
the sensibilities of patients who object to certain diagnostic labels.
Where current DSM terminology has become the norm for discussing a
particular phenomenon, I use it unless it obscures older, richer
concepts. But at a scholarly level, it seems an exercise in futility to
continue to rename things rather than to use their existing names.
Substituting "self-defeating" for "masochistic" or "histrionic" for
"hysterical" may be preferred by those who want to avoid terms that
contain psychodynamic assumptions, but such changes make less sense for
those of us who think analytically and assume the operation of
unconscious processes in character formation.

My somewhat ambivalent conclusion about the language to be used in this
book has been to employ mostly traditional psychoanalytic nomenclature,
alternating occasionally, in the hope of reducing the clanking weight of
professional jargon, with more recent, roughly equivalent terms. Since I
am trying to raise the consciousness of my audience about the rationale
for each label that has come to denote a character attribute, I will
generally rely on familiar psychoanalytic language and try to make it
user-friendly. To the reader without a psychodynamic background, this
may lend an anachronistic or even inferred judgmental tone to the text,
but I can only ask such a person to try to suspend criticism temporarily
and give the analytic tradition the benefit of the doubt while trying to
consider the possible utility of the concepts covered.

**A COMMENT ON TONE**

Nearly everything one can say about individual character patterns and
meanings, even in the context of accepting a general psychoanalytic
approach, is disputable. Many concepts central to analytic thinking have
not only not been systematically researched and validated, they are
inherently so resistant to being operationalized and manipulated that it
is difficult to imagine how they even could be empirically tested (see
Fisher & Greenberg, 1985). Many scholars prefer to place psychoanalysis
within the hermeneutic rather than the scientific tradition, partly
because of this resistance of much of the subject matter to
investigation by the scientific method as it has come to be defined by
many contemporary academic psychologists.

I have erred in the direction of oversimplifying rather than
obfuscating, of stating some ideas in a more sweeping way than many
thoughtful professionals would consider warranted. This text is aimed at
beginning practitioners, and I have no wish to increase the anxiety that
inevitably suffuses the process of becoming a therapist by introducing
endless complexity. In this second edition, however, in light of recent
concern in the field about essentialism and absolutistic pronouncement,
I have tried to tame any tendencies toward universalizing. All of us
learn soon enough, from the unpredictable nuances of each therapy
relationship into which we extend ourselves, how pale are even our most
elegant and satisfying formulations next to the mystery that is human
nature. Hence, I trust and encourage my readers to outgrow my
constructions.

[]{#part0009.html}

**Part I**

**CONCEPTUAL ISSUES**

**INTRODUCTION TO PART I**

 

The following six chapters contain a rationale for character diagnosis,
a review of some major psychoanalytic theories and their respective
contributions to models of personality structure, an exploration of
individual differences that have been widely understood as embodying
different maturational challenges, commentary on the therapeutic
implications of such issues, and an exposition of defenses as they
relate to character structure. Together these chapters provide a way of
thinking about the consistencies in an individual that we think of as
his or her personality.

This section culminates in the representation of diagnostic
possibilities along a biaxial grid. Although this schema, like any
attempt to generalize, is both arbitrary and oversimplified, I have
found it useful in introducing therapists to central dynamic
formulations and their clinical value. I believe that this way of
construing personality is implicit in much of the psychoanalytic
literature. Occasionally, a similar formulation has been explicit (e.g.,
M. H. Stone, 1980, who also included an axis for genetic tendencies).
Other analysts have provided other visual representations of diagnostic
possibilities (e.g., Blanck & Blanck, 1974, pp. 114--117; Greenspan,
1981, pp. 234--237; Horner, 1990, p. 23; Kernberg, 1984, p. 29; Kohut,
1971, p. 9).

Especially in the past two decades, researchers studying infants,
patterns of relationship, trauma, and neuroscience have inspired new
ways of thinking about personality differences. My diagram can
incorporate many of their findings, but some conceptualizations emerging
from contemporary empirical studies represent significantly different
angles of vision. My aim is not to dispute other organizations of
developmental, structural, and temperamental concepts but to offer a
synthesized and streamlined image for newcomers to this confusing field.

[]{#part0010.html}

**1**

Why Diagnose?

[F]{.dropcap}or many people, including some therapists, "diagnosis" is a
dirty word. We have all seen the misuse of psychodiagnostic
formulations: The complex person gets flippantly oversimplified by the
interviewer who is anxious about uncertainty; the anguished person gets
linguistically distanced by the clinician who cannot bear to feel the
pain; the troublesome person gets punished with a pathologizing label.
Racism, sexism, heterosexism, classism, and numerous other prejudices
can be (and have often been) handily fortified by nosology. Currently in
the United States, where insurance companies allot specific numbers of
sessions for specific diagnostic categories, often in defiance of a
therapist's judgment, the assessment process is especially subject to
corruption.

One objection to diagnosing is the view that diagnostic terms are
inevitably pejorative. Paul Wachtel (personal communication, March 14,
2009) recently referred to diagnoses, for example, as "insults with a
fancy pedigree." Jane Hall writes that "labels are for clothes, not
people" (1998, p. 46). Seasoned therapists often make such comments, but
I suspect that in their own training it was helpful for them to have
language that generalized about individual differences and their
implications for treatment. Once one has learned to see clinical
patterns that have been observed for decades, one can throw away the
book and savor individual uniqueness. Diagnostic terms can be used
objectifyingly and insultingly, but if I succeed in conveying individual
differences respectfully, readers will not recruit diagnostic terms in
the service of feeling superior to others. Instead, they will have a
rudimentary language for mentalizing different subjective possibilities,
a critical aspect of both personal and professional growth.

The abuse of diagnostic language is easily demonstrated. That something
can be abused, however, is not a legitimate argument for discarding it.
All kinds of evil can be wreaked in the name of worthy ideals---love,
patriotism, Christianity, whatever---through no fault of the original
vision but because of its perversion. The important question is, Does
the careful, nonabusive application of psychodiagnostic concepts
increase a client's chances of being helped?

There are at least five interrelated advantages of the diagnostic
enterprise when pursued sensitively and with adequate training: (1) its
usefulness for treatment planning, (2) its implications for prognosis,
(3) its contribution to protecting consumers of mental health services,
(4) its value in enabling the therapist to convey empathy, and (5) its
role in reducing the probability that certain easily frightened people
will flee from treatment. In addition, there are fringe benefits to the
diagnostic process that indirectly facilitate therapy.

By the diagnostic process, I mean that except in crises, the initial
sessions with a client should be spent gathering extensive objective and
subjective information. My own habit (see McWilliams, 1999) is to devote
the first meeting with a patient to the details of the presenting
problem and its background. At the end of that session I check on the
person's comfort with the prospect of our working together. Then I
explain that I can understand more fully if I can see the problem in a
broader context, and I get agreement to take a complete history during
our next meeting. In that session I reiterate that I will be asking lots
of questions, request permission to take confidential notes, and say
that the client is free not to answer any question that feels
uncomfortable (this rarely happens, but people seem to appreciate the
comment).

I am unconvinced by the argument that simply allowing a relationship to
develop will create a climate of trust in which all pertinent material
will eventually surface. Once the patient feels close to the therapist,
it may become harder, not easier, for him or her to bring up certain
aspects of personal history or behavior. Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
meetings are full of people who spent years in therapy, or consulted a
bevy of professionals, without ever having been asked about substance
use. For those who associate a diagnostic session with images of
authoritarianism and holier-than-thou detachment, let me stress that
there is no reason an in-depth interview cannot be conducted in an
atmosphere of sincere respect and egalitarianism (cf. Hite, 1996).
Patients are usually grateful for professional thoroughness. One woman I
interviewed who had seen several previous therapists remarked "No one
has ever been this interested in me!"

**PSYCHOANALYTIC DIAGNOSIS VERSUS DESCRIPTIVE\
PSYCHIATRIC DIAGNOSIS**

Even more than when I wrote the first edition of this book, psychiatric
descriptive diagnosis, the basis of the DSM and ICD systems, has become
normative---so much so that the DSM is regularly dubbed the ("bible" of
mental health, and students are trained in it as if it possesses some
self-evident epistemic status. Although
inferential/contextual/dimensional/subjectively attuned diagnosis can
coexist with descriptive psychiatric diagnosis (Gabbard, 2005; PDM Task
Force, 2006), the kind of assessment described in this book has become
more the exception than the rule. I view this state of affairs with
alarm. Let me mention briefly, with reference to the DSM, my
reservations about descriptive and categorical diagnosis. Some of these
may be quieted when DSM-5 appears, but I expect that the overall
consequences of our having deferred to a categorical, trait-based
taxonomy since 1980 will persist for some time.

First, the DSM lacks an implicit definition of mental health or
emotional wellness. Psychoanalytic clinical experience, in contrast,
assumes that beyond helping patients to change problematic behaviors and
mental states, therapists try to help them to accept themselves with
their limitations and to improve their overall resiliency, sense of
agency, tolerance of a wide range of thoughts and affects,
self-continuity, realistic self-esteem, capacity for intimacy, moral
sensibilities, and awareness of others as having separate
subjectivities. Because people who lack these capacities cannot yet
imagine them, such patients rarely complain about their absence; they
just want to feel better. They may come for treatment complaining of a
specific Axis I disorder, but their problems may go far beyond those
symptoms.

Second, despite the fact that a sincere effort to increase validity and
reliability inspired those editions, the validity and reliability of the
post-1980 DSMs have been disappointing (see Herzig & Licht, 2006). The
attempt to redefine psychopathology in ways that facilitate some kinds
of research has inadvertently produced descriptions of clinical
syndromes that are artificially discrete and fail to capture patients'
complex experiences. While the effort to expunge the psychoanalytic bias
that pervaded DSM-II is understandable now that other powerful ways to
conceptualize psychopatholgy exist, the deemphasis on the client's
subjective experience of symptoms has produced a flat,
experience-distant version of mental suffering that represents clinical
phenomena about as well as the description of the key, tempo, and length
of a musical composition represents the music itself. This critique
applies especially to the personality disorders section of the DSM, but
it also applies to its treatment of experiences such as anxiety and
depression, the diagnosis of which involves externally observable
phenomena such as racing heartbeat or changes in eating and sleeping
patterns rather than whether the anxiety is about separation or
annihilation, or the depression is anaclitic or introjective (Blatt,
2004)---aspects that are critical to clinical understanding and help.

Third, although the DSM system is often called a "medical model" of
psychopathology, no physician would equate the remission of symptoms
with the cure of disease. The reification of "disorder" categories, in
defiance of much clinical experience, has had significant unintended
negative consequences. The assumption that psychological problems are
best viewed as discrete symptom syndromes has encouraged insurance firms
and governments to specify the lowest common denominator of change and
insist that this is all they will cover, even when it is clear that the
presenting complaints are the tip of an emotional iceberg that will
cause trouble in the future if ignored. The categorical approach has
also benefited pharmaceutical companies, who have an interest in an
ever-increasing list of discrete "disorders" for which they can market
specific drugs.

Fourth, many of the decisions about what to include in post-1980 DSMs,
and where to include it, seem in retrospect to have been arbitrary,
inconsistent, and influenced by contributors' ties to pharmaceutical
companies. For example, all phenomena involving mood were put in the
Mood Disorders section, and the time-honored diagnosis of depressive
personality disappeared. The result has been the misperception of many
personality problems as discrete episodes of a mood disorder. Another
example: If one reads carefully the DSM descriptions of some Axis I
disorders that are seen as chronic and pervasive (e.g., generalized
anxiety disorder, somataform disorder), it is not clear why these are
not considered personality disorders.

Even when the rationale for including or excluding a condition is clear
and defensible, the result can seem arbitrary from a clinician's
perspective. From DSM-III on, a criterion for inclusion has been that
there has to be research data on a given disorder. This sounds
reasonable, but it has led to some strange results. While there was
enough empirical research on dissociative personalities by 1980 to
warrant the DSM category of multiple personality disorder, later renamed
dissociative identity disorder, there was very little research on
childhood dissociation. And so, despite the fact that there is wide
agreement among clinicians who treat dissociative adults that one does
not develop a dissociative identity without having had a dissociative
disorder in childhood, there is (as I write this in 2010) no DSM
diagnosis for dissociative children. In science, naturalistic
observation typically precedes testable hypotheses. New
psychopathologies (e.g., Internet addiction, especially to pornography,
a version of compulsivity unknown before technology permitted it) are
observed by clinicians before they can be researched. The dismissal of
clinical experience from significant influence on post-1980 editions of
the DSM has created these kinds of dilemmas.

Finally, I want to comment on a subtle social effect of categorical
diagnosis: It may contribute to a form of self-estrangement, a
reification of self-states for which one implicitly disowns
responsibility. "I have social phobia" is a more alienated, less
self-inhabited way of saying "I am a painfully shy person." When its
patent on Prozac expired, Eli Lilly put the same recipe into a pink
pill, named it Serafem, and created a new "illness": premenstrual
dysphoric disorder (PMDD) (Cosgrove, 2010). Many women become irritable
when premenstrual, but it is one thing to say "I'm sorry I'm kind of
cranky today; my period is due" and another to announce "I *have* PMDD."
It seems to me that the former owns one's behavior, increases the
likelihood of warm connection with others, and acknowledges that life is
sometimes difficult, while the latter implies that one has a treatable
ailment, distances others from one's experience, and supports an
infantile belief that everything can be fixed. Maybe this is just my
idiosyncratic perspective, but I find this inconspicuous shift in
communal assumptions troubling.

**TREATMENT PLANNING**

Treatment planning is the traditional rationale for diagnosis. It
assumes a parallel between psychotherapy and medical treatment, and in
medicine the relationship between diagnosis and therapy is (ideally)
straightforward. This parallel sometimes obtains in psychotherapy and
sometimes does not. It is easy to see the value of a good diagnosis for
conditions for which a specific, consensually endorsed treatment
approach exists. Examples include the diagnosis of substance abuse
(implication: make psychotherapy contingent on chemical detoxification
and rehabilitation) and bipolar illness (implication: provide both
individual therapy and medication).

Although a number of focused interventions for characterological
problems have been developed over the past 15 years, the most common
prescription for personality disorders is still long-term psychoanalytic
therapy. But analytic treatments, including psychoanalysis, are not
uniform procedures applied inflexibly regardless of the patient's
personality. Even the most classical analyst will be more careful of
boundaries with a hysterical patient, more pursuant of affect with an
obsessive person, more tolerant of silence with a schizoid client.
Efforts by a therapist to be empathic do not guarantee that what a
particular client will experience is empathy---one has to infer
something about the person's individual psychology to know what can help
him or her feel known and accepted. Advances in the understanding of
people with psychotic disorders (e.g., Read, Mosher, & Bentall, 2004)
and borderline conditions (e.g., Bateman & Fonagy, 2004; Clarkin, Levy,
Lenzenweger, & Kernberg, 2007; Steiner, 1993) have led to treatment
approaches that are not "classical analysis" but are rooted in
psychodynamic ideas. To use them, one must first recognize one's client
as recurrently struggling with psychotic or borderline states,
respectively.

It is common for research purposes to define therapies, analytic and
otherwise, as specific technical procedures. Therapists themselves, in
contrast, may define what they do as offering opportunities for intimate
new emotional learning in which "technique" is secondary to the healing
potential of the relationship itself. Analytic therapies are not
monolithic activities foisted in a procrustean way on everyone. A good
diagnostic formulation will inform the therapist's choices in the
crucial areas of style of relatedness, tone of interventions, and topics
of initial focus. With the increased practice of cognitive-behavioral
therapies (CBT), we are starting to see approaches to working with
serious disturbances of personality that have been developed by
practitioners of that orientation (e.g., Linehan, 1993; Young, Klosko, &
Weishaar, 2003). In response to their own clinical experiences with
individuality and complexity, CBT clinicians are now writing about case
formulation (e.g., Persons, 2008) for largely the same reasons I did. I
hope this book will be useful to them, as well as to my psychoanalytic
colleagues.

**PROGNOSTIC IMPLICATIONS**

The practitioner who expects from a patient with an obsessive character
the same rate of progress achievable with a person who suddenly
developed an intrusive obsession is risking a painful fall. An
appreciation of differences in depth and extensivity of personality
problems benefits the clinician as well as the patient. DSM categories
sometimes contain implications about the gravity and eventual prognosis
of a particular condition---the organization of information along axes
was a move in this direction---but sometimes they simply allow for
consensually accepted classification with no implicit information about
what one can expect from the therapy process.

A main theme in this book is the futility of making a diagnosis based on
the manifest problem alone. A phobia in someone with a depressive or
narcissistic personality is a different phenomenon from a phobia in a
characterologically phobic person. One reason psychodiagnosis has a bad
name in some quarters is that it has been done badly; people have simply
attached a label to the patient's presenting complaint. It is also
impossible to do good research on different diagnostic entities if they
are being defined strictly by their manifest appearance. As with any
computer analysis, if garbage goes in, garbage comes out.

A strength of the psychoanalytic tradition is its appreciation of the
differences between a stress-related symptom and a problem inhering in
personality. (This was not always true. Freud originally made few
distinctions between characterologically hysterical individuals and
people with other psychologies who had a hysterical reaction, or between
what would now be considered an obsessive person at a borderline level
of functioning and a person with an obsessional neurosis.) A bulimic
woman who develops her eating disorder as a first-year college student
and who recognizes her behavior as driven and self-destructive is a very
different patient from a woman who has had binge--purge cycles since
elementary school and who considers her behavior reasonable. Both would
meet the DSM criteria for bulimia, but one could reasonably expect the
first client to change her behavior within a few weeks, while a
realistic goal for the second would be that after a year or so she would
clearly see the costs of her eating disorder and the need for change.

**CONSUMER PROTECTION**

Conscientious diagnostic practices encourage ethical communication
between practitioners and their potential clients, a kind of "truth in
advertising." On the basis of a careful assessment, one can tell the
patient something about what to expect and thereby avoid promising too
much or giving glib misdirection. I have found that few people are upset
upon being told, for example, that given their history and current
challenges, psychotherapy can be expected to take a long time before
yielding dependable, internally experienced change. Mostly seem
encouraged that the therapist appreciates the depth of their problem and
is willing to make a commitment to travel the distance. Margaret Little
(1990) felt relief when an analyst to whom she had gone for a
consultation commented to her, "But you're very ill!"

A recent patient of mine, a psychologically sophisticated man who had
seen several people before me for what he considered severe obsessive
tendencies, confronted me: "So you're the diagnosis maven; how do you
have me categorized?" I took a deep breath and responded, "I guess what
most hits me between the eyes is the degree of paranoia that you
struggle with." "Thank God somebody finally got that," he responded. For
those few clients who demand a miracle cure and lack the desire or
ability to make the commitment it would take to make genuine change,
honest feedback about diagnosis allows them to withdraw gracefully and
not waste their own time and the practitioner's looking for magic.

Therapists working under conditions in which only short-term therapy is
possible can be tempted to believe, and to convey to their patients,
that brief therapy is the treatment of choice. Short-term therapy is, in
fact, sometimes preferable for genuinely therapeutic reasons, but
therapists should resist the human tendency to make a virtue out of a
necessity. A good assessment will give the interviewer information about
how likely it is that a short-term approach will significantly help a
particular person. It is honest, though painful to both parties, to
admit to limitation. The alternative, to make oneself and/or the client
believe that one can do effective treatment with anyone despite obvious
external constraints, contributes to self-blame in both participants
("What's the matter with me that we haven't made the progress we're
supposed to have made in six sessions?"). Converse clinical situations
used to be common: In the era some call the golden age of
psychoanalysis, many people stayed in therapy for years when they may
have been better off at a drug treatment center or in a support group or
with therapy and medication. A careful diagnostic evaluation reduces the
likelihood that someone will spend inordinate time in a professional
relationship from which he or she is deriving little benefit.

**THE COMMUNICATION OF EMPATHY**

The term "empathy" has been somewhat diluted by overuse. Still, there is
no other word that connotes the "feeling with" rather than "feeling for"
that constituted the original reason for distinguishing between empathy
and sympathy (or "compassion," "pity," "concern," and similar terms that
imply a degree of defensive distancing from the suffering person).
"Empathy" is often misused to mean warm, accepting, sympathetic
reactions to the client no matter what he or she is conveying
emotionally. I use the term throughout this book in its literal sense of
the capacity to feel emotionally something like what the other person is
feeling.

My patients who are therapists themselves often express brutal
self-criticism about their "lack of empathy" when they are having a
hostile or frightened reaction to a client. They wish they did not feel
such disturbing affects; it is unpleasant to acknowledge that
therapeutic work can include primitive levels of hatred and misery that
no one warned us about when we decided to go into the business of
helping people. Clinicians in this condition may be actually suffering
from high rather than low levels of empathy, for if they are really
feeling *with* a patient, they are feeling his or her hostility, terror,
misery, and other wretched states of mind. Affects of people in therapy
can be intensely negative, and they induce in others anything but a warm
response. That one should try not to act on the basis of such emotional
reactions is obvious even to a completely untrained person. What is less
obvious is that such reactions are of great value. They may be critical
to making a diagnosis that allows one to find a way to address a
client's unhappiness that will be received as genuinely tuned in rather
than as rote compassion, professionally dispensed regardless of the
unique identity of the person in the other chair.

Someone who strikes an interviewer as manipulative, for example, may
have, among other possibilities, an essentially hysterical character or
a psychopathic personality. A therapeutic response would depend on the
clinician's hypothesis. With a hysterically organized person, one might
help by commenting on the client's feelings of fear and powerlessness.
With the psychopathic person, one might instead convey a wry
appreciation for the client's skills as a con artist. If the therapist
has not gone beyond the "manipulative" label to a deeper inference, it
is unlikely that he or she will be able to offer the client any deep
hope of being understood. If one overgeneralizes---seeing all
manipulative clients as hysterics, or, alternatively, as
psychopaths---one will make therapeutic contact only part of the time. A
person with hysterical dynamics may feel devastated to be misunderstood
as executing a cynical power play when feeling desperately in need of
comfort for the frightened child within; a psychopathic person will have
nothing but contempt for the therapist who misses the centrality of a
penchant for "getting over" on others.

Another instance of the value of diagnosis in enabling the therapist to
convey empathy involves the common situation of a patient with a
borderline personality organization contacting an emergency service with
a threat of suicide. Emergency mental health workers are ordinarily
trained in a generic crisis-intervention model (ask about the plan, the
means, and their lethality), and that model usually serves them well.
Yet people with borderline psychologies tend to talk suicide not when
they want to die but when they are feeling what Masterson (1976) aptly
called "abandonment depression." They need to counteract their panic and
despair with the sense that someone cares about how bad they feel.
Often, they learned growing up that no one pays attention to your
feelings unless you are threatening mayhem. Assessment of suicidal
intent only exasperates them, since the interviewer is, in terms of the
patients' not-very-conscious subjective experience, distracted by the
*content* of their threat when they feel desperate to talk about its
*context*.

A clinician's effort to follow standard crisis-intervention procedures
without a diagnostic sensibility can be countertherapeutic, even
dangerous, since it can frustrate borderline patients to the point of
feeling that to be heard, they must demonstrate rather than discuss
suicidal feelings. It also leaves the therapist hating the client, since
the person seems to be asking for help and then rejecting the helper's
earnest efforts to give it (Frank et al., 1952). Emergency workers
trained in identifying borderline clients become adept at responding to
the painful affects behind the suicidal threat rather than doing an
immediate suicide inventory; paradoxically, they probably prevent more
self-destructive acts than colleagues who automatically evaluate
suicidality. They may also have fewer demoralizing experiences of hating
clients for "not cooperating" or "not being truthful."

**FORESTALLING FLIGHTS FROM TREATMENT**

A related issue involves keeping the skittish patient in treatment. Many
people seek out professional help and then become frightened that
attachment to the therapist represents a grave danger. Those with
hypomanic personalities, for example, because early experiences of
depending on others came out disastrously, tend to bolt from
relationships as soon as the therapist's warmth stimulates their
dependent longings. Counterdependent people, whose self-esteem requires
denial of their need for care, may also rationalize running from
treatment when an attachment forms, because they feel humiliated when
implicitly acknowledging the emotional importance of another person.
Experienced interviewers may know by the end of an initial meeting
whether they are dealing with someone whose character presses for
flight. It can be reassuring to hypomanic or counterdependent patients
for the therapist to note how hard it may be for them to find the
courage to stay in therapy. The statement rings true, and it also
increases the probability that they can resist temptations to flee.

**FRINGE BENEFITS**

People are more comfortable when they sense that their interviewer is at
ease. A therapeutic relationship is likely to get off to a good start if
the client feels the clinician's curiosity, relative lack of anxiety,
and conviction that the appropriate treatment can begin once the patient
is better understood. A therapist who feels pressure to begin *doing
therapy* before having come to a good provisional understanding of the
patient's personal psychology is, like a driver with some sense of
direction but no road map, going to suffer needless anxiety. (Of course,
one *is* doing therapy during a diagnostic evaluation; the process
itself contributes to a working alliance without which treatment is an
empty ritual. But the formal agreement about how the parties will
proceed, and what the boundaries and respective responsibilities of the
participants will be, should derive from a diagnostic formulation.) The
patient will feel the anxiety and will wonder about the practitioner's
competence. This self-replicating cycle can lead to all sorts of
basically iatrogenic problems.

The diagnostic process also gives both participants something to do
before the client feels safe enough to open up spontaneously without the
comforting structure of being questioned. Therapists may underestimate
the importance of this settling-in process, during which they may learn
things that will become hard for the patient to expose later in
treatment. Most adults can answer questions about their sexual practices
or eating patterns or substance use with relative frankness when talking
to someone who is still a stranger, but once the therapist has started
to feel familiar and intimate (perhaps like one's mother) the words flow
anything but easily. When a parental transference has heated up, the
client may be encouraged to push on by remembering that in an early
meeting with this person whose condemnation is now feared, all kinds of
intimate matters were shared without incurring shock or disapproval. The
patient's contrasting experiences of the therapist during the diagnostic
phase and later phases of treatment calls attention to the fact that the
transference *is* a transference (i.e., not a fully accurate or complete
reading of the therapist's personality), an insight that may eventually
be crucial to the person's understanding of what he or she typically
projects into relationships.

One source of some therapists' discomfort with diagnosis may be fear of
misdiagnosis. Fortunately, an initial formulation does not have to be
"right" to provide many of the benefits mentioned here. A diagnostic
hypothesis has a way of grounding the interviewer in a focused,
low-anxiety activity whether or not it turns out to be supported by
later clinical evidence. Given human complexity and professional
fallibility, formulation is always tentative and should be acknowledged
as such. Patients are often grateful for the clinician's avoidance of
pretension and demonstration of care in considering different
possibilities.

Finally, a positive side effect of diagnosis is its role in maintaining
the therapist's self-esteem. Among the occupational hazards of a
therapeutic career are feelings of fraudulence, worries about treatment
failures, and burnout. These processes are greatly accelerated by
unrealistic expectations. Practitioner demoralization and emotional
withdrawal have far-reaching implications both for affected clinicians
and for those who have come to depend on them. If one knows that one's
depressed patient has a borderline rather than a neurotic-level
personality structure, one will not be surprised if during the second
year of treatment he or she makes a suicide gesture. Once borderline
clients start to have real hope of change, they often panic and flirt
with suicide in an effort to protect themselves from the devastation
they would feel if they let themselves hope and then were traumatically
disappointed. Issues surrounding this kind of crisis can be discussed
and mastered (e.g., in terms of the felt dangers of hope and
disappointment just mentioned, guilt toward original love objects over
the transfer of emotional investment from them to the therapist, and
related magical fantasies that one can expiate such guilt by a ritual
attempt to die), providing emotional relief to both client and
therapist.

I have seen many gifted, devoted therapists lose confidence and find
rationalizations for getting rid of an ostensibly suicidal patient at
precisely the moment when the person is expressing, in an identifiably
provocative borderline way, how important and effective the treatment is
becoming. Typically, in the session preceding the suicide gesture the
patient expressed trust or hope for the first time, and the therapist
became excited after so much arduous work with a difficult, oppositional
client. Then with the parasuicidal behavior the therapist's own hopes
crumble. The former excitement is reframed as illusory and self-serving,
and the patient's self-destructive act is taken as evidence that the
therapeutic prospects are nil after all. Recriminations abound: "Maybe
my Psych 101 teacher was right that psychoanalytic therapy is a waste of
time." "Maybe I should transfer this person to a therapist of the other
gender." "Maybe I should ask a biologically oriented psychiatrist to
take over the case." "Maybe I should transfer the patient to the Chronic
Group." Therapists, whose personalities are often rather depressive
(Hyde, 2009), are quick to turn any apparent setback into self-censure.
Sufficient diagnostic facility can make a dent in this propensity,
allowing realistic hope to prevail and keeping one in the clinical
trenches.

**LIMITS TO THE UTILITY OF DIAGNOSIS**

As a person who does predominantly long-term, open-ended therapy, I find
that careful assessment is most important at two points: (1) at the
beginning of treatment, for the reasons given above; and (2) at times of
crisis or stalemate, when a rethinking of the kind of dynamics I face
may hold the key to effective changes in focus. Once I have a good feel
for a person, and the work is going well, I stop thinking diagnostically
and simply immerse myself in the unique relationship that unfolds
between me and the client. If I find myself preoccupied with issues of
diagnosis in an ongoing way, I suspect myself of defending against being
fully present with the patient's pain. Diagnosis can, like anything
else, be used as a defense against anxiety about the unknown.

Finally, I should mention that people exist for whom the existing
developmental and typological categories of personality are at best a
poor fit. When any label obscures more than it illuminates, the
practitioner is better off discarding it and relying on common sense and
human decency, like the lost sailor who throws away a useless
navigational chart and reverts to orienting by a few familiar stars. And
even when a diagnostic formulation is a good match to a particular
patient, there are such wide disparities among people on dimensions
other than their level of organization and defensive style that empathy
and healing may be best pursued via attunement to some of these. A
deeply religious person of any personality type will need first for the
therapist to demonstrate respect for his or her depth of conviction (see
Lovinger, 1984); diagnosis-influenced interventions may be of value, but
only secondarily. Similarly, it is sometimes more important, at least in
the early phases of therapeutic engagement, to consider the emotional
implications of someone's age, race, ethnicity, class background,
physical disability, political attitudes, or sexual orientation than it
is to appreciate that client's personality type.

Diagnosis should not be applied beyond its usefulness. Ongoing
willingness to reassess one's initial diagnosis in the light of new
information is part of being optimally therapeutic. As treatment
proceeds with any individual human being, the oversimplification
inherent in our diagnostic concepts becomes startlingly clear. People
are much more complex than even our most thoughtful categories admit.
Hence, even the most sophisticated personality assessment can become an
obstacle to the therapist's perceiving critical nuances of the patient's
unique material.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

My favorite book on interviewing, mostly because of its tone, remains
Harry Stack Sullivan's *The Psychiatric Interview* (1954). Another
classic work that is full of useful background and wise technical
recommendations is *The Initial Interview in Psychiatric Practice* by
Gill, Newman, and Redlich (1954). I was greatly influenced by the work
of MacKinnon and Michels (1971), whose basic premises are similar to the
ones informing this text. They finally issued, with Buckley, a revised
edition of their classic tome in 2006 (now available in paperback). In
*Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice*, Glen Gabbard (2005) has
masterfully integrated dynamic and structural diagnosis with the DSM.
For a well-written synthesis of empirical work on personality, applied
to the area of clinical practice, I recommend Jefferson Singer's
*Personality and Psychotherapy* (2005).

Kernberg's *Severe Personality Disorders* (1984) contains a short but
comprehensive section on the structural interview. Most beginning
therapists find Kernberg hard to read, but his writing here is pellucid.
My own book on case formulation (McWilliams, 1999) complements this
volume by systematically considering aspects of clinical assessment
other than level and type of personality organization, and my later book
on psychotherapy (McWilliams, 2004) reviews the sensibilities that
underlie psychoanalytic approaches to helping people. Mary Beth
Peebles-Kleiger's *Beginnings* (2002), similarly based on long clinical
experience, is excellent. So is Tracy Eells's (2007) more research-based
text on formulation. For an empirical measure of inner capacities of the
whole person that therapists need to evaluate, consider the
Shedler--Westen Assessment Procedure (SWAP) (Shedler & Westen, 2010;
Westen & Shedler, 1999a, 1999b). Finally, the *Psychodynamic Diagnostic
Manual* (PDM Task Force, 2006) fills in many gaps left by this book.

[]{#part0011.html}

**2**

Psychoanalytic\
Character Diagnosis

[C]{.dropcap}lassical psychoanalytic theory approached personality in
two different ways, each deriving from an early model of individual
development. In the era of Freud's original drive theory, an attempt was
made to understand personality on the basis of fixation (At what early
maturational phase is this person psychologically stuck?). Later, with
the development of ego psychology, character was conceived as expressing
the operation of particular styles of defense (What are this person's
typical ways of avoiding anxiety?). This second way of understanding
character was not in conflict with the first; it provided a different
set of ideas and metaphors for comprehending what was meant by a type of
personality, and it added to the concepts of drive theory certain
assumptions about how we each develop our characteristic adaptive and
defensive patterns.

These two explanatory sets are the basic elements of my own
visualization of character possibilities. I try to show also how
relational models in psychoanalysis (British object relations theory,
American interpersonal psychoanalysis, self psychology, and contemporary
relational ideas) can illuminate aspects of character organization. In
addition, my understanding of personality has been enriched by less
clinically influential psychodynamic formulations such as Jung's (1954)
archetypes, Henry Murray's "personology" (e.g., 1938), Silvan Tomkins's
(1995) "script theory," control--mastery theory (e.g., Silberschatz,
2005), and recent empirical work, especially attachment research and
cognitive and affective neuroscience.

Readers may note that I am applying to the diagnostic enterprise several
different paradigms within psychoanalysis that can be seen as mutually
exclusive or essentially contradictory. Because this book is intended
for therapists, and because I am temperamentally more of a synthesizer
than a critic or distinction maker (I share this sensibility with other
clinical writers such as Fred Pine \[1985, 1990\] and Lawrence Josephs
\[1992\]), I have avoided arguing for the scientific or heuristic
superiority of any one paradigm. I am not minimizing the value of
critically evaluating competing theories. My decision not to do so
derives from the specifically clinical purpose of this book and from my
observation that most therapists seek to assimilate a diversity of
models and metaphors, whether or not they are conceptually problematic
in some way.

Every new development in clinical theory offers practitioners a fresh
way of trying to communicate to troubled people their wish to understand
and help. Effective therapists---and I am assuming that effective
therapists and brilliant theorists are overlapping but not identical
samples---seem to me more often to draw freely from many sources than to
become ideologically wedded to one or two favored theories and
techniques. Some analysts adhere to dogma, but this stance has not
enriched our clinical theory, nor has it contributed to the esteem in
which our field is held by those who value humility and who appreciate
ambiguity and complexity (cf. Goldberg, 1990a).

Different clients have a way of making different models relevant: One
person stimulates in the therapist reflections on Kernberg's ideas;
another sounds like a personality described by Horney; still another has
an unconscious fantasy life so classically Freudian that the therapist
starts to wonder if the patient boned up on early drive theory before
entering treatment. Stolorow and Atwood (1979; Atwood & Stolorow, 1993)
have shed light on the emotional processes underlying theories of
personality by studying how the central themes in the theorist's life
become the issues of focus in that person's theories of personality
formation, psychopathology, and psychotherapy. Thus, it is not
surprising that we have so many alternative conceptions. And even if
some of them are logically at odds, I would argue that they are not
phenomenologically so; they may apply differentially to different
individuals and different character types.

Having stated my own biases and predilections, I now offer a brief,
highly oversimplified summary of diagnostically salient models within
the psychoanalytic tradition. I hope they will give therapists with
minimal exposure to psychoanalytic theory a basis for comprehending the
categories that are second nature for analytically trained therapists.

**CLASSICAL FREUDIAN DRIVE THEORY\
AND ITS DEVELOPMENTAL TILT**

Freud's original theory of personality development was a biologically
derived model that stressed the centrality of instinctual processes and
construed human beings as passing through an orderly progression of
bodily preoccupations from oral to anal to phallic and genital concerns.
Freud theorized that in infancy and early childhood, the person's
natural dispositions concern basic survival issues, which are
experienced at first in a deeply sensual way via nursing and the
mother's other activities with the infant's body and later in the
child's fantasy life about birth and death and the sexual tie between
his or her parents.

Babies, and therefore the infantile aspects of self that live on in
adults, were seen as uninhibited seekers of instinctual gratification,
with some individual differences in the strength of the drives.
Appropriate caregiving was construed as oscillating sensitively between,
on the one hand, sufficient gratification to create emotional security
and pleasure and, on the other, developmentally appropriate frustration
such that the child would learn in titrated doses how to replace the
pleasure principle ("I want all my gratifications, including mutually
contradictory ones, right now!") with the reality principle ("Some
gratifications are problematic, and the best are worth waiting for").
Freud talked little about the specific contributions of his patients'
parents to their psychopathology. But when he did, he saw parental
failures as involving either excessive gratification of drives, such
that nothing had impelled the child to move on developmentally, or
excessive deprivation of them, such that the child's capacity to absorb
frustrating realities was overwhelmed. Parenting was thus a balancing
act between indulgence and inhibition---an intuitively resonant model
for most mothers and fathers, to be sure.

Drive theory postulated that if a child is either overfrustrated or
overgratified at an early psychosexual stage (as per the interaction of
the child's constitutional endowment and the parents' responsiveness),
he or she would become "fixated" on the issues of that stage. Character
was seen as expressing the long-term effects of this fixation: If an
adult man had a depressive personality, it was theorized that he had
been either neglected or overindulged in his first year and a half or so
(the oral phase of development); if he was obsessional, it was inferred
that there had been problems between roughly 1½ and 3 (the anal phase);
if he was hysterical, he had met either rejection or overstimulating
seductiveness, or both, between about 3 and 6, when the child's interest
has turned to the genitals and sexuality (the "phallic" phase, in
Freud's male-oriented language, the later part of which came to be known
as the "oedipal" phase because the sexual competition issues and
associated fantasies characteristic of that stage parallel the themes in
the ancient Greek story of Oedipus). It was not uncommon in the early
days of the psychoanalytic movement to hear someone referred to as
having an oral, anal, or phallic character.

Lest this oversimplified account sound entirely fanciful, I should note
that the theory did not spring full-blown from Freud's fevered
imagination; there was an accretion of observations that influenced and
supported it, collected not only by Freud but also by his colleagues. In
Wilhelm Reich's *Character Analysis* (1933), the drive theory approach
to personality diagnosis reached its zenith. Although Reich's language
sounds archaic to contemporary ears, the book is full of fascinating
insights about character types, and its observations may still strike a
chord in sympathetic readers. Ultimately, the effort to construe
character entirely on the basis of instinctual fixation proved
disappointing; no analyst I know currently relies on a drive-based
fixation model. Still, the field retains the developmental sensibility
that the Freudian construct set in motion.

One echo of the original drive model is the continuing tendency of
psychodynamic practitioners to think in terms of maturational processes
and to understand psychopathology in terms of arrest or conflict at a
particular phase. Efforts of contemporary psychoanalytic researchers to
rethink the whole concept of standard developmental stages (see
Lichtenberg, 2004; D. N. Stern, 2000) have inspired enthusiasm for less
linear, less universalizing models, but these new ways of thinking
coexist with general tendencies to view patients' problems in terms of
some aborted developmental task, the normal source of which is seen as a
certain phase of early childhood.

In the 1950s and 1960s, Erik Erikson's reformulation of the psychosexual
stages according to the interpersonal and intrapsychic tasks of each
phase received considerable attention. Although Erikson's work (e.g.,
1950) is usually seen as in the ego psychology tradition, his
developmental stage theory echoes many assumptions in Freud's drive
model. One of Erikson's most appealing additions to Freudian theory was
his renaming of the stages in an effort to modify Freud's biologism. The
oral phase became understood by its condition of total dependency in
which the establishment of basic trust (or lack of trust) is at stake.
The anal phase was conceptualized as involving the attainment of
autonomy (or, if poorly navigated, of shame and doubt). The prototypical
struggle of this phase might be the mastery of toilet functions, as
Freud had stressed, but it also involves a vast range of issues relevant
to the child's learning self-control and coming to terms with the
expectations of the family and the larger society. The oedipal phase was
seen as a critical time for developing a sense of basic efficacy
("initiative vs. guilt") and a sense of pleasure in identification with
one's love objects.

Erikson, influenced by experiences such as having lived with Native
American Hopi tribes, extended the idea of developmental phases and
tasks throughout the lifespan and across cultures. In the 1950s, Harry
Stack Sullivan (e.g., 1953) offered another stage theory (of predictable
childhood "epochs"), one that stressed communicative achievements such
as speech and play rather than drive satisfaction. Like Erikson, he
believed that personality continues to develop and change well beyond
the first 6 or so years that Freud had stressed as the bedrock of adult
character.

Margaret Mahler's work (e.g., Mahler, 1968, 1972a, 1972b; Mahler, Pine,
& Bergman, 1975) on subphases of the separation--individuation process,
a task that reaches its initial resolution by about age 3, was a further
step in conceptualizing elements relevant to eventual personality
structure. Her theory is basically object relational, but its implicit
assumptions of fixation owe a debt to Freud's developmental model.
Mahler broke down Freud's oral and anal stages and looked at the
infant's movement from a state of relative unawareness of others (the
autistic phase, lasting about 6 weeks) to one of symbiotic relatedness
(lasting over the next 2 or so years---this period itself subdivided
into subphases of "hatching," "practicing," "rapprochement," and "on the
way to object constancy") to a condition of relative psychological
separation and individuation.

Other clinically relevant developmental observations emerged from
British analysts. Melanie Klein (1946) wrote about the infant's shift
from the "paranoid--schizoid position" to the "depressive position." In
the former, the baby has not yet fully appreciated the separateness of
other people, while in the latter, he or she has come to understand that
the caregiver is outside the child's omnipotent control and has a
separate mind. Thomas Ogden (1989) later posited a developmentally
earlier "autistic-contiguous position," a "sensory-dominated,
presymbolic area of experience in which the most primitive form of
meaning is generated on the basis of the organization of sensory
impressions, particularly at the skin surface" (p. 4). He emphasized
how, in addition to viewing these positions as progressively more mature
stages of development, we need to appreciate that we all move back and
forth among them from moment to moment.

Such contributions were greeted eagerly by therapists. With the
post-Freudian stage theories, they had fresh ways of understanding how
their patients had gotten "stuck" and could appreciate otherwise
puzzling shifts in self-states. They could now also offer
interpretations and hypotheses to their self-critical clients that went
beyond speculations about their having been weaned too early or too
late, or toilet trained too harshly or with too much laxity, or seduced
or rejected during the oedipal phase. Rather, they could wonder to
patients whether their predicaments reflected family processes that had
made it difficult for them to feel security or autonomy or pleasure in
their identifications (Erikson), or suggest that fate had handed them a
childhood devoid of the crucially important preadolescent "chum"
(Sullivan), or comment that their mother's hospitalization when they
were 2 had overwhelmed the rapprochement process normal for that age and
necessary for optimal separation (Mahler), or observe that in the
moment, they were feeling a primitive terror because the therapist had
interrupted their thought processes (Ogden).

More recently, Peter Fonagy and his colleagues (e.g., Fonagy, Gergely,
Jurist, & Target, 2002; Fonagy & Target, 1996) have offered a model of
the development of a mature sense of self and reality characterized by a
capacity to "mentalize" the motives of others. Mentalization resembles
what philosophers have called "theory of mind" and what Klein called the
depressive position: the appreciation of the separate subjective lives
of others. He observed that children move from an early "mode of psychic
equivalence," in which the internal world and external reality are
equated, to a "pretend mode" around age 2, in which the internal world
is decoupled from the external world but is not governed by its
realities (the era of imaginary friends), and the achievement of the
capacity for mentalization and reflective functioning around ages 4 or
5, in which the two modes are integrated and fantasy is clearly
distinguished from actuality. I talk more about this formulation in
[Chapter 3](#part0012.html){.calibre9} in connection with borderline
personality organization.

For therapists, such models were not just interesting intellectually;
they provided ways of helping people to understand and find compassion
for themselves---in contradistinction to the usual internal explanations
that we all generate about our more incomprehensible qualities ("I'm
bad," "I'm ugly," "I'm lazy and undisciplined," "I'm just inherently
rejectable," "I'm dangerous," etc.). And clinicians could keep their own
sanity better when they ran into otherwise incomprehensible responses to
their attempts to understand and help. For example, a client's sudden
verbal assault on the therapist could be seen as a temporary retreat
into the paranoid--schizoid position.

Many contemporary commentators have noted that our propensity to
construe problems in developmental terms is too reductive and only
questionably supported by clinical and empirical evidence. L. Mayes
(2001, p. 1062), for example, notes that "maps that orient us to the
developmental terrain are quite useful, but such maps should not be
taken literally." Others have pointed to different patterns of
psychological development in non-Western cultures (e.g., Bucci, 2002;
Roland, 2003). Contemporary developmental psychologists (e.g., Fischer &
Bidell, 1998) are leery of simple stage formulas, given that development
is a dynamic, ever-shifting process. As my colleague Deirdre Kramer has
noted (personal communication, July 20, 2010), it is probably more
accurate to speak of a "range of developmental possibilities" than "a"
developmental "level."

Still, the tendency of therapists to see psychological phenomena as
residues of normal maturational challenges persists---perhaps reflecting
the fact that developmental models have both an elegant simplicity and
an overall humanity that appeals to us. There is a generosity of spirit,
a kind of "There but for fortune go I" quality, to believing there is an
archetypal, progressive, universal pattern of development, and that
under unfortunate circumstances, any of us could have gotten stuck at
any of its phases. It is not a sufficient explanation for personality
differences, but it feels like an important *part* of the picture. One
of the axes on which I have aligned diagnostic data contains this
developmental bias in the form of relatively undifferentiated
(symbiotic--psychotic), separation--individuation (borderline), and
oedipal (neurotic) levels of personality organization.

**EGO PSYCHOLOGY**

With the publication of *The Ego and the Id* (1923), Freud introduced
his structural model, launching a new theoretical era. Analysts shifted
their interest from the contents of the unconscious to the processes by
which those contents are kept out of consciousness. Arlow and Brenner
(1964) have argued cogently for the greater explanatory power of the
structural theory, but there were also practical clinical reasons for
therapists to welcome the changes of focus from id to ego and from
deeply unconscious material to the wishes, fears, and fantasies that are
closer to consciousness and accessible if one works with the defensive
functions of a patient's ego. A crash course in the structural model and
its associated assumptions follows, with apologies to sophisticated
readers for the brevity with which complicated concepts are covered.

The "id" was the term Freud used for the part of the mind that contains
primitive drives, impulses, prerational strivings, wish--fear
combinations, and fantasies. It seeks only immediate gratification and
is totally "selfish," operating according to the pleasure principle.
Cognitively, it is preverbal, expressing itself in images and symbols.
It is also prelogical, having no concept of time, mortality, limitation,
or the impossibility that opposites can coexist. Freud called this
archaic kind of cognition, which survives in the language of dreams,
jokes, and hallucinations, "primary process" thought. Contemporary
neuroscientists might locate the id in the amygdala, the ancient part of
the brain involved in primitive emotional functioning.

The id is entirely unconscious. Its existence and power can, however, be
inferred from derivatives, such as thoughts, acts, and emotions. In
Freud's time, it was a common cultural conceit that modern, civilized
human beings were rationally motivated creatures who had moved beyond
the sensibilities of the "lesser" animals and of non-Western "savages."
(Freud's emphasis on our animality, including the dominance of sex as a
motivator, was one reason for the degree of resistance his ideas
provoked in the post-Victorian era.)

The "ego" was Freud's name for a set of functions that adapt to life's
exigencies, finding ways that are acceptable within one's family and
culture to handle id strivings. It develops continuously throughout
one's lifetime but most rapidly in childhood, starting in earliest
infancy (Hartmann, 1958). The Freudian ego operates according to the
reality principle and is the seedbed of sequential, logical,
reality-oriented cognition or "secondary process" thought. It thus
mediates between the demands of the id and the constraints of reality
and ethics. It has both conscious and unconscious aspects. The conscious
ones are similar to what most of us mean when we use the term "self" or
"I," while the unconscious aspects include defensive processes like
repression, displacement, rationalization, and sublimation. The concept
of the ego is relatively compatible with contemporary knowledge of the
prefrontal cortex and its functions.

With the structural theory, analytic therapists had a new language for
making sense of some kinds of character pathology; namely, that we all
develop ego defenses that are adaptive within our particular childhood
setting but that may turn out to be maladaptive later in the larger
world. An important aspect of this model for both diagnosis and therapy
is the portrayal of the ego as having a range of operations, from deeply
unconscious (e.g., a powerful reaction of denial to emotionally
disturbing events) to fully conscious. During psychoanalytic treatment,
it was noted, the "observing ego," the part of the patient's self that
is conscious and rational and can comment on emotional experience,
allies with the therapist to understand the total self together, while
the "experiencing ego" holds a more visceral sense of what is going on
in the therapy relationship.

This "therapeutic split in the ego" (Sterba, 1934) was seen as a
necessary condition of effective therapy. If the patient is unable to
talk from an observing position about less rational, more "gut-level"
emotional reactions, the first task of the therapist is to help the
patient develop that capacity. Observation of the presence or absence of
an observing ego became of paramount diagnostic value, because the
existence of a symptom or problem that is dystonic (alien) to the
observing ego was found to be treatable much faster than a
similar-looking problem that the patient had never regarded as
noteworthy. This insight persists among analytic practitioners in the
language of whether a problem or personality style is "ego alien" or
"ego syntonic."

The basic role of the ego in perceiving and adapting to reality is the
source of the phrase "ego strength," meaning a person's capacity to
acknowledge reality, even when it is extremely unpleasant, without
resorting to more primitive defenses such as denial (Bellak, Hurvich, &
Gediman, 1973). Over the years of the development of psychoanalytic
clinical theory, a distinction emerged between the more archaic and the
more mature defenses, the former characterized by the psychological
avoidance or radical distortion of disturbing facts of life, and the
latter involving more of an accommodation to reality (Vaillant, 1992;
Vaillant, Bond, & Vaillant, 1986).

Another clinical contribution of the ego psychology movement was the
conclusion that psychological health involves not only having mature
defenses but also being able to use a variety of defenses (cf. D.
Shapiro, 1965). In other words, it was recognized that the person who
habitually reacts to every stress with, say, projection, or with
rationalization, is not as well off psychologically as the one who uses
different ways of coping, depending on circumstances. Concepts like
"rigidity" of personality and "character armor" (W. Reich, 1933) express
this idea that mental health has something to do with emotional
flexibility.

Freud coined the term "superego" for the part of the self that oversees
things, especially from a moral perspective. (Note that Freud wrote in
simple, non-jargon-laden language: Id, ego, and superego translate as
"it," "me," and "above me," respectively \[see Bettelheim, 1983\]. Few
contemporary psychoanalytic theorists write with anything like his grace
and simplicity.) Roughly synonymous with "conscience," the superego is
the part of the self that congratulates us for doing our best and
criticizes us when we fall short of our own standards. It is a part of
the ego, although it is often felt as a separate internal voice. Freud
believed that the superego was formed mainly during the oedipal period,
through identification with parental values, but most contemporary
analysts regard it as originating much earlier, in primitive infantile
notions of good and bad.

The superego is, like the ego from which it arises, partly conscious and
partly unconscious. Again, the assessment of whether an inappropriately
punitive superego is experienced by the patient as ego alien or ego
syntonic was eventually understood to have important prognostic
implications. The client who announces that she is evil because she has
had bad thoughts about her father has a significantly different
psychology from the one who reports that a part of her seems to feel she
is evil when she entertains such thoughts. Both may be depressive,
self-attacking people, but the magnitude of the first woman's problem is
so much greater than that of the second that it was considered to
warrant a different level of classification.

There was considerable clinical benefit to the development of the
concept of the superego. Therapy went beyond simply trying to make
conscious what had been unconscious. The therapist and client could view
their work as also involving superego repair. A common therapeutic aim,
especially throughout the early 20th century, when many middle-class
adults had been reared in ways that fostered unduly harsh superegos, was
helping one's patients reevaluate overly stringent moral standards
(e.g., antisexual strictures or internal chastisement for thoughts,
feelings, and fantasies that are not put into action). Psychoanalysis as
a movement---and Freud as a person---was emphatically not hedonistic,
but the taming of tyrannical superegos was one of its frequent goals. In
practice, this tended to encourage more rather than less ethical
behavior, since people with condemnatory superegos frequently behave in
defiance of them, especially in states of intoxication or in situations
in which they can rationalize acting out. We were learning that efforts
to expose the operations of the id, to bring a person's unconscious life
into the light of day, have little therapeutic benefit if the patient
regards such illumination as exposing his or her personal depravity.

Ego psychology's achievement in describing processes that are now
subsumed under the general rubric of "defense" is centrally relevant to
character diagnosis. Just as we may attempt to understand people in
terms of the developmental phase that exemplifies their current
struggle, we can sort them out according to their characteristic modes
of handling anxiety and other dysphoric affects. The idea that a primary
function of the ego is to defend the self against anxiety arising from
either powerful instinctual strivings (the id), upsetting reality
experiences (the ego), or guilt feelings and associated fantasies (the
superego) was most elegantly explicated in Anna Freud's *The Ego and the
Mechanisms of Defense* (1936).

Sigmund Freud's original ideas had included the notion that anxious
reactions are *caused by* defenses, most notably repression
(unconsciously motivated forgetting). Bottled-up feelings were seen as
tensions that press for discharge, tensions that are experienced as
anxiety. When Freud made the shift to the structural theory, he reversed
himself, deciding that repression is a *response* to anxiety, and that
it is only one of several ways human beings try to avoid an unbearable
degree of irrational fear. He began construing psychopathology as a
state in which a defensive effort has not worked, where the anxiety is
felt in spite of one's habitual means of warding it off, or where the
behavior that masks the anxiety is self-destructive. In [Chapters
5](#part0014.html){.calibre9} and [6](#part0015.html){.calibre9} I
elaborate on the defenses, the ones identified by Sigmund and Anna
Freud, as well as by other analysts and researchers.

**THE OBJECT RELATIONS TRADITION**

As the ego psychologists were mapping out a theoretical understanding of
patients whose psychological processes were illuminated by the
structural model, some theorists in Europe, especially in England, were
looking at different unconscious processes and their manifestations.
Some, like Klein (e.g., 1932, 1957), worked both with children and with
patients whom Freud had regarded as too disturbed to be suitable for
analysis. These representatives of the "British School" of
psychoanalysis were finding that they needed another language to
describe the processes they observed. Their work was controversial for
many years, partly due to the personalities, loyalties, and convictions
of those involved, and partly because it is hard to write about inferred
primitive phenomena. Object relations theorists struggled with how to
put preverbal, prerational processes into rationally mediated words.
Although they shared his respect for the power of unconscious dynamics,
they disputed Freud on certain key issues.

W. R. D. Fairbairn (e.g., 1954), for example, rejected Freud's biologism
outright, proposing that people do not seek drive satisfaction so much
as they seek relationships. In other words, a baby is not so much
focused on getting mother's milk as it is on having the experience of
*being nursed*, with the sense of warmth and attachment that goes with
that experience. Psychoanalysts influenced by Sandor Ferenczi (such as
Michael and Alice Balint, sometimes referred to as belonging to the
"Hungarian School" of psychoanalysis) pursued the study of primary
experiences of love, loneliness, creativity, and integrity of self that
do not fit neatly within the confines of Freud's structural theory.
People with an object relations orientation put their emphasis not on
what drive had been mishandled in a person's childhood, or on what
developmental phase had been poorly negotiated, or on what ego defenses
had predominated. Rather, the emphasis was on what the main love objects
in the child's world had been like, how they had been experienced, how
they and felt aspects of them had been internalized, and how internal
images and representations of them live on in the unconscious lives of
adults. In the object relations tradition, oedipal issues loom less
large than themes of safety and agency, and separation and
individuation.

The term "object relations" is unfortunate, since "object" in
psychoanalese usually means "person." It derives from Freud's early
explication of instinctual drives as having a source (some bodily
tension), an aim (some biological satisfaction), and an object
(typically a person, since the drives Freud saw as central to one's
psychology were the sexual and aggressive ones). This phrase has
remained in use despite its unattractive, mechanistic connotations
because of this derivation and also because there are instances in which
an important "object" is a nonhuman attachment (e.g., the American flag
to a patriot, footwear to a shoe fetishist) or is part of a human being
(the mother's breast, the father's smile, the sister's voice, etc.).

Freud's own work was not inhospitable to the development and elaboration
of object relations theory. His appreciation of the importance of the
child's actual and experienced infantile objects comes through in his
concept of the "family romance," in his recognition of how different the
oedipal phase could be for the child depending on the personalities of
the parents, and also in his increasing emphasis on relationship factors
in treatment. Richard Sterba (1982) and others who knew Freud have
stated that he would have welcomed this direction in psychoanalysis.

By the middle of the 20th century, object relational formulations from
the British and Hungarian schools were paralleled to a striking degree
by developments among therapists in the United States who identified
themselves as "interpersonal psychoanalysts." These theorists, who
included Harry Stack Sullivan, Erich Fromm, Karen Horney, Clara
Thompson, Otto Will, Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, and Harold Searles were,
like their European colleagues, trying to work with more seriously
disturbed patients. They differed from object relations analysts across
the Atlantic mainly in the extent to which they emphasized the
internalized nature of early object relations: The American-based
therapists tended to put less stress on the stubbornly persisting
unconscious images of early objects and aspects of objects. Both groups
deemphasized the therapist's role as conveyer of insight and
concentrated more on the importance of establishing emotional safety.
Fromm-Reichmann (1950) famously observed that "The patient needs an
experience, not an explanation."

Freud had shifted toward an interpersonal theory of treatment when he
stopped regarding his patients' transferences as distortions to be
explained away and began seeing them as offering the emotional context
necessary for healing. Emphasizing the value of the patient's exorcising
an internal image of a problematic parent by seeing that image in the
analyst and defying it, he noted that "It is impossible to destroy
anyone in absentia or in effigie" (1912, p. 108). The conviction that
the emotional connection between therapist and client constitutes the
most vital curative factor in therapy is a central tenet of contemporary
analytic therapists (Blagys & Hilsenroth, 2000). It is also supported by
considerable empirical work on psychotherapy outcome (Norcross, 2002;
Strupp, 1989; Wampold, 2001; Zuroff & Blatt, 2006) and seems to apply to
nonpsychodynamic as well as psychodynamic therapies (Shedler, 2010).

Object relational concepts allowed therapists to extend their empathy
into the area of how their clients experienced interpersonal connection.
They might be in a state of psychological fusion with another person, in
which self and object are emotionally indistinguishable. They might be
in a dyadic space, where the object is felt as either for them or
against them. Or they might see others as fully independent of
themselves. The child's movement from experiential symbiosis (early
infancy) through me-versus-you struggles (age 2 or so) through more
complex identifications (age 3 and up) became more salient in this
theory than the oral, anal, and oedipal preoccupations of those stages.
The oedipal phase was appreciated as a cognitive milestone, not just a
psychosexual one, in that it represents a victory over infantile
egocentrism for a child to understand that two other people (the
parents, in the classical paradigm) may relate to each other in ways
that do not involve the child.

Concepts from the European object relations theorists and the American
interpersonalists heralded significant advances in treatment because the
psychologies of many clients, especially those suffering from more
serious psychopathology, are not easily construed in terms of id, ego,
and superego. Instead of having an integrated ego with a self-observing
function, such persons seem to have different "ego states," conditions
of mind in which they feel and behave one way, often contrasting with
the way they feel and behave at other times. In the grip of these
states, they may have no capacity to think objectively about what is
going on in themselves, and they may insist that their current emotional
experience is natural and inevitable given their situation.

Clinicians trying to help these difficult patients learn that treatment
goes better if one can figure out which internal parent or other
important early object is being activated at any given time, rather than
trying to relate to them as if there is a consistent "self" with mature
defenses that can be engaged. Thus, the arrival of the object relations
point of view had significant implications for extending the scope and
range of treatment (L. Stone, 1954). Therapists could now listen for the
voices of "introjects," those internalized others who had influenced the
child and lived on in the adult, and from whom the client had not yet
achieved a satisfactory psychological separation.

Within this formulation, character could be seen as stable patterns of
behaving like, or unconsciously inducing others to behave like, the
experienced objects of early childhood. The "stable instability" of the
borderline client (Schmideberg, 1947; Kernberg, 1975) became more
theoretically comprehensible and hence more clinically addressable. With
the metaphors and models of object relations theory, filtered through
the therapist's internal images and emotional reactions to the patient's
communications, a practitioner now had more ways of understanding what
was happening in therapy, especially when an observing ego could not be
accessed. For example, when a disturbed patient would launch into a
paranoid diatribe, the therapist could make sense of it as a re-creation
of the patient's having felt relentlessly and unfairly criticized as a
child.

A new appreciation of countertransference evolved in the psychoanalytic
community, reflecting therapists' accumulating clinical knowledge and
exposure to the work of object relational theorists writing about their
internal responses to patients. In the United States, Harold Searles
distinguished himself for frank depictions of normal countertransference
storms, as in his 1959 article on efforts of psychotic people to drive
therapists crazy. In Britain, D. W. Winnicott was one of the bravest
self-disclosers, as in his famous 1949 article "Hate in the
Countertransference." Freud had regarded strong emotional reactions to
patients as evidence of the analyst's incomplete self-knowledge and
inability to maintain a benign, physicianly attitude toward the other
person in the room. In gradual contrast to this appealingly rational
position, analysts working with psychotic clients and with those we now
diagnose as borderline or traumatized or personality disordered were
finding that one of their best vehicles for comprehending these
overwhelmed, disorganized, desperate, tormented people was their own
intense countertransferential response to them.

In this vein, Heinrich Racker (1968), a South American analyst
influenced by Klein, offered the clinically useful categories of
"concordant" and "complementary" countertransferences. The former term
refers to the therapist's feeling (empathically) what the patient as a
child had felt in relation to an early object; the latter connotes the
therapist's feeling (unempathically, from the viewpoint of the client)
what the object had felt toward the child.

For example, one of my patients once seemed to be going nowhere for
several sessions. I noticed that every time he mentioned someone, he
would attach a sort of verbal "footnote," such as "Marge is the
secretary on the third floor that I eat lunch with on Tuesdays"---even
if he had often talked about Marge before. I commented on this habit,
wondering whether someone in his family had not listened to him very
carefully: He seemed to assume I didn't remember any of the main figures
in his current life. He protested angrily, insisting that his parents
had been very interested in him---especially his mother. He then
commenced a long defense of her, during which I began, without really
noticing it, to get very bored. Suddenly, I realized I had not heard a
thing he had said for several minutes. I was off in a daydream about how
I would present my work with him as a case study to some eminent
colleagues, and how my account of this treatment would impress them with
my skill. As I pulled myself out of this narcissistic reverie and
started listening again, I was fascinated to hear that he was saying, in
the context of defending his mother against the charge of lack of
attentiveness, that every time he was in a play in elementary school,
she would make the most elaborate costume of any mother in the grade,
would rehearse every line of dialogue with him over and over, and would
sit in the front row on the day of the performance, radiating pride.

In my fantasy, I had become startlingly like the mother of his childhood
years, interested in him mainly as an enhancer of my own reputation.
Racker (1968) would call this countertransference complementary, since
my emotional state seemed to parallel that of one of the patient's
significant childhood objects. If instead I had found myself feeling,
presumably like the client as a child, that I was not really being
attended to but was valued by him mainly for the ways I enhanced his
self-esteem (an equally possible outcome of the emotional atmosphere
between us), then my countertransference would be considered concordant.

This process of unconscious induction of attitudes comparable to those
assimilated in earliest infancy can sound rather mystical. But there are
ways of looking at such phenomena that may make them more
comprehensible. In the initial 1 to 2 years of life, most communication
between infant and others is nonverbal. People relating to babies figure
out what they need largely on the basis of intuitive, emotional
reactions. Nonverbal communication can be remarkably powerful, as anyone
who has ever taken care of a newborn, or been moved to tears by a
melody, or fallen inexplicably in love can testify. Since the first
edition of this book, there has been an explosion of neuroscientific
understanding of infant development (Beebe & Lachmann, 1994; Sasso,
2008)---right-brain-to-right-brain communication (Fosha, 2005; Schore,
2003a, 2003b; Trevarthen & Aitken, 1994), the role of mirror neurons
(Olds, 2006; Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004) and the way the brains of
both client and therapist change in intimate emotional connection,
including therapy (Kandel, 1999; Tronick, 2003)---fulfilling Freud's
(1895) hope that one day we would have chemical and neurological
explanations for what he could describe only in metaphors.

Before we had functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies,
analytic theories created hypothetical structures to describe those
processes, assuming that in making contact, we draw on early infantile
knowledge that both predates and transcends the formal, logical
interactions we easily put into words. The phenomenon of parallel
process (Ekstein & Wallerstein, 1958), the understanding of which
presumes the same emotional and preverbal sources, has been extensively
documented in the clinical literature on supervision. The transformation
of countertransference from obstacle to asset is one of the most
critical contributions of object relations theory (see Ehrenberg, 1992;
Maroda, 1991).

**SELF PSYCHOLOGY**

Theory influences practice, and it is also influenced by it. When enough
therapists come up against aspects of psychology that do not seem to be
adequately addressed by prevailing models, the time is ripe for a
paradigm shift (Kuhn, 1970; Spence, 1987). By the 1960s, many
practitioners were reporting that their patients' problems were not well
described in the language of the existing analytic models; that is, the
central complaints of many people seeking treatment were not reducible
to either a problem managing an instinctual urge and its inhibitors
(drive theory), or to the inflexible operation of particular defenses
against anxiety (ego psychology), or to the activation of internal
objects from which the patient had inadequately differentiated (object
relations theory). Such processes might be inferable, but they lacked
both the economy of explanation and the explanatory power one would want
from a good theory.

Rather than seeming full of stormy, primitive introjects, as object
relations theory described so well, many mid-century patients were
reporting feelings of emptiness---they seemed devoid of internal objects
rather than beleaguered by them. They lacked a sense of inner direction
and dependable, orienting values, and they came to therapy to find some
meaning in life. On the surface, they might look self-assured, but
internally they were in a constant search for reassurance that they were
acceptable or admirable or valuable. Even among clients whose reported
problems lay elsewhere, a sense of inner confusion about self-esteem and
basic values could be discerned.

With their chronic need for recognition from outside sources, such
patients were regarded by analytically oriented people as having core
problems with narcissism, even when they did not fit the stereotype of
the "phallic" narcissistic character (arrogant, vain, charming) that W.
Reich (1933) had delineated. They evoked a countertransference
noteworthy not for its intensity, but for boredom, impatience, and vague
irritation. People treating such clients reported that they felt
insignificant, invisible, and either devalued or overvalued by them. The
therapist could not feel appreciated as a real other person trying to
help, but instead seemed to be regarded as a replaceable source of the
client's emotional inflation or deflation.

The disturbance of such people seemed to center in their sense of who
they were, what their values were, and what maintained their
self-esteem. They would sometimes say they did not know who they were or
what really mattered to them, beyond getting reassured *that* they
mattered. From a traditional standpoint, they often did not appear
flagrantly "sick" (they had impulse control, ego strength, interpersonal
stability), but they nevertheless felt little pleasure in their lives
and little realistic pride in themselves. Some practitioners considered
them untreatable, since it is a more monumental task to help someone
develop a self than it is to help him or her repair or reorient one that
already exists. Others worked at finding new constructs through which
these patients' suffering could be better conceptualized and hence more
sensitively treated. Some stayed within existing psychodynamic models to
do so (e.g., Erikson and Rollo May within ego psychology, Kernberg and
Masterson within object relations); others went elsewhere. Carl Rogers
(1951, 1961) went outside the psychoanalytic tradition altogether to
develop a theory and therapy that made affirmation of the client's
developing self and self-esteem its hallmarks.

Within psychoanalysis, Heinz Kohut formulated a new theory of the self:
its development, possible distortion, and treatment. He emphasized the
normal need to idealize and the implications for adult psychopathology
when one grows up without objects that can be initially idealized and
then gradually and nontraumatically deidealized. Kohut's contributions
(e.g., 1971, 1977, 1984) proved valuable not only to those who were
looking for new ways to understand and help narcissistically impaired
clients; they also furthered a general reorientation toward thinking
about people in terms of self-structures, self-representations,
self-images, and how one comes to depend on internal processes for
self-esteem. An appreciation of the emptiness and pain of those without
a reliable superego began to coexist with the compassion that analysts
already felt for those whose superegos were excessively strict.

Kohut's body of work, its influence on other writers (e.g., George
Atwood, Sheldon Bach, Michael Basch, James Fosshage, Arnold Goldberg,
Alice Miller, Andrew Morrison, Donna Orange, Paul and Anna Ornstein,
Estelle Shane, Robert Stolorow, Ernest Wolf), and the general tone it
set for rethinking psychological issues had important implications for
diagnosis. This new way of conceptualizing clinical material added to
analytic theory the language of self and encouraged evaluators to try to
understand the dimension of self-experiences in people. Therapists began
observing that even in patients not notable for their overall
narcissism, one could see the operation of processes oriented toward
supporting self-esteem, self-cohesion, and a sense of
self-continuity---functions that had not been stressed in most earlier
literature. Defenses were reconceptualized as existing not only to
protect a person from anxiety about id, ego, and superego dangers but
also to sustain a consistent, positively valued sense of self (Goldberg,
1990b). Interviewers could understand patients more completely by
asking, in addition to traditional questions about defense ("Of what is
this person afraid? When afraid, what does this person do?" \[Waelder,
1960\]), "How vulnerable is this person's self-esteem? When it is
threatened, what does he or she do?"

A clinical example may show why this addition to theory is useful. Two
men may be clinically depressed, with virtually identical vegetative
signs (sleep problems, appetite disturbance, tearfulness, psychomotor
retardation, etc.), yet have radically disparate subjective experiences.
One feels bad, in the sense of morally deficient or evil. He is
contemplating suicide because he believes that his existence only
aggravates the problems of the world and that he would be doing the
planet a favor by removing his corrupting influence from it. The other
feels not morally bad but internally empty, defective, ugly. He also is
considering suicide, not to improve the world, but because he sees no
point in living. The former feels a piercing guilt, the latter a diffuse
shame. In object relations terms, the first man is too full of
internalized others telling him he is bad; the second is too empty of
internalizations that could give him any direction.

Diagnostic discrimination between the first kind of depression
("melancholia" in the early psychoanalytic literature and "introjective
depression" more recently \[Blatt, 2008\]) and the second, a more
narcissistically depleted state of mind (Blatt's "anaclitic"
depression), is a critical one for very practical reasons. The man with
the first kind of depressive experience will not respond well to an
overtly sympathetic, supportive tone in the interviewer; he will feel
misunderstood as a person more deserving than he knows he really is, and
he will get more depressed. The man with the second kind of subjective
experience will be relieved by the therapist's direct expression of
concern and support; his emptiness will be temporarily filled, and the
agony of his shame will be mitigated. I will have more to say about such
discriminations later, but the point here is that self psychological
frames of reference have had significant diagnostic value.

**THE CONTEMPORARY RELATIONAL MOVEMENT**

Winnicott (1952) stated, provocatively and memorably, that there is no
such thing as a baby. He meant that there is an interpersonal *system*
of a baby and a caregiver, as the baby cannot exist except in a specific
context of care. Similarly, recent psychoanalytic theorists have
challenged the assumption that there is such a thing as a discrete,
stable, separate personality; they prefer to conceive of a series of
self-states that arise in different interpersonal contexts. The most
important recent theoretical innovations were set in motion by a 1983
text by Jay Greenberg and Steven Mitchell that contrasted drive and ego
psychological models with relational theories (interpersonal, object
relational, self psychological). Since that time, there has been a
remarkable shift of conceptualization of the clinical process, generally
dubbed the "relational turn" (S. A. Mitchell, 1988), in which the
inevitably intersubjective nature of the clinical situation has been
emphasized.

Scholars such as Louis Aron, Jessica Benjamin, Philip Bromberg, Jodie
Davies, Adrienne Harris, Irwin Hoffman, Owen Renik, and Donnell Stern
have challenged prior notions that the therapist's objectivity or
emotional neutrality is either possible or desirable, and have
emphasized the contributions to the clinical situation of the
unconscious life of the therapist as well as that of the patient.
Despite its obvious asymmetricality, the relationship that any
therapist--client pair experiences is seen as mutual and co-constructed
(Aron, 1996), and the analyst is assumed not to be an objective "knower"
but a codiscoverer of the patient's psychology as it contributes to
inevitable two-person enactments of the client's major interpersonal
themes.

Relational psychoanalysts have been more interested in therapeutic
*process* than in hypothesized structures such as character; in fact,
many explicitly worry that talking about personality as a patterned,
fixed phenomenon ignores the evidence for our ongoing construction of
experience and for self-experiences that are more state dependent than
personality driven. Still, their paradigm shift has affected how we
think about personality and its implications for practice. By
deconstructing prior conceits that analysts can somehow observe patients
antiseptically (according to Heisenberg \[1927\], even electrons cannot
not be studied without the act of observation affecting what is
observed), relational analysts opened the door to appreciating the
personality contributions of the therapist as well as the patient in the
understanding of what is going on between them in therapy.

In response to the clinical challenges presented by people with
histories of emotional and sexual abuse, much relational thinking has
returned to the early Freudian focus on trauma, but with an emphasis on
dissociative rather than repressive processes. The contributions of
relational analysts, along with advances in neuroscience and child
development research, have changed some of our assumptions about psychic
structure, especially in contexts that promote dissociation. I talk
about this in more detail in [Chapter 15](#part0025.html){.calibre9}.

From the perspective of personality diagnosis, perhaps the most
important contributions of analysts in the relational movement include
their sensitivity to unformulated experience (D. B. Stern, 1997, 2009),
social construction of meaning (Hoffman, 1998), multiple self-states
(Bromberg, 1991, 1998), and dissociation (Davies & Frawley, 1994), all
ways of thinking about self-experience that imply more fluidity and
unfinishedness than traditional theory assumed. Given the speed of
social and technological change over the past quarter-century, it is not
surprising that a major theoretical position has emerged in which
impermanence and the collaborative construction of experience are
foundational assumptions.

**OTHER PSYCHOANALYTIC CONTRIBUTIONS\
TO PERSONALITY ASSESSMENT**

In addition to drive, ego psychology, object relations, self, and
relational orientations, there are several other theories within a broad
psychoanalytic framework that have affected our conceptualizations of
character. They include, but are not limited to, the ideas of Jung,
Adler, and Rank; the "personology" of Murray (1938); the "modern
psychoanalysis" of Spotnitz (1976, 1985); the "script theory" of Tomkins
(1995); the "control--mastery" theory of Sampson and Weiss (Weiss,
1993); evolutionary biology models (e.g., Slavin & Kriegman, 1990),
contemporary gender theory (e.g., A. Harris, 2008), and the work of
Jacques Lacan (Fink, 1999, 2007). I refer to some of these paradigms in
subsequent chapters. I cannot resist noting my prediction in the first
edition of this book that psychoanalysts would soon apply chaos theory
(nonlinear general systems theory) to clinical issues, a prophecy that
has since been realized (Seligman, 2005).

In concluding this chapter, I want to stress that analytic theories
emphasize themes and dynamisms, not traits; that is why the word
"dynamic" continues to apply. It is the appreciation of oscillating
patterns that makes analytic notions of character richer and more
clinically germane than the lists of static attributes one finds in most
assessment instruments and in compendia like the DSM. People become
organized on dimensions that have significance for them, and they
typically show characteristics expressing both polarities of any salient
dimension. Philip Slater (1970) captured this idea succinctly in a
footnote commentary on modern literary criticism and biography:

 

Generations of humanists have excited themselves and their readers by
showing "contradictions" and "paradoxes" in some real or fictional
person's character, simply because a trait and its opposite coexisted in
the same person. But in fact traits and their opposites always coexist
if the traits are of any intensity, and the whole tradition of cleverly
ferreting out paradoxes of character depends upon the psychological
naiveté of the reader for its impact. (pp. 3n--4n)

 

Thus, people with conflicts about closeness can get upset by both
closeness and distance. People who crave success the most hungrily are
often the ones who sabotage it the most recklessly. The manic person is
psychologically more similar to the depressive than to the schizoid
individual; a compulsively promiscuous man has more in common with
someone who resolved a sexual conflict by celibacy than with someone for
whom sexuality is not problematic. People are complicated, but their
intricacies are not random. Analytic theories offer us ways of helping
our clients to make sense out of seemingly inexplicable ironies and
absurdities in their lives, and to transform their vulnerabilites into
strengths.

**SUMMARY**

I have briefly described several major clinical paradigms within
psychoanalysis: drive theory, ego psychology, object relations theory,
self psychology, and the contemporary relational sensibility. I have
emphasized their respective implications for conceptualizing character,
with attention to the clinical inferences that can be drawn from seeing
people through these different lenses. I have also noted other
influences on dynamic ideas about character structure and implications
for therapy. This review could only hit the highlights of over a hundred
years of intellectual ferment, controversy, and theory development.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

For those who have never read him, I think the best way to get a sense
of the early Freud and of his nascent drive theory, is to peruse *The
Interpretation of Dreams* (1900), skipping over the parts where he
addresses contemporary controversies or develops grand metaphysical
schemes. His *Outline of Psycho-Analysis* (1938) gives a synopsis of his
later theory, but I find it too condensed and dry; Bettelheim's *Freud
and Man's Soul* (1983) is a good corrective. Freud's *The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life* (1901) remains an easy and
entertaining read for those who have not been exposed to his remarkable
mind. Michael Kahn's *Basic Freud* (2002) is an unusually user-friendly
text on core psychoanalytic ideas. For an interesting exploration of
personality types in the Jungian tradition, see Dougherty and West's
*The Matrix and Meaning of Character* (2007).

For a fascinating and readable overview of the history and politics of
psychoanalytic theories, see Jeremy Safran's *Psychoanalysis and
Psychoanalytic Therapies* (in press). For a summary of ego psychology
concepts and their relevance to practice, see the Blancks' *Ego
Psychology* (1974). Guntrip's *Psychoanalytic Theory, Therapy, and the
Self* (1971), a model of psychoanalytic humanitarianism, puts object
relations theory in context, as does Symington's (1986) well-written
study. Hughes (1989) has gracefully explicated Klein, Winnicott, and
Fairbairn. Fromm-Reichmann (1950) and Levenson (1972) are excellent
spokespeople for American interpersonalists.

For self psychological sources, Kohut's *The Analysis of the Self*
(1971) is almost impenetrable to beginners, but *The Restoration of the
Self* (1977) is easier going. E. S. Wolf's *Treating the Self* (1988)
accessibly translates the theory into practice. Stolorow and Atwood's
*Contexts of Being* (1992) is a readable introduction to the
intersubjective view. Lawrence Joseph's *Character Structure and the
Organization of the Self* (1992) helpfully synthesizes psychoanalytic
personality theory with self and relational constructs and their
clinical implications, as do Fred Pine's integrative books (1985, 1990).

For an introduction to control--mastery theory, see George
Silberschatz's *Transformative Relationships* (2005). To read seminal
papers in the relational movement, go to Mitchell and Aron's *Relational
Psychoanalysis* (1999); Paul Wachtel (2008) has written an integrative
text from this perspective. For a readable overview of the major
psychoanalytic theories, I strongly recommend Mitchell and Black's
*Freud and Beyond* (1995). For coverage of empirical contributions to
psychoanalytic personality theory, there are several excellent reviews
in the *Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual* (PDM Task Force, 2006). Morris
Eagle (2011) has recently published a brilliant historical review and
critique of evolving psychoanalytic theory. For a vivid exposure to how
a practicing analyst applies theory (especially Winnicott, Lacan, and
Klein) to practice, read Deborah Luepnitz's (2002) account of five cases
in *Schopenhauer's Porcupines*, a gem of a book that is as absorbing as
a good novel.

[]{#part0012.html}

**3**

Developmental Levels\
of Personality Organization

[T]{.dropcap}his chapter focuses on what many analysts have seen as the
maturational issues embedded in a person's character---the unfinished or
impeded business of early psychological development: what Freud called
fixation and what later analysts called developmental arrest. In much
analytic writing about personality, it has been assumed that the earlier
the developmental obstacle, the more disturbed the person. This belief
is a great oversimplification and in some ways is simply wrong (see
Fischer & Bidell, 1998; Westen, 1990). But for purposes of introducing a
way to think about character that can be clinically helpful, I lay out
the traditional overview as well as more recent efforts to account for
general differences in psychological health and personality structure.

Historically, analysts have conceived of a continuum of overall mental
functioning, from more disturbed to healthier. They have explicitly or
implicitly construed individual personality as organized at a particular
developmental level and structured by the individual's characteristic
defensive style. The first dimension conceptualizes a person's degree of
healthy psychological growth or pathology (psychotic, borderline,
neurotic, "normal"); the second identifies his or her type of character
(paranoid, depressive, schizoid, etc.).

A close friend of mine, a man with no experience in psychotherapy, who
cannot imagine why anyone would go into a field where one spends hour
upon hour listening to other people's problems, was trying to understand
my interest in writing this book. "It's simple for me," he commented. "I
have just two categories for people: (1) nuts and (2) not nuts." I
responded that in psychoanalytic theory, which assumes that everyone is
to some degree irrational, we also have two basic attributions: (1) How
nuts? and (2) Nuts in what particular way? As I mentioned in [Chapter
2](#part0011.html){.calibre9}, although contemporary analysts conceive
the phases through which young children pass in less drive-defined ways
than Freud did, many of their theories continue to reflect his
conclusion that current psychological preoccupations reflect infantile
precursors, and that interactions in our earliest years set up the
template for how we later assimilate experience.

Conceptualizing someone's unmet developmental challenges can help in
understanding that person. Interestingly, the same three phases of early
psychological organization keep reappearing in psychoanalytic
developmental theories: (1) the first year and a half to 2 years
(Freud's oral phase), (2) the period from 18 to 24 months to about 3
years (Freud's anal phase), and (3) the time between 3 or 4 and about 6
(Freud's oedipal period). The approximateness of these ages reflects
individual differences; the sequence seems to be the same whether a
child is precocious or late blooming. Many theorists have discussed
these phases, variously emphasizing drive and defense, ego development,
or images of self and other that characterize them. Some have stressed
behavioral issues of the stages, others have addressed cognition, still
others the child's affective maturation.

Many scholars (e.g., Lyons-Ruth, 1991; D. N. Stern, 2000) have critiqued
stage theories in light of infant research, which has illuminated far
more competence in early infancy than most developmental models assume
and connects difficulties to parental attachment behaviors rather than
presumed developmental phases. Analysts of a postmodern bent (e.g.,
Corbett, 2001; Fairfield, 2001) point out that models of "normal
development" contain implicit cultural prescriptions, inevitably
contributing to images of an in-group that is fine and an out-group that
is not. Despite these limitations, I think that some notion of
expectable psychological stages will survive in our conceptual
formulations, as there is something that invites clinical empathy in the
idea that we all go through a similar process of growth. In the
following, I draw mostly on the ideas of Erikson, Mahler, and Fonagy to
explicate the developmental aspect of psychoanalytic diagnosis.

It has never been empirically demonstrated that people with a lot of
"oral" qualities have more severe degrees of psychopathology than those
with central dynamics that earlier analysts would have regarded as
either anal or oedipal, even though Freud's naming of the first three
stages of development by these inferred drive concepts has a lot of
intuitive appeal and correlates to some degree with *type* of
personality (depressive people at any level of health or pathology tend
to manifest orality; the preoccupations of compulsive people are
notoriously anal---see [Chapter 13](#part0023.html){.calibre9}---whether
or not their compulsivity causes them major problems).

Yet there is substantial clinical commentary (e.g., Volkan, 1995) and
increasing empirical research (e.g., Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, & Target,
2002; L. Silverman, Lachmann, & Milich, 1982), supporting a correlation
between, on the one hand, one's level of ego development and self--other
differentiation, and, on the other, the health or pathology of one's
personality. To a certain extent this correlation is definitional and
therefore tautological; that is, assessing primitive levels of ego
development and object relations is like saying an interviewee is
"sick," whereas seeing someone as obsessive or schizoid is not
necessarily assigning pathology. But this way of conceptualizing
psychological wellness versus disturbance according to categories from
ego psychology and the later relational theories has profound clinical
implications across different character types. A brief history of
psychoanalytic attempts to make diagnostic distinctions between people
based on the extent or "depth" of their difficulties rather than their
type of personality follows.

**HISTORICAL CONTEXT: DIAGNOSING LEVEL\
OF CHARACTER PATHOLOGY**

Before the advent of descriptive psychiatry in the 19th century, certain
forms of mental disturbance that occurred with any frequency in what was
considered the "civilized world" were recognized, and most observers
presumably made distinctions between the sane and the insane, much as my
nonpsychological friend distinguishes between "nuts" and "not nuts."
Sane people agreed more or less about what constitutes reality; insane
people deviated from this consensus.

Men and women with hysterical conditions (which included what today
would be diagnosed as posttraumatic problems), phobias, obsessions,
compulsions, and nonpsychotic manic and depressive symptoms were
understood to have psychological difficulties that fall short of
complete insanity. People with hallucinations, delusions, and thought
disorders were regarded as insane. People we would today call antisocial
were diagnosed with "moral insanity" (Prichard, 1835) but were
considered mentally in touch with reality. This rather crude taxonomy
survives in the categories of our legal system, which puts emphasis on
whether the person accused of a crime was able to assess reality at the
time of its commission.

**Kraepelinian Diagnosis: Neurosis versus Psychosis**

Emil Kraepelin (1856--1926) is usually cited as the father of
contemporary diagnostic classification. Kraepelin observed mental
patients carefully, with the aim of identifying general syndromes that
share common characteristics. In addition, he developed theories about
the etiologies of those conditions, at least to the extent of regarding
their origins as either exogenous and treatable or endogenous and
incurable (Kraepelin, 1913). (Interestingly, he put severe bipolar
illness \["manic--depressive psychosis"\] in the former category and
schizophrenia \["dementia praecox"---believed to be an organic
deterioration of the brain\] in the latter.) The "lunatic" began to be
understood as a person afflicted with one of several possible documented
illnesses.

Freud went beyond description and simple levels of deduction into more
inferential formulations; his developing theory posited complex
epigenetic explanations as preferable to Kraepelin's basic
internal--external versions of causality. Still, Freud tended to view
psychopathology by the Kraepelinian categories then available. He would
describe a man troubled by obsessions (e.g., his patient the "Wolf Man"
\[Freud, 1918; Gardiner, 1971\]), as having an obsessive--compulsive
neurosis. By the end of his career, Freud began to discriminate between
an obsessional neurosis in an otherwise nonobsessive person and an
obsession that was part of an obsessive--compulsive character. But it
was later analysts (e.g., Eissler, 1953; Horner, 1990) who made the
distinctions that are the subject of this chapter, among (1) the
obsessive person who is virtually delusional, who uses ruminative
thoughts to ward off psychotic decompensation; (2) the person whose
obsessing is part of a borderline personality structure (as in the "Wolf
Man"); and (3) the obsessive person with a neurotic-to-normal
personality organization.

Before the category of "borderline" emerged in the middle of the 20th
century, analytically influenced therapists followed Freud in
differentiating only between neurotic and psychotic levels of pathology,
the former being distinguished by a general appreciation of reality and
the latter by a loss of contact with it. A neurotic woman knew at some
level that her problem was in her own head; the psychotic one believed
it was the world that was out of kilter. When Freud developed the
structural model of the mind, this distinction took on the quality of a
comment on a person's psychological infrastructure: Neurotic people were
viewed as suffering because their ego defenses were too automatic and
inflexible, cutting them off from id energies that could be put to
creative use; psychotic ones suffered because their ego defenses were
too weak, leaving them helplessly overwhelmed by primitive material from
the id.

The neurotic-versus-psychotic distinction had important clinical
implications. The gist of these, considered in light of Freud's
structural model, was that therapy with a neurotic person should involve
weakening the defenses and getting access to the id so that its energies
may be released for more constructive activity. In contrast, therapy
with a psychotic person should aim at strengthening defenses, covering
over primitive preoccupations, influencing realistically stressful
circumstances so that they are less upsetting, encouraging reality
testing, and pushing the bubbling id back into unconsciousness. It was
as if the neurotic person were like a pot on the stove with the lid on
too tight, making the therapist's job to let some steam escape, while
the psychotic pot was boiling over, necessitating that the therapist get
the lid back on and turn down the heat.

It became common for supervisors to recommend that with healthier
patients, one should attack the defenses, whereas with people suffering
from schizophrenia and other psychoses, one should support them. With
the advent of antipsychotic drugs, this formulation lent itself to a
widespread tendency not only to medicate---often the compassionate
response to psychotic levels of anxiety---but also to assume that
medication would do the covering over and would be needed on a lifetime
basis. Therapists were advised not to do any "uncovering" with a
potentially psychotic person: That might disturb the fragile defenses
and send the client over the edge again. This way of conceptualizing
degree of pathology is not without usefulness; it has opened the door to
the development of different therapeutic approaches for different kinds
of difficulties. But it falls short of a comprehensive and clinically
nuanced ideal. Any theory oversimplifies, but this
neurotic-versus-psychotic division, even with Freud's elegant structural
underpinnings and their therapeutic implications, offered only a start
at a useful inferential diagnosis.

**Ego Psychology Diagnosis: Symptom Neurosis, Neurotic\
Character, Psychosis**

In the psychoanalytic community, in addition to a distinction between
neurosis and psychosis, differentiations of *extent* of maladaptation,
not simply *type* of psychopathology, gradually began to appear within
the neurotic category. The first clinically important one was Wilhelm
Reich's (1933) discrimination between "symptom neuroses" and "character
neuroses." Therapists were learning that it was useful to distinguish
between a person with a discrete neurosis and one with a character
permeated by neurotic patterns. This distinction lives on in the DSM, in
which conditions labeled "disorder" tend to be those that analysts have
called neuroses, and conditions labeled "personality disorder" resemble
the old analytic concept of neurotic character.

To assess whether they were dealing with a symptom neurosis or a
character problem, therapists were trained to pursue the following kinds
of information when interviewing a person with neurotic complaints:

1.  Is there an identifiable precipitant of the difficulty, or has it
    existed to some degree as long as the patient can remember?
2.  Has there been a dramatic increase in the patient's anxiety,
    especially pertaining to the neurotic symptoms, or has there been
    only an incremental worsening of the person's overall state of
    feeling?
3.  Is the patient self-referred, or did others (relatives, friends, the
    legal system) send him or her for treatment?
4.  Are the person's symptoms ego alien (seen by him or her as
    problematic and irrational) or are they ego syntonic (regarded as
    the only and obvious way the patient can imagine reacting to current
    life circumstances)?
5.  Is the person's capacity to get some perspective on his or her
    problems (the "observing ego") adequate to develop an alliance with
    the therapist against the problematic symptom, or does the patient
    seem to regard the interviewer as either a potential attacker or a
    magic rescuer?

The former alternative in each of the above possibilities was
presumptive evidence of a symptom problem, the latter of a character
problem (Nunberg, 1955). The significance of this distinction lay in its
implications for treatment and prognosis. If it was a symptom neurosis
that the client suffered (equivalent to "Axis I disorder without
comorbid personality disorder"), then one suspected that something in
the person's current life had activated an unconscious conflict and that
the patient was now using maladaptive mechanisms to cope with
it---methods that may have been the best available solution in childhood
but that were now creating more problems than they were solving. The
therapist's task would be to determine the conflict, help the patient
understand and process the emotions connected to it, and develop new
resolutions of it. The prognosis was favorable, and treatment might be
relatively short (cf. Menninger, 1963). One could expect a climate of
mutuality during therapy, in which strong transference (and
countertransference) reactions might appear, but usually in the context
of an even stronger degree of cooperation.

If the patient's difficulties amounted to a character neurosis or
personality problem, then the therapeutic task would be more
complicated, demanding, and time consuming, and the prognosis more
guarded. This is only common sense, of course, in that trying to foster
personality change obviously poses more challenges than helping someone
get rid of a maladaptive response to a specific stress. But analytic
theory went beyond common sense in specifying ways in which work on a
person's basic character would differ from work with a symptom not
embedded in personality.

First, one could not take for granted that what the patient wanted
(immediate relief from suffering) and what the therapist saw as
necessary for the patient's eventual recovery and resistance to future
difficulties (modification of personality) could be seen by the patient
as compatible. In instances when the patient's aims and the analyst's
conception of what was ultimately needed were at variance, the analyst's
educative role became critical. One had to start by trying to convey to
the patient how the therapist saw the problem; that is, "making ego
alien what has been ego syntonic." For example, a 30-year-old accountant
once came to me looking to "achieve more balance" in his life. Raised to
be the hope of his family, with a mission to compensate for his father's
failed ambitions, he was hardworking to the point of drivenness. He
feared that he was missing precious years with his young children, whom
he might enjoy if only he could stop pushing himself relentlessly to
produce at work. He wanted me to develop a "program" with him in which
he agreed to spend a certain amount of time per day exercising, a
certain amount playing with his kids, a certain amount working on a
hobby, and so forth. The proposed program included designated space for
volunteer work, watching television, cooking, doing housework, and
making love to his wife.

In the meeting that followed our initial interview, he brought in a
sample schedule detailing such changes. He felt that if I could get him
to put this program into effect, his problems would be solved. My first
task was to try to suggest that this solution was part of the problem:
He approached therapy with the same drivenness he was complaining about
and pursued the serenity he knew he needed as if it were another job to
do. I told him he was very good at *doing*, but he evidently had had
little experience with just *being*. While he grasped this notion
intellectually, he had no emotionally salient memory of a less
compulsive approach to life, and he regarded me with a mixture of hope
and skepticism. Although simply telling his story had provided some
short-term relief of his depression, I saw him as having to get used to
the fact that to avoid this kind of misery in the future, he would need
to bring into conscious awareness and to rethink some of the major
assumptions that had governed his life.

Second, in working with someone whose character was fundamentally
neurotic, one could not take for granted an immediate "working alliance"
(Greenson, 1967). Instead, one would have to create the conditions under
which it could develop. The concept of the working or therapeutic
alliance refers to the collaborative dimension of the work between
therapist and client, the cooperation that endures in spite of the
strong and often negative emotions that may surface during treatment.
Empirically, a solid working alliance is associated with good outcome
(Safran & Muran, 2000), and its establishment (or restoration after a
rupture) takes precedence over other aims.

Patients with symptom neuroses feel on the side of the therapist in
opposing a problematic *part* of the self. They rarely require a long
period to develop a shared perspective. In contrast, those whose
problems are complexly interwoven with their personality may easily feel
alone and under attack. When the therapist raises questions about
lifelong, ego-syntonic patterns, their whole identity may feel
assaulted. Distrust is inevitable and must be patiently endured by both
parties until the therapist has earned the client's confidence. With
some patients, this process of building an alliance can take more than a
year. Trying too quickly to take on what the therapist sees as obvious
problems may damage the alliance and impede the process of change.

Third, therapy sessions with someone with a character rather than a
symptom problem could be expected to be less exciting, less surprising,
less dramatic. Whatever the therapist's and patient's fantasies about
unearthing vivid repressed memories or unconscious conflicts, they would
have to content themselves with a more prosaic process, the painstaking
unraveling of all the threads that had created the emotional knot that
the patient had until now believed was just the way things had to be,
and the slow working out of new ways of thinking and handling feelings.

In the development of personality disorders, as opposed to the
appearance of neurotic reactions to particular current stresses, there
are long patterns of identification, learning, and reinforcement. Where
the etiology is traumatic, "strain trauma" (Kris, 1956) is implicated,
rather than the "shock trauma" (one unassimilated, unmourned injury)
celebrated in Hollywood's early, enthusiastic portrayals of
psychoanalytic treatment (see, e.g., Hitchcock's *Spellbound*). As a
consequence, one could expect that in the therapy of character neuroses,
both parties would have to deal with occasional boredom, impatience,
irritability, and demoralization---the patient by expressing them
without fear of criticism and the therapist by mining such feelings for
empathy with the patient's struggle with a difficult, protracted task.

This distinction between neurotic symptoms and neurotic personality
remains important, even in instances where one cannot do the long-term
work (e.g., D. Shapiro, 1989) that character change requires. If one
understands one's patient's inflexible personality issues, one can often
find some way of making a short-term impact that avoids the person's
feeling misunderstood or attacked. For example, knowing that a woman has
a central psychopathic streak alerts the therapist that in trying to
interfere with some damaging pattern, it is better to appeal to her
pride than to her assumed concern for others.

For a long time, the categories of symptom neurosis, character neurosis,
and psychosis constituted the main constructs by which we understood
personality differences on the dimension of severity of disorder. A
neurosis was the least serious condition, a personality disorder more
serious, and a psychotic disturbance quite grave. These formulations
maintained the old distinction between sane and insane, with the sane
category including two possibilities: neurotic reactions and
neurotically structured personalities. Over time, however, it became
apparent that such an overall scheme of classification was both
incomplete and misleading.

One drawback of this taxonomy is its implication that all character
problems are more pathological than all neuroses. One can still discern
such an assumption in the DSM, in which the criteria for diagnosing most
personality disorders include significant impairments in functioning.
And yet some stress-related neurotic reactions are more crippling to a
person's capacity to cope than, say, some hysterical and obsessional
personality disorders. A man I know suffers from agoraphobia, ego alien
but severe. He has warm relations with friends, enjoys his family, and
works productively at home, but he never leaves his house. I see his
life as more constricted and deadened than that of many people with
personality disorders and even psychoses.

To complicate the issue still further, there is also a problem in the
other direction: Some character disturbances seem to be much more severe
and primitive in quality than anything that could reasonably be called
"neurotic." One can see that there is no way in such a linear,
three-part classification to differentiate between distortions of
character that are mildly incapacitating and those that involve fairly
dire consequences. A problem can be characterological and of any level
of severity. The line between benign personality "traits" or "styles"
and mild personality "disorders" is quite blurry. On the other end of
the continuum, some character disorders have been understood for a long
time as involving such substantial deformities of the ego that they are
closer to psychosis than neurosis. Psychopathy and malignant forms of
narcissistic personality organization, for example, have long been
recognized as variants of human individuality, but until fairly
recently, they have tended to be considered as somewhat outside the
scope of possible therapeutic intervention and not easily placed on a
neurotic--character disordered--psychotic continuum.

**Object Relations Diagnosis: The Delineation\
of Borderline Conditions**

Even in the late 19th century, some psychiatrists were identifying
patients who seemed to inhabit a psychological "borderland" (Rosse,
1890) between sanity and insanity. By the middle of the 20th century,
other ideas about personality organization suggesting a middle ground
between neurosis and psychosis began to appear. Adolph Stein (1938)
noted that people with qualities he called "borderline" got worse rather
than better in standard psychoanalytic treatment. Helene Deutsch (1942)
proposed the concept of the "as-if personality" for a subgroup of people
we would now see as narcissistic or borderline, and Hoch and Polatin
(1949) made a case for the category of "pseudoneurotic schizophrenia."

By the middle 1950s, the mental health community had followed these
innovators in noting the limitations of the neurosis-versus-psychosis
model. Numerous analysts began complaining about clients who seemed
character disordered, but in a peculiarly chaotic way. Because they
rarely or never reported hallucinations or delusions, they could not be
considered psychotic, but they also lacked the consistency of
neurotic-level patients, and they seemed to be miserable on a much
grander and less comprehensible scale than neurotics. In treatment, they
could become temporarily psychotic---convinced, for example, that their
therapist was *exactly like* their mother, yet outside the consulting
room there was an odd stability to their instability. In other words,
they were too sane to be considered crazy, and too crazy to be
considered sane. Therapists began suggesting new diagnostic labels that
captured the quality of these people who lived on the border between
neurosis and psychosis. In 1953, Knight published a thoughtful essay
about "borderline states." In the same decade, T. F. Main (1957) was
referring to similar pathology in hospitalized patients as "The
Ailment." In 1964, Frosch suggested the diagnostic category of
"psychotic character."

In 1968, Roy Grinker and his colleagues (Grinker, Werble, & Drye, 1968)
did a seminal study documenting a "borderline syndrome" inhering in
personality, with a range of severity from the border with the neuroses
to the border with the psychoses. Gunderson and Singer (e.g., 1975)
continued to subject the concept to empirical scrutiny, and eventually,
via both research and clinical findings, and thanks to the elucidation
of writers such as Kernberg (1975, 1976), Masterson (1976), and M. H.
Stone (1980, 1986), the concept of a borderline level of personality
organization attained widespread acceptance in the psychoanalytic
community.

By 1980, the term had been sufficiently researched to appear in the DSM
(DSM-III; American Psychiatric Association, 1980) as a personality
disorder. This development has had mixed effects: It has legitimated a
valuable psychoanalytic concept but at the price of losing its original
meaning as a *level of functioning*. The concept of borderline
psychology represented in the DSM drew heavily on the work of Gunderson
(e.g., 1984), who had studied a group that most analysts would have
diagnosed as having a hysterical or histrionic psychology at the
borderline level. Kernberg (1984), one of the originators of the
concept, began having to differentiate between "borderline personality
organization" (BPO) and the DSM's "borderline personality disorder"
(BPD).

I am probably fighting a losing battle in trying to preserve the
original meaning of the term "borderline" (as I did, for example, in the
Personality section of the *Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual* \[PDM Task
Force, 2006\]), but I think a lot has been sacrificed in equating the
term with a particular character type. The concept of "borderline" as a
level of psychological functioning had evolved over decades of clinical
experience, coming to be generally viewed as a stable instability on the
border between the neurotic and psychotic ranges, characterized by lack
of identity integration and reliance on primitive defenses without
overall loss of reality testing (Kernberg, 1975). I worry that with the
DSM definition having become accepted, we are losing a way of talking
about, say, obsessional or schizoid people at the borderline level
(e.g., the "quiet borderline" patient of Sherwood & Cohen, 1994). If all
our empirical research on borderline phenomena applies narrowly to the
more self-dramatizing, histrionic version of borderline-level
personality organization, we are left in the dark about the etiology and
treatment of other personality disorders at the borderline level.

By the second half of the 20th century, many therapists struggling to
help clients that we now see as borderline found themselves drawing
inspiration and validation from writings of analysts in the British
object relations movement and the American interpersonal group, who
looked at patients' experiences with key figures in childhood. These
theorists emphasized the patient's experience of relationship: Was the
person preoccupied with symbiotic issues, separation--individuation
themes, or highly individuated competitive and identificatory motifs?
Erikson's (1950) reworking of Freud's three infantile stages in terms of
the child's interpersonal task made a significant clinical impact, in
that patients could be conceptualized as fixated at either primary
dependency issues (trust vs. mistrust), secondary
separation--individuation issues (autonomy vs. shame and doubt), or more
advanced levels of identification (initiative vs. guilt).

These developmental-stage concepts made sense of the differences
therapists were noticing among psychotic-, borderline-, and
neurotic-level patients: People in a psychotic state seemed fixated at
an unindividuated level in which they could not differentiate between
what was inside and what was outside themselves; people in a borderline
condition were construed as fixated in dyadic struggles between total
enmeshment, which they feared would obliterate their identity, and total
isolation, which they equated with traumatic abandonment; and people
with neurotic difficulties were understood as having accomplished
separation and individuation but as having run into conflicts between,
for example, things they wished for and things they feared, the
prototype for which was the oedipal drama. This way of thinking made
sense of numerous puzzling and demoralizing clinical challenges. It
accounted for why one woman with phobias seemed to be clinging to sanity
by a thread, while another was oddly stable in her phobic instability,
and yet a third woman was, despite having a phobia, otherwise a paragon
of mental health.

By the late 20th century there was, both within the psychoanalytic
tradition and outside it, a vast literature on borderline
psychopathology, showing a bewildering divergence of conclusions about
its etiology. Some investigators (e.g., M. H. Stone, 1977) emphasized
constitutional and neurological predispositions; some (e.g., G. Adler,
1985; Masterson, 1972, 1976) focused on developmental failures,
especially in the separation--individuation phase described by Mahler
(1971); some (e.g., Kernberg, 1975) conjectured about aberrant
parent--child interaction at an earlier phase of infantile development;
some (e.g., Mandelbaum, 1977; Rinsley, 1982) pointed to poor boundaries
between members in dysfunctional family systems; and some (e.g.,
McWilliams, 1979; Westen, 1993) made sociological speculations. Others
(e.g., Meissner, 1984, 1988) were integrative of many of these
perspectives. With advances in attachment research (e.g., Ainsworth,
Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978), some writers began to conjecture about
the infantile attachment styles that correlated later with borderline
psychology. By the 1990s, more and more people were writing about how
trauma, especially incest, plays a bigger role in the development of
borderline dynamics than had previously been suspected (e.g., Wolf &
Alpert, 1991).

Recent empirical studies of borderline personality, most of them using
the DSM definition, have looked at all these aspects. There is some
evidence for constitutional predispositions (Gunderson & Lyons-Ruth,
2008; Siever & Weinstein, 2009); some for misattuned parenting around
attachment and separation issues (Fonagy, Target, Gergeley, Allen, &
Bateman, 2003; Nickell, Waudby, & Trull, 2002); and some for the role of
trauma, especially relational trauma in early attachment (Schore, 2002)
but also later experiences of sexual abuse (Herman, 1992). It is
probable that all these factors play a role, that borderline psychology
is not a single entity and is multidetermined, like most other complex
psychological phenomena. Current psychoanalytic writing, especially
about borderline dynamics, has drawn heavily on empirical findings in
the areas of infant development, attachment, and trauma. One consequence
has been a significant paradigm shift, as unquestioned notions of
fixation at a normative developmental phase have been challenged by
evidence for different experiences of attachment and for the destructive
effects of recurrent trauma even long after the preschool years.

Whatever the etiology of borderline personality organization, and it
probably differs from person to person, clinicians of diverse
perspectives have attained a surprisingly reliable consensus on the
clinical manifestations of problems in the borderline range. Especially
when an interviewer is trained in what information, subjective as well
as objective, should be observed and pursued, the diagnosis of
borderline level of character structure may be readily confirmed or
disconfirmed (e.g., through Kernberg's \[1984\] structural interview or
the later, more carefully empirically validated instrument of his
colleagues, the Structured Interview for Personality Organization
\[STIPO; Stern, Caligor, Roose, & Clarkin, 2004\]).

Despite the complexity of the etiologies of borderline conditions, I
think it can still be useful to view people with a vulnerability to
psychosis as unconsciously preoccupied with the issues of the early
symbiotic phase (especially trust), people with borderline personality
organization as focused on separation--individuation themes, and those
with neurotic structure as more "oedipal" or capable of experiencing
conflicts that feel more internal to them. The most prevalent kind of
anxiety for people in the psychotic range is fear of annihilation
(Hurvich, 2003), evidently an activation of the brain's FEAR system
(Panksepp, 1998) that evolved to protect against predation; the central
anxiety for people in the borderline range is separation anxiety or the
activation of Panksepp's PANIC system that deals with early attachment
needs; anxiety in neurotic people tends to involve more unconscious
conflict, especially fear of enacting guilty wishes.

**OVERVIEW OF THE\
NEUROTIC--BORDERLINE--PSYCHOTIC SPECTRUM**

In the following sections, I discuss neurotic, borderline, and psychotic
levels of character structure in terms of favored defenses, level of
identity integration, adequacy of reality testing, capacity to observe
one's pathology, nature of one's primary conflict, and transference and
countertransference. I focus on how these abstractions manifest
themselves as discernible behaviors and communications in an initial
interview or in an ongoing treatment. In [Chapter
4](#part0013.html){.calibre9} I explore implications of these
discriminations for the conduct and prognosis of therapy. Again, I want
to emphasize that these levels of organization are somewhat artificial,
that we can all find in ourselves issues from every level, and that
viewing one's client as organized at one or another of the levels should
not distract a therapist from the person's individuality and areas of
strength.

**Characteristics of Neurotic-Level Personality Structure**

It is an irony that the term "neurotic" is now reserved by most analysts
for people so emotionally healthy that they are considered rare and
unusually gratifying clients. In Freud's time, the word was applied to
most nonorganic, nonschizophrenic, nonpsychopathic, and
non-manic--depressive patients---that is, to a large class of
individuals with emotional distress short of psychosis. We now see many
of the people Freud called neurotic as having borderline or even
psychotic features ("hysteria" was understood to include hallucinatory
experiences that clearly cross the border into unreality). The more we
have learned about the depth of certain problems, and their stubborn
enmeshment within the matrix of a person's character, the more we
currently reserve the term "neurotic" to denote a high level of capacity
to function despite emotional suffering.

People whose personalities would be described by many contemporary
analysts as organized at an essentially neurotic level rely primarily on
the more mature or second-order defenses. While they also use primitive
defenses, these are not nearly so prominent in their overall functioning
and are evident mostly in times of unusual stress. While the presence of
primitive defenses does not rule out the diagnosis of neurotic level of
character structure, the absence of mature defenses does. Traditionally,
the psychoanalytic literature noted that healthier people use repression
as their basic defense, in preference to more indiscriminate solutions
to conflict such as denial, splitting, projective identification, and
other more archaic mechanisms.

Myerson (1991) has described how empathic parenting allows a young child
to experience intense affects without having to hang on to infantile
ways of dealing with them. As the child grows up, these powerful and
often painful states of mind are put away and forgotten rather than
continually reexperienced and then denied, split off, or projected. They
may reemerge in long-term, intensive analysis, when analyst and client
together, under the conditions of safety that evoke a "transference
neurosis," peel back layers of repression; but ordinarily, overwhelming
affects and primitive ways of handling them are not characteristic of
persons in the neurotic range. And even in deep psychoanalytic
treatment, the neurotic-level client maintains some more rational,
objective capacities in the middle of whatever emotional storms and
associated distortions occur.

People with healthier character structure strike the interviewer as
having a somewhat integrated sense of identity (Erikson, 1968). Their
behavior shows some consistency, and their inner experience is of
continuity of self through time. When asked to describe themselves, they
are not at a loss for words, nor do they respond one-dimensionally; they
can usually delineate their overall temperament, values, tastes, habits,
convictions, virtues, and shortcomings with a sense of their long-range
stability. They feel a sense of continuity with the child they used to
be and can project themselves into the future as well. When asked to
describe important others, such as their parents or lovers, their
characterizations tend to be multifaceted and appreciative of the
complex yet coherent set of qualities that constitutes anyone's
personality.

Neurotic-level people are ordinarily in solid touch with what most of
the world calls "reality." Not only are they strangers to hallucinatory
or delusional misinterpretations of experience (except under conditions
of chemical or organic influence, or posttraumatic flashback), they also
strike the interviewer or therapist as having comparatively little need
to misunderstand things in order to assimilate them. Patient and
therapist live subjectively in more or less the same world. Typically,
the therapist feels no compelling emotional pressure to be complicit in
seeing life through a lens that feels distorting. Some portion of what
has brought a neurotic patient for help is seen by him or her as odd; in
other words, much of the psychopathology of neurotically organized
people is ego alien or capable of being addressed so that it becomes so.

People in the neurotic range show early in therapy a capacity for what
Sterba (1934) called the "therapeutic split" between the observing and
the experiencing parts of the self. Even when their difficulties are
somewhat ego syntonic, neurotic-level people do not seem to demand the
interviewer's implicit validation of their ways of perceiving. For
example, a paranoid man who is organized neurotically will be willing to
consider the possibility that his suspicions derive from an internal
disposition to emphasize the destructive intent of others.
Contrastingly, paranoid patients at the borderline or psychotic level
will put intense pressure on the therapist to join their conviction that
their difficulties are external in origin; for example, to agree that
others may be out to get them. Without such validation, they worry that
they are not safe with the therapist.

Similarly, compulsive people in the neurotic range may say that their
repetitive rituals are crazy but that they feel anxiety if they neglect
them. Compulsive borderline and psychotic people sincerely believe
themselves to be protected in some elemental way by acting on their
compulsions and have often developed elaborate rationalizations for
them. A neurotic-level patient will share a therapist's assumption that
the compulsive behaviors are in some realistic sense unnecessary, but a
borderline or psychotic patient may privately worry that the
practitioner who questions the rituals is deficient in either common
sense or moral decency. A neurotic woman with a cleaning compulsion will
be embarrassed to admit how frequently she launders the sheets, while a
borderline or psychotic one will feel that anyone who washes the bedding
less regularly is unclean.

Sometimes years can go by in treatment before a borderline or psychotic
person will even mention a compulsion or phobia or obsession---in the
patient's view there is nothing unusual about it. I worked with one
borderline client for more than 10 years before she casually mentioned
an elaborate, time-consuming morning ritual to "clear her sinuses" that
she considered part of ordinary good hygiene. Another borderline woman,
who had never mentioned bulimia in her abundance of even more
distressing symptoms, dropped the comment, after 5 years in therapy, "By
the way, I notice I'm not puking anymore." She had not previously
thought to regard that part of her behavioral repertoire as
consequential.

Their histories and their behavior in the interview situation give
evidence that neurotic-level people have more or less successfully
traversed Erikson's first two stages, basic trust and basic autonomy,
and that they have made at least some progress toward identity
integration and a sense of initiative. They tend to seek therapy not
because of problems in essential security or agency, but because they
keep running into conflicts between what they want and obstacles to
attaining it that they suspect are of their own making. Freud's
contention that the proper goal of therapy is the removal of inhibitions
against love and work applies to this group; some neurotic-level people
are also looking to expand their capacity for solitude and play.

Being in the presence of someone at the healthier end of the continuum
of character pathology feels generally benign. The counterpart of the
patient's possession of a sound observing ego is the therapist's
experience of a sound working alliance. Often from the very first
session, the therapist of a neurotic client feels that he or she and the
patient are on the same side and that their mutual antagonist is a
problematic *part* of the patient. The sociologist Edgar Z. Friedenberg
(1959) compared this alliance to the experience of two young men
tinkering with a car: one the expert, the other an interested learner.
In addition, whatever the valence of the therapist's
countertransference, positive or negative, it tends not to feel
overwhelming. The neurotic-level client engenders in the listener
neither the wish to kill nor the compulsion to save.

**Characteristics of Psychotic-Level Personality Structure**

At the psychotic end of the spectrum, people are much more internally
desperate and disorganized. Interviewing a deeply disturbed patient can
range from being a participant in a pleasant, low-key discussion to
being the recipient of a homicidal attack. Especially before the advent
of anti-psychotic drugs in the 1950s, few therapists had the natural
intuitive talent and emotional stamina to be significantly therapeutic
to those in psychotic states. One of the finest achievements of the
psychoanalytic tradition has been its inference of some order in the
apparent chaos of people who are easy to dismiss as hopelessly and
incomprehensibly crazy, and its consequent offer of ways to understand
and mitigate severe mental suffering (Arieti, 1974; Buckley, 1988; De
Waelhens & Ver Eecke, 2000; Eigen, 1986; Ogden, 1989; Robbins, 1993;
Searles, 1965; Silver, 1989; Silver & Cantor, 1990; Spotnitz, 1985;
Volkan, 1995).

It is not difficult to diagnose patients who are in an overt state of
psychosis: they express hallucinations, delusions, and ideas of
reference, and their thinking strikes the listener as illogical. There
are many people walking around, however, whose basic psychotic-level
internal confusion does not surface conspicuously unless they are under
considerable stress. The knowledge that one is dealing with a
"compensated" schizophrenic, or a currently nonsuicidal depressive who
may be subject to periodic delusional yearnings to die, can make the
difference between preventing and precipitating disaster. Having carried
out or supervised the long-term treatment of many extremely difficult,
sometimes putatively "untreatable" cases, I am convinced that devoted
therapists do significant prevention. We preempt psychotic breaks,
prevent suicides and homicides, and keep people out of hospitals. (These
critical effects of therapy go mostly undocumented; no one can prove
that he or she prevented a calamity, and critics tend to argue that if
one claims to have forestalled a psychotic break, the patient was not
really at risk of psychosis in the first place.)

I share with many analysts the view that it is also useful to conceive
of some people who may never become diagnosably psychotic as
nevertheless living in a symbiotic--psychotic internal world or, in
Klein's (e.g., 1946) terms, in a consistently "paranoid--schizoid"
state. They function, sometimes quite effectively, but they strike one
as confused and deeply terrified, and their thinking feels disorganized
or paranoid. One man I worked with, for example, told me with palpable
dread that he would never return to a particular gym to exercise:
"*Three times* someone has moved my things, so it's obvious that I'm not
wanted there." Another used to switch topics abruptly whenever he was
becoming very sad. I commented on this, and he said, "Oh yeah, I know I
do that." I asked him what his understanding of the pattern was,
expecting him to say something like "I'm not ready to go there," or "It
hurts too much," or "I don't want to start crying." But what he said, in
a tone suggesting it was self-evident, was "Well, I can see I'm hurting
you!" He saw sympathetic sadness on my face and could not imagine he was
not damaging me.

To understand the subjective world of psychotic-level clients, one must
first appreciate the defenses they tend to use. I will expand on these
in [Chapter 5](#part0014.html){.calibre9}; at this point I am simply
listing them: withdrawal, denial, omnipotent control, primitive
idealization and devaluation, primitive forms of projection and
introjection, splitting, extreme dissociation, acting out, and
somatization. These processes are preverbal and prerational; they
protect one against a level of "nameless dread" (Bion, 1967) so
overwhelming that even the frightening distortions that the defenses
themselves may create are a lesser evil than that state of terror. As
Fromm-Reichmann (1950) noted, people who struggle with psychosis have a
core, immobilizing dread of their fantasied superhuman potential for
destructiveness.

Second, people whose personalities are organized at an essentially
psychotic level have grave difficulties with identity---so much so that
they may not be fully sure *that* they exist, much less whether their
existence is satisfying. They are deeply confused about who they are,
and they usually struggle with such basic issues of self-definition as
body concept, age, gender, and sexual orientation. "How do I know who I
am?" or even "How do I know that I exist?" are not uncommon questions
for psychotically organized people to ask in earnest. They cannot depend
on a sense of continuity of identity in themselves and do not experience
others as having continuity of self either: They live in fear of
"malevolent transformations" (Sullivan, 1953) that will turn a trusted
person abruptly into a sadistic persecutor. When asked to describe
themselves or other important people in their lives, they tend to be
vague, tangential, concrete, or observably distorting.

Often in rather subtle ways, one feels that a patient with an
essentially psychotic personality is not anchored in reality. Although
most of us have vestiges of magical beliefs (e.g., the idea that saying
something positive will jinx a situation), careful investigation will
reveal that such attitudes are not ego alien to psychotic-level
individuals. They are often confused by and estranged from the
assumptions about "reality" that are conventional within their culture.
Although they may be preternaturally attuned to the underlying affect in
any situation, they often do not know how to interpret its meaning and
may assign highly self-referential significance to it.

For example, a very paranoid patient I worked with for a long time,
whose sanity was often at risk, had an uncanny feel for my emotional
state. She would read it accurately but then attach to her perception of
it the primitive preoccupations she had about her own essential goodness
or badness, as in "You look irritated. It must be because you think I'm
a bad mother." Or "You look bored. I must have offended you last week by
leaving the session 5 minutes early." It took her years to feel safe
enough to tell me that was how she was interpreting my expressions, and
several more years to transform the conviction "Evil people are going to
kill me because they hate my lifestyle" into "I feel guilty about some
aspects of my life."

People with psychotic tendencies have trouble getting perspective on
their psychological problems. They lack the "reflective functioning"
that Fonagy and Target (1996) have identified as critical to cognitive
maturation. This deficit may be related to the well-documented
difficulties that schizophrenic people have with abstraction (Kasanin,
1944). Those whose mental health history has given them enough jargon to
*sound* like good self-observers (e.g., "I know I tend to overreact" or
even "My schizophrenia interferes with my judgment") may reveal to a
sensitive interviewer that in an effort to reduce anxiety they are
compliantly parroting what they have been told about themselves. One
patient of mine had had so many intakes at psychiatric hospitals during
which she had been asked (in a mental status evaluation that helps
determine whether the patient is capable of abstract thought) to give
the meaning of the proverb "A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush"
that she had asked an acquaintance what it meant and memorized the
answer (she proudly offered this explanation when I commented in an
interested way on the automatic quality of her response).

Early psychoanalytic formulations about the difficulties that psychotic
people have in getting perspective on their realistic troubles stressed
energic aspects of their dilemma; that is, they were expending so much
energy fighting off existential terror that none was left to use in the
service of coping with reality. Ego psychology models emphasized the
psychotic person's lack of internal differentiation between id, ego, and
superego, and between observing and experiencing aspects of the ego.
Students of psychosis influenced by interpersonal, object relations, and
self psychology theories (e.g., Atwood, Orange, & Stolorow, 2002) have
referred to boundary confusion between inside and outside experience,
and to deficits in attachment that make it subjectively too dangerous
for the psychotic person to enter the same assumptive world as the
interviewer.

Recently, in light of fMRI studies showing similarities between effects
of trauma on the developing brain and the biological abnormalities found
in the brains of individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia, John Read and
his colleagues (Read, Perry, Moskowitz, & Connolly, 2001) have argued
for a traumatic etiology of schizophrenia. A full account of the lack of
"observing ego" in psychotic-level clients probably includes all these
perspectives as well as genetic, biochemical, and situational
contributants. The critical thing for therapists to appreciate is that
close to the surface in people with psychotic-level psychologies, one
finds both mortal fear and dire confusion.

The nature of the primary conflict in people with a potential for
psychosis is literally existential: life versus death, existence versus
obliteration, safety versus terror. Their dreams are full of stark
images of death and destruction. "To be or not to be" is their recurrent
theme. Laing (1965) eloquently depicted them as suffering "ontological
insecurity." Psychoanalytically influenced studies of the families of
schizophrenic people in the 1950s and 1960s consistently reported
patterns of emotional communication in which the psychotic child
received subtle messages to the effect that he or she was not a separate
person but an extension of someone else (Bateson, Jackson, Haley, &
Weakland, 1956; Lidz, 1973; Mischler & Waxier, 1968; Singer & Wynne,
1965a, 1965b). Although the discovery of the major tranquilizers has
diverted attention from more strictly psychological investigations of
psychotic processes, no one has yet presented evidence controverting the
observation that the psychotic person is deeply unconvinced of his or
her right to a separate existence, or may even be unfamiliar with the
sense of existing at all.

Despite their unusual and even frightening aspects, patients in the
psychotic range may induce a positive countertransference. This reaction
differs a bit from warm countertransference reactions to neurotic-level
clients: One may feel more subjective omnipotence, parental
protectiveness, and deep soul-level empathy toward psychotic people than
toward neurotic ones. The phrase "the lovable schizophrenic" was for a
long time in vogue as an expression of the solicitous attitude that
mental health personnel often feel toward their most severely troubled
patients. (The implicit contrast group here, as I discuss below, is the
borderline population.) Psychotic people are so desperate for respect
and hope that they may be deferential and grateful to any therapist who
does more than classify and medicate them. Their gratitude is naturally
touching.

People with psychotic tendencies are particularly appreciative of
sincerity. A recovered schizophrenic woman once told me she could
forgive even serious failings in a therapist if she saw them as "honest
mistakes." Psychotic-level clients may also appreciate educative efforts
and may respond with relief to the normalization or reframing of their
preoccupations. These dispositions, along with their propensity for
fusion and idealization, can make the therapist feel strong and
benevolent. The downside of these patients' poignant dependence on our
care is the burden of psychological responsibility they inevitably
impose. In fact, the countertransference with psychotic-level people is
remarkably like normal maternal feelings toward infants under a year and
a half: They are wonderful in their attachment and terrifying in their
needs. They are not yet oppositional and irritating, but they also tax
one's resources to the limit. I should not work with a schizophrenic, a
supervisor once told me, unless I was prepared to be eaten alive.

This "consuming" feature of their psychology is one reason that many
therapists prefer not to work with individuals with schizophrenia and
other psychoses. In addition, as Karon (1992) has noted, the access of
psychotic patients to deeply upsetting realities that the rest of us
would prefer to ignore is often too much for us. In particular, they see
our flaws and limitations with stunning clarity. Other reasons for their
relative unpopularity as patients despite their appealing qualities
probably include therapists' lack of adequate training in psychotherapy
with psychotics (Karon, 2003; Silver, 2003), economic pressures that
breed rationalizations about limited approaches or "management" instead
of therapy (Whitaker, 2002), and personal dispositions not to work
toward relatively modest treatment goals in contrast to what can be
achieved with a neurotic-level person. But as I stress in the next
chapter, it can be effective and rewarding to work with clients in the
psychotic range if one is realistic about the nature of their
psychological difficulties.

**Characteristics of Borderline Personality Organization**

One of the most striking features of people with borderline personality
organization is their use of primitive defenses. Because they rely on
such archaic and global operations as denial, projective identification,
and splitting, when they are regressed they can be hard to distinguish
from psychotic patients. An important difference between borderline and
psychotic people, though, is that when a therapist confronts a
borderline patient on using a primitive mode of experiencing, the
patient will show at least a temporary responsiveness. When the
therapist makes a similar comment to a psychotically organized person,
he or she will likely become further agitated.

As an illustration, consider the defense of primitive devaluation. Being
devalued is a familiar and painful experience to any therapist.
Devaluation is an unconscious strategy that is often intended to
preserve self-esteem, but which does so at the expense of learning. An
effort to address that defense might go something like "You certainly
love to cherish all my defects. Maybe that protects you from admitting
that you might need my help. Perhaps you would be feeling 'one down' or
ashamed if you weren't always putting me down, and you're trying to
avoid that feeling." A borderline patient might scorn such an
interpretation, or grudgingly admit it, or receive it silently, but in
any event, he or she would give some indications of reduced anxiety. A
psychotic person would react with increased anxiety, since to someone in
existential terror, devaluation of the power of the therapist may be the
only psychological means by which he or she feels protected from
obliteration. The therapist's discussing it as if it were optional would
be extremely frightening.

Borderline patients are in some ways similar to and in others different
from psychotic people on the dimension of identity integration. Their
experience of self is likely to be full of inconsistency and
discontinuity. When asked to describe their personalities, they may,
like psychotic-level patients, be at a loss. And when asked to describe
important people in their lives, they may respond with anything but
three-dimensional, evocative descriptions of recognizable human beings.
"My mother? She's just a regular mother, I guess" is a typical response.
They often give global, dismissive descriptions such as "An alcoholic.
That's all." Unlike patients with psychosis, they rarely sound concrete
or tangential to the point of being bizarre, but they do tend to dismiss
the therapist's interest in the complexities of themselves and others.
Fonagy (2000) writes that borderline clients are insecurely attached and
lack the "reflective function" that finds meaning in their own behavior
and that of others. They cannot "mentalize"; that is, they cannot
appreciate the separate subjectivities of other people. In philosophical
terms, they lack a theory of mind.

Clients in the borderline range may become hostile when confronted with
the limited continuity of their identity. One of my patients flew into a
full-blown fury at a questionnaire she was given as a standard intake
procedure in a clinic. It had a sentence-completion section in which the
client was asked to fill in blanks like "I am the kind of person who
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." "How can anybody know what to do with this
shit?" she raged. (Some years and countless sessions later she mused,
"*Now* I could fill in that form. I wonder why I went ballistic about
it.") In general, borderline patients have trouble with affect tolerance
and regulation, and quickly go to anger in situations where others might
feel shame or envy or sadness or some other more nuanced affect.

In two ways, the relation of borderline patients to their own identity
is different from that of psychotic people. First, the sense of
inconsistency and discontinuity that people with borderline organization
suffer lacks the degree of existential terror of the schizophrenic.
Borderline patients may have identity confusion, but they know they
exist. Second, people with psychotic tendencies are much less likely
than borderline patients to react with hostility to questions about
identity of self and others. They are too worried about losing their
sense of ongoing being, consistent or not, to resent the interviewer's
focus on that problem.

Despite these distinctions, both borderline and psychotic people, unlike
neurotics, rely heavily on primitive defenses and suffer a basic defect
in the sense of self. The dimension of experience on which the two
groups differ substantially is reality testing. Borderline clients, when
interviewed thoughtfully, demonstrate an appreciation of reality no
matter how crazy or florid their symptoms look. It used to be standard
psychiatric practice to assess the degree of the patient's "insight into
illness" in order to discriminate between psychotic and nonpsychotic
states. Because a borderline patient may relentlessly deny
psychopathology yet still show a level of discrimination about what is
real or conventional that distinguishes him or her from a psychotic
peer, Kernberg (1975) proposed that "adequacy of reality testing" be
substituted for that criterion.

To make a differential diagnosis between borderline and psychotic levels
of organization, Kernberg (1984) advises investigating the person's
appreciation of conventional notions of reality by picking out some
unusual feature of his or her self-presentation, commenting on it and
asking if the patient is aware that others might find that feature
peculiar (e.g., "I notice that you have a tattoo on your cheek that says
'Death!' Can you understand how that might seem unusual to me or
others?"). The borderline person will acknowledge that the feature is
unconventional and that outsiders might not understand its significance.
The psychotic person is likely to become frightened and confused because
the sense that he or she is not understood is deeply disturbing. These
differing reactions, which Kernberg and his coworkers (e.g., Kernberg,
Yeomans, Clarkin, & Levy, 2008) have explored both clinically and via
empirical research, may be viewed as support for psychoanalytic
assumptions about the centrality of separation--individuation issues for
people with borderline pathology as contrasted with unconscious deficits
in self--other differentiation in psychosis.

The capacity of someone at the borderline level to observe his or her
own pathology---at least the aspects of it that impress an external
observer---is quite limited. People with borderline psychologies come to
therapy for complaints such as panic attacks or depression or illnesses
that a physician has insisted are related to "stress," or they arrive at
the therapist's office at the urging of an acquaintance or family
member, but they rarely come with the agenda of changing their
personalities in directions that outsiders readily see as advantageous.
Even in recent years, when they are apt to know they "have BPD" and can
endorse the DSM criteria for diagnosing it, they still lack a sense of
what it would be like to be different. Having never had any other kind
of character, they have little emotional basis for knowing how it would
feel to have identity integration, mature defenses, the capacity to
defer gratification, a tolerance for ambivalence and ambiguity, or an
ability to regulate affects. They just want to stop hurting or to get
some critic off their back.

In nonregressed states, because their reality testing is fine and
because they may present themselves in ways that compel our empathy,
they do not look particularly "sick." Sometimes it is only after therapy
has proceeded for a while that one realizes that a given patient has a
borderline structure. Usually the first clue is that interventions that
the therapist intends to be helpful are received as attacks. In other
words, the therapist keeps assuming a capacity for reflective
functioning that the patient mostly lacks. (In older language, the
therapist is trying to talk with an observing ego, something the client
cannot access, especially when upset.) The patient knows only that some
aspect of the self is being criticized. The therapist keeps trying to
forge the kind of alliance that is possible with neurotic-level patients
and keeps coming to grief in the effort.

Eventually, one learns that one must first just weather the affective
storms that seem to keep raging, while trying to behave in ways that the
patient will experience as different from whatever influences have
shaped such a troubled and help-resistant person. Only *after* therapy
has brought about some structural change will the patient be different
enough to begin to understand what the therapist is trying to work
toward. This may take a long time---sometimes 2 years in my
experience---but it is of comfort that in the meantime, the most
disabling borderline behaviors may disappear. Clarkin and Levy (2003)
describe significant symptom reduction after 1 year of
transference-focused therapy. Still, the work will typically have been
tumultuous and frustrating to both parties.

Masterson (1976) has vividly depicted, and others with different
viewpoints report similar observations, how borderline clients seem
caught in a dilemma: When they feel close to another person, they panic
because they fear engulfment and total control; when they are alone,
they feel traumatically abandoned. This central conflict of their
emotional experience results in their going back and forth in
relationships, including the therapy relationship, in which neither
closeness nor distance is comfortable. Living with such a basic
conflict, one that does not respond immediately to interpretive efforts,
is exhausting for borderline patients, their friends, their families,
and their therapists. They are famous among emergency psychiatric
service workers, at whose door they frequently appear talking suicide,
for manifesting "help seeking--help rejecting behavior."

Masterson saw borderline patients as fixated at the rapprochement
subphase of the separation--individuation process (Mahler, 1972b), when
the child has attained some autonomy yet still needs reassurance that a
caregiver remains available and powerful. This drama unfolds around age
2, when children typically alternate between rejecting mother's help ("I
can do it myself!") and dissolving in tears at her knees. Masterson
(1976) believed that borderline patients have had mothers who
discouraged them from separating in the first place or neglected them
when they needed to regress after attaining some independence. Whether
or not his ideas about etiology are correct, his observations about the
borderline person's entrapment in dilemmas of separation and
individuation help make sense of the changing, demanding, and often
confusing qualities of borderline patients.

Transferences in borderline clients tend to be strong, unambivalent, and
resistant to ordinary kinds of intervention. The therapist may be
perceived as all good or all bad. If a well-intentioned but clinically
naive therapist tries to interpret transference as one would with a
neurotic person (e.g., "Perhaps what you're feeling toward me is
something you felt toward your father"), he or she will find that no
relief or helpful sense of insight follows; in fact, often the client
will simply agree that the therapist is actually behaving like the
earlier object. Also, it is not uncommon for a borderline person in one
state of mind to perceive the therapist as godlike in power and virtue,
and in another (which may appear a day later) as weak and contemptible.

Not surprisingly, countertransference reactions with borderline clients
tend to be strong and upsetting. Even when positive (e.g., dominated by
fantasies of rescuing the devastated patient), they may have a
disturbing, consuming quality. Analysts in hospital settings (Gabbard,
1986; Kernberg, 1981) have noted that with some borderline patients,
staff tend to be either oversolicitous (seeing them as deprived, weak,
and in need of extra love to grow) or punitive (seeing them as
demanding, manipulative, and in need of limits). Inpatient personnel
frequently find themselves divided into opposing camps when treatment
plans for borderline clients are discussed (Gunderson, 1984; Main,
1957). Outpatient practitioners may move internally between one position
and the other, mirroring each side of the client's conflict at different
times. It is not unusual for the therapist to feel like the exasperated
mother of a 2-year-old who will not accept help yet collapses in
frustration without it.

**SUMMARY**

This chapter has given a cursory overview of evolving efforts to
describe different realms of character organization. From Kraepelinian
distinctions between the sane and the insane, through early
psychoanalytic conceptions of symptom versus character neuroses, to
taxonomies that emphasize either neurotic-level, borderline, or
psychotic-level structure, to characterizing clients in terms of
attachment pattern and traumatic influences, therapists have sought to
account for the varying reactions of their individual clients to their
efforts to be of help. I have argued that the assessment of a person's
central preoccupation (security, autonomy, or identity), characteristic
experience of anxiety (annihilation anxiety; separation anxiety; or more
specific fears of punishment, injury, and loss of control), primary
developmental conflict (symbiotic, separation--individuation, or
oedipal), object relational capacities (monadic, dyadic, or triadic),
and sense of self (overwhelmed, embattled, or responsible) constitutes
one useful dimension of psychoanalytic diagnosis.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

Phyllis and Robert Tyson (1990) have made a helpful synthesis of
traditional psychoanalytic developmental theory through the late 20th
century. Two classic books by Gertrude and Rubin Blanck (1979, 1986)
have sections on the connection between development and diagnosis.
Clinicians who treat children will find Stanley Greenspan's
*Developmentally Based Psychotherapy* (1997) useful. For a contemporary
book connecting recent developmental research with clinical practice,
especially with borderline clients, I recommend *Affect Regulation,
Mentalization, and the Development of the Self* (Fonagy et al., 2002), a
comprehensive tome that is thankfully available in paperback. For a
recent, readable self psychologically influenced account of
psychological development, I suggest Russell Meares's *Intimacy and
Alienation: Memory, Trauma, and Personal Being* (2002).

For a classical exegesis of the difference between neurotic symptom and
neurotic character, the chapter on "Character Disorders" in Fenichel's
*The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis* (1945) is the standard. More
recently, Josephs (1992) and Akhtar (1992) have published integrative
books that pursue at a more advanced level some of the characterological
issues introduced here. For a study in the Kleinian tradition of the
clinical implications of different levels of development, Steiner's
*Psychic Retreats* (1993) is brilliant but may be difficult for
beginning therapists.

For classic analytic articles about personality organization, New York
University Press has put out fine collections of papers on character
neurosis (Lax, 1989), psychosis (Buckley, 1988), and borderline
conditions (M. H. Stone, 1986). For a phenomenological appreciation of
psychosis, Laing's *The Divided Self* (1965) remains unmatched. Eigen's
*The Psychotic Core* (1986) is difficult but rewarding. Elyn Saks's
(2008) memoir of living with schizophrenia gives a moving yet witty
close-up of psychotic experience and also of the potential for
individuals with psychotic dynamics, when given good medical and
psychological care, to live rich, generative lives.

The literature on borderline conditions is so abundant and diverse as to
be overwhelming, but recent contributions by Kernberg and his colleagues
(e.g., Clarkin, Yeomans, & Kernberg, 2006) and Fonagy and his colleagues
(Bateman & Fonagy, 2004) usefully consider classical formulations in
light of recent research and connect their ideas to treatment. For a
readable book that values a categorical rather than dimensional
definition of borderline psychology and has synthesized a vast amount of
research in the tradition of John Gunderson, I recommend Paris's
*Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder* (2008).

Since the first edition of this book there has been an explosion of
clinical and empirical literature on attachment. The struggles of
borderline patients have been described in Wallin's *Attachment in
Psychotherapy* (2007) and in Mikulincer and Shaver's *Attachment in
Adulthood* (2007) in terms of severe attachment anxiety. For application
of trauma research and theory to the experience of patients who are
diagnosed as borderline, Judith Herman's *Trauma and Recovery* (1992) is
probably the best place to start. See also the suggestions at the end of
[Chapter 15](#part0025.html){.calibre9}.

[]{#part0013.html}

**4**

Implications of Developmental\
Levels of Organization

[L]{.dropcap}ike politics, psychotherapy is the art of the possible. One
advantage of conceptualizing each client developmentally is that one can
derive a sense of what is reasonably expectable, with optimal treatment,
for each one. Just as a physician expects a healthy person to recover
faster and more completely from an illness than a sickly one, or as a
teacher assumes that an intelligent student will master more material
than a slow one, a therapist should have different expectations for
people with different levels of character development. Realistic goals
protect patients from demoralization and therapists from burnout.

It was easier to write the first edition of this chapter; in the early
1990s there was something closer to a psychoanalytic consensus about
what approach is appropriate for each level of personality organization.
Since that time, several things have occurred. Analysts in the
relational movement have challenged many aspects of traditional
technique---especially its assumptions about the analyst's capacity for
objectivity and neutrality. They have also questioned the value of any
generalizations about character structure and have revised our
understandings of the patient--therapist dyad to put the emphasis on
what the two parties construct together rather than on what the
therapist does for or to the patient. The two-person model of the
therapeutic process has gone mainstream and has influenced even those
who think more traditionally. It will probably be evident, even in this
book with its one-person focus on patients' individual psychologies,
that relational analysts have greatly influenced my thinking.

At the same time, several specific therapies for borderline personality
organization have been developed, and psychoanalytic theorists no longer
dominate professional conversations about how to understand borderline
phenomena. Marsha Linehan, the architect of dialectical behavior therapy
(e.g., 1993), has frequently acknowledged her debt to Otto Kernberg, but
the treatment she created reflects both cognitive-behavioral concepts
and some Zen Buddhist ideas, not assumptions about a dynamic
unconscious. Jeffrey Young's schema therapy (e.g., Rafaeli, Bernstein, &
Young, 2010), which also derives from cognitive-behavioral psychology
with some psychodynamic influences, has been applied to borderline-level
personality disorders. In the specifically psychoanalytic realm, where
Kernberg's original notion of expressive therapy once predominated, we
have seen the development of several specific, research-tested
treatments: Kernberg's transference-focused psychotherapy (Clarkin,
Yeomans, & Kernberg, 2006) and Fonagy's mentalization-based therapy
(Bateman & Fonagy, 2004) being the best known.

Finally, the International Society for the Psychological Treatments of
Schizophrenia has brought together therapists interested in
psychotherapy with psychotic patients, and their synergy has added new
elements to what we know about treating severely troubled people. Even
more than in 1994, our mental health culture tends to overstate the
pharmaceutical needs of people with psychoses and to understate their
need for therapy. I think there is greater urgency now than in earlier
decades to pass on our knowledge about effective talk therapy for those
who suffer the most.

I start, as before, with considerations about treating neurotic-level
clients, then those in the psychotic range, and finally those in the
borderline spectrum. Even though the story has become more complicated,
I think it is still useful to note clinical implications of levels of
severity. I cannot do justice to the subtleties of specific approaches,
but I try to present enough of a feel for how to work, depending on a
person's inferred developmental challenges, that I demonstrate the value
of assessing these levels. The goal of any dynamic therapy is to help
each client with the maturational task that is most compelling for that
person---whether that is the full flowering of one's creativity or the
attainment of some minimal awareness that one exists and deserves to
stay alive.

**THERAPY WITH NEUROTIC-LEVEL PATIENTS**

It used to be commonly claimed that psychoanalytic therapy is unsuited
to anyone but the "worried well." The kernel of truth in this view is
that psychoanalysis *as a specific treatment* works best with articulate
neurotic-level clients who have the ambitious goal of character change
and/or deep self-knowledge. The arrangements that define classical
Freudian analysis (frequent sessions, free association, use of the
couch, attention to transference and resistance, open-ended contract)
work less well for other patients---although early in the psychoanalytic
movement, before modified approaches were developed, analysis was
attempted with a wide array of clients. Also, the session frequency that
Freud had recommended (originally six, then five times a week; later
four or even three) made traditional analysis affordable only by people
of some means.

That psychoanalytic therapy works faster and goes further with already
advantaged people can be compared to the responses of healthy people to
medical care or bright people to education. There are many reasons why
it is easier to do analytic therapy with healthier patients than with
borderline or psychotic individuals. In Eriksonian terms, one can assume
basic trust, considerable autonomy, and a reliable sense of identity.
Treatment goals may include removing unconscious obstacles to full
gratification in the areas of love, work, and play. Freud equated
psychoanalytic "cure" with freedom, and in the Platonic tradition, he
believed it is truth that ultimately makes us free. A search for
difficult truths about the self is possible for neurotic-level people
because their self-esteem is resilient enough to tolerate some
unpleasant discoveries. Accordingly, Theodor Reik (1948) used to say
that the primary requisite to conduct or undergo analysis is moral
courage.

**Psychoanalysis and Open-Ended Psychoanalytic Therapies**

Neurotic-level patients quickly establish with the therapist a working
alliance in which the clinician and the observing part of the client are
allies in accessing previously unconscious or disavowed defenses,
feelings, fantasies, beliefs, conflicts, and strivings. If the patient
is seeking a thorough understanding of his or her personality, with the
goal of the greatest possible degree of growth and change, intensive
analysis should be considered. Lately, students in psychoanalytic
training constitute the majority of patients willing at the outset to
make the three-or-four-sessions-per-week commitment that analysis
dictates (usually because their training institute requires it), but
some patients who are not in the mental health field decide after a
period of less intensive therapy that they want to "go deeper" and move
from analytically oriented treatment (twice a week or less) into
analysis. In the United States, this is happening less frequently, not
because of lack of interest, but because of insurance companies'
unwillingness to fund intensive treatments.

The fact that psychoanalysis may go on for years does not obviate the
fact that, perhaps especially with healthier persons, symptomatic and
behavioral improvement may happen quickly. But people have a feel for
the difference between behavior change that is possible in spite of
one's psychology and behavior change that has come to feel congruent
with one's insides. To move from the first to the second is one reason
people may choose to stay in analytic treatment for the long haul. An
analogy would be the difference that a man addicted to alcohol feels
between early sobriety, during which he struggles minute by minute to
resist the temptation to drink, and later recovery, when he no longer
feels the urge. The behavior of not drinking is the same in early and
late sobriety, but the underpinnings of it change. It may have taken
years of AA meetings and unremitting discipline to alter old patterns,
habits, and beliefs, but to the recovering alcoholic the shift from a
barely controlled compulsion to indifference toward alcohol is a
priceless achievement.

For neurotic-level people who are unable or unwilling to take on the
commitment of time, money, and emotional energy involved in intensive
analysis, psychoanalytic (or "psychodynamic") therapy, which developed
as a modification of classical analysis in the direction of being more
specifically problem focused, may be the treatment of choice. Patient
and therapist meet for fewer than three sessions a week, usually
face-to-face. The therapist is less encouraging of emotional regression
and more active in pointing out themes and patterns that patients who
come more frequently tend to notice by themselves. Both psychoanalysis
and modified psychoanalytic therapies have been referred to as
"uncovering" or "exploratory" or "expressive" treatments because the
invitation to the client is to be as open as possible, to focus on
feelings, and to try to push past defensiveness. Sometimes they have
been also called "insight-oriented" therapies, in reference to the
analytic assumption that self-knowledge reduces conflict and promotes
growth.

**Short-Term Treatments and Nonpsychodynamic Therapies**

Patients in the neurotic range are also often good candidates for
short-term analytic therapies (Bellak & Small, 1978; Davanloo, 1980;
Fosha, 2000; Malan, 1963; Mann, 1973; Messer & Warren, 1995; Sifneos,
1992). Intensive focusing on a conflict area can be overwhelming to
someone with a borderline or psychotic structure; in contrast, a
neurotic-level person may find it stimulating and productive. Similarly,
higher-functioning clients tend to do well in analytically informed
group and family modes of treatment, while borderline and psychotic
people often do not. (Lower-functioning clients absorb so much of the
emotional energy of the group or family unit that the other parties get
hopelessly torn between resentment at their always being center stage
and guilt about that resentment, as the more troubled person is
obviously suffering so much.)

In fact, virtually any approach to therapy will be helpful to most
clients in the neurotic range. In CBT therapy they tend to do any
homework the therapist suggests, and with biologically oriented
psychiatrists, they may willingly take the medicines they are
prescribed. They have had enough experiences with loving people that
they assume benevolence in the therapist and try to cooperate. They are,
understandably, popular clients. One of the reasons for the prestige
that once attended classical analysis may be that people with the
requisites to be analysands are readily responsive to and appreciative
of their treatment. They are good advertisements for their analysts,
unlike borderline people, for example, who may---even when they may be
improving in therapy---disparage their therapists ruthlessly to
outsiders or idealize them in such a cloying way that everyone in their
circle of friends thinks they have been taken in by a master charlatan.

Most psychodynamic writers feel that intensive psychoanalysis offers
neurotically organized people the greatest ultimate benefits and that
anyone with the resources to undergo in-depth, high-frequency treatment,
especially someone in young adulthood with years ahead to reap the
psychological rewards, would be well advised to do so. I share this
opinion, having benefited all my adult life from a good early classical
analysis. It is also true, however, that a person in the neurotic range
can benefit from all sorts of different experiences and can extract
psychological growth even from some conditions that others might find
disabling.

**THERAPY WITH PATIENTS IN THE PSYCHOTIC RANGE**

Probably the most important thing to understand about people with
psychotic illnesses or psychotic-level psychologies is that they are
terrified. It is no accident that many drugs that are helpful for
schizophrenic conditions are major antianxiety agents; the person with a
vulnerability to psychotic disorganization lacks a basic sense of
security in the world and is ready to believe that annihilation is
imminent. Adopting any approach that permits a lot of ambiguity, as does
traditional analytic therapy with neurotics, is like throwing gasoline
into the flame of psychotic-level terror. Consequently, the treatment of
choice with psychotic-level patients has generally been framed as
"supportive therapy," an approach that emphasizes active support of the
patient's dignity, self-esteem, ego strength, and need for information
and guidance.

All therapy is supportive, but in the ego psychology tradition the
phrase has had a narrower meaning, reflecting the experience of several
decades of psychodynamic work with more deeply disturbed people (Alanen,
Gonzalez de Chavez, Silver, & Martindale, 2009; Arieti, 1974; Eigen,
1986; Federn, 1952; Fromm-Reichmann, 1950; Jacobson, 1967; Karon &
VandenBos, 1981; Klein, 1940, 1945; Lidz, 1973; Little, 1981; Pinsker,
1997; Rockland, 1992; Rosenfeld, 1947; Searles, 1965; Segal, 1950;
Selzer, Sullivan, Carsky, & Terkelson, 1989; Silver, 2003; Sullivan,
1962; R. S. Wallerstein, 1986). It is generally agreed that there is a
continuum from supportive through expressive (or "uncovering," or
"exploratory") therapy (Friedman, 2006), in which at the uncovering end
one encourages full expression of intrapsychic conflict, leading to
insight and resolution, while at the supportive end one tries to
"support the ego in its struggle to contain, or repress intrapsychic
conflicts and to suppress their symptomatic expression" (R. S.
Wallerstein, 2002, p. 143). Much of what I cover in this section can
apply to work with any patient but is particularly critical to working
with more disturbed people.

**Explicit Safety, Respect, Honesty**

The first aspect of supportive work I should mention is the therapist's
demonstration of trustworthiness. The fact that psychotic-level people
are often compliant does not mean that they trust. In fact, their
compliance may mean quite the opposite: It may express their fear that
authorities will kill them for being separate, for having their own
will. The therapist needs to keep in mind that it is important not to
act in ways that reinforce the primitive images of hostile and
omnipotent authority with which psychotic-level people are tormented. To
prove that one is a safe object is not so easy. With a neurotic-level
person in a paranoid state, it may be enough to interpret the
transference, that is, to comment on how the patient is mixing one up
with some negative person from the past or some projected negative part
of the self. Interpretation of this sort is useless with severely
disturbed people; in fact, they are likely to consider it a diabolical
evasion.

Instead, one must repeatedly counteract the patient's most frightening
expectations. A facial expression that conveys respect is enough to make
a neurotic-level patient comfortable, but with a person at risk for
psychosis, one must demonstrate much more actively one's acceptance of
the patient as a morally equal human colleague. This might include
simple communications such as asking such clients to tell you if it gets
too warm or too cold in the office, asking their opinions about a new
painting, creating opportunities for them to demonstrate areas of
personal expertise, or commenting on the creative and positive aspects
of even their most bizarre symptoms. In this context, Karon (1989) has
provided a pertinent example:

 

Therapeutically, it is often useful to tell the patient, "That is a
brilliant explanation." The patient is generally startled that any
professional would take his or her ideas seriously. "You mean you think
it is right?" If, as is usually the case, the therapist believes that
the patient can tolerate it, the therapist might usefully say, "No, but
that is because I know some things about the human mind which you don't
know yet, and I'll tell you if you're interested. But given what you do
know, that is a brilliant explanation." With such a nonhumiliating
approach to the patient, it is often possible to get the most suspicious
paranoid to consider what might be going on and its real meaning as an
attempt to solve the terrifying dilemmas of his or her symptoms and life
history. (p. 180)

 

Another aspect of demonstrating that one is trustworthy is behaving with
unwavering honesty. Anyone experienced with schizophrenic clients can
attest to their attunement to affective nuance and their need to know
that their therapist is emotionally truthful. Psychotic-level people
require much more emotional self-disclosure than other patients; without
it, they may stew in their worst fantasies. This is an area where
supportive therapy diverges from traditional analytic therapy with
neurotic-level people. With healthier people, one may avoid emotional
revelations so that the patient can notice and explore what his or her
fantasies are about the therapist's affective state. With more troubled
clients, one must be willing to be known.

Take irritation, for example. It is natural for the therapist to feel
irritated with any patient at various points, especially when the person
seems to be behaving self-destructively. A perception that one's
therapist looks annoyed would be upsetting to any client, but it is
mortally terrifying to more deeply troubled ones. If a neurotic-level
person asks, "Are you mad at me?" one helpful response would be
something along the lines of "What are your thoughts and feelings about
what it would mean if I were mad at you?" If the same query is made by a
potentially psychotic patient, the therapeutic reply might be "You're
very perceptive. I guess I am feeling a little irritation. I'm a bit
frustrated that I can't seem to help you as fast as I would like. What
was your reason for asking?"

Notice that with the supportive approach, one still invites the patient
to explore his or her perceptions, but only after a potentially
inhibiting apprehension has been directly counteracted by specific
information. In the example above, the therapist has also explicitly
expressed respect for the patient's accurate perception, thus supporting
his or her realistically based self-esteem, and has implicitly
counteracted primitive fantasies of the therapist's dangerous
omnipotence by connecting anger with ordinary human limitation rather
than with talionic destruction. No one who finds it uncomfortable to
admit to baser human motives should work with people in the psychotic
range; they can smell hypocrisy, and it literally makes them crazy.

Along these lines, it is important with a psychotic-level patient to
give explicit rationales for one's way of working, rationales that will
make emotional sense to the person. Higher-functioning people are often
therapy-savvy, and if any arrangement does not seem reasonable to them,
they will usually ask about it. Take the fee, for example. With neurotic
patients, regardless of how many fantasies they have about what money
means to you and to them, there is rarely a need to go into why one
charges what one does. It was part of the original contract, and the
reasonable part of the healthier patient understands that this is a
relationship where a fee is charged for services rendered.

Psychotically vulnerable people, in contrast, can have all kinds of
secret and very peculiar ideas about the meaning of money exchange---not
in the form of fantasies that coexist with more rational notions, but as
their private conviction. One of my more psychotically organized
patients told me after several months that he believed that if I really
wanted to help him, I would see him for free, and that any other basis
for our relationship was corrupt. He was cooperating with me, he
explained, because maybe if he could work his way enough into my
affections, I would treat him simply out of love and thereby heal his
deep conviction of unlovability. This kind of thinking in symbiotically
preoccupied people is far from rare and has to be addressed directly.
"Analyzing" it as one would do with a neurotic-level person will not be
helpful because the belief is syntonic, not a buried vestige of
infantile forms of thought.

Hence, if one is asked about the fee by a patient with these fantasies,
one might say something like, "I charge what I do because this is the
way I earn my living, helping people with emotional problems. Also, I
have learned that when I charge less than this, I find myself feeling
resentful, and I don't believe I can be fully helpful when I'm in a
state of resentment." This is not only useful education about how the
world works and about the essentially reciprocal nature of
psychotherapy---which is in itself corrective to the more fused,
enmeshed conceptions of relationship held by more disturbed people---but
it is also emotionally honest and will consequently be received with
relief even if the patient still thinks the fee is unnecessary or too
high.

My own style with most psychotic-level people is quite self-disclosing.
I have been known to talk about my family, my personal history, my
opinions---anything to put the person at ease with me as an ordinary
human being. Such an approach is controversial; not every therapist is
temperamentally comfortable with exposure. It also has certain hazards,
not the least of which is that some aspect of the therapist's revealed
person will incite a psychotic response in the patient. My rationale
lies in the contrast between symbiotically organized people and more
individuated ones. The former have such total, encompassing
transferences that they can only learn about their distortions of
reality when reality is painted in stark colors in front of them,
whereas the latter have subtle and unconscious transferences that may
surface only when the therapist is more opaque.

The terror of the patient that he or she is in the hands of a powerful,
distant, and perhaps persecutory Other is so great that the benefits of
being more open may outweigh the risks. And if some revelation provokes
a psychotic response, it can be addressed; nondisclosure certainly
provokes its share of psychotic upset anyway. In fact, occasional
disasters are inevitable in work with more disturbed people and cannot
be avoided by the "right" technique. Once I sent a paranoid young man
into a full-scale delusion about my intent to murder him because I
absentmindedly swatted a bug ("You killed a living thing!") in his
presence.

Another way one may have to demonstrate basic concern, and thereby
trustworthiness, is by extending oneself to help in a more specific,
problem-solving way than would be warranted in psychotherapy with
healthier persons. Advice is ordinarily not given to healthier clients,
as it implicitly infantilizes a person with a sense of agency. Karon and
VandenBos (1981) discuss the value of practical advice to the patient
about counteracting insomnia. One may have to take a position on the
patient's behalf on certain matters. For instance, "I think it's
important that you go to your sister's funeral. I know it won't be easy,
but I'm afraid if you avoid it you'll always fault yourself, and you
won't have another chance. I'll be here afterward to help you cope with
any upset you feel." One may have to advocate for the patient with
agencies and social authorities.

The reader will have picked up by now that with psychotic-level people
one must relate in a more authoritative (not authoritarian) way than
with higher-functioning patients. By behaving like a professional expert
but a human equal, the therapist can make frightened clients feel safer.
The egalitarian tone is nonhumiliating; the sense of authority reassures
them that the therapist is strong enough to withstand their fantasied
destructiveness. Naturally, the issues on which one takes an
authoritative stand must be ones in which the therapist is genuinely
confident. Eventually, as they progress in treatment, even very
disturbed people will develop enough security in the relationship to
express a difference of opinion, and the therapist can take pride in
having fostered the evolution of some genuine psychological
independence.

**Education**

A related aspect of supportive therapy is the therapist's educative
role. Individuals in the psychotic range have areas of great cognitive
confusion, especially about emotions and fantasies. Older research into
family dynamics in schizophrenia (Bateson et al., 1956; Lidz, 1973;
Mischler & Waxier, 1968; Singer & Wynne, 1965a, 1965b) suggest that many
psychotic people grew up in systems in which baffling, paralyzing
emotional language was used. Family members may have talked about love
while acting hatefully, claimed to represent the client's feelings while
unwittingly distorting them, and so forth. As a result, psychosis-prone
people often need explicit education about what feelings are, how they
are natural reactions, how they differ from actions, how everyone weaves
them into fantasies, and how universal are the concerns that the
psychotically organized person believes constitute his or her
idiosyncratic and warped drama. In many vulnerable people, feelings are
not so much unconscious as they are fundamentally unformulated (D. B.
Stern, 1997).

One component of the educative process is normalization. The active
solicitation of all the client's concerns and then the reframing of
frightening thoughts and feelings as natural aspects of being an
emotionally responsive human being are vital to work with more disturbed
people. For example, a psychotically bipolar woman became agitated on
finding herself admiring my legs as I opened a window; she worried that
this meant she was a lesbian. With a less fragile person, I would have
asked her to associate to that worry, assuming that her anxiety about
sexual orientation was tolerable and would lead to interesting
discoveries about disowned aspects of herself. With this woman, however,
I remarked warmly that I felt complimented (she looked frightened, as if
expecting me to be horrified by the prospect of her attraction), and I
went on to say that as far as I could tell on the basis of her history
she was not essentially a lesbian, although everyone has some sexual
feelings toward people of both genders, and that the only way she might
differ from others in having noticed this idea in herself is that some
people have a knack for automatically keeping such perceptions
unconscious. I recast her worry as being another instance of her greater
sensitivity to her inner life and to emotional subtlety than most people
have, and I reiterated that my role with her included my trying to help
her become comfortable with the fact that she was often in touch with
aspects of universal human psychology that many people keep out of
awareness.

In this work, one draws on accumulated clinical wisdom, generalizing to
the patient what therapists have learned about human psychology. Early
conceptions of psychosis as a state of defenselessness, contrasting with
the overdefendedness of neurotic people, contributed to the development
of this difference in technique. (We now understand psychotic-level
people as having defenses, but very primitive ones that cannot be
analyzed without making the client feel bereft of one of his or her few
means of feeling less frightened.) Psychotically inclined people become
traumatically overstimulated by primary process material and often can
reduce their upset from that material only by having it normalized.

For example, a young man I treated briefly for a psychotic reaction to
his father's death confessed that he sometimes believed that he had
become his father: his self had died, and his father had taken over his
body. He was having recurrent dreams in which monsters pursued him,
turned into his father, and tried to kill him, and he was genuinely
terrified that the dead man, who had been a difficult and punitive
parent in life, was capable of invading his body from the grave. I
assured him that this was a natural though not always conscious fantasy
that people have after bereavement, told him he could expect to lose
that feeling as the mourning period progressed, and explained that his
belief that his father inhabited his body was expressing numerous
natural responses to the death of a parent. First, it indicated denial
that his father was dead---a normal phase of grief; second, it expressed
his own survivor guilt, handled by the fantasy that he rather than his
father had died; third, it was an attempt to reduce anxiety, in that if
his father was in his body, he was not somewhere else planning to murder
his son for the sin of outliving him.

This kind of active, educative stance is vital to the emotional
equilibrium of a psychotically anxious person because it mitigates the
terror that he or she harbors about going crazy. It also welcomes the
client into a world of greater psychological complexity and implicitly
invites him or her to "join the human race." Many people with psychotic
tendencies have been placed since early childhood in the sick role,
first by their families and later by other social systems that define
them as oddballs. Consequently, they come to treatment expecting that a
therapist will be similarly impressed by their lack of sanity.
Interventions that embrace rather than stigmatize are relievingly
corrective and can have a self-fulfilling effect. In educative
conversations it is more important to convey a general expectation of
eventual understanding than to be completely accurate. Since one never
does understand perfectly, it is also important to modify one's
authoritative tone with some qualifications about such explanations
being a "best guess" or "provisional understanding."

This style of intervention was first developed for children whose
primitive preoccupations coexisted with fears of regression (B.
Bornstein, 1949) and has variously been called "reconstruction upward"
(Greenson, 1967; R. M. Loewenstein, 1951), "interpreting upward"
(Horner, 1990), and simply "interpreting up." These phrases imply a
contrast with the kind of interpretation helpful to neurotic-level
patients, by which one works "from surface to depth" (Fenichel, 1941),
addressing whatever defense is closest to conscious understanding. In
interpreting up, one directly plumbs the depths, names their contents,
and explains why that material would have been set off by the patient's
life experiences. Oddly, this essential aspect of psychodynamic work
with frightened patients is seldom spelled out in books on technique.

**Identification of Triggers**

A third principle of supportive therapy involves attention to feelings
and stresses rather than defenses. For example, when working with more
disturbed people we frequently have to sit through extended paranoid
tirades when the patient is upset. It is tempting, in the face of an
assault on the senses of a psychotic degree of fear and hatred, to try
to explain away the projective defense or to contrast the client's
distortions with the therapist's view of reality, but either of those
strategies is likely to make the patient worry that the therapist is
secretly in league with the persecutors. Yet just witnessing a
disorganized psychotic outburst seems hardly therapeutic. So what is one
to do?

First, one waits until the patient pauses for breath. It is better to
wait too long than not long enough (this may mean sitting quietly and
nodding sympathetically for most of the session), reminding oneself that
at least the patient now trusts you enough to express uncensored
feelings. Second, one makes a comment something like "You seem more
upset than usual today," with no implication that the content of the
upset is crazy. Finally, one tries to help the client figure out what
set off this intensity of feeling. Often, the source of the distress is
only peripherally related to the topic of the rant; it may be, for
example, some life circumstance involving a separation (the client's
child is entering kindergarten, or a brother announced his engagement,
or the therapist mentioned vacation plans). Then one empathizes actively
with how disconcerting separations can be.

In this process, one must sometimes tolerate the odd role of accepting
what the therapist sees as the person's distortions, and occasionally,
as most strikingly dramatized in Robert Lindner's (1955) entertaining
essay, "The Jet-Propelled Couch," one must even actively accept the
patient's frame of reference. Sometimes only in being joined this way
will the patient feel sufficiently understood to accept later
reflections (cf. Federn, 1952). The school of "Modern Psychoanalysis"
(Spotnitz, 1985) has raised this style of therapy to a high art.
Originally labeled "paradigmatic psychoanalysis" (Coleman & Nelson,
1957), this approach has a lot in common with later "paradoxical
intervention" techniques favored by some family systems therapists.
Joining is not as cynical as it may seem, as there is always some truth
in even the most paranoid constructions.

Some examples of joining: A woman storms into her therapist's office,
accusing him of involvement in a plot to kill her. Rather than
questioning the existence of the plot or suggesting that she is
projecting her own murderous wishes, the therapist says, "I'm sorry! If
I've been connected with such a plot, I wasn't aware of it. What's going
on?" A man falls into a miserable silence and when prodded confesses
that he is responsible for the carnage in the Middle East. The therapist
responds, "It must be terrible to carry that burden of guilt. In what
way are you responsible?" Or a patient confides that the therapist's
colleague and friend, the ward nurse, tried to poison him. The therapist
says, "How awful. Why do you suppose she is mad enough at you to try to
kill you?"

Note that in all these instances, the therapist does not express
agreement with the patient's interpretations of events, but neither does
he or she inflict the wound to the patient's pride of dismissing them.
And most important, the therapist invites further discussion. Usually,
once the client lets off enough steam, a less terrifying understanding
will gradually replace more paranoid attributions. Sometimes the
therapist can assist this process by gently asking about alternative
explanations of the patient's perceptions, but only after giving the
client time for self-expression. Often by the end of the session, the
patient feels reoriented and leaves in a more composed state.

By now it is probably evident how different psychoanalytic work with
psychotic-level people is from therapy with neurotic individuals. Not
everyone has the temperament to do this kind of work comfortably---it is
facilitated by both counterphobia and a sense of personal power that is
alien to the personalities of many therapists; those without such
qualities may be better off in other areas of mental health service. One
of the most important things to learn in one's training is which kinds
of people one enjoys and treats effectively, and which kinds one should
refer.

Therapy with psychotic and potentially psychotic people has different
aims and satisfactions from therapy with healthier clients. Despite some
prejudice against it in the name of cost cutting (a position I see as
comparable to arguing that cancer patients should receive aspirin),
psychotherapy with psychotic people is effective (Gottdiener, 2002,
2006; Gottdeiner & Haslam, 2002; Silver, 2003) and may be gratefully
received (see, e.g., A Recovering Patient, 1986; Saks, 2008). By the
mid-1990s, cognitive-behavioral therapists (e.g., Hagarty et al., 1995)
were describing effective work with psychotic patients characterized by
education, support, and skills training---an approach that in practice
seems pretty similar to psychoanalytic supportive treatment. Therapy
with the severely disturbed can be lifesaving; expertise in it is much
rarer than expertise treating healthier people; it is intellectually and
emotionally stimulating; it nourishes one's creativity. At the same
time, it can be depleting, confusing, and discouraging, and it
inevitably confronts one with the limits on one's capacities to effect
dramatic transformations.

In closing this section, I offer the following rules from Ann-Louise
Silver (2003, p. 331) for working with people with psychoses:

::: calibre1
 
:::

1.  If you cannot help the patient, do no harm. Consequently,
2.  Use physical force only to prevent a patient from harming him or
    herself or someone else, never as punishment, or "negative
    reinforcement."
3.  Never humiliate your patient.
4.  Get as accurate a case history as possible. Don't limit yourself to
    a few hours or even a few sessions.
5.  Encourage work and social relations.
6.  Most centrally, do your best to understand your patient as an
    individual human being.

**THERAPY WITH BORDERLINE PATIENTS**

The term "borderline," used as a level of organization, encompasses
great diversity. Not only is a depressive person with borderline
character structure quite different from a narcissistic or hysterical or
paranoid borderline person, but there is a wide range of severity within
the borderline spectrum, extending from the border with the neuroses to
the border with the psychoses (Grinker et al., 1968)---somewhat
arbitrary borders to begin with. The closer a person's psychology is to
neurotic, the more positively he or she will respond to a more
"uncovering" kind of treatment, whereas clients who border on psychosis
will react better to a more supportive style. We are not unidimensional;
every neurotic-level person has some borderline tendencies, and vice
versa. But in general, people with a borderline level of personality
organization need highly structured therapies. In what follows I mention
some cognitive and behavioral approaches along with psychodynamic ones,
as in practice, there are significant similarities across treatment
approaches.

The aim of therapy for people with borderline psychologies is the
development of an integrated, dependable, complex, and positively valued
sense of self. Along with this goes the evolution of a capacity to love
other people fully despite their flaws and contradictions and the
ability to tolerate and regulate a wide range of emotions. A gradual
movement from capricious reactivity to steady reliance on one's
perceptions, feelings, and values is possible for borderline people,
despite the difficulties they present to therapists, especially in the
early part of treatment.

Theorists with different explanatory constructions about borderline
personality structure have emphasized different aspects of treatment.
Originally, it was widely seen as a developmental arrest (e.g., Adler &
Buie, 1979; Balint, 1968; Blanck & Blanck, 1986; Giovacchini & Boyer,
1982; Masterson, 1976; Meissner, 1988; Pine, 1985; Searles, 1986;
Stolorow, Brandchaft, & Atwood, 1987) in interaction with a
constitutional temperament (Gabbard, 1991; Kernberg, 1975; M. H. Stone,
1981). More recently, it has been viewed as a result of trauma (e.g.,
Briere, 1992; C. A. Ross, 2000), especially attachment trauma (Blatt &
Levy, 2003). These theories are not mutually exclusive; "borderline
personality" is a complex concept and probably multiply determined.

Although the generalizability of most empirical studies of therapy for
people with borderline psychologies is limited to those meeting DSM
criteria for BPD, research on treatments for borderline conditions has
been encouraging and has given empirical support to several approaches.
Linehan's dialectical behavior therapy (e.g., 1993) is often cited as
"the" evidence-based therapy for BPD, but there have also been
methodologically rigorous studies (e.g., Bateman & Fonagy, 2004; Levy et
al., 2006) of both Fonagy's mentalization-based therapy (MBT) and
Kernberg's transference-focused psychotherapy (TFP)---the latter being
the manualized version of the "expressive therapy" denoted in this
book's first edition. Recently, Young's schema-focused therapy
(SFT---whence the three-letter acronym rule?!) has been empirically
tested (van Asselt et al., 2008). Differing views of etiology and
differing therapy traditions naturally lead to different treatments, and
there is sufficient controversy in the literature on treating borderline
clients that a few paragraphs cannot address all the divergences. Still,
it is remarkable how much practical consensus, despite varied
theoretical languages and etiological assumptions, there is about
overall principles of treatment, some of which I summarize here (cf.
Paris, 2008).

**Safeguarding Boundaries and Tolerating Emotional Intensity**

Although borderline patients have more capacity to trust than
psychotically organized people do, and thus rarely require the
therapist's continual demonstration that they are safe in the consulting
room, they may take up to several years to develop the kind of
therapeutic alliance that a neurotic client may feel within minutes of
meeting the therapist. By definition, the borderline client lacks an
integrated observing ego that sees things more or less as the therapist
does; instead, he or she is subject to shifting chaotically between
different ego states, with no capacity yet for putting disparate
attitudes together. Whereas the psychotic person tends to fuse
psychologically with the clinician and the neurotic one to keep a clear
separate identity, the borderline person alternates---confusingly to
self and others---between symbiotic attachment and hostile, isolated
separateness. Both states are upsetting: One raises the specter of
engulfment, the other of desertion.

Given this instability of ego state, a critical dimension of treatment
with borderline patients is the establishment of the consistent
conditions of the therapy---what Langs (1973) has called the therapeutic
frame. This includes not only arrangements as to time and fee but may
also involve numerous other decisions about the boundaries of the
relationship that rarely come up with other clients. All the mainstream
therapies for BPD have mechanisms (contracts, consequences, rules of the
treatment, ways to limit self-destructiveness) to maintain treatment via
explicit boundary conditions. One can be more flexible with either
neurotic- or psychotic-level patients.

Common concerns of borderline clients include "Can I call you at home?"
"What if I'm suicidal?" "Will you break confidentiality for any reason?"
"How late can I cancel a session without being charged?" "Can I sleep on
the floor in your waiting room?" "Will you write my professor and say I
was too stressed out to take the exam?" Some of these issues are
articulated as questions; others come up in enacted form (e.g., one
finds the client sleeping on the waiting room floor). The possibilities
for boundary struggles are limitless with people in the borderline
range, and the critical thing for the therapist to know is not so much
*what* conditions should be set (these may vary according to the
patient's personality, the therapist's preferences, and the situation)
but *that* they must be set, consistently observed, and enforced by
specific sanctions if the patient fails to respect them. It is
disturbing to people with separation--individuation issues to be
indulged rather than contained, much as it is to adolescents whose
parents do not insist on responsible behavior. Without explicit limits,
they tend to escalate until they find the ones that have been unstated.

Borderline-level clients will often react with anger to the
practitioner's boundaries, but two therapeutic messages will be received
nonetheless: (1) the therapist regards the patient as a grown-up and has
confidence in his or her ability to tolerate frustration, and (2) the
therapist refuses to be exploited and is therefore a model of
self-respect. Often, the histories of people in the borderline range
give evidence of their having had ample exposure to the opposite
messages; they have been indulged when regressed (and usually ignored
when acting more mature), and they have been expected to be exploitable
and allowed to exploit.

When I first began practicing, I was struck by the amount of deprivation
and trauma in the histories of borderline clients. I tended to see them
as hungry and needy more than as aggressive and angry and I would extend
myself beyond my usual limits in the hope of making up for their
hardships. I learned that the more I gave, the more they regressed, and
the more I became resentful. I eventually learned to adhere to my frame,
however harsh it might seem in the moment. I would not let sessions run
over, for example, even when the patient had just gone into a state of
intense grief. Instead, I learned to end the session gently but firmly
at the regular time and then to listen in the next meeting for the
person's anger at having been kicked out. When borderline patients could
tell me off about my rigid, selfish rules, I noticed that they did a lot
better than when I was trying to put them into a state of gratitude for
my generosity---an inherently infantilizing position.

Therapists new to work with borderline patients often wonder when all
the preconditions of therapy will finally be worked out, a working
alliance created, and the actual therapy begun. It may be painful to
realize that all the work with the conditions of treatment *is* the
therapy. The beginner wonders when the borderline patient will "calm
down." The intensity of borderline patients will characterize the work
throughout, and it is critical that the therapist be able to tolerate or
"contain" that intensity, even when it involves verbal attacks on the
therapist (Bion, 1962; Charles, 2004). Once a neurotic-type alliance is
achieved, the patient by definition will have taken a giant step
developmentally. It is disconcerting to spend so much time on boundary
issues, especially when they stimulate over-the-top reactivity, with
people who are often bright, talented, and articulate, and with whom one
naturally wants to get on to other things. Niggling over limits is
scarcely what we envisioned as constituting therapy when we went into
this field. Thus, people working with their first borderline clients may
suffer periodic fits of doubt about their competence.

Even for patients who are attracted to psychoanalysis and who want to
"go deep," face-to-face therapy is generally better for borderline
clients. Although not as subject to overwhelming transferences as
psychotically vulnerable people are, they have more than enough anxiety
without the therapist's being out of their line of vision. Seeing the
therapist's facial affect may also be critical for the recovery of more
difficult patients. In videotaped therapies with clients who had had
prior treatment failures, Krause and his colleagues (e.g., Anstadt,
Merten, Ullrich, & Krause, 1997) found that irrespective of the
therapist's orientation, improvement correlated with the client's seeing
a "nonmatching" affect on the therapist's face. For example, when the
client's face showed shame, the therapist's might show anger that
someone had shamed the client; when there was fear on the client's face,
the therapist's might show curiosity about the fear). Also, again
because intensity needs no encouragement in borderline clients, only
unusual circumstances (such as the need for increased support during
withdrawal from an addiction) would warrant scheduling borderline
clients at a frequency of more than three times a week, as in classical
analysis.

**Voicing Contrasting Feeling States**

A second thing to attend to with borderline clients is one's way of
speaking. With neurotic patients, one's comments may be infrequent, with
the goal of being impactful when they occur ("less is more"). One can
talk with healthier clients in a pithy, emotionally blunt way (Colby,
1951; Fenichel, 1941; Hammer, 1968), noting the underside of some
conflict in which the client is aware of only one feeling. For example,
a woman in the neurotic range may be gushing about a friend with whom
she is in a somewhat competitive situation in a way that suggests she is
not in touch with any negative affects. The therapist may say something
along the lines of "But you'd also like to kill her." Or a man may be
going on about how independent and free spirited he is; the therapist
may comment, "And yet you are always worried about what I think of you."

In these cases, the respective neurotic clients will know that the
therapist has revealed a part of their subjective experience that they
had been keeping out of consciousness. Because they can appreciate that
the clinician is not being reductive, is not claiming that the disowned
attitude is their *real* feeling and that their conscious ideas were
illusory, they may feel expanded in their awareness as a result of the
interpretation. They feel understood, even if slightly wounded. But
borderline clients to whom one talks this way will feel criticized and
diminished, because unless the statement is phrased differently, the
main message that will be received is "You're utterly wrong about what
you really feel." This response derives from their tendency to be in one
or another self-state rather than in a frame of mind that can experience
and tolerate ambivalence and ambiguity.

For these reasons, it is common for beginning therapists to think they
are expressing solicitous understanding and to find that the borderline
person reacts as if attacked. One way around this problem is to
appreciate that the borderline client lacks the reflective capacity to
process an interpretation as additional information about the self, and
that consequently one must provide that function within the
interpretation. So one would have a better chance of being heard as
empathic if one said, "I can see how much Mary means to you. Is it
possible, though, that there is also a part of you---a part that you
would not act upon of course---that would like to get rid of her because
she's in some ways in competition with you?" Or, "You certainly have
established that you have a very independent, self-reliant streak. It's
interesting that it seems to coexist with some opposite tendencies, like
a sensitivity to what I think of you." Such interventions lack the punch
and beauty of an economy of words, but given the particular
psychological problems of borderline people, they are much more likely
than more trenchant formulations to be taken in as intended.

**Interpreting Primitive Defenses**

A third feature of effective psychoanalytic therapy with patients in the
borderline range is the interpretation of primitive defenses as they
appear in the relationship. This work is not different in principle from
ego psychological work with neurotic-level people: one analyzes
defensive processes as they appear in the transference. But because the
defenses of a borderline person are so primal, and because they may come
across as entirely different in different ego states, the analysis of
their defenses requires a special approach.

With borderline clients, it is rarely helpful to make "genetic"
(historical) interpretations, in which a transference reaction is linked
to feelings that belonged to a figure from the patient's past. With
neurotic-level clients, one can get a lot of mileage out of a comment
like "Perhaps you're feeling so angry at me because you're experiencing
me as like your mother." The patient may agree, notice the differences
between the therapist and the mother, and get interested in other
instances in which this association might have been operating. With
borderline patients, reactions can vary from "So what?" (meaning,
"You're a lot like my mother, so why wouldn't I react that way?") to
"How's that supposed to be useful?" (meaning, "You're just talking
party-line shrink talk now. When are you going to get down to helping
me?") to "Right!" (meaning, "Finally you're getting the picture. The
problem is my mother, and I want you to change her!"). Such reactions
can leave a beginning therapist bewildered, disarmed, and deskilled,
especially if genetic interpretations were a helpful aspect of the
therapist's personal experience in psychotherapy.

What can be interpreted with borderline clients is the here-and-now
emotional situation. For example, when anger permeates the therapeutic
dyad, it is likely that the patient's defense is not displacement or
straightforward projection, as it would be in the above example of the
neurotic person with the mother transference; instead, the patient may
be using projective identification. He or she is trying to unload the
feeling of "bad me" (Sullivan, 1953) and the associated affect of rage
by putting them on the therapist, but the transfer of image and affect
is not "clean"; the client retains feelings of badness and anger despite
the projection. This is the painful price paid by the borderline person,
and inevitably shared by the therapist, for inadequate psychological
separation.

Here is a critical difference between borderline clients and both
psychotic and neurotic ones. The psychotic client is sufficiently out of
touch with reality not to care whether a projection "fits." The neurotic
person has an observing ego capable of noticing that he or she is
projecting. Borderline patients cannot quite succeed in getting rid of
the feeling being projected. They cannot take an attitude of
indifference about how realistic the projected material is because
unlike psychotics, they have intact reality testing. And they cannot
relegate it to the unconscious part of the ego because, unlike
neurotics, they switch states rather than using repression. So they keep
feeling whatever is projected, along with the need to *make it fit* so
that they will not feel crazy. The therapist gets the client's anger (or
other strong affect), and as the client tries to make the projection fit
by insisting that he or she is angry *because the therapist is hostile*,
also begins to feel a rage at being misunderstood. Soon, the therapist
*is* hostile. Such transactions account for the bad reputation
borderline clients have among many mental health professionals, even
though they are not always unpleasant people and are usually responsive
to good treatment.

The kind of interpretation that may reach a borderline person in such a
predicament is something like "You seem to have a conviction that you
are bad. You're angry about that, and you're handling that anger by
saying that I am the one who is bad, and that it's my anger that causes
yours. Could you imagine that both you and I could be some combination
of good and bad and that that wouldn't have to be such a big deal?" This
is an example of a here-and-now confrontation of a primitive defense. It
represents an effort by the therapist, one that will have to be repeated
in different forms for months at best, to help the patient shift from a
psychology in which everything is black or white, all or nothing, to one
in which diverse good and bad aspects of the self, and a range of
emotions, are all consolidated within an overall identity. This kind of
intervention does not come easily to most people, but fortunately, it
improves with practice.

**Getting Supervision from the Patient**

A fourth dimension of work with borderline clients that I have found
valuable is asking the patient's help in resolving the either/or
dilemmas into which the therapist is typically put. This technique, by
which one in effect gets the patient to be one's supervisor, relates to
the all-or-nothing way in which borderline people construe things. They
tend to evoke in a therapist the sense that there are two mutually
exclusive options for responding to a given situation, and that both
would be wrong, for different reasons. Usually there is a test involved
(Weiss, 1993) in which if the therapist acts one way, he or she will
fail according to one polarity of the patient's conflict, and if the
other alternative is chosen, there will be an equal failure of the
opposite sort.

For example, I once treated a 22-year-old man with an alcoholic father,
who seemed not to notice his existence, and an overinvolved, anxious,
intrusive mother, who took over her son's life to the extent of picking
out his clothes each day. (I had met the parents and was thus in a
position to know more about the real people who had influenced this man
than one often knows with borderline clients.) As the therapy
progressed, this patient would stop speaking for increasing amounts of
time during our sessions. At first, it seemed as if he simply needed the
space to get his thoughts together, but as the silences stretched out to
15 and then 20 minutes at a time, I felt that something less benign was
going on and that I would be remiss in not addressing it.

If this patient had been in the neurotic range, I would have reminded
him of his agreement to keep talking about whatever was on his mind and
explored with him what was getting in the way of his willingness to do
that; in other words, I would have done simple resistance analysis. But
with this young man I could feel that something more primitive was going
on, involving counterpoised terrors of engulfment and abandonment, and I
knew we did not have enough of a working alliance for me to approach his
silence as I would with a healthier person. If I remained quiet, I was
fairly sure he would feel hurtfully neglected, as by his father; yet if
I spoke, I suspected he would experience me as taking over, like his
mother. My quandary at this juncture probably mirrored his sense that he
would be damned if he did talk and damned if he didn't.

After trying for a while to figure out which intervention would be the
lesser evil, it occurred to me to ask him to help me solve the problem.
At least that way, whatever came out of our interaction would have an
element of his autonomy in it. So I asked him how he wanted me to
respond when he went into a long silence. He answered that he guessed he
wanted me to ask him questions and to draw him out. I then commented
that I would be glad to do that, but that he should know that I might be
way off base in my pursuit of what he was thinking about since when he
was quiet, I had no idea what was on his mind. (There had been evidence
in the dreams and fantasies he had reported, while still talking, that
he believed that others, like the fantasied omniscient mother of early
infancy, could read his mind. I wanted to send a contrary and more
realistic message.)

He brightened up and on that basis changed his mind, deciding I should
wait until he felt ready to talk. He then came for three sessions in a
row in which he greeted me cheerfully, sat down, said nothing for 45
minutes, then departed politely when I said our time was up.
Interestingly, whereas I had been in a miserable internal state before I
got him to supervise me in this way, I was at peace with his silence
afterward. A couple of years later, he was able to tell me that my
willingness to take his direction marked the beginning of his ability to
feel like a separate person in the presence of someone else. This
approach thus reduces the therapist's immediate uneasiness; more
important, it models an acceptance of uncertainty, affirms the patient's
dignity and creativity, and reminds both parties nonjudgmentally of the
cooperative nature of the work.

It is important in such interventions to talk from the perspective of
one's one own motives rather than the patient's inferred motives. The
value of "I-statements" is as great here as when one argues with a lover
or friend. There is a huge difference between being on the receiving end
of "You're putting me in a bind" or "You're setting it up so that
whatever I do is wrong" and hearing "I'm trying to do right by you as
your therapist, and I find myself feeling in a bind. I worry that if I
do *X*, I'll be unhelpful in one direction, and if I do *Y*, I'll
disappoint you in another."

**Promoting Individuation and Discouraging Regression**

People with borderline psychologies need empathy as much as anyone else,
but their mood changes and ego-state fluctuations make it hard for
clinicians to know how and when to convey it. Because they tend to evoke
loving countertransferences when they are depressed or frightened, and
hateful ones when they act antagonistically, one may find oneself
inadvertently rewarding them for regression and punishing them for
individuation. Therapists trained to work with neurotic-level patients
by fostering a contained regression may, out of habit, evoke some of the
least healthy responses of borderline clients. An appreciation of their
psychology helps us to act somewhat counterintuitively; that is, to be
relatively nonresponsive to states of subjective helplessness and to
show appreciation for assertiveness---even when it takes the form of
angry opposition.

As I mentioned in [Chapter 3](#part0012.html){.calibre9}, Masterson
(1976) noted that when borderline clients, whose mothers he saw as
having rewarded their clinging, are in a regressed, dependent
relationship, they feel safe. When alone, they suffer an anguished
desperation that he called "abandonment depression." His observations
comport with those of researchers in attachment (e.g., M. Main, 1995),
who have related some insecure attachment patterns to an anxious,
autonomy-impeding mothering style. Because separateness is eventually
empowering, Masterson urged therapists to behave with borderline
patients conversely from the way their mothers purportedly had; namely,
to confront regressive and self-destructive behaviors actively (e.g.,
"Why would you want to pick up men at bars?") and to endorse
empathically any efforts toward autonomy and competence (e.g., "I'm glad
to see you can tell me off when I make you angry"). He advised us not to
reward the clinging that gives the patient no basis for self-esteem, and
to take pains to see the forward-moving, adaptive elements in even
aggravating manifestations of self-assertion. At first such a posture
may feel a bit contrived, but as one sees clients respond, it may become
more integrated and authentic to one's therapeutic style.

**Interpreting during Quiescence**

Pine (1985) contributed an important dictum to our literature on working
with clients who struggle over separation and individuation: "Strike
when the iron is cold." With many neurotic-level people, the best time
to make interpretations is when the patient is in a state of emotional
arousal, so that the content of the therapist's observation is not
intellectualized and the affective power of the issues being addressed
is unmistakable. With borderline clients, the opposite consideration
applies, because when they are in a state of heightened emotionality,
they are too upset to take anything in. One can comment on what happened
in their rage or panic or desperate regression, but only after that
state is over and they are internally reassured of having recovered from
such a disturbing intensity of feeling.

Thus one might say to a borderline patient, "I was thinking. What you're
talking about now, your tendency to feel murderous envy and to attack
people when you're in that state . . . was something like that part of
your outburst at me last week? It felt as if whatever I offered you, you
had to destroy it." In a state of emotional repose, a borderline client
may be willing---even relieved---to hear that the therapist has named
such a dynamic and tried to understand it. But in a state of intense
feeling, the patient may receive such a comment not only as condemnation
but also as an effort to dismiss passionately held attitudes as if they
were contemptible. Telling someone in the throes of an envious rage that
he or she is trying to destroy the therapist may increase the person's
helpless fury and shame over having such raw impulses. Talking about it
later may be fruitful.

**Respecting Countertransference Data**

A final aspect of the implications of a borderline diagnosis for
psychotherapy concerns the central role of the therapist's understanding
of countertransference. Much more than neurotic-level people, borderline
clients communicate through powerful and unverbalized affect
transmission, probably via the early right-brain-to-right-brain
communication characteristic of parents and infants (Schore, 2003a). By
this I mean that even though they may talk freely in therapy, the most
vital communications they send are often not in the content of their
words but in the "background music" of their emotional state. The
intuitive, affective, and imaginal responses of therapists when sitting
with a borderline patient can often provide better data about the
essence of what is going on between the two people than either cognitive
reflection on the content of the patient's communication or recourse to
ideas on theory and technique.

When one suddenly feels bored, or in a rage, or panicky, or overwhelmed
with the wish to rescue, or diverted by sexual images, something is
probably going on that says something important about the client's
internal state. For example, a paranoid man, in treatment with a young
woman, is in a state of self-righteous indignation about mistreatment by
some authority. The therapist notices that she feels weak, small,
fearful of the patient's criticism, and distracted by fantasies of being
attacked. She should consider the possibility that what she is feeling
is a split-off, disowned part of the patient that is being projected
into her in an almost physical way. If that idea seems reasonable after
some reflection, it may be therapeutic (to both parties!) for her to say
something like "I know that you are in touch with feeling angry and
energized, but I think there may also be a part of you that feels weak,
anxious, and fearful of being attacked."

This area of the informational value of countertransference is a tricky
one. Not every passing thought and emotion that one feels in the
presence of a borderline patient was "put" there by the patient. At our
worst, we can do harm in the name of concepts like projective
identification and co-construction; I have even heard of therapists
getting into hassles with borderline clients over whose "fault" it is
that the therapist is having strong reactions. I do not want to feed
anyone's rationalizations in this direction. Decades of clinical work
suggests that countertransference, like transference, is a mixture of
internally generated and externally stimulated material, sometimes
weighted more in one direction, sometimes more in the other (Gill, 1983;
Jacobs, 1991; Roland, 1981; Sandler, 1976; Tansey & Burke, 1989). In our
therapeutic role we should be insightful about our own dynamics and take
responsibility for our reactions, even when they are being provoked by a
patient's incursions on our equanimity. And even interpretations that we
feel sure are valid should be offered in a way that invites clients to
take issue if they disagree.

The extreme converse attitude, that one should regard
countertransference as solely one's "own stuff," can also be inimical to
clinical progress. Some psychoanalytic supervisors put so much stress on
their students' understanding of their own dynamics that they foster a
distracting degree of self-consciousness. No emotional energy is left
over for reflecting on what can be learned about the patient from one's
responses. A kind of navel gazing comes to substitute for real
relatedness, and people of talent and compassion become reluctant to
trust what are often excellent natural instincts because they fear they
are acting something out. If in the above example, for instance, the
therapist had handled her countertransference with self-examination
alone, reflecting on how she has a vulnerability to feeling small and
frightened in the presence of angry men who remind her of her critical
father, there would be little to do therapeutically with such an
insight. It might help her to contain defensive reactions, an
achievement not to be disdained, but it would not guide the therapist
toward what she could actively do to help the patient. The worst thing
that can happen if we mistake our own feelings for a client's is that we
will be wrong, and if interpretations are made in a tone of hypothesis
rather than pronouncement, the patient will be glad to point out our
errors.

Different writers emphasize different aspects of tone with borderline
patients. My own style, one that fits my own personality, is to be more
emotionally "real" with borderline patients than with neurotic-level
ones. Trying to act "neutral" with them, especially when they are
self-harming, tends to sound stiff and false. For example, a therapist
has been working for weeks to reduce a young woman's tendency for
self-harm and is just beginning to see progress. Then the client comes
in, smiles coyly, and says, "Well, I know we've been working on this,
but I cut myself again." Or "I know you think I should always use
condoms, but I did have unprotected sex with a guy this week that I met
in a bar. I don't think he's HIV positive, though; he seems nice. Are
you angry at me?" At such points, a hot rage may start to burn in one's
gut.

I have learned that it is not helpful to say, as if one could be
dispassionate, "So tell me about your fantasies about my reaction," as
one might with a neurotic-level person who had acted out and feared
disapproval. Instead, it is better to say something like "Well, you know
it's my job to try to help you be less self-destructive, so when I hear
that you've been *more* self-destructive, it does get to me. What's it
like for you when I get irritated at your behavior?" As Karen Maroda
(1999) has emphasized, it does not usually close the patient down when
the therapist is able to show some emotion---especially borderline
patients, who know they are difficult.

A book on diagnosing individuals takes by definition a one-person
perspective of trying to understand what is consistent about the patient
in *any* relationship. And I have argued, contra some relational
arguments, that this is a valuable perspective (cf. Chodorow, 2010). But
in treatment, it is important to remember the psychological equivalent
of the Heisenberg principle: When we are observing something, we are
part of what is being observed. When we are with a patient, we are
relating to a person *as he or she exists in the situation of being with
us*. What we are learning about the emotional brain, about
right-brain-to-right-brain communication, about the intersubjective
nature of all interaction, reveals that the image of any person as an
autonomous individual whom one is "objectively" observing is a fiction
(Wachtel, 2010). The fact that all relationships are co-constructed
means that one must own one's own contribution to whatever goes on.
Attunement to that fact may be particularly important with borderline
clients, who struggle with humiliation and may be relieved by the
therapist's sharing responsibility for what goes on in the dyad.

This concludes what I can say in a primer about implications of
developmental level for treatment. I have only scratched the surface. If
this were a treatise on technique per se, each level would merit at
least a chapter, or better yet, would be the subject of its own book.
And as if the above issues were not complex enough, let me now introduce
the topic of the interaction of developmental and typological categories
of personality structure and their complex relationship.

**INTERACTION OF MATURATIONAL AND TYPOLOGICAL DIMENSIONS OF CHARACTER**

[Figure 4.1](#part0013.html_fig4.1){#part0013.html_reffig4.1 .calibre9}
sets out visually the ways in which many analytically oriented
therapists implicitly map out their patients' personality structures.
The developmental axis, though divided into the three main categories of
organization, is actually a continuum, with differences of degree that
gradually become great enough to warrant conceptualization as
differences of kind. We all fluctuate in terms of our maturational
state; under enough stress an optimally healthy person can have a
temporary psychotic reaction; and even the most delusional schizophrenic
has moments of utter lucidity. Many of the typological categories that
cross the maturational axis should be familiar, even though they will
not be discussed systematically until later in this book. In [Chapters
5](#part0014.html){.calibre9} and [6](#part0015.html){.calibre9} I cover
in detail the concept of defense, since the personality configurations
on the typological axis represent the habitual use of one defense or one
cluster of defenses.

In every category on the horizontal axis, there is a range of character
pathology from the psychotic to the neurotic--healthy areas. Yet people
are not evenly distributed along all points of each continuum. Those
categories that represent the habitual use of a more primitive defense
will "load" more toward the psychotic end of the continuum; paranoid
people, for example, who by definition depend on denial and projection,
will be more common at the lower rather than at the upper end of the
developmental axis. Those typological categories representing reliance
on more mature defenses will load more toward the neurotic pole; a
greater proportion of obsessional people, for example, will be at the
neurotic end of the obsessive dimension than at the psychotic pole. Most
character patterns that are maladaptive enough to be considered a DSM
personality *disorder*, rather than just a personality *style*, are
likely to be in the borderline range.

Anyone's life experience with a diversity of human beings gives evidence
that it is possible for someone to have a high degree of ego development
and identity integration and still handle anxieties with a primitive
defense. Again taking the case of people with significant paranoia, most
of us can think of individuals whose personalities are distinctly
paranoid but who have good ego strength, clarity about their existence
as individuated human beings, an elaborated and consolidated identity,
and enduring relationships. They often find a home in professions like
detective work or covert operations in which their paranoid tendencies
work to advantage. The fact that healthier paranoid people do not
usually seek psychotherapy (a fact intrinsically related to their
paranoia) does not mean that they are not out there. The frequency with
which people seek therapy and thereby get into mental health statistics
is not the same across different types of personality because the
categories reflect important differences in areas like one's disposition
to trust, inclination to hope, willingness to part with money for
nonmaterial benefits, and so forth.

Correspondingly, ordinary life experience also suggests that it is
possible for people to rely centrally on a "mature" defense like
intellectualization and nevertheless have poor reality testing,
inadequate separateness, limited identity integration, and unsatisfying
object relationships. Thus, whereas healthier obsessive people may be
easier to find than those with psychotic leanings, any intake worker in
an inpatient facility has seen people whose penchant for
intellectualizing has crossed the line into delusion.

It is often more important clinically to have a sense of a client's
overall developmental level than it is to identify his or her most
appropriate typological descriptor. Since flexibility of defense is one
aspect of psychological health, people in the higher ranges rarely
exemplify one pure personality type. But both areas of assessment are
important, as will be exemplified in certain instances of differential
diagnosis that I cover in [Chapters 7](#part0017.html){.calibre9}
through [15](#part0025.html){.calibre9}.

![art](images/00008.jpeg){.calibre16}

[**FIGURE 4.1.**](#part0013.html_reffig4.1){#part0013.html_fig4.1
.calibre9} Developmental and typological dimensions of personality.

**SUMMARY**

The subject of this chapter has been the implications for therapy of
whether a given client is mainly neurotic, psychotic, or borderline
characterologically. Neurotic-level people are usually good candidates
for either psychoanalysis or traditional exploratory therapies; their
ego strength also makes them responsive to many other kinds of
intervention.

Patients at a symbiotic--psychotic level usually need supportive
therapy, characterized by, among other things, an emphasis on safety,
respect, honesty, education, and attention to the effects of particular
stresses.

Patients at a borderline level are most helped by modes of working in
which boundaries are fastidiously maintained, contrasting ego states
named, and primitive defenses interpreted. The patient's help may be
solicited to resolve impasses. Interventions that are useful to
borderline patients discourage regression and support individuation. The
therapist builds understanding during periods of quiescence and respects
information contained in countertransference.

Finally, character structure was diagrammed on two axes in order to
illustrate graphically the principle of appreciating both developmental
and typological dimensions of personality.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

The standard text on classical psychoanalysis with neurotic-level people
is still Greenson's *The Technique and Practice of Psychoanalysis*
(1967). Schafer's *The Analytic Attitude* (1983) articulates aspects of
therapy that conventional books leave out. Among the texts on therapy
that try to be generic across levels of character organization, I
recommend those by Fromm-Reichmann (1950), Hedges (1992), Pine (1985),
Charles (2004), and my own text (McWilliams, 2004). The most readable
book on therapy across developmental levels from an object relations
perspective is probably Horner's *Psychoanalytic Object Relations
Therapy* (1991). E. S. Wolf's *Treating the Self* (1988) gives a
particularly useful self psychology perspective. Good relationally
oriented texts include Maroda's *Psychodynamic Techniques* (2010) and
Safran's research-based primer (in press).

The best writing I know of about working with psychotic-level
patients---and good sources in this area are much scarcer---includes
work by Arieti (1955), Searles (1965), Lidz (1973), Karon and VandenBos
(1981), Selzer and his colleagues (1989), and Geekie and Read (2009).
The text by Alanen and colleagues (2009) is a good overview of
psychotherapy with schizophrenia. The long-standing need for
comprehensive books on supportive therapy has been filled by Rockland
(1992) and Pinsker (1997). For a moving account of recovery from
schizophrenia from the patient's perspective, see the classic *I Never
Promised You a Rose Garden*, by Hannah Green (1964), the pseudonym of
the still-healthy Joanne Greenberg, who was treated by Freida
Fromm-Reichmann.

The literature on the therapies for borderline personality organization
is confusing because of the diversity of approaches to conceptualizing
borderline clients. Hartocollis's (1977) edited volume is useful for the
historical context of the concept. Among the more classic psychoanalytic
contributions to technique, Masterson's work, which has the virtue of
being gracefully written, is perhaps best summarized in his 1976 book.
G. Adler's (1985) contribution is a readable overview of a more self
psychologically influenced way of understanding and treating people in
this group.

Kernberg's research group (Clarkin et al., 2006) has published a
comprehensive manual on transference-focused therapy, with emphasis on
primitive defenses, especially splitting. Bateman and Fonagy's
*Mentalization-Based Treatment for Borderline Personality Disorders*
(2004) similarly synthesizes knowledge gleaned from a long program of
research and practice, with emphasis on cognitive and attachment
deficits. Linehan's cognitive-behavioral work (e.g., 1993), which
emphasizes the affect dimension of borderline experience, is accessibly
written and clinically useful by therapists of all orientations.

[]{#part0014.html}

**5**

Primary Defensive Processes

[I]{.dropcap}n this chapter and the next, I cover the major common
defenses. The concept of defense has been central to psychoanalytic
character diagnosis. The major diagnostic categories that have been used
by analytic therapists to denote personality types refer implicitly to
the persistent operation in an individual of a specific defense or
constellation of defenses. Thus, a diagnostic label is a kind of
shorthand for a person's habitual defensive pattern.

The term "defense" is in many ways unfortunate. What we refer to as
defenses in adults begin as global, inevitable, adaptive ways of
experiencing the world. Freud is responsible for originally observing
and naming some of these processes; his choice of the term "defense"
reflects at least two aspects of his thinking. First, he was fond of
military metaphors. When he was trying to make psychoanalysis palatable
to a skeptical public, he frequently made analogies, for pedagogical
purposes, comparing psychological operations to army tactical maneuvers,
or compromises over military objectives, or battles with complex
outcomes.

Second, when he first encountered the most dramatic and memorable
examples of processes that we now call defenses (repression, conversion,
dissociation) he saw them when they were operating in their defensive
function. The emotionally damaged, predominantly hysterical people he
first became fascinated by were trying to avoid reexperiencing what they
feared would be unbearable pain. They were doing so, Freud observed, at
a high cost to their overall functioning. Ultimately it would be better
for them to feel fully the overwhelming emotions they were afraid of,
thereby liberating their energies for getting on with their lives. Thus,
the earliest context in which the defenses were talked about was one in
which the doctor's task was to diminish their power.

Construed that way, the therapeutic value of weakening or breaking down
a person's maladaptive defenses was self-evident. Unfortunately, in the
climate of excitement surrounding Freud's early observations, the idea
that defenses are somehow by nature maladaptive spread among the lay
public, and the word acquired an undeservedly negative cast. Calling
someone "defensive" is universally understood to be a criticism.
Analysts also use the word in that way in ordinary speech, but when they
are discussing defense mechanisms in a scholarly, theoretical way, they
do not necessarily assume that anything pathological is going on when a
defense is operating. In fact, analytically influenced therapists have
sometimes understood certain problems, notably psychotic and
close-to-psychotic "decompensations," as evidence of insufficient
defenses.

The phenomena that we refer to as defenses have many benign functions.
They begin as healthy, creative adaptations, and they continue to work
adaptively throughout life. When they are operating to protect the self
against threat, they are discernible as "defenses," a label that seems
under those circumstances to fit. The person using a defense is
generally trying unconsciously to accomplish one or both of the
following: (1) the avoidance or management of some powerful, threatening
feeling, usually anxiety but sometimes overwhelming grief, shame, envy,
and other disorganizing emotional experiences; and (2) the maintenance
of self-esteem. The ego psychologists emphasized the function of
defenses in dealing with anxiety; object relations theorists, who focus
on attachment and separation, introduced the understanding that defenses
operate against grief as well; and self psychologists have stressed the
role of defenses in the effort to maintain a strong, consistent,
positively valued sense of self. Analysts in the relational movement
have emphasized the shared nature of defenses that emerge in couples and
systems.

Psychoanalysts assume, although this is seldom explicitly stated, that
we all have preferred defenses that have become integral to our
individual styles of coping. This preferential and automatic reliance on
a particular defense or set of defenses is the result of a complex
interaction among at least four factors: (1) one's constitutional
temperament, (2) the nature of the stresses that one suffered in early
childhood, (3) the defenses modeled---and sometimes explicitly
taught---by parents and other significant figures, and (4) the
experienced consequences of using particular defenses (in the language
of learning theory, reinforcement effects). In psychodynamic parlance,
the unconscious choice of one's favorite modes of coping is
"overdetermined," expressing the cardinal analytic principle of
"multiple function" (Waelder, 1960).

Defenses have been extensively researched. Phoebe Cramer (2008) has
reviewed empirical findings supporting seven core psychoanalytic
observations; namely, that defenses (1) function outside of awareness;
(2) develop in predictable order as children mature; (3) are present in
normal personality; (4) become increasingly used in times of stress;
(5) reduce the conscious experience of negative emotions; (6) operate
via the autonomic nervous system; and (7) when used excessively, are
associated with psychopathology. Substantial agreement exists among
psychoanalytic scholars that some defenses are less developmentally
mature than others (Cramer, 1991; Laughlin, 1970; Vaillant et al.,
1986). Cramer (2006) has demonstrated, for example, that denial occurs
very early, projection develops later, and identification arrives still
later (though I discuss here the archaic precursors of both projection
and identification as primary defensive processes). In general, defenses
that are referred to as "primary" or "immature" or "primitive" or "lower
order" involve the boundary between the self and the outer world. Those
conceived as "secondary" or "more mature" or "advanced" or "higher
order" deal with internal boundaries, such as those between the ego or
superego and the id, or between the observing and the experiencing parts
of the ego.

Primitive defenses operate in a global, undifferentiated way in a
person's total sensorium, fusing cognitive, affective, and behavioral
dimensions, whereas more advanced ones make specific transformations of
thought, feeling, sensation, or behavior, or some combination of these.
The conceptual division between more archaic and higher-order defenses
is somewhat arbitrary. Ever since Kernberg (e.g., 1976) called attention
to borderline clients' use of archaic forms of projection and
introjection (a precursor of identification), however, many therapists
have followed him in identifying the following defenses as intrinsically
"primitive": withdrawal, denial, omnipotent control, primitive
idealization and devaluation, projective and introjective
identification, and splitting. In 1994 I suggested adding extreme forms
of dissociation to that list. And now, based on the work of Vaillant
(e.g., Vaillant et al., 1986) and other researchers with which I was not
so familiar in 1994, and at the suggestion of several colleagues, I have
added somatization, acting out, and sexualization to the more primitive
defenses. There are mature expressions of those processes, but that is
also true of some other lower-order defenses, such as primitive
idealization and withdrawal.

To be considered primary, a defense typically has two qualities
associated with the preverbal phase of development: a lack of attainment
of the reality principle (see [Chapter 2](#part0011.html){.calibre9})
and a lack of appreciation of the separateness and constancy of those
outside the self. For example, denial is thought to be a manifestation
of a more primitive process than repression. For something to be
repressed, it has to have been known in some way and then consigned to
unconsciousness. Denial is an instant, nonreflective process. "This is
not happening" is a more magical way of dealing with something
unpleasant than "This happened, but I'll forget about it because it's
too painful."

Similarly, the defense mechanism known as "splitting," in which a person
segregates experiences into all-good and all-bad categories, with no
room for ambiguity and ambivalence, is considered primitive because it
is believed to derive from a time before the child has developed object
constancy. The perception of mother when one feels gratified is thought
to be an overall sense of "good mother," whereas the perception of the
same person when one is frustrated is "bad mother." Before the infant is
mature enough to appreciate the reality that it is the same person in
each situation, one whose presence sometimes feels good and sometimes
feels bad, we assume each experience has a kind of total, discrete,
defining quality. In contrast, a defense like rationalization is
considered mature because it requires some sophisticated verbal and
thinking skills and more attunement to reality for a person to make up
reasonable explanations that justify a feeling.

Many defensive processes have more primitive and more mature forms. For
example, "idealization" can denote an unquestioning, worshipful
conviction that another person is perfect, or it can refer to a subtle,
subdued sense that someone is special or admirable despite some visible
limitations. "Withdrawal" can refer to the full renunciation of reality
in favor of a psychotic state of mind, or it can refer to a mild
tendency to deal with stress by daydreaming. For this chapter on
primitive defenses, I have called a defense "extreme" if it also has
more mature manifestations.

The so-called primitive defenses are ways we believe the infant
naturally perceives the world. These ways of experiencing live on in all
of us, whether or not we have significant psychopathology; we all deny,
we all split, we all have omnipotent strivings. Such processes pose a
problem only if we lack more mature psychological skills or if these
defenses are used to the exclusion of possible others. Most of us also
supplement them with more sophisticated means of processing anxiety and
assimilating a complex and disturbing reality. *It is the absence of
mature defenses, not the presence of primitive ones, that characterizes
borderline or psychotic structure.*

It is much harder to describe the primitive defenses than the more
advanced ones. The fact that they are preverbal, prelogical,
comprehensive, imaginal, and magical (part of primary process thought)
make them extremely hard to represent in prose; in fact, the
representation of preverbal processes in words is to some degree an
oxymoron. The following summary gives an overview of those defenses that
are conventionally understood as primary.

**EXTREME WITHDRAWAL**

An infant who is overstimulated or distressed will often simply fall
asleep. Withdrawal into a different state of consciousness is an
automatic, self-protective response that one sees in the tiniest of
human beings. Adult versions of the same process can be observed in
people who retreat from social or interpersonal situations, substituting
the stimulation of their internal fantasy world for the stresses of
relating to others. A propensity to use chemicals to alter one's
consciousness can also be considered a kind of withdrawal. Some
professionals, including contributors to recent editions of the DSM,
prefer the term "autistic fantasy" to withdrawal; this label refers to a
specific version of the general tendency to shrink from personal
contact.

Some babies are temperamentally more inclined than others toward this
way of responding to stress; observers of infants have sometimes noted
that it is the babies who are especially sensitive who are most likely
to withdraw. People with this constitutionally impressionable
disposition may generate a rich internal fantasy life and regard the
external world as problematic or affectively impoverished. Experiences
of emotional intrusion or impingement by caregivers and other early
objects can reinforce withdrawal; conversely, neglect and isolation can
also foster that reaction by leaving a child dependent on what he or she
can generate internally for stimulation. Schizoid personality styles are
the characterological outcome of reliance on the defense of withdrawal.

The obvious disadvantage of withdrawal is that it removes the person
from active participation in interpersonal problem solving. People with
schizoid partners are frequently at a loss as to how to get them to show
some kind of emotional responsiveness. "He just fiddles with the TV
remote control and refuses to answer me" is a typical complaint. People
who chronically withdraw into their own minds try the patience of those
who love them by their resistance to engaging on a feeling level. Those
with serious emotional disturbance are hard to help because of their
apparent indifference to the mental health workers who try to win their
attention and attachment.

The main advantage of withdrawal as a defensive strategy is that while
it involves a psychological escape from reality, it requires little
distortion of it. People who depend on withdrawal console themselves not
by misunderstanding the world but by retreating from it. Consequently,
they may be unusually sensitive, often to the great surprise of those
who write them off as dull nonparticipants. And despite their lack of a
disposition to express their own feelings, they may be highly perceptive
of feelings in others. On the healthier end of the schizoid scale, one
finds people of remarkable creativity: artists, writers, theoretical
scientists, philosophers, religious mystics, and other highly talented
onlookers whose capacity to stand aside from ordinary convention gives
them a unique capacity for original commentary.

**DENIAL**

Another early way in which infants can handle unpleasant experiences is
by refusing to accept that they are happening. Denial lives on
automatically in all of us as our first reaction to any catastrophe; the
initial response of individuals who are informed of the death of someone
important to them is typically "Oh, no!" This reaction is the shadow of
an archaic process rooted in the child's egocentrism, in which a
prelogical conviction that "If I don't acknowledge it, it isn't
happening" governs experience. It was processes like this one that
prompted Selma Fraiberg to title her classic popular book on early
childhood *The Magic Years* (1959).

Examples of people for whom denial is a bedrock defense are the
Pollyana-like individuals who insist that everything is always fine and
for the best. The parents of one of my patients continued to have one
child after another even after three of their offspring had died from
what any parents not in a state of denial would have realized was a
genetically implicated affliction. They refused to mourn for the dead
children, ignored the suffering of their two healthy sons, resisted
advice to get genetic counseling, and insisted that their condition
represented the will of God, who knew what was best for them.
Experiences of rapture and overwhelming exhilaration, especially when
they occur in situations in which most people would perceive some
negative aspects to their circumstances, are similarly assumed to
reflect the operation of denial.

Most of us occasionally use denial, with the worthy aim of making life
less unpleasant, and many people use it frequently in dealing with
specific stresses. A person whose feelings get hurt in situations in
which it is inappropriate or unwise to cry is more likely to deny the
hurt feelings than to acknowledge them fully and inhibit the crying
response consciously. In crises or emergencies, a capacity to deny
emotionally that one's survival is at risk can be lifesaving: Denial may
permit the most realistically effective and even heroic actions. Every
war brings tales of those who "kept their heads" in terrifying,
life-threatening conditions, and saved themselves and their fellows.

Less benignly, denial can contribute to the contrary outcome. An
acquaintance of mine refuses to get annual Pap smears, as if by ignoring
the possibility of cancer she can magically avoid it. Spouses who deny
that their abusive partner is dangerous, alcoholics who insist they have
no drinking problem, mothers who ignore the evidence of sexual
molestation of their daughters, elderly people who will not give up a
driver's license despite obvious impairment---all are familiar examples
of denial at its worst. This psychoanalytic concept has made its way
more or less undistorted into everyday language, partly because the word
"denial" is, like "withdrawal," not jargonized and partly because it is
a concept of singular significance to 12-step programs and other
enterprises that attempt to confront people on their use of this defense
and thereby help them out of whatever hell it has created for them.

A component of denial can be found in the operation of most of the more
mature defenses. Take, for instance, the consoling belief that the
person who rejected you really desired you but was not ready for a full
commitment. Such a conclusion includes denial that one was rejected as
well as the more sophisticated excuse-making activity that we refer to
as rationalization. Similarly, the defense of reaction formation, in
which an emotion is turned into its opposite (e.g., hatred into love),
constitutes a specific and more complex type of denial of the feeling
being defended against than a simple refusal to feel that emotion.

The clearest example of psychopathology defined by the use of denial is
mania. In manic states, people may deny to an astonishing degree their
physical limitations, their need for sleep, their financial exigencies,
their personal weaknesses, even their mortality. Where depression makes
the painful facts of life supremely unignorable, mania makes them seem
insignificant. Analysts may refer to those who use denial as their main
defense as hypomanic (the "hypo" prefix, meaning "a little" or
"somewhat," distinguishes them from those who suffer full manic
episodes). They have also been termed "cyclothymic" ("alternating
emotion"), because of their tendency to cycle between manic and
depressed moods, usually short of diagnosable bipolar illness. We
understand this oscillation as the repetitive use of denial followed by
its inevitable collapse as the person becomes exhausted in the manic
condition. Although this personality diagnosis has not been in the DSM
since its second edition because of a decision to put all mood-related
phenomena into a "mood disorders" section, it is described in the PDM
and in [Chapter 11](#part0021.html){.calibre9}.

As with most primitive defenses, unmodified denial in adults is usually
cause for concern. Nonetheless, mildly hypomanic people can be
delightful. Many comedians and entertainers show the quick wit, the
elevated energy, the playfulness with words, and the infectious high
spirits that characterize those who successfully screen out and
transform painful affects for long periods of time. Yet the depressive
underside of such people is often visible to their closer friends, and
the psychological price exacted by their manic charm is often not hard
to see.

**OMNIPOTENT CONTROL**

For the newborn, the world and the self are felt more or less as one.
Fonagy's research (Fonagy et al., 2003) suggests that infants live for
about 18 months in a mental state of "psychic equivalence," in which the
external world is felt as isomorphic with the internal one. Piaget
recognized this phenomenon (e.g., 1937) in his concept of "primary
egocentrism" (a cognitive phase roughly equivalent to Freud's \[1914b\]
"primary narcissism," during which primary process thought prevails). It
may be that the source of all events is understood by the newborn as
internal in some way; that is, if the infant is cold, and a caregiver
perceives this and provides warmth, the baby has some preverbal
experience of its having magically elicited the warmth. The awareness
that there is a locus of control in separate others, outside the self,
has not yet developed.

A sense that one can influence one's surroundings, that one has agency,
is a critical dimension of self-esteem, one that may begin with
infantile and unrealistic but developmentally normal fantasies of
omnipotence. It was Sandor Ferenczi (1913) who first called attention to
the "stages in the development of a sense of reality." He noted that at
the infantile stage of primary omnipotence or grandiosity, the fantasy
that one controls the world is normal; that this naturally shifts, as
the child matures, to a phase of secondary or derived omnipotence in
which one or more caregivers are believed to be all-powerful; and that
eventually, the maturing child comes to terms with the unattractive fact
that no one's potency is unlimited. A precondition for the mature adult
attitude that one's power is not boundless may be, paradoxically, the
opposite emotional experience in infancy: a secure enough early life
that one can freely enjoy the developmentally appropriate illusions of,
first, one's own omnipotence, and second, that of those on whom one
depends.

Some healthy residues of the sense of infantile omnipotence remain in
all of us and contribute to feelings of competence and effectiveness in
life. There is a natural kind of "high" that we feel when we effectively
exert our will. Anyone who has ever "had a hunch" about impending luck
and then won some kind of gamble knows how delicious is the sense of
omnipotent control. The conviction that individuals can do anything they
set their mind to is a piece of American ideology that flies in the face
of common sense and most human experience, but it nonetheless can be a
powerfully positive and self-fulfilling fiction.

For some people, the need to feel a sense of omnipotent control, and to
interpret experiences as resulting from their own unfettered power,
remains compelling. If one's personality is organized around seeking and
enjoying the sense that one has effectively exercised one's power, with
all other practical and ethical concerns relegated to secondary
importance, one's personality is in the psychopathic range
("sociopathic" and "antisocial" are terms of later origin). Psychopathy
and criminality are overlapping but not equivalent categories (Hare,
1999). Nonprofessionals frequently assume that most criminals are
psychopaths and vice versa. Yet many people who rarely break the law
have personalities driven by the defense of omnipotent control, as in
the corporate "snakes in suits" described by Babiak and Hare (2007).
They use conscious manipulation as a primary way of avoiding anxiety and
maintaining self-esteem.

"Getting over on" others is a central preoccupation and pleasure of
individuals whose personalities are dominated by omnipotent control
(Bursten, 1973a). Such people are common in enterprises that require
guile, a love of stimulation or danger, and a willingness to subordinate
other concerns to the central objective of making one's influence felt.
They can be found in leadership roles in business, in politics, in
covert operations, among cult leaders and evangelists, in the
advertising and entertainment industries, and in other walks of life
where the potential to wield raw power is high. Once when I was
consulting at a military base, making myself available for anyone who
wanted to confer on a question within my expertise, the commander of the
base wanted an hour with me. His question was "How can we prevent
psychopaths from becoming generals?"

**EXTREME IDEALIZATION AND DEVALUATION**

Ferenczi's formulation about how early fantasies of omnipotence of the
self are gradually replaced by fantasies of the omnipotence of one's
caregivers continues to be valuable. One can see how fervently a young
child would need to believe that Mommy or Daddy can protect him or her
from all the dangers of life. As we get older, we forget how frightening
it is to children to confront for the first time the realities of
hostility, vulnerability to illness and harm, mortality, and other
terrors (C. Brenner, 1982). One way that youngsters cushion themselves
against these overwhelming fears is to believe that someone, some
benevolent, all-powerful authority, is in charge. (In fact, this wish to
believe that the people who are running the world are somehow more
inherently wise and powerful than ordinary, fallible human beings lives
on in most of us and can be inferred by our degree of upset whenever
events remind us that such a construction is only a wish.)

The conviction of young children that their mother or father is capable
of superhuman acts is the great blessing and curse of parenthood. It is
an undisputed advantage in the boo-boo curing department, and there is
nothing more touching than a child's total and loving trust, but in
other ways it creates in parents a barely controllable exasperation. I
remember one of my daughters, then about 2½, throwing a full-scale
tantrum when I tried to explain that I could not make it stop raining so
that she could go swimming.

We all idealize. We carry remnants of the need to impute special value
and power to people on whom we depend emotionally. Normal idealization
is an essential component of mature love (Bergmann, 1987). And the
developing tendency over time to deidealize or devalue those to whom we
have childhood attachments seems to be a normal and important part of
the separation--individuation process. It would be unusual for an
18-year-old to leave home feeling it is a much better place than the
life that awaits. In some people, however, the need to idealize seems
relatively unmodified from infancy. Their behavior shows evidence of the
survival of archaic and rather desperate efforts to counteract internal
terror by the conviction that some attachment figure is omnipotent,
omniscient, and omnibenevolent, and that through psychological merger
with this wonderful Other, they are safe. They also hope to be free of
shame: A by-product of idealization and the associated belief in
perfection is that imperfections in the self are harder to bear; fusion
with an idealized object is an attractive remedy.

Longings for the omnipotent caregiver naturally appear in people's
religious convictions; more problematically, they are evident in
phenomena like the insistence that one's lover is perfect, one's
personal guru is infallible, one's school is the best, one's taste is
unassailable, one's government is incapable of error, and similar
illusions. People in cults have been known to die rather than devalue a
leader who has become crazy. In general, the more dependent one is or
feels, the greater the temptation to idealize. Numerous female friends
have announced to me during pregnancy, a time of awesome confrontation
with personal vulnerability, that their obstetrician is "wonderful" or
"the best in the field."

People who live their lives seeking to *rank* all aspects of the human
condition according to how comparatively valuable they are, and who
appear motivated by a search for perfection through merger with
idealized objects, efforts to perfect the self, and tendencies to
contrast the self with devalued alternatives, have narcissistic
personalities. While other aspects of narcissistic organization have
been emphasized in much of the psychoanalytic literature, a structural
way of construing the psychology of such people is in terms of their
habitual recourse to primitive idealization and devaluation. Their need
for constant reassurance of their attractiveness, power, fame, and value
to others (i.e., perfection) results from depending on these defenses.
Self-esteem strivings in people who need to idealize and devalue are
contaminated by the idea that one must perfect the self rather than
accept it.

Primitive devaluation is the inevitable downside of the need to
idealize. Since nothing in human life is perfect, archaic modes of
idealization are doomed to disappointment. The more an object is
idealized, the more radical the devaluation to which it will eventually
be subject. The bigger one's illusions, the harder they fall. Clinicians
working with narcissistic people can ruefully attest to the damage that
may ensue when the client who has thought that a therapist can walk on
water decides instead that the therapist cannot walk and chew gum at the
same time. Treatment relationships with narcissistic clients are
notoriously subject to sudden rupture when the patient becomes
disenchanted. However sweet it can feel to be the object of total
idealization, it is nevertheless onerous, both because of the irritating
aspects of being treated as if we can stop the rain and because we have
learned the hard way that being put on a pedestal is only the precursor
to being knocked off. My colleague Jamie Walkup (personal communication,
May 1992) adds that it is also a straitjacket, tempting the therapist to
deny normal ignorance, to find intolerable the modest goals of help and
assistance, and to think that only one's best performance is "typical."

In ordinary life, one can see analogues of this process in the degree of
hate and rage that can be aimed at those who seemed to promise much and
then failed to deliver. The man who believed that his wife's oncologist
was the only cancer specialist who could cure her is the one most likely
to initiate a lawsuit if death eventually defeats the doctor. Some
people spend their lives running from one intimate relationship to the
next, in recurrent cycles of idealization and disillusionment, trading
the current partner in for a new model every time he or she turns out to
be a human being. The modification of primitive idealization is a
legitimate goal of all long-term psychoanalytic therapy, but that
enterprise has particular relevance in work with narcissistic clients
because of the degree of unhappiness in their lives and in those of the
people who try to love them.

**PROJECTION, INTROJECTION,\
AND PROJECTIVE IDENTIFICATION**

I am combining the discussion of two of the most primitive defensive
processes, projection and introjection, because they represent opposite
sides of the same psychological coin. In both projection and
introjection, there is a permeated psychological boundary between the
self and the world. As mentioned earlier, in normal infancy, before the
child has developed a sense of which experiences come from inside and
which ones have their sources outside the self, we assume that there is
a generalized sense of "I" being equivalent to "the world." A baby with
colic probably has the experience of "Hurt!" rather than "Something
inside me hurts." The infant cannot yet distinguish between an
internally located pain like colic and an externally caused discomfort
like pressure from diapers that are too tight. From this era of relative
undifferentiation come the processes that later, in their defensive
function, we refer to as projection and introjection. When these
processes work together, they are considered one defense, called
projective identification. Some writers (e.g., Scharff, 1992)
distinguish between projective and introjective identification, but
similar processes are at work in each kind of operation.

Projection is the process whereby what is inside is misunderstood as
coming from outside. In its benign and mature forms, it is the basis for
empathy. Since no one is ever able to get inside the mind of another
person, we must use our capacity to project our own experience in order
to understand someone else's subjective world. Intuition, leaps of
nonverbal synchronicity, and peak experiences of mystical union with
another person or group involve a projection of the self into the other,
with powerful emotional rewards to both parties. People in love are well
known for reading one another's minds in ways that they themselves
cannot account for logically.

In its malignant forms, projection breeds dangerous misunderstanding and
untold interpersonal damage. When the projected attitudes seriously
distort the object on whom they are projected, or when what is projected
consists of disowned and highly negative parts of the self, all kinds of
difficulties can ensue. Others resent being misperceived and may
retaliate when treated, for example, as judgmental, envious, or
persecutory (attitudes that are among the most common of those that tend
to be ignored in the self and ascribed to others). A person who uses
projection as his or her main way of understanding the world and coping
with life, and who denies or disavows what is being projected, can be
said to have a paranoid character.

I should note that paranoia has nothing inherently to do with
suspiciousness (which may be based on realistic, unprojected observation
and experience, or may derive from posttraumatic vigilance), nor with
whether or not an attribution is accurate. The fact that a projection
"fits" does not make it any less a projection; and although it is easier
to spot a projection when the attribution does *not* fit, it is also
possible that there is some other, nondefensive reason for a
misunderstanding of someone else's motives. Popular misuse of the word
"paranoid" has wrongly equated it with "fearful" or "unreasonably
suspicious," much to the detriment of precision in language, even though
it is true that what people project is usually unpleasant stuff to which
they then may react with fear and distrust (see McWilliams, 2010).

Introjection is the process whereby what is outside is misunderstood as
coming from inside. In its benign forms, it amounts to a primitive
identification with important others. Young children take in all kinds
of attitudes, affects, and behaviors of significant people in their
lives. The process is so subtle as to be mysterious, although recent
studies of mirror neurons and other brain processes are starting to shed
light on it. Long before a child can make a subjectively voluntary
decision to be like Mommy or Daddy, he or she seems to have "swallowed"
them in some primal way.

In its problematic forms, introjection can, like projection, be highly
destructive. The most striking examples of pathological introjection
involve the process that has been labeled, somewhat inappropriately in
view of its primitivity, "identification with the aggressor" (A. Freud,
1936). It is well known, from both naturalistic observations (e.g.,
Bettelheim, 1960) and empirical research (e.g., Milgram, 1963), that
under conditions of fear or abuse, people will try to master their
fright and pain by taking on qualities of their abusers. "I'm not the
helpless victim; I'm the powerful perpetrator" seems to be the
unconscious attraction to this defense. This mechanism crosses all
diagnostic boundaries but is particularly evident in characterological
dispositions toward sadism, explosivity, and what is often misleadingly
called impulsivity.

Introjection is also implicated in some kinds of depressive psychology
(Blatt, 1974, 2004). When we are deeply attached to people, we introject
them, and their representations inside us become a part of our identity
("I am Tom's son, Mary's husband, Sue's father, Dan's friend," etc.). If
we lose someone whose image we have internalized, whether by death,
separation, or rejection, not only do we feel that our environment is
poorer for that person's absence in our lives but we also feel that we
are somehow diminished, that a part of our self has died. An emptiness
or sense of void comes to dominate our inner world. We may also, in an
effort to feel some sense of power rather than helpless loss, become
preoccupied with the question of what failure or sin of ours drove the
person away. The critical, attacking voice of a lost object can live on
in us as a way of keeping that person internally alive. When mourning is
avoided, unconscious self-criticism thus takes its place. Freud (1917a)
beautifully described the process of mourning as a slow coming to terms
with this condition of loss, in which "the shadow of the object fell
upon the ego" (p. 249). A person who is unable over time to separate
internally from a loved one whose image has been introjected, who
consequently fails to invest emotionally in other people (the function
of the grieving process), will continue to feel diminished, unworthy,
depleted, and bereft.

Similarly, children in destructive families prefer to believe there is
something wrong with them (preserving hope that by changing, they can
improve their lot), than to take in the terrifying fact that they are
dependent on negligent or abusive caregivers. Fairbairn (1943) called
this process the "moral defense," noting that it is "better to be a
sinner in a world ruled by God than to live in a world ruled by the
Devil" (pp. 66--67). If one regularly uses introjection to reduce
anxiety and maintain continuity in the self, keeping psychological ties
to unrewarding objects of one's earlier life, one can reasonably be
considered characterologically depressive.

Melanie Klein (1946) was the first analyst to write about a defensive
process that she found to be ubiquitous in more disturbed patients,
which she called "projective identification." This fusion of projective
and introjective mechanisms has been compactly described by Ogden
(1982):

 

In projective identification, not only does the patient view the
therapist in a distorted way that is determined by the patient's past
object relations; in addition, pressure is exerted on the therapist to
experience himself in a way that is congruent with the patient's
unconscious fantasy. (pp. 2--3)

 

In other words, the patient both projects internal objects and gets the
person on whom they are projected to behave like those objects, as if
the target person had those same introjects. Projective identification
is a difficult abstraction, one that has inspired much controversy in
the analytic literature (e.g., S. A. Mitchell, 1997). My own
understanding of the term involves the ideas implied in the previous
paragraph; that is, projection and introjection each have a continuum of
forms, running from primitive to advanced (cf. Kernberg, 1976), and at
the primitive end, those processes are fused because of their similar
confusion of inside and outside. This fusion is what we call projective
identification. In [Chapter 4](#part0013.html){.calibre9} I discussed
briefly the operation of projective identification in psychotic and
borderline states.

To illustrate how that process differs from mature projection, consider
the contrast between the following hypothetical statements from two
young men who have come for an intake interview:

P[ATIENT]{.small} A: (*somewhat apologetically*) I know I have no reason
to believe you're critical of me, but I can't help thinking that you
are.

P[ATIENT]{.small} B: (*in an accusatory tone*) You shrinks all love to
sit back and judge people, and I don't give a shit what you think!

Let us assume that in reality, the therapist began the session with a
genuinely friendly, interested, nonjudgmental attitude toward each
client. The content of what is bothering each man is similar; both are
worried that the therapist is taking a harsh, evaluative stance. Both
are projecting an internalized critical object onto the therapist. Three
aspects of their respective communications, however, make them very
different from each other.

First, Patient A shows evidence of the capacity for self-reflection
(observing ego, reflective functioning), the ability to see that his
fantasy may not necessarily conform to reality; his projection is ego
alien. Patient B, on the other hand, experiences what is projected as an
accurate depiction of the therapist's state of mind; his projection is
ego syntonic. In fact, he believes in the reality of his attribution so
absolutely that he is already launching a counterattack against the
assault that he is certain the therapist is planning. The fusion of
cognitive, affective, and behavioral dimensions of experience typical of
primitive processes is discernible here.

Second, these patients differ in the extent to which their projective
process has successfully done the job for which the defense was called
upon, namely, to get rid of a troublesome feeling. Patient A has ejected
the critical attitude and presumably feels some relief in reporting it,
while Patient B both projects it and keeps it. He ascribes a critical
attitude to the other person, yet that does not relieve him of feeling
censorious himself. Kernberg (1975) has described this aspect of
projective identification as "maintaining empathy" with what has been
projected.

Finally, these patients' respective communications will likely have very
different emotional effects. The therapist will find it easy to like
Patient A and will readily form a working alliance. With Patient B,
however, the therapist will rapidly begin feeling like exactly the sort
of person the patient is already convinced he is sitting with: uncaring,
ready to judge, and disinclined to exert the energy it will take to try
to care about this man. In other words, the countertransference toward
the first man will be positive and mild, while toward the second it will
be negative and intense.

The late Bertram Cohen once explained the "self-fulfilling prophecy"
quality of projective identification to me as a natural consequence of a
person's being disturbed enough to have very primitive *but not
psychotic* perceptions. A woman who is invested in staying anchored in
reality will feel less crazy if she can induce in someone else the
feelings she is convinced the other person already has. A frankly
psychotic woman will not care whether her projection "fits," and will
therefore spare others the pressure to confirm its appropriateness and
hence her sanity.

Projective identification is a particularly powerful and challenging
operation, one that strains the therapist's capacities. While all the
defenses in this section are considered primitive, this one, along with
splitting, which I discuss next, has a special reputation for causing
headaches to clinicians. When one is caught in the patient's certainty
about how the therapist "really" feels, along with the patient's
unrelenting struggle to induce just those feelings, it is hard to
withstand the emotional barrage. Moreover, since all of us share in the
predicament of being human, and hence contain already within ourselves
all the different emotions, defenses, and attitudes that get projected
onto us, there is always some truth in the projective identifier's
belief. It can be very confusing to figure out in the heat of the
clinical moment where the patient's defense ends and the therapist's
psychology begins. Perhaps the capacity of this defense to threaten the
therapist's confidence in his or her own mental health accounts for the
fact that projective identification, along with splitting, is implicated
in borderline personality organization. In particular, because the
projective piece of it is so powerful, it is associated with borderline
levels of paranoid personality.

Contrary to professional popular opinion, however, projective
identification is not used exclusively by people whose character is
essentially borderline. There are numerous subtle and benign ways that
the process operates in everyday life irrespective of psychopathology.
For example, when what is projected and identified with involves the
loving, joyful affects, a contagion of good feeling can occur in a
group. Even when what is projected and identified with is negative, as
long as the process is not relentless, intense, and unmodulated by other
interpersonal processes of a more mature sort, it is not unduly harmful.
There has been a tendency in recent American psychoanalysis to reframe
the unconscious as an intersubjectively shared phenomenon rather than as
one's individual "stuff" (see Aron, 1996, or Zeddies, 2000, on the
relational unconscious) and also to see it as creative and positive
rather than as Freud's seething cauldron of dangerous desire (Eigen,
2004; Grotstein, 2000; Newirth, 2003; Safran, 2006). The positive
aspects of projective identification are implicit in such formulations.

**SPLITTING OF THE EGO**

Splitting of the ego, usually referred to simply as "splitting," is the
other interpersonally powerful process that is understood as deriving
from a preverbal time, before the infant can appreciate that his or her
caregivers have good and bad qualities and are associated with good and
bad experiences. We can observe in 2-year-olds a need to organize their
perceptions by assigning good and bad valences to everything in their
world. That tendency, along with a sense of the difference between big
and little (adult and child, respectively), is one of the primary ways
in which young human beings organize experience. Before one has object
constancy, one cannot have ambivalence, since ambivalence implies
opposite feelings toward a constant object. Instead, one can be in
either a good or a bad ego state toward an object in one's world.

In everyday adult life, splitting remains a powerful and appealing way
to make sense of complex experiences, especially when they are confusing
or threatening. Political scientists can attest to how attractive it is
for any unhappy group to develop a sense of a clearly evil enemy,
against which the good insiders must struggle. Manichean visions of good
versus evil, God versus the devil, cowboys versus Indians, the free
world against the terrorists, the lone whistle-blower against the
hateful bureaucracy, and so on, have pervaded the mythology of
contemporary Western culture. Comparably split images can be found in
the folklore and organizing beliefs of any society.

The mechanism of splitting can be very effective in its defensive
functions of reducing anxiety and maintaining self-esteem. Of course,
splitting always involves distortion, and therein lies its danger.
Scholarly studies of the "authoritarian personality" (Adorno,
Frenkl-Brunswick, Levinson, & Sanford, 1950) in the post--World War II
era explored the far-reaching social consequences of the use of
splitting (not by that name) to make sense of the world and one's place
in it. The authors of the original study on authoritarianism believed
that certain right-wing beliefs were particularly likely to be
associated with this kind of inflexibility, but later commentators
established that left-wing and liberal forms of authoritarianism also
exist (see Brown, 1965).

Clinically, splitting is evident when a patient expresses one
nonambivalent attitude and regards its opposite (the other side of what
most of us would feel as ambivalence) as completely disconnected. For
example, a borderline woman experiences her therapist as all good, in
contrast to the allegedly uncaring, hostile, stupid bureaucrats who work
in the same setting. Or the therapist may suddenly become the target of
undiluted rage, as the patient regards him or her as the personification
of evil, neglect, or incompetence, when last week the therapist could do
no wrong. If confronted with inconsistencies in his or her attributions,
the client who splits will not find it arresting or worth pondering that
someone who seemed so good has become so bad.

It is well known that in institutions like psychiatric hospitals and
clinics, patients whose psychologies we describe as borderline not only
split internally, they create (via projective identification) splits in
the staff of the agency (G. Adler, 1972; Gunderson, 1984; Kernberg,
1981; T. F. Main, 1957; Stanton & Schwartz, 1954). Those mental health
workers associated with a borderline client's care find themselves in
repeated arguments in which some of them feel a powerful sympathy toward
the patient and want to rescue and nurture, whereas the others feel an
equally powerful antipathy and want to confront and set limits. This is
one reason that splitting as a defense has a less than glowing
reputation. Patients who use it as their customary way of organizing
their experience tend to wear out their caregivers.

**SOMATIZATION**

When young children are not helped by their caregivers to state their
feelings in words, they tend to express them in either depleted bodily
states (illness) or action. Somatization is what analysts have called
the process by which emotional states become expressed physically.
Although it is common to conflate somatization with malingering, the
somatic experience of being emotionally unwell in ways that are
unverbalizable is not equivalent to pretending to be ill in order to
extract sympathy or avoid a responsibility. Nor does it equate with a
problem's being "all in your head." The brain is a part of one's
physicality, not a detached overseer. Distinctions between body and
mind, along with assumptions that the mind "controls" the body, have
been long exposed as quaint myths of the Enlightenment era, with its
smug assumption that "man" has natural dominion over nature, other
animals, and his own body (cf. Meissner, 2006).

Our earliest reactions to the stresses of life are somatic, and many of
these reactions remain basic to our responsiveness. The
fight--flight--freeze response to stress seems pretty hard-wired.
Blushing is an automatic aspect of the shame response. Under trauma, the
brain is flooded with glucocorticoids, with multiple systemic
consequences. The gastrointestinal system, the circulatory system, the
immune system, the endocrine system, the skin, the breath, the
heart---all get activated in different ways under emotional pressures.
Part of maturation is the slow mastering of language to describe
experiences that are originally felt as inchoate bodily arousal. If one
has little help on making that transition, the automatic physical
responses may be the only language one has for states of emotional
activation (Gilleland, Suveg, Jacob, & Thomassin, 2009).

Analysts have long described somatizing patients as characterized by
alexithymia, or lack of words for affect (Krystal, 1988, 1997;
McDougall, 1989; Sifneos, 1973), an observation supported by a recent,
comprehensive study by Mattila and colleagues (2008). Waldinger, Shulz,
Barsky, and Ahern (2006) found that both insecure attachment and a
childhood history of trauma are associated with somatization. Trauma has
been implicated by a number of researchers (Reinhard, Wolf & Cozolino,
2010; Samelius, Wijma, Wingren, & Wijma, 2009; Zink, Klesges, Stevens, &
Decker, 2009). Contrary to the assumptions of many, there is little
empirical evidence for the reinforcement of somatization by parental
responsiveness to it (Jellesma, Rieffe, Terwogt, & Westenburg, 2009).
Rather, it seems to correlate with childhood fear, insecure attachment,
and a less integrated sense of self (Evans et al., 2009; Tsao et al.,
2009).

When life is hard to bear, the immune system can break down. I can
recall (more clearly now than I could see at the time) several instances
when I became ill during a period of emotional overload, and I have
often heard friends and clients describe such tipping points in the face
of particularly taxing events. Several studies have found that
DSM-IV-defined somatization disorder co-occurs with the majority of
personality disorders (Bornstein & Gold, 2008; Garcia-Campayo, Alda,
Sobradiel, Olivan, & Pascual, 2007; Spitzer & Barnow, 2005), suggesting
that somatization is common in more serious character pathology. People
who regularly and characteristically respond to stress with illness may
be conceptualized as having a somatizing personality (PDM Task Force,
2006). Although the DSM has never included characterological
somatization in its listing of personality disorders, the DSM-IV
description of "somatization disorder" describes individuals who have
problems in multiple organ systems, over many years, under many
different circumstances. This is pretty hard to differentiate
conceptually from a personality disorder.

Most of us can think of acquaintances who respond to stress by getting
sick. Therapists see many clients referred by physicians who have been
defeated by a patient's chronic physical fragility, whom they have
finally sent to see whether psychotherapy can help. We see others who
come to us as a last resort because nothing else has successfully
treated their tension headaches or irritable colon or skin rashes or
chronic pain. Expression of feelings is the ordinary currency of the
psychoanalytic and humanistic therapies. Because somatizers suffer
automatically and physically and lack the capacity for such expression,
they can be difficult to help---especially when their physical suffering
has been complicated by having encountered impatience, exasperation, and
a sense of defeat in previous health professionals and therapists.

The conclusion that a person complaining to a therapist of physical pain
or exhaustion is using the defense of somatization should not be reached
unreflectively. For one thing, the stress of disease itself can cause a
regressive reaction. People can get sick because they are unconsciously
depressed; they can also get depressed because they are medically ill.
In addition, some clients come from cultures in which it is normative to
express psychological suffering by reference to bodily pain or
malfunction. In traditions where the idiom of distress is physical, even
psychologically mature individuals express their difficulties this way,
and so the assumption of a primitive regressive process is unwarranted
(Rao, Young, & Raguram, 2007; So, 2008).

**ACTING OUT (DEFENSIVE ENACTMENT)**

As noted above, the other way young children express unverbalizable
states of mind is by acting them out. In the first edition of this book,
I put acting out with the more mature defenses because in the chapter on
primary defensive processes I was concentrating on the processes that
Kernberg (1984) had explicated in connection with borderline and
psychotic conditions. I think now that even though it characterizes
healthy as well as more troubled individuals, it is a mistake to frame
enactment as a second-order process: Putting into action what one lacks
the words to express is by definition a preverbal operation. But I still
want to issue my earlier caution: The label "acting out" gets applied to
all kinds of behavior that the labeler happens not to like, often in a
tone quite at odds with its original nonpejorative meaning. Most readers
have probably heard the phrase bandied about disapprovingly and may not
be aware of the more simply descriptive use of the term.

To my knowledge, the earliest uses of the phrase "acting out" occurred
in psychoanalytic descriptions of patients' actions outside the
analyst's office, when their behavior seemed to embody feelings toward
the analyst that the person was unaware of having or was too anxious to
let into awareness, especially in the analyst's presence (Freud, 1914b).
Later on, the term became used more generally to describe behavior that
is driven by unconscious needs to master the anxiety associated with
internally forbidden feelings and wishes, with powerfully upsetting
fears and fantasies, and with traumatic memories (Aichhorn, 1936;
Fenichel, 1945). Still later, the related term "enactment" was applied
to the representation in action of experiences for which the affected
person had never had words and could not formulate verbally (Bromberg,
1998; D. B. Stern, 1997). Analysts in the relational movement emphasize
that enactments are inevitable in therapy, as the unconscious worlds of
both patient and therapist create mutually enacted dynamics, which the
therapist is responsible to turn into speech and reflection. With
respect to the individual function of acting out as a defense, by
enacting upsetting scenarios, the unconsciously anxious person turns
passive into active, transforming a sense of helplessness and
vulnerability into an experience of agency and power, no matter how
negative the drama that is played out (cf. Weiss, 1993).

A teacher, whose relationship to her judgmental mother had left her both
frightened of and deeply hungry for intimacy, began a sexual affair with
a colleague named Nancy a few weeks after entering therapy with me. I
suspected she was beginning to feel some wish for closeness with me, was
unconsciously assuming that I (like her mother) would be scornful of her
longings, and was handling her unconscious and forbidden strivings by
acting out aspects of what she wished and feared with someone who bore
my name. This kind of enactment, assuming my interpretation of it is
accurate, happens frequently in analysis, especially with patients who
have a childhood basis for fearing an authority's rejection of their
needs and feelings.

"Acting out" or "enactment" thus properly refers to any behavior that is
assumed to be an expression of transference attitudes that the patient
does not yet feel safe enough, or emotionally articulate enough, to
bring into treatment in words. It may also be used to label the process
by which any attitude, in or out of treatment, may be discharged in
action with the unconscious purpose of mastering overwhelming,
unverbalizable affects that surround it. What is acted out may be
predominantly self-destructive, or predominantly growth enhancing, or
some of each; what makes it acting out is not its goodness or badness
but the unconscious or dissociated nature of the feelings that propel
the person into action and the compulsive, automatic way in which the
acted-out behavior is undertaken. The current popularity of calling any
unappreciated behavior---in obstreperous children, for example, or in
rude acquaintances---"acting out" is psychoanalytically unjustified. The
negative cast that the phrase has acquired may reflect the fact that
beneficial kinds of acting out do not call attention to themselves in
the way that destructive ones do.

Analysts have created several imposing labels depicting classes of
behaviors that, when unconsciously motivated, fall under the general
heading of acting out: exhibitionism, voyeurism, sadism, masochism,
perversion, and all the "counter" terms ("counterphobia,"
"counterdependency," "counterhostility"). I am not, by the way, implying
that these processes are inherently negative or even inherently
defensive. We have normal exhibitionistic and voyeuristic needs that are
ordinarily discharged in socially acceptable ways of looking and being
looked at. Our masochistic and sadistic strivings may find positive
expression in acts of personal sacrifice or dominance, respectively. All
these tendencies may be integrated into pleasurable sexual experiences.
But when applied to specific acts that are understood as defensive, such
terms assume underlying fear or other disavowed or unformulated negative
feelings. Freud's early observation that we act out what we do not
remember remains astute, especially if we assume that the reason we do
not remember is that something very painful went along with the
unremembered and now-enacted state.

To the extent that there is an identifiable population of persons who
rely on acting out to deal with their psychological dilemmas, that group
would fall into the category of impulsive personalities. This
nomenclature is misleading, as it implies an uncomplicated readiness to
do whatever one feels like doing at the moment. Much of what may look
like spontaneous, uncomplicated impulsiveness is often unconsciously and
very complexly driven behavior, behavior that is anything but innocently
expressive and random. Hysterically organized people are famous for
acting out unconscious sexual scenarios; addicted people of all kinds
can be conceptualized as repeatedly acting out their relation to their
preferred substance (in such cases, of course, chemical dependency can
complicate what was already a psychological addiction); people with
compulsions are by definition acting out when they succumb to internal
pressure to engage in their particular compulsive acts; psychopathic
people may be reenacting a complicated pattern of manipulation. Thus,
the defense may be seen in many contrasting clinical presentations.

**SEXUALIZATION (INSTINCTUALIZATION)**

Sexualization usually takes an enacted form and might be considered a
subtype of acting out. I have chosen to present it separately, though,
partly because it is possible to sexualize without acting out (a process
that is more accurately referred to as erotization) and partly because
it is a concept of such general and interesting significance that it
deserves some special attention.

Freud (1905) originally assumed that basic sexual energy, a force he
called "libido," underlies virtually all human activity. (Later,
impressed with the prevalence of human destructiveness, he decided that
aggressive strivings are equally fundamental and motivating, but most of
the language of his clinical theory derives from a time before that
shift in his thinking.) One consequence of his biological, drive-based
theory was his tendency to regard sexual behaviors as expressing a
primary motivation, not a derivative and defensive one. Obviously,
sexuality is a powerful basic dynamism in human beings, and much human
sexual behavior amounts to relatively direct expressions of the
reproductive imperative of our species. Clinical experience and research
findings (see Celenza, 2006; Ogden, 1996; Panksepp, 2001; Stoller, 1968,
1975, 1980, 1985) over the decades since Freud's work, however, attest
to how often sexual activity and fantasy are used defensively: to master
anxiety, to restore self-esteem, to offset shame, or to distract from a
sense of inner deadness.

People may sexualize any experience with the unconscious intention of
converting terror or pain or other overwhelming sensation into
excitement---a process that has also been referred to as
instinctualization. Sexual arousal is a reliable means of feeling alive.
A child's fear of death---by abandonment, abuse, or other dreaded
calamity---can be mastered psychologically by turning a traumatic
situation into a life-affirming one; many children masturbate to reduce
anxiety. Studies of people with unusual sexual proclivities have often
turned up infantile experiences that overwhelmed the child's capacity to
cope and were consequently transformed into self-initiated
sexualizations of the trauma. For example, Stoller's (e.g., 1975) work
with sexually masochistic people, those for whom pain is a condition of
sexual satisfaction, revealed that a significant number of them had
suffered invasive and painful medical treatments as young children. At
the other end of the sadomasochistic spectrum, rape is the sexualization
of violence.

Most of us use sexualization to some degree to cope with and spice up
troublesome aspects of life. There are some gender differences in what
tends to be sexualized: For example, women are more apt to sexualize
dependency and men to sexualize aggression. Some people sexualize money,
some sexualize dirt, some sexualize power, and so on. Many of us
sexualize the experience of learning; the erotic aura around talented
teachers has been noted at least since the time of Socrates. Our
tendency to erotize our reaction to anyone with superior power may
explain why political figures and other celebrities are typically
deluged with sexually available admirers, and why the potential for
sexual corruption and exploitiveness is so great among the influential
and famous.

The susceptibility of those in a relatively weak position to converting
their envy, hostility, and fear of mistreatment into a sexual scenario,
one in which they compensate for a relative lack of official power with
recourse to a very personal erotic power, is one of the reasons we need
laws and conventions protecting those who are structurally dependent on
others (employees on employers, students on teachers, sergeants on
lieutenants, patients on therapists). We all need to be discouraged not
only from the possibility of crass exploitation by the authorities in
our lives but also from the temptations created by our own defenses.

At the risk of belaboring a point that applies to all defensive
processes, let me stress that sexualization is not inherently
problematic or destructive. People's individual sexual fantasies,
response patterns, and practices are probably more idiosyncratic than
almost any other psychological aspect of their lives; what turns one
person on erotically may leave another cold. If I happen to sexualize
the experience of someone's handling my hair (even if the childhood
genesis of my doing so was a defensive sexualizing of my mother's
abusive hair yanking), and my sexual partner loves to run his or her
fingers through it, I am not likely to go into psychotherapy. But if I
sexualize the experience of being frightened by abusive males, and I
have repeated affairs with men who beat me up, I might well seek help.
As with every other defense, it is the context and consequences of its
use in adulthood that determine whether it is reasonable to be regarded
(by self and others) as a positive adaptation, an unremarkable habit, or
a pathological affliction.

**EXTREME DISSOCIATION**

I have put extreme dissociation with the primary defenses here, both
because it works so globally on the total personality and because many
dissociated states are essentially psychotic. Since the first edition of
this book, however, I have become increasingly sensitized to the range
of dissociative reactions and the inadvisability of restricting our use
of the term "dissociation" to the overwhelming, shock-trauma versions of
the defense. In 1994 I wrote that dissociation seemed different from the
other lower-order defenses because it is so clearly a response to severe
trauma, from which many of us are thankfully spared while growing up
(the other processes, in contrast, represent normal modes of operating
that become problematic only if one hangs onto them too long or to the
exclusion of other ways of dealing with reality). But I have come to
agree with many contemporary relational analysts (e.g., Bromberg, 1998;
Davies & Frawley, 1994; Howell, 2005) that it is a matter of degree that
separates one person's pain from another's trauma, and that dissociation
exists on a continuum from normal and minor to aberrant and devastating.

Dissociation is a "normal" reaction to trauma. Any of us, if confronted
with a catastrophe that overwhelms our capacity to cope, especially if
it involves unbearable pain and/or terror, might dissociate. Out-of-body
experiences during war, life-threatening disasters, and major surgery
have been reported so often that only the most skeptical person can
completely disregard the evidence for dissociative phenomena. People who
undergo unbearable calamities at any age may dissociate (Boulanger,
2007; Grand, 2000); those who are repeatedly subject to horrific abuse
as young children may come to dissociate as their habitual reaction to
stress. Where this is true, the adult survivor is legitimately
conceptualized as suffering from a chronic dissociative disorder, once
labeled "multiple personality" and currently termed "dissociative
identity disorder."

There has been an explosion of research and clinical reporting on
dissociation and dissociative identity disorder in recent decades, all
of which has underscored the fact that people who use dissociation as
their primary defense exist in far greater numbers than anyone had
previously suspected (see I. Brenner, 2001, 2004). Perhaps there has
been an increase in the kind of horrific child abuse that creates
dissociation, or perhaps some threshold of public awareness was crossed
with the publication of *Sybil* (Schreiber, 1973) that has encouraged
people who suspect that they may be regularly dissociating to show
themselves sooner and in greater numbers to mental health professionals.
Neuropsychoanalytic studies are beginning to describe what goes on in
the brain in states of dissociation (Anderson & Gold, 2003; Bromberg,
2003).

The advantages of dissociating under unbearable conditions are obvious:
The dissociating person cuts off pain, terror, horror, and conviction of
imminent death. Anyone who has had an out-of-body experience when in
mortal danger, and even those of us without such a dramatic basis for
empathy, can readily understand a preference for being outside rather
than inside the sense of impending obliteration. Occasional or mild
dissociation may facilitate acts of singular courage. The great drawback
of the defense, of course, is its tendency to operate automatically
under conditions in which one's survival is not realistically at risk,
and when more discriminating adaptations to threat would extract far
less from one's overall functioning. Traumatized people may confuse
ordinary stress with life-threatening circumstances, becoming
immediately amnesic or totally different, much to their own confusion
and that of others. Outsiders, unless they also have a traumatic
history, rarely suspect dissociation when a friend suddenly forgets some
major incident or appears inexplicably changed. Rather, they conclude
that their acquaintance is moody, or unstable, or a liar. There is thus
a high interpersonal price paid by the habitual user of this defense.

**SUMMARY**

In this chapter I have described defenses that analysts conventionally
consider primitive or primary: extreme withdrawal, denial, omnipotent
control, extreme idealization and devaluation, primitive forms of
projection and introjection, splitting, somatization, enactment,
sexualization, and extreme forms of dissociation. I have reviewed the
assumed normal origins of each defense and mentioned adaptive and
maladaptive functions of each. I have also identified the personalities
and syndromes associated with heavy reliance on each primary defense.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

Primitive forms of projection and introjection have inspired a few
worthy books (Grotstein, 1993; Ogden, 1982; Sandler, 1987; Scharff,
1992); other primary defenses tend to be discussed in different writers'
speculations about psychic development. Klein's "Love, Guilt and
Reparation" (1937) and "Envy and Gratitude" (1957) are highly
illuminative of primitive processes and, unlike some of her work, not
incomprehensible to beginning therapists. Balint (1968) was gifted in
describing archaic dynamics in individuals; Bion (1959) was peerless at
discerning their operation in groups. Grotstein's *Splitting and
Projective Identification* (1993) is also a brilliant and useful
exposition of these Kleinian concepts.

Phoebe Cramer's *Protecting the Self* (2006) reviews some fascinating
studies of defenses and their development and offers empirical support
for the longstanding psychoanalytic observation that maturation of
defensive style is associated with psychological health, whereas
reliance on more primitive defenses correlates with psychopathology.
George Vaillant has devoted much of his remarkable career to the
understanding of defensive processes; his 1992 book, *Ego Mechanisms of
Defense*, is particularly useful to therapists.

[]{#part0015.html}

**6**

Secondary\
Defensive Processes

[V]{.dropcap}irtually any psychological process can be used defensively,
and so no summary of the defenses can be complete. In analysis, even
free association can be used defensively, to avoid certain topics. Anna
Freud's seminal---*The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense* (1936) covers
denial, repression, reaction formation, displacement, rationalization,
intellectualization, regression, reversal, turning against the self,
identification with the aggressor, and sublimation. Laughlin (1970)
delineated 22 major and 26 minor defense mechanisms, Vaillant and
Vaillant (e.g., 1992) named 18, which they grouped according to inferred
maturity, and the DSM-IV enumerates 31, also grouped by level. Cramer
(2006) contrasts defense mechanism with deliberate coping strategies by
noting the unconscious, automatic, nonintentional quality of defenses.

I describe here a selection of operations that is more extensive than
Anna Freud's but less comprehensive than Laughlin's and Vaillant's
lists. I have chosen the "mature," or "higher-order," defenses to be
covered according to two criteria: (1) the frequency with which they are
mentioned in psychoanalytic clinical literature and by practicing
therapists, and (2) their relevance to particular character patterns.
Anyone else's list would probably be different, would emphasize other
aspects of defense, and would reflect another writer's distinctive take
on analytic theory and practice.

**REPRESSION**

Repression was one of the first defenses to fascinate Freud, and it has
enjoyed a long history of clinical and empirical investigation. The
essence of repression is motivated forgetting or ignoring. Its implicit
metaphor recalls the early drive model with its idea that impulses and
affects press for release and have to be held in check by a dynamic
force. Freud (1915b) wrote that "the essence of repression lies simply
in turning something away, and keeping it at a distance, from the
conscious" (p. 146). If either an internal disposition or an external
circumstance is sufficiently upsetting or confusing, it may be
deliberately consigned to unconsciousness. This process may apply to a
total experience, to the affect connected with an experience, or to
one's fantasies and wishes associated with it.

Not all difficulty in paying attention or remembering constitutes
repression. Only when there is evidence that an idea or emotion or
perception has become consciously inaccessible because of its power to
upset are there grounds for assuming the operation of this defense.
Other attentional and memory deficits may result from toxic or organic
conditions, or simply from the ordinary mental sifting of the important
from the trivial. (Now that I am in my sixties and regularly forgetting
what I came upstairs for, it occurs to me that the Freudian theory that
memory lapses are always dynamically provoked could only have been
developed by a relatively young man.)

Freud saw the operation of repression in traumatic experiences such as
rape or torture that the victim later cannot recall. Instances of what
were once called the "war neuroses," now known as posttraumatic stress
reactions, have been psychoanalytically explained by reference to the
concept of repression. In such cases, a person is unable to remember at
will certain horrifying, life-threatening events but may be troubled by
intrusive flashbacks of them, a phenomenon to which Freud would have
attached the colorful label "the return of the repressed." Our current
knowledge of brain processes suggests that repression is not an accurate
concept for such traumatic memory problems. We now know that under
extreme stress, the functioning of the hippocampus, which stores
episodic memory (the sense of "it happened to me; I was there"), is shut
down by the glucocorticoids secreted during trauma. Thus, the episodic
memory *is not laid down in the first place*. After a trauma there may
be semantic memory (third-person facts after the event), procedural
memory (physical experience of the event, or "body memory"), and
emotional memory (feeling the emotions that were activated in the event
when something, such as being in the place it happened, reminds one of
it), but there may never be episodic memory (Solms & Turnbull, 2002). I
say more about the clinical implications of these facts in [Chapter
15](#part0025.html){.calibre9}.

Later analytic theory applied the term "repression" more to internally
generated ideas than to trauma. This is the version of repression that
has remained most useful to therapists. Repression is seen as the means
by which children deal with developmentally normal but unrealizable and
frightening strivings, such as the oedipal wish to destroy one parent
and possess the other: They eventually relegate them to unconsciousness.
One must have attained a sense of the wholeness and continuity of the
self before one is capable of handling disturbing impulses by
repression. For people whose early experiences did not foster identity
integration, troublesome feelings tend to be handled with more primitive
defenses, such as denial, projection, and splitting (Myerson, 1991).

A clinically inconsequential example of repression, the kind that Freud
(1901) saw as part of the "psychopathology of everyday life," would be a
speaker's momentarily forgetting the name of someone he or she is
introducing, when there is evidence for the speaker's unconscious
negative feeling toward that person. In the developmentally normal
repressive processes that allow children to reject infantile love
objects and seek partners outside the family, and in trivial (and often
entertaining) instances of repression, one can see the adaptive nature
of the process. If we were constantly aware of the whole panoply of our
impulses, feelings, memories, images, and conflicts, we would be
chronically overwhelmed. Like other defenses, repression becomes
problematic only when it (1) fails to do its job of keeping disturbing
ideas out of consciousness so that we can go about the business of
accommodating to reality, or (2) gets in the way of certain positive
aspects of living, or (3) operates to the exclusion of other more
successful ways of coping. Overreliance upon repression, along with
certain other defensive processes that often coexist with it, has
classically been considered the hallmark of the hysterical personality.

Freud's early efforts to get hysterical patients to bring into
consciousness both the traumatic events of their histories and the urges
and feelings they had been raised to consider unacceptable yielded
fascinating information (Breuer & Freud, 1893--1895). From working with
this population Freud originally concluded, as I mentioned in [Chapter
2](#part0011.html){.calibre9}, that repression causes anxiety. According
to his original mechanistic model, the anxiety that is such a frequent
concomitant of hysteria is caused by a repressive bottling up of drives
and affects. These feelings press for discharge and hence cause a
chronic state of tension (some irreverent commentators have called this
the "coitus interruptus" theory of the relationship of repression to
anxiety). Later, as Freud revised his theory in light of accumulating
clinical observations, he reversed his version of cause and effect,
regarding repression and other defense mechanisms as the result rather
than the cause of anxiety. In other words, preexisting irrational fear
created the need to forget.

This later formulation of repression as an elemental defense of the ego,
the automatic suppressor of countless anxieties that are simply inherent
in living one's life, became standard psychoanalytic theory in the ego
psychology era. Nevertheless, Freud's original postulation of repression
as the *instigator* of anxiety is not without some intuitive appeal, in
that excessive repression may ultimately cause as many problems as it
solves. This process, labeled by Mowrer (1950) the "neurotic paradox,"
whereby attempts to quell one anxiety only generate others, is the core
characteristic of what was once (in a much more comprehensive use of the
term than is typical now) called neurosis. Along these lines, Theodor
Reik used to contrast the emotionally healthy person, who can stand in
front of the window at Tiffany's admiring the jewelry and tolerating a
passing fantasy of stealing it, with the neurotic person, who looks in
the window and runs in the opposite direction. When psychoanalysis first
captured the imagination of the educated public, such popularized
examples of the pathological operation of repressive defenses
contributed to a widespread overvaluation of the goals of removing
repression and shedding inhibitions, and also to the misunderstanding
that these processes constitute the essence of all psychoanalytic
therapies.

An element of repression is present in the operation of most of the
higher-order defenses (although it is arguable that denial rather than
repression is operating in instances in which it is unclear whether or
not the person was originally aware of something before losing that
knowledge). For example, in reaction formation, the turning of an
attitude into its opposite, such as hate into love or idealization into
contempt, the original emotion can be seen as repressed (or denied,
depending on whether it was ever consciously felt). In isolation, the
affect connected with an idea is repressed (or denied, as above). In
reversal, there is a repression of the original scenario that is now
being turned around. And so forth. Freud's original belief that
repression was a sort of grandparent of all other defenses can be seen
sympathetically in this light, despite current evidence that the
processes described in [Chapter 5](#part0014.html){.calibre9} predate
repression in the child by at least a year and a half. In [Chapter
15](#part0025.html){.calibre9} I discuss current analytic views that
dissociation is a more basic defense than repression, but for purposes
of this chapter, I am giving the more classical account.

**REGRESSION**

Regression is a relatively uncomplicated defense mechanism, familiar to
every parent who has watched a child slide backward into the habits of a
prior maturational stage when tired or hungry. Social and emotional
development does not progress in a straight line; there is a fluctuation
to personal growth that becomes less dramatic as we age, but never
entirely goes away. Almost anyone, if tired enough, will begin to whine.
The "rapprochement subphase" of the separation--individuation process
that Mahler (1972a, 1972b) described as a universal feature of the last
part of every child's second year, when the toddler who has just
declared independence from the mother goes back and hides under her
skirt, is only one example of the tendency of human beings to cling to
the familiar right after having achieved some new level of competence.

In long-term psychotherapy and psychoanalysis, this tendency is easy to
observe. The patient who has finally summoned up the courage to try out
a new way of behaving, especially if it involves new behavior toward the
therapist (e.g., expressing criticism or anger, confiding masturbation
fantasies, asking for a break on fees, or scheduling with more
self-assertion than was permitted in childhood), will frequently revert
to old habits of thought, feeling, and behavior in subsequent sessions.
The therapist who does not appreciate the ebb and flow inherent in
developmental change may be dismayed by this phenomenon (the
countertransference may resemble the normal exasperation of a parent who
finally succeeds in getting a young child to sleep through the night,
and then gets a week of bedroom visits at 3:00 [A.M.]{.small}) until it
becomes clear that despite the regressive dimension of the client's
struggle, the overall direction of change is forward.

Strictly speaking, it is not regression when a person is aware of
needing some extra comfort and asks to be held or reassured, nor is it
regression when one deliberately seeks out a means---through competitive
sports, for instance---of discharging primordial levels of drive. To
qualify as a defense mechanism, the process must be unconscious. Thus,
the woman who lapses unwittingly into compliant, little-girlish ways of
relating right after realizing some ambition or the man who
thoughtlessly lashes out at his wife just after attaining some new level
of intimacy with her are regressing in the psychoanalytic meaning of the
term, as their respective actions have not been consciously chosen.
Somatization has often been seen as a type of regression, and it belongs
there *if* the person has attained the capacity to put words to feelings
and then backslides into a preverbal, somatizing state.

Some hypochondriacal people, those who drive physicians to distraction
with a litany of vague and changing complaints that never respond to
treatment, use regression to the sick role as a primary means of coping
with upsetting aspects of their lives. By the time they are persuaded to
consult a therapist, they have usually built up an additional and
virtually impenetrable wall of defensiveness deriving from having
repeatedly been treated like a spoiled child or willful attention
seeker. They expect clinicians to try to expose them as malingerers.
Consequently, the therapist whose client uses regression to the sick
role as a favored defense must have almost superhuman reserves of tact
and patience---all the more so if the patient's pattern of taking to the
sickbed has been reinforced by other rewards of that position
("secondary gain").

Although one sometimes sees a client with both, hypochondriasis should
not be confused with somatization. In the former, there is no disease
process, despite the patient's worry or even conviction of illness. In
the latter, there are diagnosable ailments related to stresses that the
person somehow cannot process emotionally. Sometimes, of course, doctors
are sure they are dealing with a hypochodriacal patient and eventually
learn that the person has been suffering from an obscure, undiagnosed
illness. Therapists have to take care to leave open a mental space for
the possibility that a difficult client who seems clearly either
hypochondriacal or somatizing may be ill with a systemic problem that
has not been identified.

Hypochondria and other kinds of regression into relatively helpless and
childlike modes of dealing with life can be a kind of cornerstone of a
person's character. Where regression, with or without hypochondria,
constitutes someone's core strategy for dealing with the challenges of
living, he or she may be characterized as having an infantile
personality. This category did not survive after the second edition of
the DSM, but some analysts have lamented its disappearance.

**ISOLATION OF AFFECT**

One way in which people may deal with anxieties and other painful states
of mind is by isolating feeling from knowing. More technically, the
affective aspect of an experience or idea can be sequestered from its
cognitive dimension. Isolation of affect can be of great value: Surgeons
could not work effectively if they were constantly attuned to the
physical agony of patients or to their own revulsion, distress, or
sadism when cutting into someone's flesh; generals could not plan battle
strategy if they were in continual touch with the graphic horrors of
war; police officers could not investigate violent crimes without
becoming unglued.

The "psychic numbing" that Lifton (1968) has described as a consequence
of catastrophe exemplifies the operation of isolation of affect on a
social level. Therapists who have worked with survivors of the Holocaust
have been struck by their wooden descriptions of atrocities that defy
the ordinary imagination. The political scientist Herman Kahn (1962)
wrote an influential book on the probable outcome of a nuclear
conflagration, in which the most horrific consequences of atomic
disaster were detailed in an almost jovial tone of detachment. With
respect to its adaptive utility in extreme situations, isolation is a
degree more discriminative than dissociation: The experience is not
totally obliterated from conscious experience, but its emotional meaning
is cut off.

Isolation can also become, by means of a certain style of child rearing
mixing with a child of a certain temperament, a core defense in the
absence of obvious trauma. We all know people who claim that they have
no emotional responses to things about which the rest of us have
powerful feelings; such people sometimes make a virtue out of the
defense of isolation and idealize the condition of expressing only
rational concerns. Our cultural tendency to admire the capacity to
isolate affect from intellect is discernible in the widespread devotion
of old *Star Trek* fans to the character of Mr. Spock, the Vulcan. The
fact that isolation is appreciated as a defensive rather than a natural
position is betrayed by the decision of the writers of that series to
give Spock a latent emotional side, the contribution of his Earthling
mother.

Many contemporary analysts consider isolation to be a subtype of
dissociation. Analysts in the ego psychology tradition considered it the
most primitive of the "intellectual defenses" and the basic unit of
psychological operation in mechanisms like intellectualization,
rationalization, and moralization. I consider these defenses separately
in the following sections, but they have in common the relegation to
unconsciousness of the personal, gut-level implications of any situation
or idea or occurrence. When one's primary defense is isolation, and the
pattern of one's life reflects the overvaluation of thinking and the
underappreciation of feeling, one's character structure is considered
obsessive.

**INTELLECTUALIZATION**

Intellectualization is the name given to a higher-order version of the
isolation of affect from intellect. The person using isolation typically
reports that he or she has no feelings, whereas the one who
intellectualizes talks about feelings in a way that strikes the listener
as emotionless. For example, the comment, "Well, naturally I have some
anger about that," delivered in a casual, detached tone, suggests that
while the idea of feeling anger is theoretically acceptable to the
person, the actual expression of it is still inhibited. When patients in
psychoanalysis are intellectualizing about their treatment, they tend to
summarize their experiences on the couch in a tone that sounds more like
a weather report on their psyche than a disclosure of something that has
moved them. In the 2004 U.S. presidential campaign, Al Gore's wooden,
perseverative lectures contributed to his defeat; the public worries
about defensiveness when a candidate seems to lack passion.

Intellectualization handles ordinary emotional overload in the same way
that isolation handles traumatic overstimulation. It shows considerable
ego strength for a person to be able to think rationally in a situation
fraught with emotional meaning, and as long as the affective aspects of
that circumstance are eventually processed with more emotional
acknowledgment, the defense is operating effectively. Many people feel
that they have made a maturational leap when they can intellectualize
under stress rather than giving an impulsive, knee-jerk response. When
someone seems unable to leave a defensively cognitive, anti-emotional
position, however, even when provoked, others tend intuitively to
consider him or her emotionally dishonest. Sex, banter, artistic
expression, and other gratifying adult forms of play may be
unnecessarily truncated in the person who has learned to depend on
intellectualization to cope with life.

**RATIONALIZATION**

The defense of rationalization is so familiar that I hardly need to
explicate it. Not only has this term seeped into common usage with a
connotation similar to the one used in psychoanalytic writing, it is
also a phenomenon that most of us find naturally entertaining---at least
in others. "So convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable Creature,"
Benjamin Franklin remarked, "since it enables one to find or make a
Reason for everything one has in mind to do" (quoted in K. Silverman,
1986, p. 39). Rationalization may come into play either when we fail to
get something we had wanted, and we conclude in retrospect that it was
actually not so desirable (sometimes called "sour grapes
rationalization" after the Aesop fable of the fox and the grapes), or
when something bad happens, and we decide that it was not so bad after
all ("sweet lemon rationalization"). An example of the first kind would
be the conclusion that the house we could not afford was too big for us
anyway; an example of the second would be the popular rationalization of
those who value education: "Well, it was a learning experience."

The more intelligent and creative a person is, the more likely it is
that he or she is a good rationalizer. The defense operates benignly
when it allows someone to make the best of a difficult situation with
minimal resentment, but its drawback as a defensive strategy is that
virtually anything can be---and has been---rationalized. People rarely
admit to doing something just because it feels good; they prefer to
surround their decisions with good reasons. Thus, the parent who hits a
child rationalizes aggression by allegedly doing it for the youngster's
"own good"; the therapist who insensitively raises a patient's fee
rationalizes greed by deciding that paying more will benefit the
person's self-esteem; the serial dieter rationalizes vanity with an
appeal to health.

**MORALIZATION**

Moralization is a close relative of rationalization. When one is
rationalizing, one unconsciously seeks cognitively acceptable grounds
for one's direction; when one is moralizing, one seeks ways to feel it
is one's *duty* to pursue that course. Rationalization converts what the
person already wants into reasonable language; moralization puts it into
the realm of the justified or morally obligatory. Where the rationalizer
talks about the "learning experience" that some disappointment provided,
the moralizer will insist that it "builds character."

The self-righteous quality of this particular transformation of impulse
makes others regard it as either amusing or vaguely unpleasant, although
in certain social and political situations, leaders who exploit their
constituents' wish to feel morally superior can produce mass
moralization so effortlessly that the public that has been thus seduced
hardly blinks. The belief of the colonialists that they were bringing
higher standards of civilization to the people whose resources they were
plundering is a good example of moralization. Adolf Hitler was able to
indulge his own murderous fantasies by persuading an astounding number
of followers that the obliteration of Jews and other devalued groups was
necessary for the ethical and spiritual improvement of the human race.
In the contemporary United States, abrogation of time-honored
protections of human rights has been justified in the name of fighting
terrorism.

At a less catastrophic level, most of us have witnessed someone who
defended having savagely criticized a subordinate on the grounds that it
is a supervisor's duty to be frank about an employee's failings. In
doctoral oral defenses, hostile examiners have been known to make
comments like "Would we be doing this student any favors by withholding
the critique that this study deserves?" One of my friends, an interior
decorator, moralized the vanity behind her decision to have an expensive
facelift by explaining that alas, it was her obligation to present an
appealing appearance to her customers. Bette Davis reported having been
in conflict over her wish to continue her acting career during World War
II, but she resolved her discomfort by noting, "But then I felt that's
what the enemy wanted---to destroy and paralyze America. So I decided to
keep on working" (quoted in Sorel, 1991, p. 75).

Moralization may be regarded as a developmentally advanced version of
splitting. Although I have not seen it presented that way in the
psychoanalytic literature, it makes sense that an inclination to
moralize would be the natural later stage of the primitive tendency to
make gross good--bad distinctions. While splitting occurs naturally in
the child before there is an integrated self capable of ambivalence,
moralization resolves, by recourse to principle, mixed feelings that the
evolving self has become able to suffer. From moralization one can infer
the operation of a superego, albeit usually a rigid and punitive one
that requires a contrast group of "others," or "those people" who lack
the ethical sensibilities of the moralizer.

Moralization is the main defense in a personality organization that has
been called moral masochism (Reik, 1941). Some obsessive and compulsive
people are also wedded to this defense. In psychotherapy, moralizers can
create vexing dilemmas for clinicians, who find that when they confront
certain self-defeating attitudes or behaviors, their patients regard
them as deficient in virtue for not seeing the issue the same way they
do. One patient of mine, an obsessive--compulsive man on the neurotic
end of the borderline continuum, kept imploring me to make a moral
judgment about his compulsive masturbation, with the hope that that
would resolve his conflict about it. "How would you feel if I said I
thought it was getting in the way of your going out and developing
relationships with women?" I asked. "I'd feel criticized, deeply
ashamed---I'd want to crawl in a hole," he responded. "How about if I
said that given your repressive background, it was an achievement to
have found any kind of sexual satisfaction, and your masturbation
represents a forward-moving tendency in your sexual development?" I
offered. "I'd think you were depraved."

Moralization thus illustrates the caveat that even though a given
defense may be considered a "mature" mechanism, it can still be
maddeningly impervious to therapeutic influence. Working with someone in
the neurotic range whose character is defined by the chronic, inflexible
use of a particular defensive strategy can be as arduous as working with
overtly psychotic patients.

**COMPARTMENTALIZATION**

Compartmentalization is another of the intellectual defenses, probably
more closely related to dissociative processes than to rationalization
and moralization, although rationalization is often called on to support
it. Like isolation of affect, it is on the more primitive side; its
function is to permit two conflicting conditions to exist without
conscious confusion, guilt, shame, or anxiety. Whereas isolation
involves a rift between cognition and emotion, in compartmentalization,
there is a rift between incompatible cognitions. When someone
compartmentalizes, he or she holds two or more ideas, attitudes, or
behaviors that are essentially and definitionally in conflict, without
appreciating the contradiction. To an observer, compartmentalization may
be indistinguishable from hypocrisy.

Examples of everyday compartmentalization of which most of us are
occasionally guilty include such simultaneous attitudes as a professed
belief in the Golden Rule and also in the principle of looking out for
Number One, espousing the importance of open communication while
defending the position of not speaking to somebody, deploring prejudice
yet savoring ethnic jokes. When compartmentalization occurs in
organizations and cultures, it can be reinforced by group dynamics. In
the United States, some politically powerful groups sincerely hold the
incompatible beliefs that we can increase our commitment to national
defense and yet not increase taxes.

As for individuals on the more pathological end of the
compartmentalization continuum, there are people who are great
humanitarians in the public sphere yet defend the abuse of their
children in the privacy of their homes. Repeatedly, we see exposés of
preachers or legislators who rail against sin while enthusiastically
committing more than their share of it. More than one crusader against
pornography has been found to have an extensive collection of erotica.
Sin that is committed with a clear sense of guilt, or in a dissociated
state at the time of commission, is not properly regarded as revealing
the defense of "compartmentalization"; the term applies only if the
discrepant activities or ideas are both accessible to consciousness.
Upon confrontation, the person using compartmentalization will
rationalize the contradictions away.

**UNDOING**

Just as moralization can be considered a more grown-up version of
splitting, undoing can be regarded as the natural successor to
omnipotent control. There is a magical quality about the defense that
betrays its archaic origins, even though individuals engaging in
defensive undoing can often be induced, via an appeal to their
reflective capacities, to see the meaning of what amounts to
superstitious behavior. "Undoing" is a term that means exactly what one
would think: the unconscious effort to counterbalance some
affect---usually guilt or shame---with an attitude or behavior that will
magically erase it. An everyday example would be a spouse's arriving
home with a gift that is intended to compensate for last night's temper
outburst. If that motive is conscious, we cannot technically call it
undoing, but when undoers are not aware of their shame or guilt, and
therefore cannot consciously own their wish to expiate it, the label
applies.

Many religious rituals have an aspect of undoing. The effort to atone
for sins, even those committed only in thought, may be a universal human
impulse. Around the age when children can cognitively grasp the fact of
death, one sees numerous magical rituals that have a component of
undoing. The childhood game of avoiding cracks in the sidewalk lest one
break mother's back is psychoanalytically comprehensible as the undoing
of unconscious death wishes for the mother, which create more fear than
they did before the concept of death had taken on a more mature meaning.
Omnipotent fantasies are discernible in the implicit belief expressed in
this behavior that one's hostile feelings are dangerous: The thought is
tantamount to the deed.

One of my patients used to give me flowers occasionally. As she was
quite disturbed and would have experienced my rejecting such gifts, or
even analyzing her disposition to give them, as a profound repudiation
of her generous impulses, for a long time I did not attempt to explore
with her the meaning of this behavior. Eventually, however, she was able
to figure out herself that she tended to bring me bouquets when she had
been unusually angry at me the previous session. "I guess they were
really for your grave," she explained, grinning.

People who have a high degree of remorse for their past sins, mistakes,
and failures, whether real, exaggerated, or committed only in thought,
may make a lifetime project out of undoing. A 79-year-old, middle-class
Caucasian woman whom I studied in connection with research on the
psychology of characterological altruists (McWilliams, 1984) had for
decades dedicated herself to the cause of equal justice for nonwhite
people; her background included her having inadvertently insulted a
woman of color, whom she had deeply loved, when she was about 9,
something over which she was still miserable. Tomkins's (1964) study of
committed abolitionists suggested a similar organization of personality
around the defense of undoing.

When undoing is a central defense in a person's repertoire, and when
acts that have the unconscious significance of expiating past crimes
comprise the main support to the individual's self-esteem, we consider
his or her personality to be compulsive. I want to stress here, since
the terms "compulsion" and "compulsive" are so often associated with
undesirable behaviors, that the concept of compulsivity is neutral as to
moral content. In other words, one can be a compulsive drinker, but one
can also be a compulsive humanitarian. Similarly, "obsessive" and
"compulsive" are not necessarily pejorative terms when applied to
personality structure, even though those labels derive from attempts to
understand pathological states of obsession and compulsion. The sufferer
of ego-alien, persistent, unwanted thoughts (obsessions) or persistent,
unwanted acts (compulsions) may be desperate for help. In contrast, a
person happily obsessed with writing a novel or pleasurably engaged in
compulsive gardening is hardly to be regarded as "sick." In describing
character, which may be highly adaptive and healthy, "obsessive" applies
to thinking styles; "compulsive" to acting modes of adaptation.

**TURNING AGAINST THE SELF**

Anna Freud (1936) tended to use simple, everyday language, as in her use
of the term "turning against the self." The concept means what it sounds
like: the redirecting of some negative affect or attitude from an
external object toward the self. If one is critical of an authority
whose goodwill seems essential to one's security, and if one thinks that
person cannot tolerate criticism, one feels safer aiming the critical
ideas inward. For children, who have no choice about where they live and
who may pay a high price for offending a touchy caregiver, the defense
of turning against the self can distract them from the much more
upsetting fact that their well-being depends on an undependable adult
(Fairbairn, 1954). However unpleasant it is to feel self-critical, it is
emotionally preferable to acknowledging a realistic threat to one's
survival under conditions in which one has no power to change things.

One of my patients spent her formative years living in the care of a
suicidal mother and an on-again-off-again, self-centered father. Her
family's security was so precarious that even at the subsistence level
they were in trouble: Some of this woman's earliest memories concern her
parents' being thrown out of their apartments for nonpayment of rent.
Rather than feel chronic terror that her mother would kill herself and
her father would disappear on some self-indulgent project---both of
which were serious possibilities---she became adept at believing that if
only she were a better person, her parents would give her their love and
protection. This conviction, which had been adaptive in childhood,
caused her continual suffering as an adult when she reacted to any
unhappy circumstance with self-attack rather than with creative efforts
to improve her situation. It took years of therapy for her to realize at
an emotional level that she was no longer a powerless child in a
dysfunctional family, whose only hope for a sense of efficacy lay in the
project of improving herself internally.

Most of us retain some tendency to turn negative affects, attitudes, and
perceptions against the self because of the illusion that the process
gives of our being more in control of upsetting situations than we may
be. Turning against the self can be considered a more mature version of
introjection. The external critic is not swallowed whole, as in
introjection, but one identifies with the critical attitude to some
degree. It is a popular defense among some healthier people who are
aware of, and resistant to, temptations to deny or project unpleasant
qualities. They prefer to err in the direction of considering that a
problem is their fault rather than someone else's. Automatic and
compulsive use of this defense is common in people with depressive
personalities and in the relational version of characterological
masochism.

**DISPLACEMENT**

Displacement is another defense that is popularly appreciated without
much distortion of its technical psychoanalytic meaning. At the age of
11 one of my daughters, observing our dog attack its pull toy right
after being scolded for misbehavior, commented, "Look at that! She's
taking her anger out on the toy---just like people!" The term
"displacement" refers to the redirection of a drive, emotion,
preoccupation, or behavior from its initial or natural object to another
because its original direction is for some reason anxiety ridden.

The classic cartoon about the man bawled out by his boss, who goes home
and yells at his wife, who in turn scolds the kids, who kick the dog is
a study in displacement. The "triangulation" emphasized by family
therapists in the tradition of Murray Bowen (e.g., 1993) is a
displacement phenomenon. I have noticed that in couples in which one
partner is unfaithful, the other partner directs most of his or her
reactive hatred not to the mate who has strayed but to the "other" woman
or man. Tirades about "that home wrecker," implying that the partner was
an innocent victim of a cynical seduction, seem to protect an already
anguished person from risking any further threat to the relationship
that might be created if the betrayed party's rage were aimed directly
at the adulterous mate.

Lust can also be displaced; sexual fetishes seem explicable as the
reorientation of erotic interest from a human being's genitals to some
unconsciously related area, such as feet or even shoes. If events in a
man's history have made vaginas seem dangerous, some other
female-associated object may be substituted. Anxiety may itself be
displaced; Freud's famous patient the "Wolf Man" was treated in his
later years by Ruth Mack Brunswick for a morbid preoccupation with his
nose that came to be understood as the displacement of frightening,
mutilatory fantasies about his penis (Gardiner, 1971). When someone uses
displacement of anxiety from a fraught area to a specific object that
symbolizes the dreaded phenomenon (e.g., a terror of spiders, which to
that person have the unconscious significance of maternal engulfment, or
a horror of knives, which the individual unconsciously equates with
phallic penetration), he or she has a phobia (Nemiah, 1973).

When people have patterns of displaced, fearful preoccupations in many
aspects of their lives, we consider their character to be phobic. Many
people have one phobia, but therapists occasionally see patients who
have agoraphobia, multiple other phobias, and a general phobic attitude.
Phobic psychology differs from fears whose origins lie in trauma: If I
avoid bridges because I once had a horrible accident on a bridge, my
avoidance is a posttraumatic phenomenon. But if I steer clear of bridges
because I am unconsciously symbolizing and displacing a normal fear
(seeing a bridge as a symbol of major life transitions, of which the
ultimate is the transition to the grave), and magically hoping that will
protect me from aging and dying, I am phobic.

Certain lamentable cultural trends such as racism, sexism, heterosexism,
and the general blaming of societal problems on disenfranchised groups
that have little power to fight back contain a large element of
displacement. So does the tendency toward scapegoating that one finds in
most organizations and subcultures. Transference, in clinical as well as
the extra-clinical manifestations of transference that Sullivan called
"parataxic distortions," contains displacement (of feelings toward
important early objects) as well as projection (of internal features of
the self). Benign forms of displacement include the diverting of
aggressive energy into creative activity---a great deal of housework
gets done when people are in a snit about something---and the
redirecting of erotic impulses from impossible or forbidden sexual
objects toward an appropriate partner.

**REACTION FORMATION**

The defense of reaction formation is an intriguing phenomenon.
Evidently, the human organism is capable of turning something into its
polar opposite in order to render it less threatening. The traditional
definition of reaction formation involves this conversion of a negative
into a positive affect or vice versa. The transformation of hatred into
love, or longing into contempt, or envy into attraction, for example,
can be inferred from many common transactions.

Perhaps the earliest age at which the process is easily discernible is
in a child's third or fourth year; by this time, if a new baby arrives,
the displaced older sibling is likely to have enough ego strength to
handle its anger and jealousy by converting them into a conscious
feeling of love toward the newborn. It is typical of reaction formation
that some of the disowned affect "leaks through" the defense, such that
observers can sense there is something a bit excessive or false in the
conscious emotional disposition. With a preschool girl who has been
displaced by a younger brother, for instance, there may be a distinct
flavor of her "loving the baby to death": hugging him too hard, singing
to him too loudly, bouncing him too aggressively, and so on. Most adult
older siblings have been told a story about their pinching the new
baby's cheeks until the child screamed, or offering some delicacy that
was actually poisonous, or committing some similar transgression that
was allegedly motivated by love.

A more accurate way to depict reaction formation than as the turning of
an emotion into its opposite might be to note that it functions to deny
ambivalence. It is a basic psychoanalytic premise that no disposition is
totally unmixed. We can hate the person we love or resent the person to
whom we feel grateful; our emotional situation does not reduce to one or
the other position. (Freud felt that there is one exception to universal
ambivalence---the love of a mother for a male baby---but one suspects
his narcissism distorted his perception.) It is a common fear that
analysts delight in exposing the fact that one *seems* to feel *x* but
*really* feels *y*; in fact, we take the view that while one may feel
*x,* one *also* (unconsciously, perhaps) feels *y.* In reaction
formation, one persuades the self that all that is felt is one polarity
of a complex emotional response.

From the example of the displaced sibling who finds a way to avoid
feeling negative affects and to experience only positive ones, at an age
when finer discriminations between shades of feeling and (more
important) between feelings and actions are not yet maturationally
possible, one can see how valuable such a defense can be. Other
situations in which its operation is mostly benevolent include
circumstances in which competitive feelings, which include both
murderous and admiring components, lead a child to emulate a competent
friend rather than to reject him or her. In adults one sees reaction
formation, but ordinarily we assume that grown people would be better
off acknowledging all aspects of their emotional reactions to any given
situation and applying their inhibition to the domain of behavior rather
than that of feeling.

Reaction formation is a favored defense in those psychopathologies in
which hostile feelings and aggressive strivings are of paramount concern
and are experienced as in danger of getting out of hand. Paranoid
people, for instance, often feel only hatred and suspicion when the
external observer suspects that they also feel longing and dependency;
obsessive and compulsive people frequently believe that they have only
respect and appreciation for the authorities that others suspect them of
simultaneously resenting.

**REVERSAL**

Another way that one can cope with feelings that present a psychological
threat to the self is by enacting a scenario that switches one's
position from subject to object or vice versa. For example, if one feels
that the yearning to be cared for by someone else is shameful or
dangerous, one can vicariously satisfy one's own dependency needs by
taking care of another person and unconsciously identifying with that
person's gratification in being nurtured. This version of reversal is a
time-honored device of therapists, who are often uncomfortable with
their own dependency but happy to be depended upon.

As soon as children are old enough to play with dolls or "action
figures" (as boys' dolls are currently marketed), they can be said to be
using reversal. An advantage of reversal is that one can shift the power
aspects of a transaction so that one is in the initiating rather than
the responding role. Control--mastery theorists call this
"passive-into-active transformation" (Silberschatz, 2005). The defense
operates constructively when the scenario being reversed is a benign one
and destructively when the reversed situation is intrinsically negative.
In fraternity hazing and other abusive rites of passage, for instance,
one's experience of persecution during one's own initiation is
transformed later into a situation that is felt as positive by virtue of
its being a switch from passive to active, from victim to victimizer.

Sometimes in clinical practice one encounters reversal being used in a
way that challenges one's therapeutic resourcefulness. I worked for a
long time with a man who had had a deeply depressed and alcoholic
mother. Every morning as a boy, he would come into the kitchen to see
her drooping over a cup of coffee, cigarette in hand, looking exhausted
and miserable. His presenting problem was a vulnerability to depression
that had originated in his unsatisfactory relationship with this
miserable, potentially suicidal woman. When he would come in for a
session, he would often scan my face and announce, "You sure look tired
today" or "You certainly seem to be down in the dumps about something."
Occasionally he was right, but more commonly I was in a good mood and
struck by the inaccuracy of his observation. As time went on, I
increasingly challenged his assumption about my fatigue or despondency,
saying that I was not aware of feeling tired or depressed. Instead of
finding this interesting, and using my comment as a springboard to
understand what he was displacing or projecting, he would reverse roles
with me psychologically, announcing that while I might think I was okay,
I obviously was not; that he was an unusually sensitive observer of
people, and he knew a depressed person when he saw one.

This man had essentially made himself the therapist and me the patient,
thus reversing a situation that was very difficult for him. His
childhood experience of unreliable maternal authority had not given him
grounds for any emotional security in a role that invited him to depend,
especially on a female object. In this case, although his use of
reversal protected him from acknowledging some deeply disturbing
feelings, it had had the unfortunate side effect of making it hard for
him to be in relationships that were emotionally reciprocal. Part of the
stimulus for his depressive symptoms was a series of failed friendships
and love affairs in which his tendency to recreate the scenario of a
needy child and empathically limited parent, with himself in the latter
position, eventually rankled potential intimates.

One subject in my research on altruism (McWilliams, 1984) was an
attractive, successful man in his 40s whose greatest satisfactions in
life lay in his activity as a volunteer for an international agency that
arranged for the adoption of hard-to-place children (some were of
stigmatized ethnic origin, some had physical handicaps or deformities,
and some suffered congenital diseases). In his words, "I can't describe
the high I get when I hand the baby to the adoptive mother and know that
a new life is beginning for that kid." His history included the sudden,
shattering death of his mother when he was 2, followed by a short period
of great distress, followed by his informal adoption by a housekeeper,
who later married his father and became in every psychological sense his
mother. Whenever he successfully arranged an adoption, he felt the
elation of rescuing someone as he had been rescued (although until I
worked with him, he had never made a conscious connection between his
own background and his humanitarian concerns) and the relief that this
time the situation was reversed: He was the rescuer, the one with the
power, and it was the other party who was the helpless, needy child.

The reader may be noticing that as I discuss these higher-order
defensive processes, there are no single personality types that reflect
an overdependence on them. Psychologically healthier people tend not
only to use more mature defenses, such as reversal, they also handle
anxiety and other difficult emotional states by recourse to varying
defensive modes. Consequently, they are less readily typed by one label.

**IDENTIFICATION**

It may seem odd for identification to be included in a list of defense
mechanisms, since most of us consider the capacity to identify with
another person, or with some aspect of another person, as a benign and
nondefensive tendency. That some kinds of identification have very few
if any defensive components (e.g., the kind that psychologists with a
social learning orientation have called "modeling" and that we currently
attribute to mirror neurons) is well established, but psychoanalytic
thinkers continue to regard many instances of identification as
motivated by needs to avoid anxiety, grief, shame, or other painful
affects; or to restore a threatened sense of self-cohesion and
self-esteem. Like the other mature defensive processes, identification
is a normal aspect of psychological development that becomes problematic
only under certain circumstances.

Freud (1923) was the first to suggest a distinction between nondefensive
and defensive identification by differentiating what he called
"anaclitic" identification (from the Greek word meaning "to lean on")
from "identification with the aggressor." The first type he considered
to be motivated by an uncomplicated wish to be like a valued person
("Mommy is generous and comforting, and I want to be just like her").
The second he regarded as an equally automatic but defensively motivated
solution to the problem of feeling threatened by the power of another
person ("I'm afraid of Mommy's punishment for my hostile impulses; if I
*become* her, her power will be inside rather than outside me"). Freud
assumed that many acts of identification contain elements of both a
straightforward taking in of what is loved and a defensive becoming like
what is feared.

Analysts use the word "identification" to connote a mature level of
deliberately, yet at least partly unconsciously, becoming like another
person. This capacity evolves in a developmental line from the earliest
infantile forms of introjection (or "incorporation"), which have the
quality of swallowing the other person whole, to more subtle,
discriminating, and subjectively voluntary processes of selectively
taking on another person's characteristics (Cramer, 2006; Schafer,
1968). Identificatory potential is assumed to evolve and modify
throughout life and to be the emotional basis of psychological growth
and change. In fact, the opportunity that close relationships provide
for mutually enriching identifications accounts for the value that
analysts have traditionally placed on emotional intimacy. In a way that
parallels how primitive projection transforms itself over the lifespan
of an emotionally healthy person into a greater and greater capacity for
empathy, archaic forms of identification gradually transmute to more and
more discerning and nuanced ways to enrich the self by accumulating the
qualities of admired others.

Freud's most familiar paradigm of defensive identification was the
oedipal situation. In this famous scenario, the young child reaches an
age, usually around 3, in which his wishes for exclusive possession of
the mother run into the harsh fact of the father's claim on her love and
physical availability (I am using the masculine pronoun because Freud's
depiction of this process was based on his understanding of heterosexual
male children---something many analysts have critiqued). He fears that
his father, whose superior power is obvious, will kill or maim him in
retaliation for his own wishes to kill or maim his father, whom he views
as a rival, and the child resolves the anxiety connected with such
fantasies by identification ("Maybe I can't get rid of Father---whom I
love anyway and don't really want to dispose of---or get Mother all to
myself---which would also have its downside, but I could be like Father
and grow up to have someone like Mother as my exclusive partner"). Freud
felt that this fantasy, which he considered normal and universal, was
the prototype for identification with the aggressor---in this case an
imagined aggressor.

Identification is inherently a neutral process; it can have positive or
negative effects depending on who is the object of the identification. A
major part of the process of psychotherapy is the rethinking of old and
now problematic identifications that were entered into automatically,
resolved a conflict for the child at the time, and are now causing
conflict in adulthood. For example, a minister that I worked with had
survived the ordeal of having an abusive, alcoholic father and an
ineffectual, phobic mother by emulating his tough Uncle Harry, a man who
solved all interpersonal problems with his fists. This resolution was
highly adaptive for my patient throughout his adolescence in a chaotic
family in a series of hostile urban neighborhoods; he could deck anybody
who got in his way, and as a result, nobody messed with him. This was
how he relieved anxiety, discharged troubling feelings that were
unwelcome in his home, restored his self-esteem, and guaranteed others'
respect. In his later professional life, however, when he threatened to
beat up several obnoxious church elders, he lost the respect of many in
his congregation, who did not regard his behavior as consistent with a
Christian sensibility. He presented himself for therapy knowing that he
had to develop new ways of coping with stress, and as he came to
understand the nature of his early identifications and the current price
he paid for them, he did.

Because identification can seem to be a remedy for all the complexities
of life, it may be used more frequently as a defense when a person is
under emotional stress, especially of the sort that puts a strain on
older subjective versions of who one is. Death or loss will predictably
instigate identification, both with the absent love object and then with
those who come to replace that person in the survivor's emotional world.
The yearning of adolescents to find icons to emulate in their effort to
address the complex demands of looming adulthood has been noted for
centuries; in fact, the dissatisfaction of contemporary teenagers with
the heroes now offered by Western culture has been connected by some
psychoanalytic observers with the alarming increase in adolescent
suicides over recent decades (e.g., Hendin, 1975).

Some people seem to identify more easily and reflexively than others, as
if they are blotters for whatever psychological ink comes in their
direction. Those who suffer from basic confusions of identity, of
whatever severity, are at risk here, as anyone who has studied cult
behavior can attest. Conversion experiences contain a heavy component of
defensive identification. Even quite healthy people with some area of
identity disturbance, such as a hysterically organized woman with
unconscious feelings that her gender is a problem, can be more than
usually subject to identifying with someone who gives the impression of
having a better handle on life's difficulties.

The capacity of human beings to identify with new love objects is
probably the main vehicle through which people recover from emotional
suffering, and the main means by which psychotherapy of any kind
achieves change. Repeatedly, research on the treatment process finds the
emotional quality of the relationship between patient and therapist to
be more highly correlated with outcome than any other specifiable
factors (Norcross, 2002; Strupp, 1989; Wampold, 2001, 2010). In some
recent analytic writing on the therapy process, relationship is stressed
to such an extent that interpretation, once seen as the mainstay of
psychological healing, may hardly be mentioned at all (e.g., Buechler,
2008; Fosha, 2005; Maroda, 2010; Safran, in press).

In psychoanalytic treatment, the patient's propensity to make
identifications with the therapist is cherished for its reparative
potential and is also safeguarded as far as possible from abuse.
Practitioners, even those who recommend disclosing countertransference
feelings under some circumstances, may try to avoid exploiting the
patient's readiness to identify by exemplifying general qualities of
human virtue (such as compassion, curiosity, tolerance of difference,
and a sense of ultimate responsibility for one's behavior) while being
reserved about showing specifics of their personal attributes, giving
advice, or sharing particular opinions. Freud's (e.g., 1938) repeated
warning to analysts to avoid falling into the temptation to present
themselves in a grandiose way as saviors, healers, or prophets to their
patients remains a guiding maxim in the field; narcissistic misuse of a
patient's wish to identify remains a professional taboo---albeit one
that, like other taboos, is probably broken much more frequently than
most of us would admit.

**SUBLIMATION**

At one time, the concept of sublimation was widely understood among the
educated public and represented a trendy way of looking at many
different individual proclivities. Contemporarily, with the receding
centrality of drive theory in psychoanalytic thinking and the reduced
familiarity with psychoanalytic theory generally, it is referred to less
in psychoanalytic literature, and it is less appreciated popularly as a
concept. The original idea was that sublimation was the "good" defense,
the one that by definition represented a creative, healthful, socially
acceptable or beneficial resolution of internal conflicts between
primitive urges and inhibiting forces.

Sublimation was the label Freud (1905) originally gave to the expression
of biologically based impulses (which to him included urges to suck,
bite, mess, fight, copulate, look at others and be looked at by them,
inflict injury, endure pain, protect the young, etc.) in a socially
valuable form. For example, Freud would have said that a periodontist
may be sublimating sadism; a performing artist, exhibitionism; a lawyer,
the wish to kill one's enemies. Instinctual strivings, according to him,
become influenced by the circumstances of one's individual childhood;
certain drives or conflicts take on special salience and may be
creatively directed into useful activities.

This defense was considered to be the healthiest means of resolving
psychological predicaments for two reasons: first, it fosters behavior
beneficial to the species; and second, it discharges the relevant
impulse instead of wasting a lot of emotional energy either transforming
it into something different (e.g., as reaction formation would do) or
counteracting it with an opposing force (e.g., denial, repression). Such
energy discharge was assumed to be inherently beneficial: it kept the
human organism in proper homeostasis (Fenichel, 1945).

Sublimation remains a concept to which one finds references in the
analytic literature when a writer is referring to someone's finding a
creative and useful way to express problematic impulses and conflicts.
In contrast to a common misunderstanding that the object of
psychotherapy is to rid oneself of infantile strivings, the
psychoanalytic position about health and growth includes the assumption
that the infantile parts of our natures remain alive throughout
adulthood. We do not have the choice to divest ourselves of them; we can
only handle them in better or worse ways.

The goals of analytic therapy include the understanding of all aspects
of the self, even the most primitive and disturbing ones, the
development of compassion for oneself (and others, as one's need to
project and displace one's previously disowned qualities lessens), and
the expansion of one's freedom to resolve old conflicts in new ways.
They do not include purging the self of its loathed aspects or
obliterating primitive desires. That sublimation is considered the
apogee of ego development says a great deal about the basic
psychoanalytic attitude toward human beings and our inherent potentials
and limits, and about the implicit values informing psychoanalytic
diagnosis.

**HUMOR**

I have added humor to this list of more mature defenses because although
it could be considered a subtype of sublimation, it is a particularly
interesting one. Children start making jokes when very young (an
8-month-old baby I knew, who had just learned the concept of "hot,"
suddenly pulled her hand away from her mother's breast, yelled "hot!"
and burst out laughing---clearly a deliberate witticism). Such jokes
seem not defensive at all---some humor has the quality of sheer joy and
playfulness. At the other end of the spectrum, the compulsion to be
funny can be extremely defensive; most of us know someone who, when
invited into a sincere conversation, cannot stop making jokes. A driven
need to be constantly funny and to avoid feeling life's inevitable pain
is a feature of hypomanic personality, a personality type that is most
commonly found at the borderline level of severity.

Some humor clearly maximizes our capacity to tolerate psychological
pain. The extreme version of this process is the "gallows humor" that
has been noted for centuries as a mechanism for surviving life's
grimmest realities. Much humor is defensive in a positive way,
performing welcome functions such as holding objects of fear up to
ridicule, acknowledging harsh realities with a light touch, transforming
pain into pleasure. A sense of humor, especially a capacity to laugh at
one's own idiosyncrasies, has long been considered a core element of
mental health. The emergence of humor in a previously dour or anguished
patient is often the first indication of significant internal change.

**CONCLUDING COMMENTS**

This concludes my review of defensive operations that are pertinent to
understanding the organization of individual character. I should remind
the reader here that this book is about personality *structure*, not
just personality *disorders*. Even though its focus is on the clinical
task of diagnosis, which presumes that the person coming for help is
suffering in some way, we should remember that the problem for which
help has been sought may not lie in the patient's basic character. It
may, for example, be a response to some stress that would tax the
reserves of anyone, with any kind of character structure.

But just how a person suffers will reflect his or her personality
organization. And how someone else can help mitigate the suffering
requires a sensitivity to personality differences. Cactus and ivy will
both grow when given light and water, but the gardener who does not
appreciate the differences between the two plants will not bring each to
full flower. An understanding of variation among people in their basic
character is essential to effective psychotherapy whether or not the
problem to be addressed is characterological. A therapeutic stance that
is helpful to an obsessive person troubled by depression will differ
from the one that helps another depressed client whose basic personality
is more hysterically organized.

All of us have powerful childhood fears and yearnings, handle them with
the best defensive strategies available at the time, and maintain these
methods of coping as other demands replace the early scenarios of our
lives. The object of a sensitive psychodiagnostic process is not to
evaluate how "sick" someone is, or to determine which people are beyond
the pale of what is socially defined as normal (McDougall, 1980), but to
understand the particularity of a person's suffering and strength so
that one can participate in mitigating the former and building on the
latter.

In the following section, I describe the major psychodynamically
significant personality types. There are many other ways of categorizing
individual differences; the one that therapists have inherited
originally organized people based on the kind of mental suffering to
which they were prone. (It would be a fascinating project to interview
people in other roles---hairdressers, bartenders, teachers, musicians,
accountants---to learn about their generalizations for dividing up the
human pie, as it is my sense that most groups generate lore about
personality types relevant to the lens through which they view the human
animal.) Each personality category, as I have mentioned, constitutes a
characterological reliance on a defense or group of defenses. Each
comprises a developmental range from people who are frankly psychotic to
those who are mentally healthy exemplars of a particular psychological
orientation. In what follows I cover subjective as well as objective
aspects of working with someone with each personality type and, where
possible, translate psychoanalytic generalities and abstractions into
reportable clinical transactions.

**SUMMARY**

In this chapter I have covered the most common and clinically relevant
of the secondary, or "higher-order," defenses: repression, regression,
isolation, intellectualization, rationalization, moralization,
compartmentalization, undoing, turning against the self, displacement,
reaction formation, reversal, identification, sublimation, and humor. I
have given adaptive and maladaptive examples of each and have noted
related character types. Finally, in the service of transition to the
next chapters, I made some general comments about the relationship of
defense to personality.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

As I mentioned at the end of [Chapter 5](#part0014.html){.calibre9},
commentary on the defenses is usually embedded in other topics and is
seldom the subject of a book. Anna Freud's (1936) and H. P. Laughlin's
(1970, 1979) writings are the exceptions, and both are relatively easy
to read. For the intrepid, Fenichel (1945) covered the topic with his
usual thoroughness in Chapters 8 and 9 of *The Psychoanalytic Theory of
Neurosis*. For excellent, empirically based overviews of defenses, try
Vaillant's edited 1992 book, *Ego Mechanisms of Defense*, or Phoebe
Cramer's 1991 and 2006 volumes, *The Development of Defense Mechanisms*
and *Protecting the Self*, respectively.

[]{#part0016.html}

**Part II**

**TYPES OF\
CHARACTER\
ORGANIZATION**

**INTRODUCTION TO PART II**

 

Each chapter in this section covers a major character type. I have
chosen these types on the basis of the frequency with which they are
encountered clinically and on the basis of my own clinical familiarity
and confidence working with them. As I noted in the
[Preface](#part0005.html){.calibre9}, some personalities that I do not
cover in this section are depicted in the *Psychodynamic Diagnostic
Manual* (PDM Task Force, 2006).

Order of presentation is arbitrary, but overall, I have started with the
least object related and ended with individuals who tend to strike
therapists as powerful in their attachment, even though their specific
attachment style may be problematic. With each personality I consider
(1) drive, affect, and temperament; (2) adaptive and defensive ego
functions; (3) early relational patterns that contribute to the
development of the personality, become internalized, and repeat in later
relationships; (4) experiences of the self, including conscious and
unconscious ways one sees oneself, along with the ways one seeks
self-esteem; (5) transference and countertransference outcomes of
internal representations of self, others, and self--other patterns of
interaction; (6) implications for treatment; and (7) considerations of
differential diagnosis.

 

**RATIONALE FOR CHAPTER ORGANIZATION**

 

The first four categories I have taken from Pine (1990), who has
summarized drive, ego, object relational, and self aspects of individual
psychology as follows:

 

Broadly speaking, under these four terms I am referring, respectively,
to the domains of (a) drives, urges, wishes; (b) defense, adaptation,
reality testing, and defects in the development of each; (c)
relationships to significant others as experienced and as carried in
memory; with whatever attendant distortions such experiences and
memories may entail; and (d) subjective experience of self in relation
to such phenomena as boundaries, esteem, authenticity, and agency. (p.
13)

 

Like Pine, I see these four perspectives as implicit in the
psychoanalytic tradition and as useful for sorting out different aspects
of psychological complexity.

I have added affect to Pine's first domain (cf. Isaacs, 1990; Kernberg,
1976; Spezzano, 1993; Tomkins, 1962, 1963, 1991, 1992). Because Freud
subsumed emotion under drive (see Solms & Nersessian, 1999), a focus on
affect per se has been slow to come to analytic theorizing. In a 2000
survey, however, Blagys and Hilsenroth found that psychodynamic
clinicians consider work with affects to be definitional of their
orientation. Analysts have long noted the therapeutic superiority of
emotional over intellectual insight (see J. G. Allen, 1980); more
recently, many theorists have put affect at the center of human
psychology and the clinical process (e.g., Chodorow, 1999; Fosha, 2000,
2005; Maroda, 2010; D. Shapiro, 2002).

There have been countless scientific studies attesting to the powerful
operation of unconscious affects (see Westen, 1999). Research during the
last two decades into early experience and brain function (e.g.,
Damasio, 1994; Lichtenberg, 1989; Panksepp, 1999; Solms & Bucci, 2000)
supports the need to differentiate and comprehend these implicit
feelings if we are to understand personality differences. Rainer
Krause's work (e.g., Anstadt et al., 1997) suggests that we all have a
characteristic facial affect pattern---an emotional "fractal," or type
and sequence of affective expression that is our unique emotional
signature. It has thus become clear that stable personality differences
include distinctive affect configurations.

I have also included temperament with drive and affect. The significance
Freud attached to innate individual differences in areas like direction
and strength of drive look prescient in the light of contemporary
genetic and neuroscientific findings and in the aftermath of decades of
scholarship about temperament (Kagan, 1994). Because therapy orients
itself to what is modifiable, a clinician may tend not to think much
about inborn "givens," but what is hardwired is still valuable to
understand. Appreciating someone's constitutional endowment contributes
to reasonable goals and allows us to help a client accept and make new
adaptations to what cannot be changed.

The next two topics under each type are intended to illuminate the
interpersonal style of someone with that psychology and to suggest
components of effective therapy with such a person. I discuss
countertransference issues for both diagnostic and therapeutic reasons.
Our emotional reactions contain important diagnostic information---often
the only clues (especially in more disturbed patients) for
differentiating between two character types with contrasting therapeutic
requirements. In addition, countertransference information may prepare
us for what we are going to feel working with any client; we can then
improve our chances of handling our feelings effectively. I have
included in these sections some ideas about passing what
control--mastery theorists would regard as characteristic "tests" of
patients with different types of personality (Weiss, 1993).

Finally, I have included a differential diagnosis section to alert
readers to possible alternatives to what may seem an evident personality
organization, especially when such differentiations have important
therapeutic consequences. It can be disastrous, for example, to
misunderstand a hysterical woman as fundamentally narcissistic, or a
narcissistic man as essentially obsessive, or a person with pervasive
dissociation as schizophrenic. And yet all of these mistakes are made
all the time because the DSM checklist approach to diagnosis lends
itself to such errors.

 

**CHARACTER, CHARACTER PATHOLOGY, AND SITUATIONAL FACTORS**

 

The following descriptions include both disturbed and healthy versions
of each character type. Everyone has regularities of experiencing and
coping that constitute a personality. In most of us, it is not
"disordered." We all have features of several personality styles no
matter which tendencies are paramount in us. Many people who do not fit
neatly into one category are adequately described as a combination of
two types of organization (e.g., paranoid--schizoid,
depressive--masochistic). Assessment of someone's character structure,
even in the absence of a personality disorder, gives the therapist an
idea of what will be assimilable by the client and what style of
relatedness will catalyze the therapist's efforts to help. Even though
no one's psychology corresponds point for point to a textbook
description, most of us can be located in a general area that gives a
clinician some orientation toward how to be therapeutic.

Dynamics are not pathology. It is reasonable to infer character
pathology or personality disorder only when a person's patterns are so
stereotypical that they prevent psychological growth and adaptation. An
obsessive man organizes his life around thinking, finding self-esteem in
creative acts of thought such as scholarship, logical analysis, detailed
planning, and judicious decision making. A pathologically obsessive one
ruminates unproductively, accomplishing no objective, realizing no
ambition, hating himself for going in circles. A depressive woman finds
satisfaction in taking care of others; a pathologically depressive one
cannot take care of herself.

In addition to distinguishing between personality and personality
disorder, it is important to distinguish between character and
responsivity. Certain situations elicit aspects of anyone's personality
that may be latent under other circumstances: losses bring out one's
depressive side; battles for control breed obsessive ruminations; sexual
exploitation evokes hysteria. The therapist should be careful to weigh
the relative impact of situational factors and characterological ones.
People who are in ongoing, unrelentingly stressful situations may look
character disordered by external criteria, but their patterns may be
more situational than internal. For example, employees or students in
"paranoiagenic" institutional surroundings may seem to have stable
traits that meet the DSM criteria for paranoid personality disorder, and
yet those traits may disappear when they leave the setting and are no
longer feeling humiliated, helpless, and unsafe (cf. Kernberg's \[1986,
2006\] observations about paranoiagenesis in psychoanalytic institutes).

A Chinese student who was seeing one of my colleagues had numerous
narcissistic preoccupations: She was acutely sensitive to how she was
perceived, spent considerable energy on maintaining her self-esteem,
suffered envy of American students to whom everything seemed to come
easily, and worried constantly about whether she "fit in." The genuine
warmth with which she related to her therapist, however, and the
affection in his countertransference, belied a conclusion that she had
an essentially narcissistic personality. The stresses of adapting to a
new community had exacerbated the latent concerns about acceptability,
identity, and self-esteem with which anyone would struggle if culturally
displaced. In addition to illustrating a caveat about confusing
personality with reactivity, this example points to the critical value
of subjective data.

 

**LIMITS ON PERSONALITY CHANGE**

 

Clinical experience suggests that although personality can be
substantially modified by therapy, it cannot be transformed (the
drive-theory homily for this observation was "You can change the
economics but not the dynamics"). That is, a therapist can help a
depressive client to be less destructively and intransigently depressive
but cannot change that client into a hysterical or schizoid character.
People maintain their "inner working models" (Fonagy, 2001): core
internal scripts, conflicts, expectations, affects, and defenses. Yet
with new experience and insight they may vastly expand their sense of
agency and realistic self-esteem. The increased sense of freedom comes
from mastery and choice in behavior that previously was automatic; the
self-acceptance comes from understanding how they got their particular
combination of tendencies. Whether or not a therapy contract includes an
agreement to try to modify character, an appreciation of it may
facilitate psychotherapy.

I have wanted this book to be comprehensive, but not so much so that it
would weigh down the reader's book bag, expense account, or fortitude.
This section gives in-depth descriptions of psychopathic, narcissistic,
schizoid, paranoid, depressive, hypomanic, masochistic, obsessive,
compulsive, hysterical, and dissociative personalities. As I noted
previously, there are many other themes around which personality can be
organized, but these are the configurations I know best. It is my
impression that most of the personality types I have omitted are seen
more commonly as melodic variations than as symphonic themes. For
example, while people whose character is fundamentally and centrally
sadistic are not unknown, they rarely come voluntarily to therapy. We
are more likely to see sadism as part of another clinical picture, such
as psychopathy or dissociation. Some people are passive--aggressive at
the level of character, but more commonly, passive--aggressive
tendencies are ancillary to other dynamics, including dependent,
obsessive--compulsive, paranoid, and masochistic trends.

[]{#part0017.html}

**7**

Psychopathic (Antisocial) Personalities

[I]{.dropcap} begin discussing the typological categories of personality
organization with what are probably the most unpopular and intimidating
patients encountered in mental health practice, those who are
essentially psychopathic. I am following Meloy (1988) in using the older
term for this personality type. The term "antisocial" looks at the
phenomenon from the outside, at what is externally visible, with an
emphasis on the social consequences of this psychology, whereas I try
here to explore the subjective experience and internal dynamics of
psychopathic people.

Research has supported Kernberg's (1984) concept of a range of
narcissistic conditions (disorders of the self), with extreme
psychopathy on the far end (e.g., Gacano, Meloy, & Berg, 1992). Robert
Hare (e.g., Hare et al., 1990) distinguishes true psychopaths from
people with antisocial tendencies, using the term "psychopath" to denote
only a fraction of the larger spectrum. This is a valuable distinction
for research, and one that has had vital practical outcomes such as
identifying job applicants who would be disastrous employees. For
purposes of discussing dynamics that pervade the antisocial spectrum,
however, I use the adjective "psychopathic" more loosely, as equivalent
to "antisocial," and the noun "psychopathy" for the whole antisocial
range. But unlike my practice in 1994 and in deference to Hare's
differentiation, I use the noun "psychopath" only for the extreme
version of this psychology, and I avoid using "sociopathic," as that
term now suggests a dated distinction.

Although there is overwhelming evidence that extreme psychopaths are not
treatable (M. H. Stone, 2000), it is possible to have a therapeutic
influence on many individuals with antisocial tendencies. People whose
personalities are structured along psychopathic lines range from
extremely psychotic, disorganized, impulsive, sadistic people like
Richard Chase (Biondi & Hecox, 1992; Ressler & Schactman, 1992), who
randomly murdered, dismembered, and drank the blood of his victims (in
the delusion that his own blood was poisoned, and he needed it to
survive), to urbane, polished charmers like the characters depicted by
Babiak and Hare (2007) in their chilling work on American corporate
psychopaths: *Snakes in Suits*. The psychopathic continuum loads heavily
in the borderline-to-psychotic direction, because conceptually, the
diagnosis refers to a basic failure of human attachment and a reliance
on very primitive defenses.

With Bursten (1973a), however, I would argue that there are people in
the higher ranges whose personalities show more psychopathy than any
other features and who are reasonably construed as high-level antisocial
personalities. Such people have enough identity integration, reality
testing, and capacity to use more mature defenses to be considered
neither borderline nor psychotic, but their core ways of thinking and
acting show an antisocial sensibility. Some highly successful people
have had an essentially psychopathic outlook; assuming good-enough ego
strength, ruthless indifference to others can make competitive
achievements easier than they are for those who are capable of loyalty
and thoughtfulness.

In 1939, Henderson differentiated between "passive--parasitic"
psychopaths and aggressive violent ones. An example of the former would
be a developer of a Ponzi scheme who seems to have a warm family and
good friendships (at least until the scam is exposed). As a society, we
seem to be more taken aback by this more subtle version of psychopathy
than by its more aggressive manifestations, but the exploitive
orientation toward others is the same. Bursten's (1973a) criterion for
diagnosing a psychopathic person, that his or her organizing
preoccupation is "getting over on" or consciously manipulating others,
captures the essence of psychopathic psychology. Conceived this way, the
diagnosis of characterological psychopathy has nothing to do with overt
criminality and everything to do with internal motivation.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT IN PSYCHOPATHY**

The fact that infants differ in temperament from birth (something any
parent with more than two children always knew) has now been well
established scientifically (Kagan, 1994; Thomas, Chess, & Birch, 1968).
Some areas in which infants have demonstrated innate variability include
activity level, aggressivity, reactivity, consolability, and similar
factors that might tilt development in a psychopathic direction. Early
studies of twins and adoptees (e.g., Vandenberg, Singer, & Pauls, 1986)
concluded that people who become antisocial may have more constitutional
aggressivity than others. In the years since the first edition of this
book, there has been an explosion of brain research showing that our
prior assumptions about the separability of what is constitutional and
what is learned was naive: Genetic dispositions can be skewed by early
experience, genes can be turned on or off, brain chemicals are altered
by experience, and everything interacts. In a well-designed longitudinal
study, Caspi and colleagues (2002) found that people with a variation in
the expression of a gene that breaks down norepinephrine and related
neurotransmitters (the monoamine oxidase A \[MAOA\] variation that can
have permanent effects on the X chromosome), are much more likely when
subjected to maltreatment to develop violent and antisocial patterns
(see Fonagy, 2003; Niehoff, 2003).

Early neglect, abuse, and maltreatment can affect the development of the
orbitofrontal cortex, which seems to be the moral center of the brain
(Damasio, 1994; Martens, 2002; Yu, 2006). Thus, the biological substrate
for the high levels of affective and predatory aggression in antisocial
people may not directly implicate their genetic heritage, but may still
be essentially "hardwired" by the interaction of experience and genes.
Antisocial personalities have low serotonin levels, of whatever origin
(Coccaro, 1996), and diagnosed psychopaths have remarkably low
reactivity of the autonomic nervous system (Intrator et al., 1997;
Lykken, 1995), a fact that may explain their sensation-seeking and
long-noted "failure to learn by experience" (Cleckley, 1941, p. 368).

Louth, Williamson, Alpert, Pouget, and Hare (1998) found that
psychopaths have anomalies in the brain circuitry that underlie
linguistic and affective processes, suggesting that extremely antisocial
people have not learned about feelings in the relationally grounded way
that most of us do. Instead, they acquire emotional speech as a kind of
"second language" that is used to manipulate others rather than to
express inner states. Psychopathic individuals have poor affect
regulation and a higher-than-average threshold for pleasurable
excitement (Kernberg, 2005). Whereas most of us can get emotional
satisfaction from good music, loving sex, natural beauty, a clever joke,
or a job well done, they may need a sharper, more jolting experience to
feel alive.

As for the main feelings of psychopathic people, it is hard to specify
them because of their inability to articulate emotion. They act instead
of talking. They seem to have a sense of basic arousal without the sense
of having specific affects. When they do feel, what they experience may
be either blind rage or manic exhilaration. In the section on relational
patterns in this chapter, I suggest some reasons for what Modell (1975)
first described as a "massive affect block." One way the treatment of
psychopathic individuals differs markedly from therapy with people with
other personalities is that the clinician cannot expect to make an
alliance by reflecting the client's presumed feelings.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN PSYCHOPATHY**

The primary defense in psychopathic people is omnipotent control. They
also use projective identification, dissociation, and acting out. The
need to exert power takes precedence over all other aims. It defends
against shame and, especially in brutal psychopaths, distracts others
from seeing the sexual perversions that often underlie criminality
(Ressler & Schactman, 1992). The psychopath's famous absence of
conscience (Cleckley, 1941) evidences not only a defective superego
(Johnson, 1949) but also a lack of primary attachments to other people.
To the deeply antisocial person, the value of others reduces to their
utility in allowing one to demonstrate clout.

Psychopathic people will brag outright about their con jobs, conquests,
and scams if they think the listener can be thereby impressed with their
power. There is nothing unconscious about this process; it is literally
shameless. Law enforcement agents are repeatedly astounded at how
readily criminals will confess to homicide yet will hide lesser offenses
(sexual compulsions, taking a few dollars from a murder victim's
handbag), evidently because these are seen as signs of weakness (N.
Susalis, personal communication, May 7, 1993). Kernberg (1984) refers to
the psychopath's "malignant grandiosity," a phrase that rings true to
anyone who has experienced such a person's effort to triumph
sadistically by sabotaging therapy.

It is important to distinguish between psychopathic manipulation and
what is frequently labeled manipulation in hysterical and borderline
patients. The former is a deliberate, syntonic attempt to use others;
the latter makes others *feel* used, while the patient may be relatively
unaware of a specific manipulative intent. As I noted in [Chapter
4](#part0013.html){.calibre9}, I recommend restricting the term
"manipulation" to the conscious, intentional psychopathic phenomenon.
Hysterical and borderline patients may try to get their needs met by
indirect means that exasperate others and provoke attributions of
manipulation, but their behaviors have significantly different sources,
and they are unconsciously intended to maintain relationships rather
than to use others indifferently.

Early observers noted, and more recent research confirms (Robins, Tipp,
& Przybeck, 1991), that many psychopathic people---those who have
escaped self-destruction and incarceration---"burn out" in middle age,
often becoming surprisingly upright citizens. They may become more
amenable to psychotherapy then and may benefit from it more than younger
people with psychopathic psychologies. This change may reflect hormonal
decreases that reduce internal pressures toward action, but it also may
reflect the loss of physical power that occurs at midlife. As long as
omnipotent defenses are unthwarted by limits, a person's motivation to
develop more mature adaptations is minimal. Older adolescents and young
adults of all personality types, especially healthy young men, typically
have omnipotent feelings: death is far away, and the prerogatives of
adulthood are at hand. Infantile grandiosity is reinforced. (I suspect
that one reason psychopathy is more common in men is that females
confront realistic limitation earlier: We are less physically strong; we
live with the nuisance of menstruation and the danger of pregnancy; we
are at greater risk of rape and physical abuse, and as primary
caregivers, we are humbled by the discrepancy between our images of
ideal maternal effectiveness and the emotional challenges of trying to
rear civilized children.) But reality has a way of catching up with us,
whatever our early advantages. By middle age, death is no longer an
abstraction, physical strength has declined, reaction time is down,
health cannot be taken for granted, and the long-term costs of hard
living have begun to appear. These facts of life can have a maturing
effect, interesting a person in less omnipotent adaptations.

As for projective identification, in psychopathic people a reliance on
this process may reflect not only a developmental arrest and reliance on
primitive defenses but also the consequences of their inarticulateness
and emotional immaturity. Their inability and/or disinclination to
express emotions verbally (except to manipulate) means that the only way
they can get other people to understand what they are feeling is to
evoke that feeling in them. The dissociative defenses of psychopaths are
commonly noted but hard to evaluate in specific instances. Dissociative
phenomena range from trivial instances of the minimizing of one's role
in some blunder to total amnesia for a violent crime. Disavowal of
personal responsibility, which may have a dissociative quality, is a
critical diagnostic indicator of psychopathy; the batterer who explains
that he and his lover had a "tiff" and he "guesses he lost his temper"
or the seemingly contrite cheater who claims to have "used bad judgment
in this instance" is showing characteristic minimization. Interviewers
who pick this up should ask for specifics: "What exactly did you do when
you lost your temper?" or "What exactly did you judge wrong?" (usually
the answer to the latter shows regret about getting caught, not remorse
about cheating).

When a psychopathic person claims to have been emotionally dissociated
or amnesic during some experience, especially during the perpetration of
an offense, it is hard to tell whether the experience was in fact
dissociated or whether words to this effect are a manipulative evasion
of responsibility. Given the frequency of severe abuse in the histories
of people diagnosed as antisocial, and given the causal relationship
between abuse and dissociation, it would be unimaginable for
dissociation not to be a frequent concomitant of a psychopathic
personality. Still, the unreliability of accounts by antisocial people
makes the topic a vexing one. I say more about this in the differential
diagnosis section at the end of this chapter and in [Chapter
15](#part0025.html){.calibre9}.

Acting out is virtually definitional of psychopathy. Not only do
antisocial people have an internal goad toward action when aroused or
upset, but they also have no experience of the increase in self-esteem
that can come from control of impulse. Older clinical literature airs a
controversy about whether psychopaths lack anxiety or whether their
anxiety is invisible. Greenwald (1974) believed that they do feel
anxious but that they act out so fast to relieve themselves of such a
toxic feeling that the observer has no chance to see it (and they would
never admit to anxiety if asked, as they would see it as "weak"). So far
as we can investigate empirically, however, those who saw them as
lacking anxiety were more accurate, at least with respect to true
psychopaths: Their level of fear and upset tests way below that of
nonpsychopathic people; they show no more reaction to a word like "rape"
than to a word like "table" (Intrator et al., 1997), and they have
virtually no startle response (Patrick, 1994). People with antisocial
tendencies *who are healthy enough to participate in therapy* may have
some anxiety, however (Gacano & Meloy, 1991; Gacano, Meloy, & Berg,
1992), and that anxiety may be a motivator that contributes to their
capacity to benefit from treatment.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN PSYCHOPATHY**

The childhoods of antisocial people are often rife with insecurity and
chaos. Confusing amalgams of harsh discipline, overindulgence, and
neglect have long been noted in the clinical literature (Abraham, 1935;
Aichhorn, 1936; Akhtar, 1992; Bird, 2001; Greenacre, 1958; Redl &
Wineman, 1951). Especially in the histories of violent psychopaths, one
can find virtually no consistent, loving, protective influences. Weak,
depressed, or masochistic mothers and explosive, inconsistent, or
sadistic fathers have been linked with psychopathy, as have alcoholism
and other addiction in the family. Moves, losses, and family break-ups
are common. Under unstable and frightening circumstances like these, the
normal confidence in one's early omnipotent feelings and later in the
power of others to protect the young self could not possibly develop
normally. The absence of a sense of power at developmentally appropriate
times may impel children in this predicament to spend the rest of their
lives seeking confirmations of their omnipotence.

Even if they are aware of them, psychopathic people cannot acknowledge
ordinary emotions because they associate them with weakness and
vulnerability. It is probable that in their families of origin, no one
helped them put words to emotional experiences. They have no concept of
using language to state feelings and no internalized basis for knowing
another role for speech. Clinical observations suggest that in their
families, words were used mostly to control others. The deficits of
their caregivers in responding to their emotional needs are related to
another piece of clinical lore: Children who become psychopathic have
often been indulged materially and deprived emotionally. The parents of
an antisocial patient of mine used to get her extravagant gifts (a
stereo, a car) when she seemed upset. It did not occur to them to draw
her out and listen to her concerns. This kind of "generosity" is
particularly destructive; in the case of my patient, it left her no way
to formulate her lingering sense that there was something missing in her
life.

The most penetrating recent psychoanalytic thinking about psychopathy
(e.g., Kernberg, 2004; Meloy, 1997) emphasizes the failure (from
whatever accidents of temperament and rearing) of attachment and
consequent internalization. The antisocial person seems never to have
attached psychologically, incorporated good objects, or identified with
caregivers. He or she did not take love in and never loved. Instead,
identification may have been with a "stranger selfobject" (Grotstein,
1982) experienced as predatory. Meloy (1988) writes of "a paucity of
deep and unconscious identifications with, initially, the primary parent
figure and ultimately the archetypal and guiding identifications with
the society and culture and humankind in general" (p. 44).

Many an adoptive parent has learned the hard way that children from
destitute orphanages or other profoundly negligent/abusive backgrounds
can have attachment disorders that render them permanently unable to
love, no matter how devoted their later care. Young children with such
histories often show disorganized--disoriented attachment, or the
apparent absence of an internalized, organized attachment strategy (D.
Diamond, 2004; Main & Solomon, 1986), in which the object of attachment
may also be a source of terror and rage, producing contradictory
behaviors such as smiling at the mother and biting her. One subtype of
the disorganized--disoriented style is a disorganized--controlling style
that shows up by age 6 in some maltreated children (Hesse & Main, 1999)
that sounds consistent with long-time observations of psychopathic
psychology.

An alternative origin of a character organized around omnipotent
fantasies and antisocial behavior is a history in which parents or other
important figures were deeply invested in the child's omnipotence and
sent repeated messages that life should pose no limits on the
prerogatives of a person so inherently entitled to exert dominance. Such
parents, identifying with the child's defiance and acting out their own
hatred of authority, tend to react with outrage when teachers,
counselors, or lawenforcement agents try to set limits on their
youngster. Like all character types, psychopathy can be "inherited" in
that the child imitates the defensive solutions of the parents. When the
main source of someone's characterological psychopathy is parental
modeling and reinforcement of manipulative and entitled behavior, the
prognosis is probably better than when the condition is rooted in chaos
and negligence. At least the child of indulgent, corrupting parents has
succeeded in identifying with *someone* and has some capacity to
connect. It may be that this kind of family breeds healthier people with
antisocial trends, and that more traumatic backgrounds breed more deeply
disturbed individuals, including true or primary psychopaths.

**THE PSYCHOPATHIC SELF**

One biological substrate of a disposition toward psychopathy is a degree
of aggression that would make a child difficult to calm, comfort, and
mirror. Children who are innately hyperactive, demanding, distractible,
and headstrong need much more active, energetic parenting than placid,
easily consoled youngsters. They also arguably need much more direct
involvement by a father figure than most preschoolers in Western
societies get (Cath, 1986; M. J. Diamond, 2007; McWilliams, 2005a; J.
Shapiro, Diamond, & Greenberg, 1995), and would probably benefit from
additional caregivers as well. I have known highly aggressive children
who were observably too much for one parent but who attached firmly if
provided with enough stimulation and loving discipline. Given
contemporary Western cultural assumptions that a single parent is
adequate, we may be raising many more psychopaths in this part of the
world than we would otherwise see.

Sociological conjectures aside, the condition of being viewed from day
one as a problem child would make it very hard for a potential
psychopath to find self-esteem via the normal route of feeling the
caregivers' love and pride. When outside objects fail, the only object
to invest in emotionally is the self and its personal power.
Self-representations may be polarized between the desired condition of
personal omnipotence and the feared condition of desperate weakness.
Aggressive and sadistic acts may stabilize the sense of self in a
psychopathic person by both reducing unpleasant states of arousal and
restoring self-esteem.

David Berkowitz, the "Son of Sam" serial killer, began his murders of
women after learning that his biological mother was something of a
slattern rather than the elevated figure of his imagination (Abrahamsen,
1985). An adoptee, he had attached his self-esteem to the fantasy of
having a superior "real" mother, and when this illusion was shattered,
he went on a rampage. Similar connections between a crime spree and some
blow to grandiosity have been noted in many sensational cases, but
observation of manipulative people in ordinary life suggests that this
pattern in its essentials is not limited to psychopathic killers. Anyone
whose fondest images of self reflect unrealistic notions of superiority,
and who runs into evidence that he or she is only human, may attempt to
restore self-esteem by exerting power.

In addition, the more chaotic the environment of a child, and the more
exhausted or inadequate the caregivers, the more likely it is that the
youngster will not run into effective limits and will not have to take
seriously the consequences of impulsive actions. From a social learning
theory point of view, grandiosity in a child would be the expectable
result of an upbringing that lacks consistent discipline. The condition
of having much more energy than one's caregiver would teach the lesson
that one can ignore the needs of others, do whatever feels compelling at
the time, and handle any adverse consequences by escaping,
dissimulating, and seducing or bullying others.

One other feature of self-experience in the psychopathic patient that
deserves mention is primitive envy, the wish to destroy that which one
most desires (Klein, 1957). Although antisocial people rarely articulate
envy, many of their behaviors demonstrate it. One probably cannot grow
up unable to love without knowing that there is something out there that
other people enjoy that one lacks. Active devaluation and depreciation
of anything in the tenderer realms of human life are characteristic of
antisocial people at all levels of severity; those in the psychotic
range have been known to kill what attracts them. The serial killer Ted
Bundy, for example, described his need to destroy pretty young women
(who, others noted, resembled his mother) as a kind of "owning" them
(Michaud & Aynesworth, 1983). The killers portrayed in Truman Capote's
*In Cold Blood* (1965) exterminated a happy family "for no reason"
except presumably that they were a happy family toward whom the
exterminators could not bear to feel their consuming envy.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH PSYCHOPATHIC PATIENTS**

The psychopathic person's basic transference to a therapist is a
projection of his or her internal predation, the assumption that the
clinician intends to use the patient for selfish purposes. Not having
had any emotional experience with love and empathy, the antisocial
patient has no way to understand the generous aspects of the therapist's
interest and will try to figure out the practitioner's "angle." If the
patient has reason to believe that the therapist can be used to promote
some personal agenda (such as giving a good report to a judge or
probation officer), he or she may be uncannily charming, so much so that
an inexperienced clinician may be taken in.

The usual countertransference to the patient's preoccupation with using
the therapist or outsmarting the therapist's presumably exploitive
agenda is shock and resistance to the sense that one's essential
identity as a helper is being eradicated. The naive practitioner may
succumb to the temptation to try to prove helpful intent. When that
fails, hostility, contempt, and moralistic outrage toward the
psychopathic person are common reactions. These "unempathic" feelings in
ordinarily compassionate people should be understood, paradoxically, as
a kind of empathy with psychopathic psychology: The client is unable to
care about the therapist, and the therapist finds it almost as hard to
care about the client. Outright hatred of the patient is not uncommon,
and is no cause for worry, since the capacity to hate is a kind of
attachment (Bollas, 1987). If one can tolerate the experience of
internal coldness and even hatred, one will get an unpleasant but useful
glimpse of what it is like to be a psychopathically organized person.

Other common countertransference reactions are complementary rather than
concordant (Racker, 1968; see [Chapter 2](#part0011.html){.calibre9})
and chiefly involve fear of a peculiarly ominous kind. People who work
with psychopaths frequently comment on their cold, remorseless eyes and
worry that such patients have them "under their thumb" (Meloy, 1988).
Eerie forebodings are common. Again, it is important that the clinician
tolerate these upsetting reactions rather than try to deny or compensate
for them, since minimizing the threat posed by a true sociopath is
highly unwise (both realistically and because it may prompt the client
to demonstrate his or her destructive power). Finally, the experience of
being actively, even sadistically depreciated can provoke intense
hostility or hopeless resignation in the clinician. Awareness that
devaluing messages constitute a defense against envy is cold
intellectual comfort in the face of a psychopath's unmitigated scorn,
but it helps.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF PSYCHOPATHY**

In light of the bad reputation of antisocial patients, I should say at
the outset that I have known of many psychopathic people who were helped
by psychotherapy. The therapist cannot be grandiose, however, about how
much can be accomplished, and more than with individuals in other
diagnostic categories, it is critical that a careful assessment be done
to see whether or not any individual psychopathic patient is treatable.
Some are so damaged, so dangerous, or so determined to destroy the
therapist's aims that psychotherapy would be an exercise in futility and
naiveté. Meloy (1988) makes a key distinction between the roles of
evaluator and therapist, a discrimination that is unnecessary with
patients of most other character types, since they lack the psychopath's
aim of defeating the clinician. Meloy's explanation of the phenomenon of
therapeutic nihilism (Lion, 1978) fits my own experience:

::: calibre1
 
:::

::: extopen3
It is the stereotypical judgment that all psychopathically disturbed
individuals, or antisocial personality disorders, *as a class*, are
untreatable by virtue of their diagnosis. Such a judgment ignores both
individual differences and the continuous nature of severity of
psychopathology. I have most commonly observed this reaction in public
mental health clinicians who are assigned patients on referral from
probation, parole, or the court; and assume, because of the coercive
nature of the treatment referral, that \... any psychotherapeutic gain
is impossible.

Such reactions are often the product of attitudes that have been
internalized as an "oral tradition" during training from senior,
teaching clinicians. They are rarely the product of direct, individual
experience. It is, in a sense, a mass retaliatory attitude where moral
judgment impinges on professional assessment. The behavioral pathology
of the psychopath, to devalue and dehumanize others, becomes the
concordant identification of the clinician doing to the psychopath what
the clinician perceives the psychopath doing to others. (Meloy, 1988, p.
325)
:::

::: calibre1
 
:::

Karon and VandenBos (1981) made a comparable critique of the equally
prevalent, empirically unsupported belief that schizophrenia is not
treatable; psychopathic patients at a psychotic level of personality
organization thus may have two strikes against them.

Attitudes about the inherent untreatability of all psychopathic
individuals may also reflect the fact that in most training
programs---even those that send their students into internship and
practicum placements at jails, youth correctional facilities, and drug
treatment centers that contain many psychopathic people---very little if
any attention is paid to the development of the skills appropriate for
this group. When new therapists fail using approaches that are effective
with other populations, they may blame the patient rather than the
limitations of their training.

The assessment of treatability is beyond the scope of this text, but I
recommend using Kernberg's structural interview (B. L. Stern et al.,
2004) to evaluate whether psychotherapy should be undertaken with any
particular psychopathic person. DSM-IV is not useful here. Its criteria
for antisocial personality disorder were normed on prison inmates and
developed with researchers rather than therapists in mind. With the
exception of lack of remorse, DSM-IV criteria for assessing antisocial
personality disorder are all factors that can be observed externally by
the clinically untrained; they do not necessarily pick up critical
internal, subjective states. Hence, they tend to overdiagnose people
with backgrounds of poverty, oppression, and marginality (who may run
afoul of authorities for many reasons other than their individual
psychology) and to underdiagnose successful, socially prominent
psychopaths. As I write this, it appears that in DSM-5, antisocial
psychology will be reframed as on the narcissistic spectrum and may be
defined more internally.

Once one has decided to work with a psychopathic person---or has
realized that a current patient is significantly antisocial---the most
critical feature of treatment is incorruptibility: of the therapist, the
frame, and the conditions that make therapy possible. It is much better
to err on the side of inflexibility than to show, in the hope that it
will be seen as empathy, what the client will see as weakness.
Psychopathic people do not understand empathy. They understand using
people, and they will feel a sadistic triumph over, not a grateful
appreciation for, a therapist who wavers from the boundaries of the
treatment contract. Any behavior that can be interpreted as weakness and
vulnerability probably will be. Anthony Hopkins gave a chilling
portrayal of the psychopath's talent for finding someone's Achilles'
heel in his character's manipulation of the detective played by Jodie
Foster in *The Silence of the Lambs.* The writers of the television
series *Dexter* have clearly done their homework; like the authors of
*The Sopranos,* they have managed a plot device that allows the viewer
to care about a lead character who has extreme *but not total*
psychopathy. Dexter is capable of some attachment, but the portrayal of
his internal world through his voiceover comments shows a lot about the
emotional limitations of the significantly antisocial person.

It is unrealistic to expect love from antisocial people, but one can
earn their respect by coming across as tough-minded and exacting. When I
work with psychopathic patients, I insist on payment at the beginning of
each session and send the client away in its absence---no matter how
reasonable the explanation offered. Like most therapists who were taught
to bend over backward to consider the special needs of each client, I
had to learn from experience that not bending at all is the right
response to the needs of the antisocial patient. Early in therapy I do
not analyze such patients' assumed motives for testing the solidity of
the contract, I merely remind them that our deal was that they would pay
up front, and I repeat that I will hold up my end of the deal---the
application of my expertise to help them understand themselves
better---if they hold up theirs.

Related to incorruptibility is uncompromising honesty: talking straight,
keeping promises, making good on threats, and persistently addressing
reality. Honesty includes the therapist's private admission of intense
negative feelings toward the patient, both countertransferences and
realistic perceptions of danger. If such reactions are denied,
countertransferences may be acted out and legitimate fears may be
minimized. To treat psychopathic clients we must make peace with our own
antisocial tendencies so that we have a basis for identifying with the
patient's psychology. With respect to money discussions, for example, we
should nondefensively admit selfishness and greed when giving a
rationale for the fee. Some therapists cannot work with psychopathic
people, as they cannot find in themselves enough antisocial features to
permit any sense of commonality.

Except for admissions like the above that legitimately pertain to the
therapeutic contract, honesty does not mean disclosure; self-revelation
will only be interpreted as frailty. Nor does it mean moralizing. When
considering the patient's destructive actions, it is futile to invite
the expression of assumed feelings of badness or guilt. The patient
lacks a normal superego and probably committed the sins in order to feel
good (omnipotent) rather than bad (weak). One must restrict oneself to
addressing the possible realistic outcomes of amoral behavior. Probes
into presumed struggles with conscience tend to evoke responses like the
one attributed to Willie Sutton when he was asked why he robbed banks:
"Because that's where the money is."

The therapist's unrelenting emphasis on the realistic risks of each
grandiose design need not be humorless just because the matters at hand
have serious consequences. One of my colleagues, a woman renowned for
her talent with antisocial clients, reports the following banter with a
court-remanded car thief:

::: calibre1
 
:::

::: extopen3
"The man was explaining to me how brilliant his scheme had been for the
heist he had almost pulled off, how if only one little unforeseen thing
hadn't happened, it would have been the perfect crime. As he talked, he
was getting more and more excited and animated, and I agreed with some
admiration that he had almost gotten away with the theft. It started to
feel like we were co-conspirators. Eventually, he got so carried away
that he asked, 'Would you do something like that?'

" 'No,' I answered.

" 'Why not?' he asked, a little deflated.

" 'Two reasons,' I said. 'First, there's always some little thing that
can go wrong, even with a brilliant plan. Life isn't that controllable.
And then I'd be in jail, or in a mental hospital involuntarily, like you
are, talking to some shrink I didn't choose myself. And second, I
wouldn't because I have something that you don't: a conscience.'

" 'Yeah,' he said. 'You know how I could get one of those?' "
:::

::: calibre1
 
:::

Of course, the first step in developing a conscience is to care about
someone to the degree that that person's opinion matters. Without
moralizing, the therapist moves the patient along toward more
responsible behavior simply by being a consistent, nonpunitive,
nonexploitable object. Harold Greenwald (1958, 1974), who worked with
antisocial people in the Los Angeles underworld, described how he would
connect with psychopaths in terms that they could understand. He
reasoned that since power is the only quality antisocial people respect,
power is the first thing the therapist must demonstrate. He gives the
following instance of claiming his own power:

::: calibre1
 
:::

 

A pimp came to see me and started to discuss his way of life. He said,
"You know I'm ashamed to show myself and so on, but after all, it's a
pretty good way to live and most guys would want to live that way, you
know, to live as a pimp. It's not bad---you get girls out hustling for
you---why shouldn't you do it? Why shouldn't anybody do it?" I said,
"You're a jerk." He asked why. I replied, "Look, I live off the earnings
of call girls. I wrote a book about them; I got respect for it; I got
famous from it; they made a movie out of it. I made much more money off
call girls than you ever will, and you, you schmuck, you can get
arrested any day and be sent to jail for ten years, whereas I get
respect, honor, and admiration." This he could understand. He saw that
somebody whom he considered similar to him had a superior way of
accomplishing the same ends. (1974, p. 371)

 

Greenwald has his own free-wheeling but still essentially incorruptible
style with psychopathic patients. He is not the only therapist who has
discovered the utility of "outpsyching the psychopath" or "conning the
con" as a way of demonstrating that he deserves respect. Like my
colleague previously quoted, he can own enough psychopathic impulses in
himself that he does not feel fully alienated from the emotional world
of his clients. Tellingly, he reports that in the second or third year
of intensive treatment with him, psychopathic patients often go into a
serious, even psychotic depression. He sees this as evidence that they
have started to care about him in a genuine way rather than as an object
to manipulate and, realizing this, they descend into a state of misery
about their dependency. This depression, which only slowly lifts,
compares in its essentials to Klein's (1935) description of the feelings
of infants in the second 6 months of life, when the child makes the
painful discovery that the mother exists as a separate person outside
the baby's control.

In contrast with appropriate therapy with people of other diagnoses, the
therapist of a psychopathic client may have to adopt an attitude of
independent strength verging on indifference. I assume this applies to
cognitive-behavioral therapies, some of which have shown promise with
this population (M. H. Stone, 2000), as well as to analytically informed
ones. One cannot seem emotionally invested in the patient's changing,
because as soon as an antisocial person sees that need, he or she can
sabotage psychotherapy to demonstrate the clinician's impotence. It is
better to invest in simply increasing one's understanding, setting the
tone that one will do one's job competently, and to communicate that it
is up to the patient to take advantage of therapy or not. This principle
is analogous to the lesson every police officer learns about
investigating a crime: Never show the suspect that it is important to
you to get a confession.

The most skilled interviewer of antisocial people I know was for a long
time the chief of detectives in my town, a man with an exceptional
record of evoking confessions---often movingly tearful ones---from
rapists, child torturers, murderers, and serial killers. Listening to
tapes of his interrogations, one is struck by his attitude of respect
and his quiet conviction that even the most monstrous perpetrator has a
need to tell someone the truth. The suspects' responsiveness to being
treated with dignity is poignant---the more so in light of their
knowledge that the interviewer's agenda is to prosecute. No one
interrogated by him has ever complained of betrayal, even as he
testifies against them in court on the basis of their confession. "He
treated me fair," they report.

These phenomena raise the question of whether the fabled callousness of
the psychopath is a response to environments that are either abusive (as
was childhood, later replicated by a savage subculture) or
incomprehensible (as is a therapist's wish to help). The fact that these
perpetrators are palpably relieved to confess to someone who wants to
incarcerate them suggests that even an incorrigible felon may have a
primitive sense of accountability and can gain something from a
relationship. The sadistic murderer Carl Panzram (Gaddis & Long, 1970)
had a lifelong friendship with a prison guard who once showed him
ordinary kindness. Rigorous tough-mindedness and rock-bottom respect
seem to be a winning combination with antisocial people. (This
observation does not equate to an argument for "leniency" toward
dangerous criminals. Understanding that psychopathic people are human
beings who may be helped to some degree should not be confused with
wishful thinking that therapy can transform a compulsive killer into a
model of citizenship. The public needs protection from antisocial people
whether or not their crimes are comprehensible psychodynamically and
whether or not they can profit from a therapeutic relationship.)

The overall aim of work with a psychopathic individual is to help the
patient move toward Klein's depressive position, in which others are
seen as separate subjects worthy of concern (Kernberg, 1992). Over the
course of treatment, as the psychopathic person's omnipotent control,
projective identification, domination by envy, and self-destructive
activities are dispassionately examined in an atmosphere of consistency
and respect, the patient will in fact change. Any shift from using words
to manipulate to using them for honest self-expression is a substantial
achievement, one that may occur simply through the antisocial person's
repeated exposure to someone with integrity. Any instance where the
client inhibits an impulse and learns something about pride in
self-control should be seen as a milestone. Since even a small movement
toward human relatedness in a psychopath may prevent an immense amount
of human suffering, such progress is worth every drop of sweat the
practitioner secretes in its service.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

It is not usually hard to spot the antisocial features in any client
whose personality has a psychopathic component. Whether those features
are central enough to define the person as characterologically
psychopathic is a more subtle question. Psychologies that can easily be
misunderstood as essentially antisocial include paranoid, dissociative,
and narcissistic conditions. The behavior of addicted individuals often
mimics psychopathy. In addition, some people with hysterical
personalities become misdiagnosed as psychopathic, a topic I discuss in
[Chapter 14](#part0024.html){.calibre9}.

**Psychopathic versus Paranoid Personality**

There is considerable overlap between predominantly psychopathic
psychologies and those that are more paranoid; many people have a lot of
each sensibility. Both antisocial and paranoid people are highly
concerned with issues of power, but from different perspectives. Unlike
psychopaths, people with essentially paranoid character structure have
profound guilt, the analysis of which is critical to their recovery from
suffering. Thus, it is vital to assess with anyone who has both paranoid
and psychopathic features which tendencies predominate.

**Psychopathic versus Dissociative Personality**

There is also considerable overlap between psychopathic and dissociative
conditions. It is critical for an interviewer to evaluate whether a
patient is a basically psychopathic person who uses some dissociative
defenses or whether he or she has a dissociative psychology with one or
more antisocial or persecutory alter personalities. The prognosis for
the former kind of patient is guarded, whereas many essentially
dissociative people, when accurately diagnosed, respond favorably to
therapy. Unfortunately, this evaluation can be exceedingly difficult,
even when done by an expert. Both primarily dissociative and primarily
psychopathic people have a deep distrust of others, and for different
reasons (terror of abuse vs. omnipotent triumph), both may dissimulate,
comply superficially, and subvert the therapist.

I do not recommend trying to make this differential diagnosis when some
important consequence hinges on it---for instance, when a man who has
committed homicide may plead not guilty by reason of insanity if he can
convince a professional that he has dissociative identity disorder. The
differential diagnosis is hard enough without that complication,
although regrettably, it is such a pivotal legal distinction that
evaluators are working to develop procedures to make it more reliable.
Even trained forensic psychologists have a tough time with these calls.
I say more on this differential in [Chapter
15](#part0025.html){.calibre9}.

**Psychopathic versus Narcissistic Personality**

Finally, there is a close connection between psychopathic and
narcissistic conditions: there is a continuum from minor narcissism
through malignant narcissism to outright psychopathy. Both predominantly
narcissistic and predominantly psychopathic people have a subjectively
empty internal world and a dependence on external events to provide
self-esteem. The dimensional formulation, originally suggested by
Kernberg (1984), has always made sense to me and now has enough recent
research support that, as of the time I write, the authors of DSM-5 are
planning to put these disorders of self on one spectrum. But I would
also suggest that antisocial and narcissistic people are different
enough to warrant thinking in terms of a continuum for each.

Most psychopathic individuals do not idealize repetitively, and most
narcissistic ones do not depend on omnipotent control. Many people have
aspects of both character types, and self-inflation can characterize
either one, but prognosis improves in inverse relation to the
psychopathic pole. Because treatment considerations are quite different
for the two groups (e.g., sympathetic mirroring comforts most
narcissistic people but antagonizes antisocial ones), despite the things
they have in common and the number of people who have aspects of each
orientation, it seems to me clinically useful to differentiate carefully
between them.

**Psychopathic Personality versus Addiction**

People struggling with substance use disorders are notoriously
manipulative and exploitive, as the addictive substance becomes more
important to them than human relationships or personal integrity.
Because of their antisocial *behavior*, observers commonly infer that
their personalities are psychopathic. Although some addicted people may
be characterologically antisocial, the personality organization of
substance abusers cannot be inferred reliably until the interviewer has
obtained reliable information about their behavior prior to their
addiction or until they have been in recovery for a considerable length
of time and their basic personality has emerged.

**SUMMARY**

In this chapter I portrayed the psychopathic personality as expressing
an organizing need to feel one's effect on other people, to manipulate
them, to "get over on" them. I summarized some constitutional
predispositions to antisocial behaviors and mentioned the rage and mania
that may briefly interrupt the affect block characteristic of antisocial
persons. I discussed psychopathy in terms of the defenses of omnipotent
control, projective identification, dissociation, and acting out; of
object relations marked by instability, pandering, emotional
misunderstanding, exploitation, and sometimes brutality; and a
self-structure dominated by grandiose efforts to avoid a sense of
weakness and envy. I mentioned putatively unempathic transference and
countertransference reactions and stressed the importance of the
therapist's incorruptibility, consistency, and self-conscious
renunciation of the need to be seen as helpful. I differentiated
psychopathic character from paranoid, dissociative, and narcissistic
psychologies, and from the consequences of addiction.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

Unfortunately, texts on psychotherapy as a general process rarely give
psychopathic clients much attention, and there is a relative paucity of
good analytic literature on this group. For an excellent collection of
seminal psychoanalytic articles on psychopathy, I recommend Meloy's
edited collection, *The Mark of Cain* (2001). Bursten's study *The
Manipulator* (1973a) and Meloy's *The Psychopathic Mind* (1988) are
comprehensive and readable explorations with some attention to therapy
issues. Akhtar also has a good chapter on the topic in *Broken
Structures* (1992). Hare's *Without Conscience* (1999) is excellent, and
his account with Babiak of *Snakes in Suits* (2007) is compelling.

[]{#part0018.html}

**8**

Narcissistic Personalities

[T]{.dropcap}he term "narcissistic" refers to people whose personalities
are organized around maintaining their self-esteem by getting
affirmation from outside themselves. All of us have vulnerabilities in
our sense of who we are and how valuable we feel, and we try to run our
lives so that we can feel good about ourselves. Our pride is enhanced by
approval and injured by disapproval from significant others. In some of
us, concerns with "narcissistic supplies," or supports to self-esteem,
eclipse other issues to such an extent that we may be considered
excessively self-preoccupied. Terms like "narcissistic personality" and
"pathological narcissism" apply to this disproportionate degree of
self-concern, not to ordinary responsiveness to approval and sensitivity
to criticism.

Narcissism, normal as well as pathological, is a topic to which Freud
(1914a) gave recurrent attention. He borrowed the term from the Greek
myth of Narcissus, the youth who fell in love with his reflection in a
pool of water and eventually died of a kind of longing that his image
could never satisfy. Yet Freud had little to say about therapy for those
in whom narcissistic concerns are central. Alfred Adler (e.g., 1927) and
Otto Rank (e.g., 1929) both wrote on topics we would now include under
narcissism, but their respective estrangements from Freud made their
work unfamiliar to many therapists. Since the early psychoanalytic era,
it has been noted that some people have problems with self-esteem that
are hard to construe solely in terms of drives and unconscious
conflicts, and are correspondingly hard to treat by reference to
conflict-based models of therapy. A deficit model seems to fit their
experience better: There is something missing from their inner lives.

Preoccupied with how they appear to others, narcissistically organized
people may privately feel fraudulent and loveless. Ways of helping them
to develop self-acceptance and to deepen their relationships awaited the
expansion of dynamic psychology into areas that Freud had only begun to
touch. Attention to concepts like basic security and identity (Erikson,
1950, 1968; Sullivan, 1953); the self as opposed to the more
functionalist concept of the ego (Jacobson, 1964; Winnicott, 1960b);
self-esteem regulation (A. Reich, 1960); attachment and separation
(Bowlby, 1969, 1973; Spitz, 1965); developmental arrest and deficit
(Kohut, 1971; Stolorow & Lachmann, 1978); shame (H. B. Lewis, 1971;
Lynd, 1958; Morrison, 1989); and affect regulation, trauma, and
attachment (Banai, Mikulincer, & Shaver, 2005; Schore, 2002) contributed
to our understanding of narcissism.

As new theoretical areas were explored in the post-Freudian years, old
areas were reworked, leading to improvements in treating narcissistic
problems. Much ferment followed challenges by object relations theorists
(Balint, 1960; Fairbairn, 1954; Horney, 1939) to Freud's concept of
"primary narcissism," the assumption that the infant cathects (invests
emotionally in) self before others. Thinkers who stressed primary
*relatedness* understood narcissistic pathology not as fixation on
normal infantile grandiosity but as compensatory for early
disappointments in relationship. Around the same time, notions like
containment (Bion, 1967), the holding environment (Modell, 1976;
Winnicott, 1960b), and mirroring (Kohut, 1968; Winnicott, 1967) were
redefining theories of therapy. These ideas were more applicable than
earlier models of psychopathology and treatment to people for whom the
continuity of a sense of self, and the feelings of reasonable worth
attached to it, are fundamentally problematic.

It is also likely that when Freud was writing, narcissistic problems of
the kind that are epidemic today were less common. Psychoanalytically
influenced social theorists (e.g., Cushman, 1995; Fromm, 1947; Hendin,
1975; Lasch, 1978, 1984; Layton, 2004; Slater, 1970) have argued that
the vicissitudes of contemporary life reinforce narcissistic concerns.
The world changes rapidly; we move frequently; mass communications
exploit our insecurities and pander to our vanity and greed;
secularization dilutes the internal norms that religious traditions once
provided. In mass societies and in times of rapid change, the immediate
impression one makes may be more compelling than one's integrity and
sincerity, qualities that are prized in smaller, more stable communities
where people know each other well enough to make judgments based on
someone's history and reputation. In the United States, a climate of
narcissistic absorption may not be a particularly recent phenomenon. In
1831, Alexis de Tocqueville (2002) noted that a society that touts
equality of opportunity leaves citizens concerned with how to
demonstrate their claim to special worth. Without a class system to
provide visible levels of status, they try to accumulate observable
evidence of their superiority, as inferiority would be equated with
personal failure.

Many of Freud's patients suffered from too much internal commentary
about their goodness or badness, a condition he came to depict as
reflecting a "harsh superego." Contemporary clients, in contrast, often
feel subjectively empty rather than full of critical internalizations;
they worry that they "don't fit in" rather than that they are betraying
their principles, and they may ruminate about observable assets such as
beauty, fame, wealth, or the appearance of political correctness rather
than more private aspects of their identity and integrity. Image
replaces substance, and what Jung (1945) called the persona (the self
one shows to the world) becomes more vivid and dependable than one's
actual person.

Ernest Jones (1913) may have been the first analytic writer to describe
the more overtly grandiose narcissistic person. He depicted a man
characterized by exhibitionism, aloofness, emotional inaccessibility,
fantasies of omnipotence, overvaluation of his creativity, and a
tendency to be judgmental. He portrayed such individuals as on a
continuum from psychotic to normal, commenting that "when such men
become insane they are apt to express openly the delusion that they
actually are God, and instances of the kind are to be met within every
asylum" (p. 245). W. Reich (1933) devoted a section of *Character
Analysis* to the "phallic--narcissistic character," represented as
"self-assured \... arrogant \... energetic, often impressive in his
bearing \... \[who\] will usually anticipate any impending attack with
an attack of his own" (pp. 217--218). This familiar type appears in its
essentials in the DSM-IV criteria for narcissistic personality disorder.

As psychoanalytic observations of personality continued, it became clear
that the overtly grandiose personality was only one form of a "disorder
of the self" (Kohut & Wolf, 1978). Current analytic conceptualization
recognizes many different external manifestations of a core difficulty
with identity and self-esteem. Bursten (1973b) suggested a typology of
narcissistic personalities that includes craving, paranoid,
manipulative, and phallic narcissistic subvarieties. Many have noted
that in every vain, grandiose narcissist hides a self-conscious,
shame-faced child, and in every depressed and self-critical narcissist
lurks a grandiose vision of what that person should or could be
(Meissner, 1979; A. Miller, 1975; Morrison, 1983). Repeatedly, the
clinical literature has distinguished between two versions of
narcissism, variously dubbed the "oblivious" versus the "hypervigilent"
type (Gabbard, 1989), the overt versus the covert or "shy" type (Akhtar,
2000); the exhibitionistic versus the "closet" type (Masterson, 1993),
and (my personal favorite) the "thick-skinned" versus the "thin-skinned"
type (Rosenfeld, 1987). Pharis (2004) has described a "virtuous
narcissist," often an inspiring political figure, who accomplishes great
things but quietly lets an associate take blame for any mistakes.

What narcissistic people of all appearances have in common is an inner
sense of, and/or terror of, insufficiency, shame, weakness, and
inferiority (Cooper, 1984). Their compensatory behaviors might diverge
greatly yet still reveal similar preoccupations. Hence, individuals as
different as Janis Joplin and Socrates's problematic student Alcibiades
might be reasonably viewed as narcissistically organized.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT IN NARCISSISM**

I am not aware of research on the topic of constitutional and
temperamental contributions to narcissistic personality organization in
adulthood. Unlike antisocial people, who pose obvious and costly
problems to society and therefore prompt funding for scientific
investigation into psychopathy, narcissistic individuals are quite
diverse, often subtle in their pathology, and not so patently damaging.
Successful narcissistic people (monetarily, socially, politically,
militarily, or however their success is manifested) may be admired and
emulated. The internal costs of narcissistic hunger for recognition are
rarely visible to onlookers, and injuries done to others in the pursuit
of narcissistically driven projects may be rationalized as trivial or
necessary side effects of competence ("You can't make an omelet without
breaking eggs"). Also, recognition of more subtle kinds of narcissism as
treatable character problems is an achievement of only the past few
decades.

Although Shedler and Westen's work (e.g., 2010) establishes that
therapists are quite reliable in identifying narcissistic dynamics, most
of our ideas about etiology are still untested, clinically generated
hypotheses. One of these is that people at risk for developing a
narcissistic character structure may be constitutionally more sensitive
than others to unverbalized emotional messages. Specifically, narcissism
has been associated with the kind of infant who seems preternaturally
attuned to the unstated affects, attitudes, and expectations of others.
Alice Miller (1975) suggested, for example, that many families contain
one child whose natural intuitive talents are unconsciously exploited by
his or her caregivers for the maintenance of their self-esteem and that
this child grows up confused about whose life he or she is supposed to
lead. Miller believed that such gifted children are more likely than
untalented youngsters to be treated as "narcissistic extensions" of
their caregivers and are hence more apt to become narcissistic adults.

On a different note, in discussing entitled, grandiose narcissistic
clients, Kernberg (1970) has suggested that they may have either an
innately strong aggressive drive or a constitutionally determined lack
of tolerance for anxiety about aggressive impulses. Such dispositions
would partially explain the lengths to which narcissistic people may go
to avoid acknowledging their own drives and appetites: They may be
scared of their power. Beyond these speculations, we know little about
temperamental propensities that may contribute to a narcissistic
character structure.

As for the main emotions associated with narcissistic personality
organization, shame and envy are recurrently stressed in the clinical
literature (e.g., Steiner, 2006). Feelings of shame and fears of being
shamed pervade the subjective experience of narcissistic people. The
early analysts underestimated the power of this emotional state, often
mistaking it for guilt and making guilt-oriented interpretations that
narcissistic patients found unempathic. Guilt is the conviction that one
is sinful or has committed wrongdoings; it is easily conceptualized in
terms of an internal critical parent or the superego. Shame is the sense
of being *seen* as bad or wrong; the audience here is outside the self.
Guilt carries with it a sense of an active potential for evil, whereas
shame has connotations of helplessness, ugliness, and impotence.

The narcissistic person's vulnerability to envy is a related phenomenon,
one that Melanie Klein's work illuminates (Segal, 1997). If I have an
internal conviction that I am lacking in some way and that my
inadequacies are at constant risk of exposure, I will be envious toward
those who seem content or who have assets that I believe would make up
for what I lack. Envy may also be the root of the much-noted judgmental
quality of narcissistically organized persons, toward themselves and
toward others. If I feel deficient and I perceive you as having it all,
I may try to destroy what you have by deploring, scorning, or ridiculing
it.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN NARCISSISM**

Narcissistically structured people may use a whole range of defenses,
but the ones they depend on most fundamentally are idealization and
devaluation. These processes are complementary, in that when the self is
idealized, others are devalued, and vice versa. Kohut (1971) originally
used the term "grandiose self" to capture the sense of
self-aggrandizement and superiority that characterizes one polarity of
the inner world of narcissistic people. This grandiosity may be felt
internally, or it may be projected. There is a constant "ranking"
process that narcissistic people use to address any issue that faces
them: Who is the "best" doctor? What is the "finest" preschool? Where is
the "most rigorous" training? Realistic advantages and disadvantages may
be completely overridden by concerns about comparative prestige.

For example, a woman I know was determined that her son would go to the
"best" college. She took him to see several exclusive schools, pulled
strings where she had any, and even wrote thank-you notes to deans of
admission with whom he had interviewed. By mid-April, he had been
accepted by several excellent colleges and universities, and he was on
the waiting list at Yale. Her response was a sense of devastation that
he had been rejected by Harvard. The young man elected to attend
Princeton. Throughout his freshman year, his mother badgered Harvard to
take him as a transfer student. Although he thrived at Princeton, when
Harvard finally capitulated to his mother's relentless entreaties, there
was no question about his destination.

The subordination of other concerns to issues of general valuation and
devaluation is of note here. This mother knew that professors in her
son's chosen field considered Harvard inferior to Princeton in that
area; she also knew that Harvard undergraduates tend to receive less
attention than those at Princeton; and she was aware that her son would
suffer socially at Harvard for missing his freshman year there.
Nevertheless, she persisted. Although she did not have a diagnosable
narcissistic personality disorder, this woman used her son as a
narcissistic extension in this instance because she had a defensive
belief system that included the conviction that her own life would have
been dramatically transformed had she gone to Radcliffe, the "sister"
school to Harvard and the "best" school for women at the time she was
applying to college.

In an instance where a parent's valuation and devaluation were
characterological, a patient of mine, a college student with artistic
and literary sensibilities, was told by his grandiose father that he
would support his becoming a doctor (preferably) or a lawyer (if he
proved untalented in the natural sciences), but nothing else. Medicine
and law would bring in money and command respect; any other career would
reflect badly on the family. Because this young man had been treated
like a narcissistic extension his whole life, he saw nothing unusual in
his father's position, which is culturally quite aberrant in the United
States.

A related defensive position in which narcissistically motivated people
are trapped concerns perfectionism. They hold themselves up to
unrealistic ideals and either convince themselves that they have
attained them (the grandiose outcome) or respond to their falling short
by feeling inherently flawed rather than forgivably human (the
depressive outcome). In therapy, they may have the ego-syntonic
expectation that the point of undergoing treatment is to perfect the
self rather than to understand it and to find more effective ways of
handling its needs. The demand for perfection is expressed in chronic
criticism of self or others (depending on whether or not the devalued
self is projected) and in an inability to find joy amid the ambiguities
of human existence.

Sometimes narcissistic people handle their self-esteem problem by
regarding someone else---a lover, a mentor, a hero---as perfect and then
feeling inflated by identification with that person ("I am an appendage
of So-and-so, who can do no wrong"). Some have lifelong patterns of
idealizing someone and then sweeping that idol off the pedestal when an
imperfection appears. Perfectionistic solutions to narcissistic dilemmas
are inherently self-defeating: One creates exaggerated ideals to
compensate for defects in the sense of self that are felt as so
contemptible that nothing short of perfection will make up for them, and
yet, since no one is perfect, the strategy is doomed, and the
depreciated self emerges again.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN NARCISSISM**

From this description of some of their dynamics, the reader has probably
already concluded that relationships between narcissistic people and
others are overly burdened with the self-esteem issues of the
narcissistic party. Although it is rare for someone with a narcissistic
personality disorder to come to therapy with the explicit agenda of
becoming a better friend or family member or lover, it is not uncommon
for clients with this problem, especially in midlife or later, to be
aware that something is wrong in their interactions with others. One
problem in helping them is conveying to them what it would be like to
accept a person nonjudgmentally and nonexploitively, to love others as
they are, without idealizing, and to express genuine feelings without
shame. Narcissistic people may have no concept of such possibilities;
the therapist's acceptance of them can become the prototype for their
emotional understanding of intimacy.

Self psychologists have coined the term "selfobjects" for the people in
our lives who support our self-esteem by their affirmation, admiration,
and approval (see Basch, 1994). The term reflects the fact that
individuals in that role function as objects outside the self and also
as part of one's self-definition. By helping to modulate self-esteem,
they augment what most of us also do internally. We all have
selfobjects, and we need them. If we lose them we feel diminished, as if
some vital piece of us has died. Yet reality and morality require that
others be more than selfobjects, that we *recognize* them (Benjamin,
1988) in terms of who they are and what they need, not just in terms of
what they do for us.

The narcissistic person needs selfobjects so greatly that other aspects
of relationship pale, and may even be unimaginable, as they were to my
client whose father would not support his being anything but a doctor or
lawyer. Thus, the most grievous cost of a narcissistic orientation is a
stunted capacity to love. Despite the importance of other people to the
equilibrium of a narcissistic person, his or her consuming need for
reassurance about self-worth leaves no energy for others except in their
function as selfobjects and narcissistic extensions. Hence, narcissistic
people send confusing messages to their friends and families: Their need
for others is deep, but their love for them is shallow. Symington (1993)
believes that the ultimate cause of this deficit is a child's having
repudiated, for whatever reason, the original emotional "lifegiver,"
with the long-term consequence of internal deadness and incapacity to
find one's vitality.

Some theorize that people get this way by having been used as
narcissistic appendages themselves. Narcissistic clients may have been
vitally important to parents or other caregivers, not because of who
they really were but because of the function they fulfilled. The
confusing message that one is highly valued, but only for a particular
role that one plays, makes children worry that if their real feelings,
especially hostile or selfish ones, are visible, rejection or
humiliation will follow. It fosters the development of what Winnicott
(1960a) called the "false self," the presentation of what one has
learned is acceptable. A crucial difference between the etiologies of
psychopathy and narcissism may be that whereas antisocial psychology
derives from overt abuse and neglect, narcissistic psychology springs
from a particular kind of attention or even doting, in which support is
given on the implicit condition that the child cooperate with a parent's
narcissistic agenda.

I assume that most parents regard their children with a combination of
narcissistic needs and true empathy. In moderation, children enjoy being
treated as narcissistic extensions. Making parents feel proud, as if
they also have been admired when their son or daughter gets recognition,
is one of the sweeter pleasures of childhood. As usual, the issue is one
of degree and balance: Does the child also get attention unrelated to
whether the parent's aims are furthered? A markedly non-narcissistic
attitude toward offspring informs the remarks of a now-deceased friend
of mine who reared 12 children during the 1930s, all of whom have turned
out well despite borderline poverty and some painful losses:

 

"Every time I'd get pregnant, I'd cry. I'd wonder where the money would
come from, how I was going to nurse this child and take care of
everything else. But around the fourth month I'd begin to feel life, and
I'd get all excited, thinking, 'I can't wait till you come out and I
find out who you are!' "

I quote this to contrast her sentiments with those of a prospective
parent who "knows" who the child is going to be: Someone to be molded by
the parent into a person who realizes all the parent's failed ambitions
and brings reflected glory to the family.

A related aspect of the upbringing of people who become narcissistic is
a family atmosphere of constant evaluation. If I have an agenda for a
child that is vital to my own self-esteem, then every time that child
disappoints me, I will be implicitly or explicitly critical. I doubt
that anyone has ever brought up a child without criticism, but the
background message that one is not good enough in some vague way is
quite different from specific feedback on behaviors that offend. An
evaluative atmosphere of perpetual praise and applause, which one finds
in some families with narcissistic children, is equally damaging to the
development of realistic self-esteem. The child is always aware of being
judged, even if the verdict is positive. He or she knows on some level
that there is a false quality to the attitude of constant admiration,
and despite the conscious sense of entitlement that may issue from such
a background, it creates a nagging worry that one is a bit of a fraud,
undeserving of this adulation that seems tangential to who one really
is. Fernando (1998) has argued that overindulgence of this kind is the
primary etiology of pathological narcissism. Fiscalini (1993), noting
different versions of narcissistic orientation, identified the shamed
child, the spoiled child, and the special child as precursors of
pathological narcissism in adulthood.

Thus we see again how certain character structures can be "inherited,"
though parents do not have to have narcissistic personalities themselves
to rear a son or daughter who is disturbed narcissistically. Parents may
have narcissistic needs toward a particular child (as in the case of the
woman whose son had to go to Harvard) that set the stage for that
child's not being able to discriminate between genuine feelings and
efforts to please or impress others. What is a nonissue to one parent is
a central one to another. We all want for our children the things we
lacked, a harmless desire as long as we spare them any pressure to live
their lives for our sakes.

Martha Wolfenstein gave us an interesting glimpse of narcissistic
processes in a 1951 article "The Emergence of Fun Morality," depicting
how liberal intellectual New Yorkers in the postwar era, having grown up
during hard times, gave their children the message that they should feel
bad about themselves if they were not *having fun*. People whose options
were drastically curtailed by some disaster such as war or persecution
are apt to send signals that their children should live the life they
never had. Frequently, the children of traumatized parents grow up with
some identity confusion and feelings of vague shame and emptiness (see
Bergmann, 1985; Fogelman, 1988; Fogelman & Savran, 1979). The
communication that "unlike me, you can have it all" is particularly
destructive, in that no one can have it all; every generation will face
its own constraints. For self-esteem to be contingent on such an
unrealistic goal is a crippling inheritance.

**THE NARCISSISTIC SELF**

I have already alluded to many of the self-experiences of people who are
diagnosably narcissistic. They include a sense of vague falseness,
shame, envy, emptiness or incompleteness, ugliness, and inferiority, or
their compensatory counterparts: self-righteousness, pride, contempt,
defensive self-sufficiency, vanity, and superiority. Kernberg (1975)
describes such polarities as opposite ego states, grandiose (all-good)
versus depleted (all-bad) definitions of self, which are the only
options narcissistic persons have for organizing their inner experience.
The sense of being "good enough" is not one of their internal
categories.

Narcissistically structured people are aware at some level of their
psychological fragility. They are afraid of falling apart, of
precipitously losing their self-esteem or self-coherence (e.g., when
criticized), and abruptly feeling like nobody rather than somebody
(Goldberg, 1990b). They sense that their identity is too tenuous to hold
together and weather some strain. Their fear of the fragmentation of
their inner self is often displaced into a preoccupation with their
physical health; thus, they are vulnerable to hypochondriacal
preoccupations and morbid fears of death.

One subtle outcome of the perfectionism of narcissistic people is the
avoidance of feelings and actions that express awareness of either
personal fallibility or realistic dependence on others. In particular,
remorse and gratitude are attitudes that narcissistic people tend to
deny (McWilliams & Lependorf, 1990). Remorse about some personal error
or injury includes an admission of defect, and gratitude for someone's
help acknowledges one's need. Because narcissistic individuals try to
build a sense of self on the illusion of not having failings and not
being in need, they fear that the admission of guilt or dependency
exposes something unacceptably shameful. Sincere apologies and heartfelt
thanks, the behavioral expressions of remorse and gratitude, may thus be
avoided or compromised in narcissistic people, to the great
impoverishment of their relationships with others.

By definition, the assessment of narcissistic personality organization
conveys that the client needs external affirmation in order to feel
internal validity. Theorists diverge rather strikingly in whether they
stress the grandiose or the depleted aspects of narcissistic
self-experience, a difference of emphasis central to the disagreement
between Kernberg and Kohut on how to understand and treat narcissistic
characters, about which I say more later. Disputes on this question go
back at least as far as differences of opinion between Freud (1914b),
who stressed the individual's primary love of self, and Alfred Adler
(1927), who emphasized how narcissistic defenses compensate for feelings
of inferiority. Which came first in the evolution of pathological
narcissism, the grandiose self-state or the depleted, shamed one, may be
the psychoanalytic equivalent of a chicken--egg riddle. From a
phenomenological standpoint, these contrasting ego states are intimately
connected, much as depression and mania are opposite sides of the same
psychological coin.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH NARCISSISTIC PATIENTS**

The transference environment with narcissistic clients feels
qualitatively different from what one feels with clients who lack
pathological narcissism. Even the highest-functioning, most cooperative
person with a narcissistic character may contribute to an ambiance in
the therapeutic relationship that contrasts sharply with the atmosphere
that emerges between the therapist and other clients. Typically, the
therapist first notices the patient's lack of interest in exploring the
therapeutic relationship. The early psychoanalysts noted this and
concluded that narcissistic patients did not have transferences because
all their libidinal energy was directed toward the self; this was
another basis for doubting that they were treatable. Contemporary
analytic theory acknowledges that narcissistic clients do have
transference reactions but of a different sort from those of other
patients.

Inquiries into how the client is feeling toward the clinician may be
received as distracting, annoying, or irrelevant to the client's
concerns. It is not unusual for narcissistic patients to conclude that
the therapist is asking about their experience of the therapeutic
relationship out of conceit or a need for reassurance. (Such silent
hypotheses may be projections, of course, even if true, but they tend to
be unverbalized, and they can rarely be usefully addressed, at least
early in treatment.) This does not mean that narcissistic patients lack
strong reactions to the therapist. They may devalue or idealize
intensely. Yet they are curiously uninterested in the meaning of those
reactions and are genuinely confused about why the clinician is asking
about them. Their transferences may be so ego syntonic as to be
inaccessible to exploration. A narcissistic patient may believe he or
she is devaluing the therapist because the therapist is objectively
second-rate or idealizing the therapist because the therapist is
objectively wonderful. Efforts to make such reactions ego alien will
usually fail, at least initially: The devalued practitioner who comments
on the patient's critical attitude will be perceived as defensive, and
the idealized one who comments on the patient's overvaluation will be
further idealized as someone whose perfection includes an admirable
humility.

Beginning therapists get a lot more devaluing transferences than
idealizing ones. It may be some consolation for the misery one endures
at being the object of subtle and relentless disparagement that being
the recipient of a narcissistic idealizing transference is not much
better. In both circumstances one may feel that one's realistic
existence as a human being with some emotional intelligence, who is
sincerely trying to help, has been extinguished. In fact, this
countertransference sense of having been obliterated, of having been
made invisible as a real person, is diagnostic of a probable
narcissistic dynamic.

Related to these phenomena are countertransferences that include
boredom, irritability, sleepiness, and a vague sense that nothing is
happening in the treatment. A typical comment about a narcissistic
client from a therapist in supervision: "She comes in every week, gives
me the news of the week in review, critiques my clothing, dismisses all
my interventions, and leaves. Why does she keep coming back? What is she
getting out of this?" A strange sense that one does not quite exist in
the room is common. Extreme drowsiness is perhaps the most unpleasant of
the countertransference reactions to narcissistic patients; every time I
experience this, I find myself generating biological explanations ("I
didn't get enough sleep last night"; "I just ate a big lunch"; "I must
be coming down with a cold"), and then once that patient is out the door
and another one is inside, I am wide awake and interested. Occasionally
one's countertransference to an idealizing person is a sense of
grandiose expansion, of joining the patient in a mutual admiration
society. But unless the therapist is also characterologically
narcissistic, such reactions are both unconvincing and short-lived.

The psychoanalytic explanation for these phenomena relates to the
special kind of transference characteristic of narcissistic people.
Rather than projecting a discrete internal object such as a parent onto
the therapist, they externalize an aspect of their self. Specifically,
instead of feeling that the therapist is like mother or father (although
sometimes one can see aspects of such transferences), the client
projects either the grandiose or the devalued part of the self. The
therapist thus becomes a container for the internal process of
self-esteem maintenance. He or she is a selfobject, not a fully separate
person who feels to the patient like a previously known, well-delineated
figure from the past.

To be used for a self-esteem maintaining function rather than perceived
as a separate person is disconcerting, even unnerving. The dehumanizing
effect of the narcissistic person's attitude accounts for some of the
negative countertransference reactions therapists have described in
connection with treating such clients. Yet most therapists also report
that they can tolerate, control, and derive empathy from such internal
reactions once they understand them as comprehensible and expectable
features of working with narcissistic patients. The disposition to feel
flawed as a therapist is a virtually inevitable mirror of the patient's
core worries about self-worth; it is relieving to substitute a revised
clinical formulation for ruminations about what one is doing wrong.

Heinz Kohut and other analysts influenced by the self psychology
movement (e.g., Bach, 1985; Buirski & Haglund, 2001; Rowe & MacIsaac,
1989; Stolorow, Brandchaft, & Atwood, 1987; E. S. Wolf, 1988) have
described several subtypes of selfobject transferences that may appear
in narcissistic patients, including mirroring, twinship, and alter-ego
patterns, and many scholars have found parallels between these concepts
and contemporary infant research (Basch, 1994). Although I cannot do
justice to the complexity of such ideas here, readers who find that the
description of narcissistic personality fits a patient they have
previously been construing some other way may find it helpful to explore
the language of self psychologists for conceptualizing their clients'
experience.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF NARCISSISM**

A therapist who is able to help a narcissistic person to find
self-acceptance without either inflating the self or disparaging others
has done a truly good deed, and a difficult one. A primary requisite for
treating narcissistic pathology is patience: No one with a track record
for influencing the psychology of narcissistic patients has done it very
fast. Although modification of any kind of character structure is a
long-term undertaking, the requirement of patience may be more keenly
felt with narcissistic clients than with those of other character types
because of one's having to endure countertransference reactions of
boredom and demoralization.

Because there are competing theories of etiology and therapy, it is hard
to summarize psychodynamic wisdom about treating narcissistic patients.
Most arguments are variants on a complex disagreement between Kohut and
Kernberg that appeared in the 1970s and 1980s. The gist of their
respective positions was that Kohut (1971, 1977, 1984) saw pathological
narcissism developmentally (the patient's maturation was going along
normally and ran into some difficulties in the resolution of normal
needs to idealize and deidealize), while Kernberg (1975, 1976, 1984)
viewed it structurally (something went askew very early, leaving the
person with entrenched primitive defenses that differ in kind rather
than in degree from normality: "Pathological narcissism reflects
libidinal investment not in a normal integrated self-structure but in a
pathological self-structure \[1982, p. 913\]). Kohut's conception of a
narcissistic person can be imaged as a plant whose growth was stunted by
too little water and sun at critical points; Kernberg's narcissist can
be viewed as a plant that has mutated into a hybrid.

A consequence of their differing theories is that some approaches to
narcissism stress the need to give the plant plenty of water and sun so
that it will finally thrive, and others propose that it must be pruned
of its aberrant parts so that it can become what it should have been.
Those more responsive to Kohut's formulation (e.g., 1971, 1977)
recommend benign acceptance of idealization or devaluation and
unwavering empathy for the patient's experience. Kernberg (e.g., 1975,
1976) advocates the tactful but insistent confrontation of grandiosity,
whether owned or projected, and the systematic interpretation of
defenses against envy and greed. Self psychologically oriented
therapists try to remain inside the patient's subjective experience,
whereas analysts influenced by ego psychology and object relations
theory oscillate between internal and external positions (see Gardner,
1991).

Most analysts I know have patients for whom Kohut's formulations, both
etiological and therapeutic, seem to fit and others for whom Kernberg's
seem apt. Kernberg has suggested that Kohut's approach might be
considered a subtype of supportive therapy, and hence appropriate for
narcissistic patients in the borderline-to-psychotic range (even though
Kohut's clinical work, unlike Kernberg's, was mostly with
high-functioning patients). This idea is implicitly endorsed by many of
my colleagues, who say they find Kohut's recommendations applicable to
their more disturbed and depressed--depleted narcissistic clients.
Because the jury is still out on the dispute, and because readers can
consult the original sources for recommendations about overall approach,
I offer some general suggestions on the treatment of narcissism that
exist outside this controversy.

I have already mentioned patience. Implicit in that attitude is an
acceptance of human imperfections that make therapeutic progress a
tedious and taxing business. The matter-of-fact assumption that we are
all imperfect and resistant to change contrasts sharply with what the
narcissistic person has internalized. Such an attitude is humane and
realistic rather than critical and omnipotent. Some therapeutic mileage
is already inherent in such a position. Although humility is important
to all clinical work, it is particularly critical when one works with
narcissistic patients that therapists embody a nonjudgmental, realistic
attitude toward their own frailties.

One of Kohut's greatest contributions to practice (Kohut, 1984) was his
attention to the consequences of the therapist's acknowledgment of
errors, especially of lapses in empathy. According to the ego
psychologists who preceded him (e.g., Greenson, 1967), a therapist's
mistake need not impel any activity other than private reflection; the
patient is simply encouraged, as always, to associate to what happened
and to report any reactions. Even Carl Rogers (1951), who had advocated
a style almost identical to Kohut's later recommendations (Stolorow,
1976), seems not to have assumed, as Kohut did, that well-meaning
therapists would inevitably inflict narcissistic injuries on clients.
Thus, client-centered therapy did not address whether to acknowledge
such errors---though I read Rogers's principle of authenticity as
implying that they should. Self psychologists have called our attention
to how devastated a narcissistic person can be by a professional's
failure of empathy, and how the only way to repair such an injury is by
expressing regret. An apology both confirms the client's perception of
mistreatment (thereby validating his or her real feelings rather than
furthering the insincere compliance with which narcissistic people are
used to operating) and sets an example of maintaining self-esteem while
admitting to shortcomings.

It is important not to become excessively self-critical when
acknowledging one's inevitable errors. If the patient perceives that the
therapist is in an agony of remorse, the message that may be received is
that mistakes should be rare and require stern self-censure---a delusion
from which the narcissistic person is already suffering. It is better to
take one's cue from Winnicott, who is reputed to have fielded a query
about his rules for interpretation with the comment: "I make
interpretations for two purposes. One, to show the patient that I am
awake. Two, to show the patient that I can be wrong." Similarly, Arthur
Robbins (personal communication, April 1991), a psychoanalyst with
expertise in art therapy and other expressive modes of treatment,
describes his theory of technique as "Fuck-up therapy: I fuck up, and
the patient corrects me." Contemporary relational writing (e.g.,
Kieffer, 2007), drawing on research with infants (Beebe & Lachmann,
1994), emphasizes the centrality to all therapy of what Kohut (1984)
deemed the inevitable "rupture and repair" process; I think this process
is especially central to the treatment of people with characterological
narcissism.

Attempts to help a narcissistic patient also require a constant
mindfulness of the person's latent self-state, however overwhelming the
manifest one is. Because even the most arrogant, entitled narcissist is
subject to excruciating shame in the face of what feels like criticism,
therapists must take pains to frame interventions sensitively. True
mutuality with narcissistic clients is tenuous because they cannot
tolerate circumstances in which their fragile self-esteem is diminished.
Their early reputation for being impossible to treat derived partly from
analysts' experience with their abruptly terminating therapies of even
several years' duration when their feelings were hurt.

I have mentioned the power of shame in the experience of the
narcissistic person, and the value of the therapist's discriminating
between shame and guilt. People with fragile self-esteem may go to great
lengths to avoid acknowledging their role in anything negative. Unlike
people who easily feel guilty and who handle their transgressions with
efforts at reparation, narcissistically motivated people run from their
mistakes and hide from those who would find them out. They may induce in
therapists either a disposition to confront them unempathically about
their own contributions to their difficulties or a tendency to join them
in bemoaning the bad deal they have gotten from others. Neither position
is therapeutic, although the second is temporarily palliative to a
person who otherwise may suffer chagrin bordering on mortification.

Because of their devastation when their imperfections are visible,
narcissistic individuals tend to use obfuscating language that
implicitly disowns personal responsibility ("Mistakes were made"). The
therapist faces the daunting task of expanding the narcissistic
patient's awareness of, and honesty about, the nature of his or her
behavior without stimulating so much shame that the person either leaves
treatment or keeps secrets. One way to do this in the context of a
client's complaints and criticisms about others is to ask, "Did you make
your needs explicit?" The rationale for this query is that narcissistic
people have deep shame about asking for anything; they believe that to
admit a need exposes a deficiency in the self. They consequently get
into situations where they are miserable because another person does not
effortlessly divine their needs and offer what they want without their
suffering what they see as the humiliation of asking. They often try to
persuade the analyst that their problem is that the people they live
with are insensitive. A question about articulating needs may gently
expose a narcissistic patient's belief that it is shameful to need
someone and may create opportunities to learn something different about
human interdependency.

I noted earlier the difference between selfobject and object
transferences. An implication of this difference is that therapists
treating narcissistic clients cannot fruitfully investigate their
transference reactions as they would those of other people. Questions
about who we are to the patient tend to fall flat; interpretations along
the lines of "Maybe you're experiencing me as like your mother right
now" may be received as pointless distractions. Therapists need to know
that despite the countertransference feeling that one means nothing to
the patient, a narcissistic person often actually needs the therapist
more than do people without significant self-esteem deficits. It can be
stunning to therapists inexperienced with narcissistic patients to learn
that the same person who renders them insignificant and impotent during
therapy sessions is quoting them admiringly outside the consulting room.
Even the arrogant, boastful, seemingly impervious patient betrays a deep
dependency on the therapist by his or her vulnerability to feeling
crushed when the therapist is insensitive. In working with narcissistic
people, practitioners have to become accustomed to absorbing a great
deal that they would address with other types of patients.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

Injuries to self-esteem may lead anyone to behave temporarily like a
narcissistic character. Moreover, all types of personality structure
have a narcissistic function: They preserve self-esteem via certain
defenses. But to qualify as characterologically narcissistic, one must
have longstanding, automatic, and situation-independent patterns of
subjectivity and behavior. Narcissistic personality organization seems
currently overdiagnosed, perhaps especially by psychodynamic clinicians.
The concept is often misapplied to people having situation-specific
reactions and to psychopathic, depressive, obsessive compulsive, and
hysterical personalities.

**Narcissistic Personality versus Narcissistic Reactions**

I have already suggested one caveat in diagnosing characterological
narcissism: Even more than with other psychological conditions to which
all human beings are vulnerable, narcissistic concerns are ubiquitous
and can easily be situationally incited. Kohut and Wolf (1978) referred
to individuals who (like the Chinese graduate student mentioned in the
Introduction to this part) confront circumstances that challenge their
prior sense of identity and undermine their self-esteem as suffering
from a "secondary narcissistic disturbance," not a narcissistic
character disorder. It is an important distinction. Any non-narcissistic
person can sound arrogant or devaluing, or empty and idealizing, under
conditions that strain his or her identity and confidence.

Medical school and psychotherapy training programs are famous for taking
successful, autonomous adults and making them feel like incompetent
children. Compensatory behaviors like bragging, opinionated
proclamations, hypercritical commentary, or idealization of a mentor are
common under such circumstances. Phenomena like these are sometimes
referred to in the psychoanalytic literature as comprising a
"narcissistic defense" (e.g., Kernberg, 1984). That one is suffering
with narcissistic issues does not make one a narcissistic personality.
Where situational factors dominate a narcissistic presentation, the
interviewer should rely on historical data and the feel of the
transference to infer the personality structure underneath the
narcissistic injury.

**Narcissistic versus Psychopathic Personality**

In the last section of the previous chapter, I mentioned the importance
of discriminating between a predominantly psychopathic personality
structure and one that is essentially narcissistic. Kohutian efforts at
empathic relatedness, at least as they are conventionally put into
practice, would be ineffective with psychopathic people because they do
not emotionally understand compassionate attitudes; they scorn a
sympathetic demeanor as the mark of weakness. The approach advocated by
Kernberg (e.g., 1984) centering on the confrontation of the grandiose
self, would be more respectfully assimilated by a psychopathically
organized person, and is consistent with the recommendations of
therapists such as Greenwald (1974), Bursten (e.g., 1973a, 1973b), Groth
(e.g., 1979), and Meloy (e.g., 2001), who have specialized in working
with psychopathic clients.

**Narcissistic versus Depressive Personality**

The more depressed kind of narcissistic person can easily be
misunderstood as having a depressive personality. The essential
difference between the two groups is, to condense a great deal of
clinical theory and observation into a simple image, that
narcissistically depressed people are subjectively empty, whereas
depressive people with introjective psychologies (Blatt, 2004) (those
who used to be described as suffering depression of the more
"melancholic" or guilty type) are subjectively full---of critical and
angry internalizations. The narcissistic depressive feels devoid of a
substantial self; the melancholic depressive feels the self is real but
irreducibly bad. I comment on these differences and their divergent
therapeutic implications more in [Chapter
11](#part0021.html){.calibre9}.

**Narcissistic versus Obsessive--Compulsive Personality**

It is easy to misconstrue a narcissistic person as obsessive and/or
compulsive on the basis of the attention to detail that may be part of
the narcissistic quest for perfection. In the early days of
psychoanalytic practice, fundamentally narcissistic people were often
considered obsessive or compulsive because their presenting symptoms
fell into one or both of those categories. They were then treated
according to assumptions about the etiology of obsessive--compulsive
character that emphasized struggles for control and guilt over anger and
fantasied aggression.

Narcissistic patients, who were empty more than angry, did not make much
progress in that kind of therapy; they would feel misunderstood and
criticized when the therapist seemed to harp on issues that were not
central to their subjectivity. Although many people have both
narcissistic and more classically obsessive concerns, those whose
personalities were predominantly narcissistic tended to get little help
from analytic therapy before the 1970s, when theories of the etiology
and treatment of pathological narcissism radically extended our capacity
to help people with disorders of the self. I know of a number of people
treated analytically before that time who still bear grudges against
their therapist and against psychoanalysis in general. In popular
accounts of psychotherapy experiences one can find what seem to be
examples of the effects of this misdiagnosis. I give more details on
this distinction and the implications of this diagnostic error in
[Chapter 13](#part0023.html){.calibre9}.

**Narcissistic versus Hysterical Personality**

While the narcissistic versus obsessive--compulsive personality
differential is called for somewhat more frequently with men than with
women, the need to distinguish between narcissism and hysteria comes up
much more commonly with female patients. Because hysterically organized
people use narcissistic defenses, they are readily misinterpreted as
narcissistic characters. Heterosexual women whose hysterical
presentation includes considerable exhibitionistic behavior and a
pattern of relating to men in which idealization is quickly followed by
devaluation may appear to be basically narcissistic, but their concerns
about self are gender specific and fueled by anxiety more than shame.
Outside certain highly conflicted areas, they are warm, loving, and far
from empty (see Kernberg, 1984).

The import of this differential lies in the contrasting therapeutic
requirements for the two groups: Hysterical patients thrive with an
attention to object transferences, whereas narcissistic ones require an
appreciation of selfobject phenomena. In [Chapter
14](#part0024.html){.calibre9} I go into more detail on this topic.

**SUMMARY**

This chapter has described the depleted subjective world of the person
with a narcissistically organized character and the compensatory
behaviors with which such a person tries to maintain a reliable and
valued sense of self. I have emphasized the affects of shame and envy,
the defenses of idealization and devaluation, and relational patterns of
using and being used to equilibrate one's self-esteem and to repair
damage to it. I discussed the narcissistic person's propensity for
selfobject transferences and noted countertransference reactions in
which a sense of unrelatedness prevails. I mentioned some implications
for technique that derive from an appreciation of these special aspects
of the narcissistic condition, although I acknowledged current
controversies in the psychoanalytic understanding of narcissism that
make effective approaches with this population a matter of some dispute.
Finally, I distinguished narcissistic character organization from
narcissistic reactions, from psychopathy, from introjective depressive
personality, from obsessive and compulsive character structure, and from
hysterical psychology.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

There has been a voluminous psychoanalytic literature on narcissism
since the 1970s, when Kohut published *The Analysis of the Self* (1971)
and Kernberg offered an alternative conception in *Borderline Conditions
and Pathological Narcissism* (1975). Both these books contain so much
jargon that they are almost impossible for someone new to psychoanalysis
to read. More manageable alternatives include Alice Miller's *Prisoners
of Childhood* (1975) (known in another edition as *The Drama of the
Gifted Child*), Bach's *Narcissistic States and the Therapeutic Process*
(1985), and Morrison's *Shame: The Underside of Narcissism* (1989).
Morrison also edited a collection, available in paperback, titled
*Essential Papers on Narcissism* (1986), which contains major
psychoanalytic essays on the topic, most of which are excellent. For a
scholarly analysis of the cultural trends behind the "empty self" that
is central to narcissistic personality, see Philip Cushman's
*Constructing the Self, Constructing America* (1995).

Newer works on narcissism tend to be based on the description in DSM-IV,
and thus strike me as more superficial, trait based, and one-dimensional
than these analytic writings. But the oversimplification and
popularization of a concept can have its advantages: There are now many
helpful popular books for individuals coping with narcissistic parents,
lovers, colleagues, employers, and other difficult people.

[]{#part0019.html}

**9**

Schizoid Personalities

[T]{.dropcap}he person whose character is essentially schizoid is
subject to widespread misunderstanding, based on the common
misconception that schizoid dynamics are always suggestive of grave
primitivity. Because the incontrovertibly psychotic diagnosis of
schizophrenia fits people at the disturbed end of the schizoid
continuum, and because the behavior of schizoid people can be
unconventional, eccentric, or even bizarre, nonschizoid others tend to
pathologize those with schizoid dynamics---whether or not they are
competent and autonomous, with significant areas of ego strength. In
fact, schizoid people run the gamut from the hospitalized catatonic
patient to the creative genius.

As with the other typological categories, a person may be schizoid at
any level, from psychologically incapacitated to saner than average.
Because the defense that defines the schizoid character is a primitive
one (withdrawal into fantasy), it may be that healthy schizoid people
are rarer than sicker ones, but I do not know of any research findings
or disciplined clinical observations that support this assumption
empirically. There is long-standing evidence (E. Bleuler, 1911; M.
Bleuler, 1977; Nannarello, 1953; Peralta, Cuesta, & de Leon, 1991) and
some recent suggestions from neuroscience and genetics (Weinberger,
2004) that the most frequent premorbid personality type in those who
become schizophrenic is schizoid. But the converse idea, that all
schizoid people are at risk of a psychotic break, has no empirical
basis.

One reason schizoid people may be pathologized is that they are
comparatively rare. People in majorities tend to assume that their own
psychology is normative and to equate difference with inferiority (as
happened with people of minority sexual orientation for many years). The
psychoanalytic concept of the schizoid person has a lot in common with
the Jungian concept of the introvert, specifically the kind of
individual who would test as an introverted, intuitive, feeling, judging
type (INFJ) on the Jungian-derived Myers Briggs inventory. INFJs
constitute only about 1% of the overall population in the areas where
personality distribution has been studied, and are understood as having
strengths as "mystics" or "confidants."

Vocations like philosophical inquiry, spiritual discipline, theoretical
science, and the creative arts attract people with this kind of
character. At the high-functioning end of the schizoid spectrum we might
find people like Ludwig Wittgenstein, Martha Graham, and other admirably
original and somewhat eccentric individuals. Albert Einstein (1931)
wrote about himself:

 

My passionate sense of social justice and social responsibility has
always contrasted oddly with my pronounced lack of need for direct
contact with other human beings and human communities. I am truly a
"lone traveler" and have never belonged to my country, my home, my
friends, or even my immediate family, with my whole heart; in the face
of all these ties, I have never lost a sense of distance and a need for
solitude. . . . (p. 9)

 

In 1980, with the publication of DSM-III, conditions that most analysts
would regard as different possibilities on the schizoid spectrum, or as
minor variants on a general schizoid theme, appeared as discrete
categories in the DSM. Complicated theoretical issues influenced this
decision (see Lion, 1986), one reflecting differences of current opinion
that echo old controversies about the nature of certain schizoid states
(Akhtar, 1992; E. Bleuler, 1911; Gottesman, 1991; Jaspers, 1963;
Kraepelin, 1919; Kretschmer, 1925; Schneider, 1959). Many analytic
practitioners continue to regard the diagnoses of schizoid, schizotypal,
and avoidant personality disorders as nonpsychotic versions of schizoid
character, and the diagnoses of schizophrenia, schizophreniform
disorder, and schizoaffective disorder as psychotic levels of schizoid
functioning.

I am often asked whether I see schizoid people as on the autistic
spectrum, and I am not sure how to answer. Our taxonomic categories
remain arbitrary and overlapping, and acting as if there are discrete
present-versus-absent differences between labels is not usually wise
clinically, when one is trying to get a sense of a patient's individual
uniqueness. Perhaps schizoid psychology, especially in its
high-functioning versions, can be reasonably viewed as at the healthy
end of the autistic spectrum. Certainly on the basis of their observable
behavior, some schizoid individuals seem as unrelated, odd, and detached
as those with diagnosed autism or Asperger syndrome.

But people who are diagnosably autistic often report an internal
inability to imagine what others are thinking and feeling and being
motivated by, whereas schizoid people, despite their withdrawal, are
more likely to be preternaturally attuned to the subjective experience
of others. I have heard Asperger-diagnosed parents say that they had to
be taught that their children need to be hugged. Even if he had trouble
getting himself to hug his child, a schizoid father would have no
difficulty understanding the child's need. Schizoid people are more
likely to describe themselves as overwhelmed by affect than as lacking
it. So in these areas there seems to me a significant difference in the
territory under consideration.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT\
IN SCHIZOID PSYCHOLOGY**

Clinical experience suggests that temperamentally, the person who
becomes schizoid is hyperreactive and easily overstimulated. Schizoid
people often describe themselves as innately sensitive, and their
relatives frequently mention their having been the kind of baby who
shrinks from too much light or noise or motion (cf. Bergman & Escalona,
1949, on babies with unusual sensitivities). It is as if the nerve
endings of schizoid individuals are closer to the surface than those of
the rest of us. Doidge (2001) depicts them as "hyperpermeable" to
external impingements. Although most infants cuddle, cling, and mold
themselves to the body of a warm caregiver, some newborns stiffen or
pull back as if the adult has intruded on their comfort and safety
(Brazelton, 1982; Kagan, 1994). One suspects that such babies are
constitutionally prone to schizoid personality structure, especially if
there is a "poor fit" (Escalona, 1968) between themselves and their main
caregivers.

In the area of drive as classically understood, the schizoid person
seems to struggle with oral-level issues. Specifically, he or she is
preoccupied with avoiding the dangers of being engulfed, absorbed,
distorted, taken over, eaten up. A talented schizoid therapist in a
supervision group I belonged to once described to the group members his
vivid fantasy that the physical circle of participants constituted a
huge mouth or a giant letter *C.* He imagined that if he exposed his
vulnerability by talking candidly about his feelings toward one of his
patients, the group would close around him, making the *C* into an *O,*
and that he would suffocate and expire inside it.

While fantasies like those of my colleague invite the interpretation
that they constitute projections and transformations of the fantasizer's
own hunger (Fairbairn, 1941; Guntrip, 1961; Seinfeld, 1991), the
schizoid person often does not experience appetitive drives as coming
from within the self. Rather, the outer world feels full of consuming,
distorting threats against security and individuality. Fairbairn's
understanding of schizoid states as "love made hungry" addresses not the
day-to-day subjective experience of the schizoid person but the dynamics
underlying the opposite and manifest tendencies: to withdraw, to seek
satisfactions in fantasy, to reject the corporeal world. As Kretschmer
noted in 1925, schizoid people are even apt to be physically thin, so
removed are they from emotional contact with their own greed.

Similarly, schizoid people do not impress one as being highly
aggressive, despite the violent content of some of their fantasies.
Their families and friends often regard them as unusually gentle, placid
people. A friend of mine, whose general brilliance and schizoid
indifference to convention I have long admired, was described lovingly
at his wedding by an older sister as having always been a "soft person."
This softness exists in fascinating contradiction to his affinity for
horror movies, true-crime books, and visions of apocalyptic world
destruction. The projection of drive can be easily assumed, but this
man's conscious experience---and the impression he makes on others---is
of a sweet, low-keyed, lovable eccentric. Most analytic thinkers who
have worked with people like my friend have inferred that schizoid
clients bury both their hunger and their aggression under a heavy
blanket of defense.

Affectively, one of the most striking aspects of many high-functioning
individuals with schizoid dynamics is their *lack* of common defenses.
They tend to be in touch with many emotional reactions at a level of
genuineness that awes and even intimidates their acquaintances. It is
common for the schizoid person to wonder how everybody else can be lying
to themselves so effortlessly when the harsh facts of life are so
patent. Part of the alienation from which schizoid people suffer derives
from their experiences of not having their own emotional, intuitive, and
sensory capacities validated---because others simply do not see what
they do. The ability of a schizoid person to perceive what others disown
or ignore is so natural and effortless that he or she may lack empathy
for the less lucid, less ambivalent, less emotionally harrowing world of
nonschizoid peers.

Schizoid people do not seem to struggle quite the way narcissistic
people do with shame or introjectively depressive people do with guilt.
They tend to take themselves and the world pretty much as is without the
internal impetus to make things different or to shrink from judgment.
Yet they may suffer considerable anxiety about basic safety. When they
feel overwhelmed, they hide---either literally with a hermit's
reclusiveness or by retreat into their imagination (Kasanin & Rosen,
1933; Nannarello, 1953). The schizoid person is above all else an
outsider, an onlooker, an observer of the human condition. One of my
schizoid friends told me his tombstone should read, "Here lies
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. He read and thought about life to the hilt."

The "split" implied in the etymology of the word "schizoid" exists in
two areas: between the self and the outside world, and between the
experienced self and desire (see Laing, 1965). When analytic
commentators refer to split experience in schizoid people, they refer to
a sense of estrangement from part of the self or from life that is
essentially "dissociative" (another word used frequently by analysts
personally and professionally acquainted with schizoid psychology, such
as D. W. Winnicott). The defense mechanism of splitting, in which a
person alternately expresses one ego state and then another opposite
one, or divides the world defensively into all-good and all-bad aspects,
is a different use of the word.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES\
IN SCHIZOID PSYCHOLOGY**

As I noted previously, the pathognomonic defense in schizoid personality
organization is withdrawal into an internal world of imagination. In
addition, schizoid people may use projection and introjection,
idealization, devaluation, and to a lesser extent, the other defenses
that have their origins in a time before self and other were fully
differentiated psychologically. Among the more "mature" defenses,
intellectualization seems to be the preference of most schizoid people.
They rarely rely on mechanisms that blot out affective and sensory
information, such as denial and repression; similarly, the defensive
operations that organize experience along good-and-bad lines, such as
compartmentalization, moralization, undoing, reaction formation, and
turning against the self, are not prominent in their repertoires. Under
stress, schizoid individuals may withdraw from their own affect as well
as from external stimulation, appearing blunted, flat, or inappropriate,
often despite showing evidence of heightened attunement to affective
messages coming from others.

The most adaptive and exciting capacity of the schizoid person is
creativity. Most truly original artists have a strong schizoid
streak---almost by definition, given that one has to stand apart from
convention to influence it in a new way. Healthier schizoid people turn
their assets into works of art, scientific discoveries, theoretical
innovations, or spiritual pathfinding, while more disturbed individuals
in this category live in a private hell where their potential
contributions are preempted by their terror and estrangement. The
sublimation of autistic withdrawal into creative activity is a primary
goal of therapy with schizoid patients.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN SCHIZOID PSYCHOLOGY**

The primary relational conflict of schizoid people concerns closeness
and distance, love and fear. A deep ambivalence about attachment
pervades their subjective life. They crave closeness yet feel the
constant threat of engulfment by others; they seek distance to reassure
themselves of their safety and separateness yet may complain of
alienation and loneliness (Eigen, 1973; Karon & VandenBos, 1981;
Masterson & Klein, 1995; Modell, 1996; Seinfeld, 1991). Guntrip (1952),
who depicted the "classic dilemma" of the schizoid individual as "that
he can neither be in a relationship with another person nor out of it,
without in various ways risking the loss of both his object and
himself," refers to this dilemma as the "in and out programme" (p. 36).

Schopenhauer's famous parable about porcupines on a cold night (see
Luepnitz, 2002) captures the dilemma of schizoid people: When they move
close for warmth, they prick one another; when they move away from the
pain, they get cold. This conflict can be enacted in the form of intense
but brief connection followed by long periods of retreat. A. Robbins
(1988) summarizes the dynamic as the message, "Come close for I am
alone, but stay away for I fear intrusion" (p. 398). Sexually, some
schizoid people are remarkably apathetic, often despite being functional
and orgasmic. The closer the other, the greater the worry that sex means
enmeshment. Many a heterosexual woman has fallen in love with a
passionate musician, only to learn that her lover reserves his sensual
intensity for his instrument. Similarly, some schizoid people crave
unattainable sexual objects, while feeling vague indifference toward
available ones. The partners of schizoid people sometimes complain of a
mechanical or detached quality in their lovemaking.

Object relations theories of the genesis of schizoid dynamics have been,
in my own view, burdened by efforts to locate the origins of schizoid
states in a particular phase of development. The adequacy of the
fixation--regression hypothesis in accounting for type of character
structure is, as I suggested previously, problematic, yet its appeal is
understandable: It normalizes puzzling phenomena by considering them
simple residues of ordinary infantile life. Melanie Klein (1946) thus
traced schizoid mechanisms to a universal paranoid--schizoid position of
early infancy, before the child has fully taken in the separateness of
others. Other early object relations analysts followed suit in
developing explanatory paradigms in which schizoid dynamics were equated
with regression to neonatal experience (Fairbairn, 1941; Guntrip, 1971).
For a long time, theorists tended to accept the developmental bias of
the fixation--regression model, yet they differed about which early
phase is the fixation point. For example, in the Kleinian tradition,
Giovacchini (1979) regarded schizoid disorders as essentially
"prementational," whereas Horner (1979) assigned their origins to a
later age when the child emerges from symbiosis.

The concept of schizoid personality overlaps considerably with the
paradigm of avoidant attachment, one of the insecure attachment styles
(Wallin, 2007). Babies labeled "avoidant" or "dismissive" by attachment
researchers react to Ainsworth's Strange Situation with what looks like
indifference to whether or not their mother is present. Although they
may seem perfectly comfortable, their heart rates during separation have
been found to be elevated, and their cortisol (stress hormone) levels
rise (Spangler & Grossmann, 1993; Sroufe & Waters, 1977). Ainsworth and
colleagues (1978) reported that the mothers of these children were
rejecting of their normal dependency. Grossmann and Grossmann (1991)
later noted that they were particularly unresponsive to sadness in their
babies. Main and Weston (1982) described mothers of avoidant infants as
brusque, emotionally unexpressive, and averse to physical contact with
their children.

These findings are interesting to consider in the context of clinical
speculations about the interpersonal etiologies of schizoid personality.
A parent who is dismissive or contemptuous of a child's neediness could
certainly foster a defensive self-sufficiency in that child (Doidge,
2001; Fairbairn, 1940). Some people with a history of early isolation
and neglect may be understood as having learned to make a virtue out of
a necessity by avoiding closeness and relying on their inner world for
stimulation. Harry Stack Sullivan and Arthur Robbins, two analysts whose
own schizoid trends prompted them to interpret the schizoid experience
to the larger mental health community, both suffered significant early
deprivation of companionship (Mullahy, 1970; A. Robbins, 1988).

A seemingly opposite type of relatedness that may encourage a child's
withdrawal is an impinging, overinvested, overinvolved kind of parenting
(Winnicott, 1965). The schizoid man with the smothering mother is a
staple of popular literature and can also be found in scholarly work. A
type of family background commonly reported to clinicians by schizoid
male patients is a seductive or boundary-transgressing mother and an
impatient, critical father. Although DSM-IV gives no information on
gender distribution for schizoid, schizotypal, and avoidant diagnoses,
it is my impression that therapists see more males than females with
schizoid personalities. This would accord with the psychoanalytic
observation that because most primary caregivers are female, and because
girls identify with female caregivers whereas boys tend to disidentify
from them eventually (Chodorow, 1978, 1989; Dinnerstein, 1976), women
are more prone to disorders characterized by too much attachment (e.g.,
depression, masochism, dependent personality disorders) and men to those
characterized by too little (e.g., psychopathy, sadism, schizoid
conditions).

The content, not just the degree, of parental involvement may also
contribute to the development of a pattern of schizoid aloofness and
withdrawal. Numerous observers of the families of people who developed a
schizophrenic psychosis have stressed the role of contradictory and
confusing communications in psychotic breakdowns (Bateson et al., 1956;
Laing, 1965; Lidz & Fleck, 1965; Searles, 1959; Singer & Wynne, 1965a,
1965b). It is possible that such patterns foster schizoid dynamics in
general. A child raised with double-binding, pseudomutual, emotionally
dishonest messages could easily come to depend on withdrawal to protect
the self from intolerable levels of confusion and anger. He or she would
also feel deeply hopeless, an attitude often noted in schizoid patients
(e.g., Giovacchini, 1979).

It is typical of the literature on schizoid phenomena---an extensive
literature because of the huge social cost of schizophrenia---that
contrasting and mutually exclusive formulations can be found everywhere
one looks (Sass, 1992). These inconsistencies uncannily mirror the
dissociated self-states of the schizoid person. It is not impossible
that both impingement and deprivation codetermine the schizoid pattern:
If one is lonely and deprived, yet the only kind of parenting available
is unempathic and intrusive, a conflict between yearning and avoiding,
between closeness and distance, would be highly likely.

Elizabeth Howell (2005) notes that Fairbairn's conceptualization of
schizoid experience can form a basis for also understanding dissociative
disorders, borderline phenomena, and narcissism (p. 3), all of which
have elements of falseness, split experience, difficulty with affect
tolerance, and internalization of toxic others. Schizoid psychology in
particular may emerge from a pattern of microdissociations in response
to traumatic overstimulation by caregivers who are insensitive to the
child's temperamental sensitivity and intensity. Masud Khan's (1963,
1974) studies of schizoid conditions inferred "cumulative trauma" from
failures of realistic maternal protection inherent in the mother's
intense overidentification with the baby. Some contemporary students of
trauma and dissociation (e.g., R. Chefetz, personal communication,
September 12, 2010) consider schizoid psychology to be understandable
through the lens of dissociative processes (disordered affect regulation
and somatic experience, chronic depersonalization and/or derealization,
etc.) as the product of repetitive relational trauma. In a vivid
communication of this process, a talented musician once told me, with
characteristic schizoid access to imagery, that before his father died
(when he was 9), the world was in color; afterward, it was in black and
white.

**THE SCHIZOID SELF**

One of the most striking aspects of people with schizoid personalities
is their disregard for conventional social expectations. In dramatic
contrast to the narcissistic personality style, the schizoid person may
be markedly indifferent to the effect he or she has on others and to
evaluative responses coming from those in the outside world. Compliance
and conformity go against the grain for schizoid people, whether or not
they are in touch with a painful subjective loneliness. Even when they
see some expediency in fitting in, they tend to feel awkward and even
fraudulent making social chitchat or participating in communal forms,
regarding them as essentially contrived and artificial. The schizoid
self tries to stand at a safe distance from the rest of humanity.

Many observers have commented on the detached, ironic, and faintly
contemptuous attitude of many schizoid people (E. Bleuler, 1911; M.
Bleuler, 1977; Sullivan, 1973). This tendency toward an isolated
superiority may have its origins in fending off the incursions of an
overcontrolling or overintrusive Other about which I have just
hypothesized. Even in the most seemingly disorganized schizophrenic
patients, a kind of deliberate oppositionality has long been noted, as
if the patient's only way of preserving a sense of self-integrity is in
making a farce of every conventional expectation. Under the topic of
"counter-etiquette," Sass (1992) comments on this phenomenon:

::: calibre1
 
:::

Cross-cultural research has shown \... that schizophrenics generally
seem to gravitate toward "the path of most resistance," tending to
transgress whatever customs and rules happen to be held most sacred in a
given society. Thus, in deeply religious Nigeria, they are especially
likely to violate religious sanctions; in Japan, to assault family
members. (p. 110)

One way of understanding these apparently deliberate preferences for
eccentricity and defiance of custom is to assume that the schizoid
person is assiduously warding off the condition of being
defined---psychologically taken over and obliterated---by others.

Abandonment is thus a lesser evil than engulfment to schizoid people.
Anticipating Blatt's (2008) comprehensive work on the polarities of
self-definition and relationship, Michael Balint (1945), in a famous
essay with the evocative title "Friendly Expanses---Horrid Empty
Spaces," contrasted two antithetical characters: the philobat (lover of
distance), who seeks the comforts of solitude when upset, and the
"ocnophil" (lover of closeness), who gravitates toward others, seeking a
shoulder to cry on. Schizoid people are the ultimate philobats. Perhaps
predictably, since human beings are often drawn to those with opposite
and envied strengths, schizoid people tend to attract (and to be
attracted to) warm, expressive, sociable people such as those with
hysterical personalities. These proclivities set the stage for certain
familiar and even comic problems in which the nonschizoid partner tries
to resolve interpersonal tension by continually moving closer, whereas
the schizoid person, fearing engulfment, keeps moving farther away.

I do not want to give the impression that schizoid individuals are cold
or uncaring. They may care very much about other people yet still need
to maintain a protected personal space. Some gravitate to careers in
psychotherapy, where they put their exquisite sensitivity to use safely
in the service of others. Allen Wheelis (1956), who may have experienced
himself as schizoid, wrote an eloquent essay on the attractions and
hazards of a psychoanalytic career, stressing how people with a core
conflict over closeness and distance may be drawn to the profession of
psychoanalysis. As an analyst, one gets to know others more intimately
than anyone else has ever known them, but one's own exposure is within
predictable professional bounds.

For someone with schizoid dynamics, self-esteem is often maintained by
individual creative activity. Issues of personal integrity and
self-expression tend to dominate self-evaluative concerns. Where the
psychopath pursues evidence of personal power, or the narcissist seeks
admiring feedback to nourish self-regard, the schizoid person wants
confirmation of his or her genuine originality, sensitivity, and
uniqueness. This confirmation must be internally rather than externally
bestowed, and because of their high standards for creative endeavors,
schizoid people are often rigorously self-critical. They may take the
pursuit of authenticity to such extreme lengths that their isolation and
demoralization are virtually guaranteed.

Sass (1992) has compellingly described how schizoid conditions are
emblematic of modernity. The alienation of contemporary people from a
communal sensibility, reflected in the deconstructive perspectives of
20th-century art, literature, anthropology, philosophy, and criticism,
has eerie similarities to schizoid and schizophrenic experience. Sass
notes in particular the attitudes of alienation, hyperreflexivity
(elaborate self-consciousness), detachment, and rationality gone
virtually mad that characterize modern and postmodern modes of thought
and art, contrasting them with "the world of the natural attitude, the
world of practical activity, shared communal meanings, and real physical
presences" (p. 354). His exposition also calls effectively into question
numerous facile and oversimplified accounts of schizophrenia and the
schizoid experience.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH SCHIZOID PATIENTS**

Although one would assume intuitively from their predilection for
withdrawal that schizoid people would shun encounters as intimate as
psychotherapy and psychoanalysis, when treated with consideration and
respect, they are often appreciative of and cooperative in the therapy
process. The clinician's discipline in addressing the client's own
agenda, and the safe distance created by the customary boundaries of
treatment (time limitations, fee arrangements, ethical prohibitions
against social or sexual relationships with clients), seem to decrease
the schizoid person's fears about enmeshing involvements.

Schizoid clients approach therapy with the same combination of
sensitivity, honesty, and fear of engulfment that typifies their other
relationships. They may be seeking help because their isolation from the
rest of the human community has become too painful, or because they have
suffered a loss of one of the very few people they felt close to, or
because they have circumscribed goals related to their isolation, such
as a wish to get over an inhibition against dating or pursuing other
specific social behaviors. Sometimes the psychological disadvantages of
their personality type are not evident to them; they may want relief
from a depression or an anxiety state or another symptom syndrome. At
other times, they may arrive for treatment afraid---sometimes
rightly---that they are on the brink of going mad.

It is not uncommon for a schizoid person to be tongue-tied and to feel
empty, lost, and pained in the early phases of therapy. An anguished
schizoid woman I treated (McWilliams, 2006a), who became mute for long
periods in every session, finally telephoned to tell me, poignantly, "I
want you to know that I want to talk to you, but it hurts too much." A
therapist may have to endure long silences while the patient
internalizes the safety of the setting. Eventually, however, unless a
client is excruciatingly nonverbal or confusingly psychotic, most people
with schizoid psychologies are a pleasure to work with. As one would
expect, they are often highly perceptive of their internal reactions,
and they are grateful to have a place where honest self-expression will
not arouse alarm, disdain, or derision. I have been touched many times
by the gratitude of schizoid individuals when they feel understood and
treated with respect, not only when patients have expressed such
appreciation, but when I get warm e-mails from self-diagnosed schizoid
readers who spontaneously thank me for writing this chapter and another
article (McWilliams, 2006b) that explores their psychology without
pathologizing them.

The initial transference--countertransference challenge for the
therapist working with a schizoid patient is to find a way into the
person's subjective world without arousing too much anxiety about
intrusion. Because schizoid people may withdraw into detached and
obscure styles of communication, it is easy to fall into a
counterdetachment, in which one regards them as interesting specimens
rather than as fellow creatures. Their original transference "tests," as
per control--mastery theory, involve efforts to see whether the
therapist is concerned enough for them to tolerate their confusing,
off-putting messages while maintaining the determination to understand
and help. Naturally, they fear that the therapist will, like other
people in their lives, withdraw from them emotionally and consign them
to the category of hopeless recluse or amusing crackpot.

The history of efforts to understand schizoid conditions is replete with
examples of "experts" objectifying the lonely patient, being fascinated
at schizoid phenomena but keeping a safe distance from the emotional
pain they represent and regarding the schizoid person's verbalizations
as meaningless, trivial, or too enigmatic to bother to decode. The
current psychiatric enthusiasm for physiological explanations of
schizoid states is a familiar version of this disposition not to take
the schizoid person's subjectivity seriously. As Sass (1992) has argued,
efforts to find biochemical and neurological contributions to schizoid
and schizophrenic states do not obviate the continuing need to address
the *meaning* of the schizoid experience to the patient. In *The Divided
Self*, R. D. Laing (1965) reassesses a schizophrenic woman interviewed
by Emil Kraepelin. The patient's words, which had been incomprehensible
to Kraepelin, gain meaning when regarded from Laing's empathic
perspective. Karon and VandenBos (1981) present case after case of
helpable patients who might easily be dismissed as "management" projects
by clinicians who are untrained or unwilling to try to understand them.

People who are characterologically schizoid and in no danger of a
psychotic break---the majority of schizoid people---provoke much less
incomprehension and defensive detachment in their therapists than do
hospitalized schizophrenics, the subject of most of the serious analytic
writing on pathological withdrawal. But the same therapeutic
requirements apply, in less extreme degree. The patient needs to be
treated as if his or her internal experience, even if outlandish to
others, has potentially discernable meaning and can constitute the basis
for a nonthreatening intimacy with another person. The therapist must
keep in mind that the aloofness of the schizoid client is an addressable
defense, not an insurmountable barrier to connection. If the clinician
can avoid acting on countertransference temptations either to prod the
patient into premature disclosure, or to objectify and distance him or
her, a solid working alliance should evolve.

Once a therapeutic relationship is in place, certain other emotional
complexities may ensue. In my experience, the subjective fragility of
the schizoid person is mirrored in the therapist's frequent sense of
weakness or helplessness. Images and fantasies of a destructive,
devouring external world may absorb both parties to the therapy process.
Counterimages of omnipotence and shared superiority may also be present
("We two form a universe"). Fond perceptions of the patient as a unique,
exquisite, misunderstood genius or underappreciated sage may dominate
the therapist's inner responses, perhaps in parallel to the attitude of
an overinvolved parent who imagined greatness for this special child.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF SCHIZOID PERSONALITY**

The therapist who works with a schizoid patient must be open to a degree
of authenticity and a level of awareness of emotion and imagery that
would be possible only after years of work with patients of other
character types. While I have known many practitioners who do well with
many kinds of clients without having undergone a thoroughgoing personal
analysis, I doubt that unless they are schizoid themselves, they can
respond effectively to schizoid patients without having had extensive
therapeutic exposure to their own inner depths.

Because many therapists have somewhat depressive psychologies, and their
fears of abandonment are thus stronger than their fears of engulfment,
they naturally try to move close to people they wish to help. Empathy
with the schizoid patient's need for emotional space may consequently be
hard to come by. A supervisor of mine once commented about my earnest
and overly impinging efforts to reach a schizoid patient, "This man
needs bicarbonate of soda, and you keep trying to feed him pumpkin pie."
Emmanuel Hammer (1968) commented on the effectiveness of simply moving
one's chair farther from the patient, thus giving nonverbal reassurance
that the therapist will not intrude, hurry, take over, or smother.

In the early phases of therapy, most interpretation should be avoided on
the basis of the patient's fears of being treated intrusively. Also,
schizoid patients probably know more about their inner life than the
therapist can at this point. Comments and casual reactions may be
gratefully accepted, but efforts to push the client beyond what he or
she is expressing will disconcert or antagonize the schizoid person,
increasing tendencies toward withdrawal. Susan Deri (1968) emphasized
the importance of phrasing one's remarks in the words or images just
used by the patient in order to reinforce the person's sense of reality
and internal solidity. Hammer (1990) further cautioned against probing,
quizzing, or treating the schizoid patient in a way that makes him or
her feel like a "case."

Normalizing is an important part of effective therapy with schizoid
people. In [Chapter 4](#part0013.html){.calibre9} I discussed the
general technique of "interpreting up" with reference to people at the
psychotic end of the psychotic--borderline--neurotic axis; it may also
be useful for schizoid patients at any level of psychological health
because of their difficulty believing that their hyperacute reactions
will be understood and appreciated. Even if they are demonstrably high
functioning, most schizoid people worry that they are fundamentally
aberrant, incomprehensible to others. They want to be fully known by the
people they care about, but they fear that if they are completely open
about their inner life, they will be exposed as freaks.

Even those schizoid people who are confident of the superiority of their
perceptions are not indifferent to the effect they may have in
alienating others. By behaving in a way that conveys that the schizoid
person's inner world is comprehensible, the therapist helps the client
to take in the experience of being accepted without being asked to
submit to the agenda of another person. Eventually, schizoid patients
accrue enough self-esteem that even when other people fail to
understand, they can appreciate that the difficulty may lie in the
limitations of others rather than in the grotesqueness of their own
sensibilities. The therapist's reframing of imaginal richness as talent
rather than pathology may be deeply relieving to schizoid people, who
may have had their emotional reactions disconfirmed or minimized all
their lives by less sensitive commentators.

One way to give a schizoid patient confirmation without being
experienced as either engulfing or minimizing is to use artistic and
literary sources of imagery to communicate understanding of the
patient's issues. A. Robbins (1988) describes the early part of his own
psychoanalysis as follows:

::: calibre1
 
:::

When there were many lengthy silences in which I had little sense of
what to say or how to communicate my feelings regarding my life history,
fortunately my analyst did not desert me. Sometimes he would offer me
"bedtime stories" \[Robbins had never been read to as a child\] in the
form of citing plays, literature, and movies that had some relevance to
the diffuse threads and images I presented to him in treatment. My
curiosity was aroused by the references, and I made a point of reading
the material. The likes of Ibsen, Dostoyevsky, and Kafka became
important sources of rich symbolic material that seemed to mirror and
clarify my inner experiences. Literature, and later art, seemed to give
symbolic form to what I was trying to express. Most importantly, this
material provided a significant means of sharing emotionally with my
analyst. (p. 394)

A. Robbins and his colleagues (1980; A. Robbins, 1989) have made rich
contributions to the creative arts therapies and have elaborated on the
aesthetic dimension of psychoanalytic work with clients, aspects of
therapy that hold particular promise for those who are schizoid.

Perhaps the most common obstacle to therapeutic progress with schizoid
patients---once the therapy relationship is soundly in place and the
work of understanding is proceeding---is the tendency for both therapist
and patient to form a kind of emotional cocoon, in which they feel they
understand each other comfortably and look forward to therapy sessions
as a respite from a demanding world. Schizoid people have a tendency,
with which an empathic therapist may unwittingly collude, to try to make
the therapy relationship a substitute for, rather than an enhancer of,
their lives outside the consulting room. Considerable time may go by
before the therapist notices that although the patient develops rich
insights in nearly every session, he or she has not gone to a social
function, asked anybody out, improved a sexual relationship, or embarked
on a creative project.

The generalization to the outside world of the schizoid client's
attainment of a safe intimacy with the therapist can be a challenge. The
therapist confronts the dilemma of having been hired to foster better
social and intimate functioning yet realizing that any reminders to the
patient that he or she is not pursuing that goal may be received as
intrusive, controlling, and unempathic with the need for space. This
tension is addressable, and the naming of it may deepen the schizoid
person's appreciation of how powerful is the conflict between desire for
closeness and fear of it. As with most aspects of therapy, timing is
everything.

A. Robbins (1988) has emphasized the importance of the therapist's
willingness to be seen as a "real person," not just a transference
object. This recommendation has particular relevance for the schizoid
person, who has an abundance of "as if" relationships and needs the
sense of the therapist's active participation as a human being:
supporting risks in the direction of relationships, being playful or
humorous in ways that were absent in the schizoid person's history, and
responding with attitudes that counteract the patient's tendencies to
hide or "pass" or go through the motions of connecting emotionally with
others. Authenticity is important with every client, but for those with
schizoid personalities, it is critical at a cellular level. With these
sensitive people who have radar for falseness, one finds that the
client's transference reactions are not only not obscured by a more
responsive therapeutic style, they may even become more accessible.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

Schizoid psychology is usually easy to recognize, given the relative
indifference of schizoid people to making a conventional impression on
the interviewer. The central diagnostic challenge is assessing the
strength of the client's ego: schizoid people may be misunderstood as
both more and less troubled than they are, depending on what they share
with the interviewer. Less portentously, some obsessive and compulsive
people, especially in the borderline-to-psychotic range, are easily
misconstrued as more schizoid than they are.

**Degree of Pathology**

It is critical, first of all, to evaluate how disturbed a person in the
schizoid range is. It is probably experience with the importance of this
dimension that led the contributors to DSM-IV to give several
alternative schizoid diagnoses, something they did not do for several
other personality disorders that also exist with a wide range of
severity. Obviously, it is critical to consider possible psychotic
processes in an intake interview; questions about hallucinations and
delusions, attention to the presence or absence of disordered thinking,
evaluation of the patient's capacity to distinguish ideas from actions,
and, in puzzling instances, psychological testing are warranted with
people who present with a schizoid style. Medication and/or
hospitalization may be indicated when the results of such inquiries
suggest psychosis.

Misunderstanding a schizophrenic person as a nonpsychotic schizoid
personality can be a costly blunder. It is an equally unfortunate
mistake, however, to assume that a patient is at risk of decompensation
simply because he or she has a schizoid character. Schizoid people are
often seen as sicker than they are, and for a therapist to make this
error compounds the insults these clients have absorbed throughout a
life in which their individuality may have always been equated with
lunacy. (Actually, even with a psychotic patient, the therapist's stance
that the client is not "just" a schizophrenic but a person with
significant strengths, who can reasonably expect to be helped, is the
most effective reducer of psychotic-level anxiety.)

Admiration for the schizoid person's originality and integrity is a
therapeutic attitude that is easy to adopt once one has accepted the
fact that schizoid processes are not necessarily ominous. Some healthy
schizoid individuals who have come to therapy about a problem not
inextricably tied up with their personality will not want their
eccentricities to be addressed. This is their right. Therapeutic
knowledge of how to make a schizoid person comfortable and
self-revealing can still facilitate work on the issues that the patient
does wish to confront.

**Schizoid versus Obsessive and Compulsive Personalities**

Schizoid people often isolate themselves and spend a great deal of time
thinking, even ruminating, about the major issues in their fantasy life.
They can also, because of their conflict about closeness, appear wooden
and affectless, and may respond to questions with intellectualization.
Some have quirks of behavior that are or appear to be compulsive, or
they use compulsive defenses to arrange their lives by an idiosyncratic
set of rituals that protects them from disturbing intrusions.
Consequently, they can be misunderstood as having an obsessive or
obsessive--compulsive personality structure. Many people combine
schizoid and obsessive or compulsive qualities, but insofar as the two
kinds of personality organization can be discussed as "pure" types,
there are some important differences.

Obsessive individuals, in marked contrast to schizoid people, are
usually sociable and, in equally marked contrast to the schizoid
person's march to a unique drummer, may be highly concerned with
respectability, appropriateness, the approval of their peers, and their
reputation in the community. Obsessive people are also apt to be
moralistic, observing carefully the mores of their reference group,
whereas schizoid people have a kind of organic integrity and are not
particularly invested in mulling over conventional questions of right
and wrong. People with obsessive--compulsive personalities deny or
isolate feelings, whereas schizoid individuals identify them internally
and pull back from relationships that invite their expression.

**SUMMARY**

I have emphasized how people with schizoid personalities preserve a
sense of safety by avoiding intimacy with others from whom they fear
engulfment and by escaping to internal fantasy preoccupations. When
conflicted about closeness versus distance, schizoid people will opt for
the latter, despite its loneliness, because closeness is associated with
unbearable overstimulation and with having the self taken over in
noxious ways. Possible constitutional sources of schizoid tendencies
include hypersensitivity and hyperpermeability of the self. In addition
to the use of autistic-like withdrawal into fantasy, the schizoid person
employs other "primitive" defenses but also shows enviable capacities
for authenticity and creativity.

I discussed the impact of these tendencies on relations with others,
with attention to the patterns of family interaction that may have
fostered the schizoid person's approach--avoidance conflict, namely the
coexistence of deprivation and intrusion. I framed relevant transference
and countertransference issues as including difficulties in the
therapist's initial admission into the client's world, a tendency for
the therapist to share the client's feelings of either helpless
vulnerability or grandiose superiority, and temptations to be complicit
with the patient's reluctance to move toward others. I recommended
maximal self-awareness in the therapist, as well as patience,
authenticity, normalization, and a willingness to show one's "real"
personality. Finally, I emphasized the importance of assessing
accurately a person's location on the schizoid continuum, and I
differentiated the schizoid character from obsessive and compulsive
personalities.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

Much commentary on schizoid conditions is buried in writing on
schizophrenia. An eloquent and absorbing exception is Guntrip's
*Schizoid Phenomena, Object Relations and the Self* (1969). Seinfeld's
*The Empty Core* (1991) is also an excellent representative of
object-relational thinking about schizoid psychology. More recently,
Ralph Klein's chapters about the "self-in-exile" in a book he coedited
on disorders of the self (Masterson & Klein, 1995) are very helpful to
the clinician. Arnold Modell's *The Private Self* (1996) is an important
contribution. For more of my own thinking on this topic, readers can
consult my essay on the mute schizoid woman I mentioned earlier
(McWilliams, 2006a) or a recent article in the journal *Psychoanalytic
Review* (McWilliams, 2006b).

The American Psychological Association intends to put out two videos in
August 2011, to be marketed as *Three Approaches to Psychotherapy: The
Next Generation* (Beck, Greenberg, & McWilliams, in press-a, in press-b)
modeled after the famous "Gloria" tapes (Shostrum, 1965), in which a
woman with that pseudonym was filmed in single-session interaction with
Carl Rogers, Fritz Perls, and Albert Ellis, respectively. This time, the
therapists will be Judith Beck, Leslie Greenberg, and me, and there will
be one DVD of our work with a male patient and one with a female
patient. Readers who would like to see me doing short-term, analytically
oriented work with a patient I saw as having a basically schizoid
personality structure (at the healthy end of the spectrum) can watch the
DVD of my interview (and those of Beck and Greenberg) with a man named
Kevin (Beck, Greenberg, & McWilliams, in press-b).

[]{#part0020.html}

**10**

Paranoid Personalities

[M]{.dropcap}ost of us have a clear mental image of a paranoid person
and recognize the type when it is portrayed fictionally. Peter Sellers's
brilliant performance in the classic movie *Doctor Strangelove,* for
example, captures the suspiciousness, humorlessness, and grandiosity
that strike familiar chords in any of us who have paranoid
acquaintances, or who recognize the comic elaboration of the paranoid
streak we can all find in ourselves. Identifying less flagrant paranoid
presentations requires a more disciplined sensibility. The essence of
paranoid personality organization is the habit of dealing with one's
felt negative qualities by disavowing and projecting them; the disowned
attributes then feel like external threats. The projective process may
or may not be accompanied by a consciously megalomanic sense of self.

The diagnosis of paranoid personality structure implies to many people a
serious disturbance in mental health, yet as with other dynamics that
infuse personality, this type of organization exists on a continuum of
severity from psychotic to normal (Freud, 1911; Meissner, 1978; D.
Shapiro, 1965). As with the personality types in the preceding chapters,
the defense that defines paranoia may derive from a time before the
child had clarity about internal versus external events, where self and
object were thus confused. Paranoia intrinsically involves experiencing
what is inside as if it were outside the self. It may be that
"healthier" paranoid people are rarer than "sicker" ones, but someone
can have a paranoid character at any level of ego strength, identity
integration, reality testing, and object relations.

The trait-based descriptions of paranoid personality disorder in DSM-IV
are from a clinician's perspective rather superficial, but the manual is
accurate in noting that our knowledge of this personality type may be
limited. A paranoid person has to be in fairly deep trouble before he or
she seeks (or is brought for) psychological help. In contrast to
depressive, hysterical, or masochistic people, for example,
higher-functioning paranoid individuals tend to avoid psychotherapy
unless they are in severe emotional pain or are causing significant
upset to others. Because they are not disposed to trust strangers,
paranoid people are also unlikely to volunteer to be research subjects.

People with normal-level paranoid characters often seek out political
roles, where their disposition to oppose themselves to forces they see
as evil or threatening can find ready expression. Reporters and
satirists have often portrayed Dick Cheney as paranoid, but even if they
hate his politics, they have seldom questioned his capacity to cope
efficaciously in the world. At the other end of the continuum, some
serial murderers who killed their victims out of the conviction that the
victims were trying to murder them exemplify the destructiveness of
projection gone mad; that is, paranoia operating without the moderating
effects of more mature ego processes and without a solid grounding in
reality. Several recent notorious murders seem to have had a paranoid
basis.

I want to emphasize again as I did in [Chapter
5](#part0014.html){.calibre9} that attributions of paranoia should not
be made on the basis of an interviewer's belief that a person seeking
help is wrong about the danger he or she is in. Some people who look
paranoid are actually being stalked or persecuted---by members of a cult
they have left, for example, or by a rejected lover or a disaffected
relative. (Some people who are diagnosably paranoid are also
realistically imperiled; in fact, the off-putting qualities of many
paranoid people make them natural magnets for mistreatment.) Some people
who are not characterologically paranoid become temporarily so in
paranoiagenic situations that are humiliating and entrapping. When
interviewing for diagnostic purposes, one should not reject out of hand
the possibility that the interviewee is legitimately frightened, or that
those who are urging him or her to seek therapy have a personal stake in
making the client look crazy.

Contrastingly, some individuals who are in fact paranoid do not appear
to be. Nonparanoid associates in their social group---and the
interviewer for that matter---may share their beliefs about the dangers
of certain people, forces, or institutions (terrorists, capitalists,
religious authorities, pornographers, the media, the government,
patriarchy, racists---whatever is seen as the obstacle to the triumph of
good) and may therefore fail to discern that there is something
internally generated and driven about their preoccupations (Cameron,
1959). If Congressman Allard Lowenstein had fathomed the paranoid
character of Dennis Sweeney, one of his protégés in the student
movements of the 1960s and the man who later assassinated him in the
grip of a delusion, he might have known better than to behave in a way
that was interpretable as sexually seductive, and he might still be
alive (see D. Harris, 1982). But Lowenstein and Sweeney had similar
beliefs about what social evils required confrontation, and where
Lowenstein's were not primarily projections, Sweeney's were.

There are also people whose perceptions turn out to be prescient, who
are nevertheless paranoid. Howard Hughes had a consuming terror of the
consequences of atomic testing in Nevada at a time when few others were
concerned with nuclear contamination of the environment. Years later, as
the toll exacted by radiation became clearer, he looked a lot less
crazy. But the eventual vindications of his point of view do not make
his psychology less paranoid; the events of his later life speak for the
extent to which his own projections were the source of his suffering
(Maheu & Hack, 1992). My aim in bringing up all these possibilities is
to stress the importance of making informed, reflective diagnostic
judgments instead of automatic, a priori assumptions---especially with
clients whose grim, suspicious qualities may make them hard to warm up
to.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT IN PARANOIA**

Because they see the sources of their suffering as outside themselves,
paranoid people in the more disturbed range are likely to be more
dangerous to others than to themselves. They are much less suicidal than
equally disturbed depressives, although they have been known to kill
themselves to preempt someone else's expected destruction of them. The
angry, threatening qualities of many paranoid people have prompted
speculations that one contributant to a paranoid psychology is a high
degree of innate aggression or irritability. It stands to reason that
high levels of aggressive energy would be hard for a young child to
manage and integrate into a positively valued sense of self, and that
the negative responses of caregivers to an obstreperous, demanding
infant or toddler would reinforce the child's sense that outsiders are
persecutory. There has not been much recent research relating paranoia
to temperament; in 1978 Meissner marshalled empirical evidence
connecting it with an "active" symptomatic style in infancy
(irregularity, nonadaptability, intensity of reaction, and negative
mood) and with a thin stimulus barrier and consequent hyperexcitability.

Affectively, paranoid people struggle not only with anger, resentment,
vindictiveness, and other visibly hostile feelings, they also suffer
overwhelmingly from fear. Silvan Tomkins (e.g., 1963) regarded the
paranoid stance as a combination of fear and shame. The downward-left
eye movements common in paranoid people (the "shifty" quality that even
nonprofessionals notice) are physically a compromise between the
horizontal-left direction specific to the affect of pure fear and the
straight-down direction of uncontaminated shame (S. Tomkins, personal
communication, 1972). Even the most grandiose paranoid person lives with
the terror of harm from others and monitors each human interaction with
extreme vigilance.

Analysts have long referred to the kind of fear suffered by paranoid
clients as "annihilation anxiety" (Hurvich, 2003); that is, the terror
of falling apart, being destroyed, disappearing from the earth. Anyone
who has experienced this level of dread knows how terrifying it is. The
research of Jaak Panksepp (1998) into mammalian affect has identified
this kind of anxiety as part of the FEAR system that evolved
evolutionarily to cope with the possibility of predation. Panksepp
differentiates it from attachment/separation anxiety that belongs
neurobiologically to the PANIC system and is mediated by serotonin.
Paranoid anxiety tends not to be quelled by serotonin reuptake
inhibitors, but is instead responsive to benzodiazepines, alcohol, and
other "downer" drugs, which may be why paranoid patients often struggle
with addiction to those chemical agents.

As for shame, that affect is as great a menace to paranoid people as to
narcissistic ones, but paranoid people experience the danger
differently. Narcissistic individuals, even arrogant ones, suffer
conscious feelings of shame if they feel unmasked. Their energies go
into efforts to impress others so that the devalued self will not be
exposed. Paranoid people, contrastingly, may use denial and projection
so powerfully that no sense of shame remains accessible within the self.
The energies of the paranoid person are therefore spent on foiling the
efforts of those who are seen as bent on shaming and humiliating them.
People with narcissistic character structures are afraid of revealing
their inadequacies; those with paranoid personalities are afraid of
other people's malevolence. This focus on the assumed motives of others
rather than on what is happening internally can be, as anyone
experienced with paranoid patients can testify, a formidable obstacle to
therapy.

Also like narcissistic people, paranoid individuals are vulnerable to
envy. Unlike them, they handle it projectively. The degree of anger and
intensity they have to manage may account for some of the difference.
Resentment and jealousy, sometimes of delusional proportions, darken
their lives. These attitudes may be directly projected (the conviction
that "others are out to get me because of the things about me that they
envy"); more often, they are ancillary to the denial and projection of
other affects and impulses, as when a paranoid husband, oblivious to his
own normal fantasies of infidelity, becomes convinced his wife is
dangerously attracted to other men. Frequently involved in this kind of
jealousy is an unconscious yearning for closeness with a person of the
same sex. Because such longings may be unconsciously confused with
erotic homosexuality (Karon, 1989), which can frighten heterosexual
males, the wishes are abhorred and denied. These desires for care from a
man then resurface as the conviction that it is, for example, one's
girlfriend rather than oneself who wants to be more intimate with a
mutual male friend.

Finally, paranoid people are profoundly burdened with guilt, a feeling
that may be unacknowledged and projected in the same way that shame is.
Some reasons for their deep sense of badness will be suggested below,
along with ways of trying to relieve it therapeutically. Their
unbearable burden of unconscious guilt is another feature of their
psychology that makes paranoid clients so hard to help: They live in
terror that when the therapist *really* gets to know them, he or she
will be shocked by all their sins and depravities, and will reject or
punish them for their crimes. They are chronically warding off this
humiliation, transforming any sense of culpability in the self into
dangers that threaten from outside. They unconsciously expect to be
found out, and they transform this fear into constant, exhausting
efforts to discern the "real" evil intent behind anyone else's behavior
toward them.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN PARANOIA**

Projection, and disavowal of what is projected, dominate the psychology
of the paranoid person. Depending on the patient's ego strength and
degree of stress, the paranoid process may be at a psychotic,
borderline, or neurotic level. Let me first review those differences. In
a frankly psychotic person, upsetting parts of the self are projected
and fully believed to be "out there," no matter how crazy the
projections may seem to others. The paranoid schizophrenic who believes
that homosexual Bulgarian agents have poisoned his water is projecting
his aggression, his wish for same-sex closeness, his ethnocentrism, and
his fantasies of power. He does not find ways of making his beliefs fit
with conventional notions of reality; he may be quite convinced that he
is the only one in the world who sees the threat.

Because reality testing is not lost in people at a borderline level of
personality organization, paranoid patients in the borderline range
project in such a way that those on whom disowned attitudes are
projected are subtly provoked to feel those attitudes. This is
projective identification: The person tries to get rid of certain
feelings, yet retains empathy with them and needs to reassure the self
that they are justified. The borderline paranoid person works to make
what is projected "fit" the target. Thus the woman who disowns her
hatred and envy announces to her therapist in an antagonistic manner
that she can tell that the therapist is jealous of her accomplishments;
comments made in a sympathetic spirit are reinterpreted by the client as
evidence of envy-driven wishes to undermine and control, and soon the
therapist, worn down by being steadily misunderstood, is hating the
patient and envying her freedom to vent her spleen (Searles, 1959). This
remarkable process torments therapists, who do not choose our profession
expecting to have to endure such powerful negative feelings toward those
we hope to help; it accounts for the general intolerance among many
mental health professionals toward both borderline and paranoid
patients.

In paranoid people at the neurotic level, internal issues are projected
in a potentially ego-alien way. That is, the patient projects yet has
some observing part of the self that eventually will be capable, in the
context of a reliable relationship, of acknowledging the externalized
contents of the mind as projection. People who, in an intake interview,
describe themselves as paranoid are often in this category (though
borderline and psychotic paranoid clients may sometimes talk this way
also, in an effort to show that they know the jargon but without any
real internal appreciation that their fears constitute projections). I
knew one of my patients was getting better when he came in announcing
that he was having fantasies that I was critical, even though he
couldn't find any evidence of my critical attitude. Sensitive to the
possible grain of truth in a projection, I said something like, "Well,
let me think about whether there *is* some way in which I may have been
critical," and he responded, "Can't you sometimes just let it be my
crazy paranoia?!"

A talented and healthy but characterologically paranoid client of mine
was subject to profound fears that I would sell him out in the service
of my need to look good to others. If a professional in the community
who knew both of us were to criticize him to me, he was sure that I
would somehow convey agreement. (Meanwhile, when he felt hurt by me, he
had no reluctance to complain about me in ways that made some of my
colleagues quite critical of my treatment of him.) Even before he was
able to understand this fear as the projection of his
own---unnecessarily hated---needs for acceptance and admiration, plus
the projection and acting out of his defensive criticism, he was willing
to consider that he might be putting on me something that I did not
deserve.

The need of the paranoid person to handle upsetting feelings
projectively entails the use of an unusual degree of denial and its
close relative, reaction formation. All of us project; indeed, the
universal disposition toward projection is the basis for transference,
the process that makes analytic therapy possible. But paranoid people do
it in the context of such a great need to disavow upsetting attitudes
that it feels like a whole different process from projective operations
in which denial is not so integral. Freud (1911) accounted for paranoia,
at least of the psychotic variety, by the successive unconscious
operations of reaction formation ("I don't love you; I hate you") and
projection ("I don't hate you; you hate me"). Implicit in this
formulation is the paranoid person's terror of experiencing normal
loving feelings, presumably because prior attachment relationships were
toxic. Freud thought same-sex longing was particularly implicated in
paranoia, but my own experience suggests that any kind of longing feels
unbearably dangerous to a paranoid person.

Freud's paradigm shows only one of several possible routes by which a
paranoid person may emerge at a psychological place very far from the
original, more humanly comprehensible attitudes that initiated the
paranoid process (Salzman, 1960). Karon (1989) summarizes the ways in
which a delusional paranoid person can handle wishes for same-sex
closeness:

::: calibre1
 
:::

If one considers the different ways in which one could contradict the
feeling "I love him," one derives many typical delusions. "I do not love
him, I love me (megalomania)." "I do not love him, I love her
(erotomania)." "I do not love him, she loves him (delusional jealousy)."
"I do not love him, he loves me (projecting the same-sex longing,
producing a delusional homosexual threat)." "I do not love him, I hate
him (reaction formation)." And, finally, most common, projecting the
delusional hatred as "He hates me, hence, it is alright for me to hate
him (and if I hate him, I do not love him)." (p. 176)

Again, a significant difficulty in working with paranoid people concerns
how long and convoluted is the distance between their basic affects and
their defensive handling of them.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN PARANOID PSYCHOLOGY**

Clinical experience suggests that children who grow up paranoid have
suffered severe insults to their sense of efficacy; they have repeatedly
felt overpowered and humiliated (MacKinnon et al., 2006; Tomkins, 1963;
Will, 1961). The father of Daniel Paul Schreber, from whose report of a
paranoid psychosis Freud (1911) extracted a theory of paranoia, was
reportedly a domineering patriarch who advocated, and insisted on his
son's adopting, arduous physical regimes intended to toughen up children
(Niederland, 1959). Then Schreber suffered humiliation by authorities he
had trusted and by the legal system of his era (Lothane, 1992).

Criticism, capricious punishment, adults who cannot be pleased, and
utter mortification are common in the backgrounds of paranoid people.
Those who rear children who become paranoid also frequently teach by
example. A child may observe suspicious, condemnatory attitudes in
parents, who emphasize---paradoxically, in view of their abusive
qualities and the objectively kinder worlds of school and
community---that family members are the only people one can trust.
Paranoid people in the borderline and psychotic ranges may come from
homes where criticism and ridicule dominated familial relationships, or
where one child, the future sufferer of paranoia, was the
scapegoat---the target of the family members' hated and projected
attributes, especially those in the general category of "weakness." In
my experience, those in the neurotic-to-healthy range tend to come from
families in which warmth and stability were combined with teasing and
sarcasm.

Another source of paranoid personality organization is unmanageable
anxiety in a primary caregiver. A paranoid patient of mine came from a
family in which the mother was so chronically nervous that she took a
thermos of water with her everywhere she went (for her dry mouth) and
described her body as having "turned into a cement block" from
accumulated tension. Whenever her daughter would come to her with a
problem, the mother would either deny it, because she could not bear any
additional worries, or catastrophize about it, because she could not
contain her anxiety. The mother was also confused about the line between
fantasy and behavior and hence conveyed to her child that thoughts
equaled deeds. The daughter got the message that her private feelings,
whether loving or hateful, had a dangerous power.

For example, when once as an adult my patient told her mother that in
reaction to her husband's arbitrariness she had challenged him, her
mother first contended she was misreading him: He was a devoted husband,
and she must be imagining anything objectionable coming from him. When
my patient persisted with an account of the argument, her mother urged
her to be careful, as he might beat her up or abandon her if provoked
(she herself had been battered and then divorced by her husband). And
when my patient went on to vent anger at how he had acted, she was
begged to think about something else so that her negative thoughts would
not make things worse. An adolescent prototype for this interaction was
her telling her mother of her father's effort to molest her. The mother
managed both to insist that it had not happened and to blame it on her
daughter's sexuality.

This well-meaning but very disturbed mother, who had had no comfort as a
youngster, was incapable of comforting. In her daughter's formative
years, her anxiety-soaked advice and dire predictions compounded the
girl's fears. My client thus grew up being able to console herself only
by drastic transformations of her feelings. When I began working with
her, she had already seen several therapists who had been defeated by
her bottomless need and relentless hostility. All of them had seen her
as paranoid in either the psychotic or low-level borderline range. Her
capacity to report transactions like the preceding to me, and to
comprehend how destructive similar ones had been all her life, came only
after many years of therapy.

One can detect in the preceding example of distorted maternal
responsiveness several different seeds of paranoia. First, both reality
and the patient's normal emotional reactions to it were disconfirmed,
instilling fear and shame rather than a sense of being understood.
Second, denial and projection were modeled. Third, primitive omnipotent
fantasies were reinforced, laying the foundation for a diffuse and
overwhelming guilt. Finally, the interaction created additional anger
while resolving none of the original distress, thus magnifying the
patient's confusion about basic feelings and perceptions. In situations
like this, in which a person has been implicitly insulted (in this case,
seen as unappreciative, incapable of managing feelings, dangerous), he
or she must at some level feel even more aggravated than originally. But
such a reaction may be judged as either incomprehensible or evil because
the insulting party was only trying to help.

Such mind-muddling transactions get replicated repeatedly in the adult
relationships of paranoid people. Their internalized objects keep
undermining both the paranoid person and those to whom he or she
relates. If a child's primary source of knowledge is a caregiver who is
deeply confused and primitively defended, who---in desperate attempts to
feel safe or important---uses words not to express honest feeling but to
manipulate, the child's subsequent human relations cannot be unaffected.
The struggle of the paranoid person to understand what is "really" going
on (D. Shapiro, 1965) is comprehensible in this light, as is the
bewilderment, helplessness, and estrangement that beset people dealing
with paranoid friends, acquaintances, and relatives.

The mother's anxiety was not the only influence on this woman's
psychology, of course. If she had had any significant caregiver capable
of relating in a confirmatory way, her personality would probably not
have developed in a paranoid direction. But her father, prior to
abandoning his family when she was an older teenager, was frighteningly
critical, explosive, and disrespectful of boundaries. The tendency of
paranoid people to lash out rather than endure the anxiety of passively
awaiting inevitable mistreatment ("I'll hit you before you hit me") is
another well-known and unfortunate cost of this kind of parenting
(Nydes, 1963). The presence of a frightening parent and the absence of
people who can help the child process the resulting feelings (except by
making them worse) is, according to many therapists who have
successfully mitigated the condition, a common breeding ground for
paranoia (MacKinnon et al., 2006).

Because of their orientation toward issues of power and their tendency
to act out, paranoid people have some qualities in common with
psychopathic ones. But a critical difference lies in their capacity to
love. Even though they may be terrified by their own dependent needs and
wracked with suspicion about the motives and intentions of those they
care about, paranoid individuals are capable of deep attachment and
protracted loyalty. However persecutory or inappropriate their childhood
caregivers were, paranoid clients apparently had enough availability and
consistency in their early lives to be able to attach, albeit anxiously
or ambivalently. Their capacity to love is what makes therapy possible
in spite of all their hyperreactivity, antagonisms, and terrors.

**THE PARANOID SELF**

The main polarity in the self-representations of paranoid people is an
impotent, humiliated, and despised image of the self versus an
omnipotent, vindicated, triumphant one. A tension between these two
images suffuses their subjective world. Cruelly, neither position
affords any solace: A terror of abuse and contempt goes with the weak
side of the polarity, whereas the strong side brings with it the
inevitable side effect of psychological power, a crushing guilt.

The weak side of this polarity is evident in the degree of fear with
which paranoid people chronically live. They never feel fully safe and
spend inordinate energy scanning the environment for dangers. The
grandiose side is evident in their "ideas of reference": Everything that
happens has something to do with them personally. This is most obvious
in psychotic levels of paranoia, instances in which a patient believes,
say, that he or she is the personal target of an international spy ring
or is receiving covert messages during TV commercials about the
incipient end of the world. But I have also heard high-achieving,
reality-oriented clients ruminate about whether the fact that someone
sat in their usual chair revealed a plot to harass and humiliate them.
Incidentally, such clients often do not come across as paranoid in the
intake interview, and it can be startling to hear, after several
sessions, the emergence of the organizing conviction that everything
that happens to them reflects the significance to other people of their
personal existence.

The megalomania of paranoid people, whether unconscious or overt,
burdens them with unbearable guilt. If I am omnipotent, then all kinds
of terrible things are my fault. The intimate connection between guilt
and paranoia can be intuitively comprehended by any of us who have felt
culpable and then worried about being exposed and punished. I notice
that when one of my students is late turning in a paper, he or she
avoids me whenever possible, as if the only thing on my mind is that
transgression and my planned retribution. A woman I was treating who was
having an extramarital affair reported with amusement that while she was
on a drive with her lover, holding hands in the car, she noticed a
police vehicle ahead and pulled her hand away.

When an unbearable attitude is denied and projected, the consequences
can be grave. A connection between paranoia and disavowed homosexual
preoccupations has been noted for some time by clinicians (e.g.,
Searles, 1961) and was confirmed by some empirical studies (e.g.,
Aronson, 1964) several decades ago. More recently, Adams, Wright, and
Lohr (1996) did a series of experiments that showed that the more a man
was aroused by homosexual imagery, the more homophobic he tested.
Paranoid people, even the minority of them who have acted on homoerotic
feelings, may regard the idea of same-sex attraction as upsetting to a
degree that is scarcely imaginable to the nonparanoid. To gay and
lesbian people, who find it hard to see why their sexual orientation is
perceived as so threatening, the homophobia of some paranoid groups is
truly menacing.

As the brief triumph of Nazism demonstrates (and Nazism targeted gay
people, mentally disabled people, and the Roma, as well as the Jews),
when paranoid trends are shared by a whole culture or subculture, the
most horrific possibilities arise. Students of the rise of Nazism (e.g.,
Gay, 1968; Rhodes, 1980; F. Stern, 1961) locate its psychological
origins in the same kinds of events that clinicians have found in the
childhoods of paranoid individuals. The crushing humiliation of Germany
in World War I and the subsequent punitive measures that created runaway
inflation, starvation, and panic, with little responsiveness from the
international community, laid the groundwork for the appeal of a
paranoid leader and the organized paranoia that is Nazism (for a
description of the role of paranoia in recent American politics, see
Welch, 2008).

At the core of the self-experience of paranoid people is a profound
emotional isolation and need for what Sullivan (1953) called "consensual
validation" from a "chum" or what Benjamin (1988) later called
"recognition." The main way in which paranoid people try to enhance
their self-esteem is through exerting effective power against
authorities and other people of importance. Experiences of vindication
and triumph give them a relieving (although fleeting) sense of both
safety and moral rectitude. The dreaded litigiousness of paranoid
individuals derives from this need to challenge and defeat the
persecutory parent. Some people with paranoid personalities provide
devoted service to victims of oppression and mistreatment, because their
disposition to battle unjust authorities and vindicate underdogs keeps
them on the barricades far longer than other well-meaning social
activists whose psychodynamics do not similarly protect them against
burnout.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH PARANOID PATIENTS**

Transference in most paranoid patients is swift, intense, and often
negative. Occasionally, the therapist is the recipient of projected
savior images, but more commonly he or she is seen as potentially
disconfirming and humiliating. Paranoid clients approach a psychological
evaluation with the expectation that the interviewer is out to feel
superior by exposing their badness, or is pursuing some similar agenda
that has nothing to do with their well-being. They tend to strike
clinicians as grim, humorless, and poised to criticize. They may fix
their eyes relentlessly on the therapist in what has been called the
"paranoid stare."

Not surprisingly, interviewers respond with a sense of vulnerability and
general defensiveness. Countertransference is usually either anxious or
hostile; in the less common instance of being regarded as a savior, it
may be benevolently grandiose. In any case, the therapist is usually
aware of strong reactions, in contrast to the often subtler
countertransferences that arise with narcissistic and schizoid patients.
Because of the combination of denial and projection that constitute
paranoia, causing the repudiated parts of the self to be extruded,
therapists of paranoid patients often find themselves consciously
feeling the aspect of an emotional reaction that the client has exiled
from consciousness. For example, the patient may be full of hostility,
whereas the therapist feels the fear against which the hostility is a
defense. Or the patient may feel vulnerable and helpless, while the
therapist feels sadistic and powerful.

Because of the weight of these internal reactions in the therapist, and
the extent to which they betray to a sensitive person the degree of
suffering that a paranoid client is trying to manage, there is a
countertransference tendency in most therapists to try to "set the
patient straight" about the unrealistic nature of whatever danger the
patient believes he or she is in. Most of us who have practiced for any
length of time have had at least one client who seemed to be crying out
for reassurance and yet, upon receiving it, became convinced that we
were part of the conspiracy to divert him or her from a terrible threat.
The therapist's powerlessness to give much immediate help to a person
who is so unhappy and suspicious is probably the earliest and most
intimidating barrier to establishing the kind of relationship that can
eventually offer relief.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF PARANOID PERSONALITY**

The first challenge a therapist faces with a paranoid patient is
creating a solid working alliance. Although establishing such a
relationship is necessary (and sometimes challenging) for the successful
treatment of any client, it is particularly important in work with
paranoid people because of their difficulty trusting. A beginning
student of mine, asked about his plan for working with a very paranoid
woman, commented, "First I'll get her to trust me. Then I'll work on
assertiveness skills." Wrong. When a paranoid person truly trusts the
therapist, many years may have passed, and the treatment has been a huge
success. But the student was right in one sense: There has to be some
initial embrace by the client of the possibility that the therapist is
well intentioned and competent. This takes not only considerable
forbearance from the therapist, it takes some capacity for comfort
talking about the negative transference and conveying that the degree of
hatred and suspicion aimed at the clinician is to be expected. The
therapist's unflustered acceptance of intense hostility fosters the
patient's sense of safety from retribution, mitigates fear that hatred
destroys, and exemplifies how aspects of the self that the patient has
regarded as evil are simply ordinary human qualities.

This section will be longer than in other chapters because effective
work with paranoid clients differs substantially from "standard"
psychoanalytic practice. Although it has in common the goals of
understanding at the deepest level, bringing into consciousness the
unknown aspects of the self, and promoting the most thoroughgoing
possible acceptance of one's full humanity, it accomplishes these ends
differently. For example, interpretation "from surface to depth" is
usually impossible with paranoid clients because so many radical
transformations of their original feelings have preceded their manifest
preoccupations. A man who longs for support from someone of his gender,
who has unconsciously misread that yearning as sexual desire, denied
that, projected it on to someone else, displaced it, and become
overwhelmed with fears that his wife is having an affair with his friend
will not have his real concerns addressed if the therapist simply
encourages him to associate freely to the idea of his wife's infidelity.

"Analyzing resistance before content" can be similarly ill fated.
Commenting on actions or statements made by a paranoid client only makes
that client feel judged or scrutinized like a laboratory guinea pig
(Hammer, 1990). Analysis of the defenses of denial and projection
elicits only more Byzantine uses of the same defenses. The conventional
aspects of psychoanalytic technique---such as exploring rather than
answering questions, bringing up aspects of a patient's behavior that
may be expressing an unconscious or withheld feeling, calling attention
to slips, and so forth---were designed to increase patients' access to
internal material and to support their courage to talk more openly about
it (Greenson, 1967). With paranoid people, such practices boomerang. If
the standard ways of helping clients to open up elicit only further
elaborations of a paranoid sensibility, how can one help?

First, one can call on a sense of humor. Many of my teachers advised
against joking with paranoid patients lest they feel teased and
ridiculed. This caution is warranted, but it does not rule out the
therapist's modeling an attitude of self-mockery, amusement at the
world's irrationalities, and other nonbelittling forms of wit. Humor is
indispensable in therapy---perhaps especially with paranoid
clients---because jokes are a time-honored way to discharge aggression
safely. Nothing relieves both patient and therapist more than glimpses
of light behind the gloomy stormcloud that surrounds a paranoid person.
The best way to set the stage for mutual enjoyment of humor is to laugh
at one's own foibles, pretensions, and mistakes. Paranoid people miss
nothing; no defect in the therapist is safe from their scrutiny. A
friend of mine claims to have perfected the "nose yawn," a priceless
asset to the conduct of psychotherapy, but I would bet my couch that
even he could not fool a good paranoid.

The woman whose history I described earlier in this chapter has never
failed to notice my yawning, no matter how immobile my face. I reacted
to her initial confrontations about this with apologetic admissions that
she had found me out again, and with whining self-pity about not being
able to get away with anything in her presence. This kind of reaction,
rather than the heavy, humorless exploration of what her fantasy was
when she thought I was yawning, has deepened our work together.
Naturally, one stands ready to apologize if one's wit is mistaken for
ridicule, but the idea that work with hypersensitive patients must be
conducted in an atmosphere of oppressive seriousness seems to me
unnecessarily fussy and somewhat patronizing. Especially after a
reliable alliance has been established, something that may take months
or years, judicious teasing, in an effort to make omnipotent fantasies
ego alien, can be helpful to a paranoid person. Jule Nydes (1963), who
had a gift for working with difficult clients, cites the following
interventions:

::: extopen3
One patient \... was convinced that his plane would crash while en route
to a well earned vacation in Europe. He was startled and relieved when I
remarked, "Do you think God is so merciless that He would sacrifice the
lives of a hundred other people simply to get at you?"

Another such example is that of a young woman \... who developed strong
paranoid fears shortly before her forthcoming marriage which she
unconsciously experienced as an outstanding triumph. This was at the
time the "mad bomber" was planting his lethal weapons in subway cars.
She was certain that she would be destroyed by a bomb, and so she
avoided the subway. "Aren't you afraid of the 'mad bomber'?" she asked
me. And then before I could reply she sneered, "Of course not. You ride
only in taxicabs." I assured her that I rode the subways and that I was
unafraid for the very good reason that I knew the "mad bomber" was out
to get her, not me. (p. 71)
:::

::: calibre1
 
:::

Hammer (1990), who stresses the importance of indirect, face-saving ways
of sharing insights with paranoid patients, recommends the following
joke as a way to interpret the drawbacks of projection:

::: calibre1
 
:::

A man goes toward his neighbor's house to borrow a lawnmower, thinking
how nice his friend is to extend him such favors. As he walks along,
however, doubts concerning the loan begin to gnaw at him. Maybe the
neighbor would rather not lend it. By the time he arrives, the doubts
have given way to rage, and as the friend appears at the door the man
shouts, "You know what you can do with your damn lawnmower; shove it!"
(p. 142)

Humor, especially willingness to laugh at oneself, is probably
therapeutic in that to the patient it represents being "real," rather
than playing a role and pursuing a secret game plan. The histories of
paranoid people may be so bereft of basic authenticity that the
therapist's direct emotional honesty comes as a revelation about how
people can relate to each other. With some reservations cited below,
having to do with maintaining clear boundaries, I recommend being quite
forthcoming with paranoid clients. This means responding to their
questions honestly rather than withholding answers and investigating the
thoughts behind the inquiry; it is my experience that when the manifest
content of a paranoid person's concern is respectfully addressed, he or
she becomes more rather than less willing to look at the latent concerns
represented in it.

Second, one can "go under" or "sidestep" or "do an end run around"
(depending on one's favored metaphor) the complex paranoid defense and
into the affects against which it has been erected. In the case of the
man consumed with ruminations about his wife's possible infidelity, one
could be helpful by commenting on how lonely and unsupported he seems to
feel. It is startling to see how fast a paranoid rant can disappear if
the therapist simply lets it run its course, avoiding all temptations to
deconstruct a convoluted defensive process, and then engages
empathically with the disowned, projected feelings from which the angry
preoccupation originally sprang.

Often the best clue to the feeling being defended against is one's
countertransference; paranoid people are usefully imagined as actually
projecting their unacknowledged attitudes physically into the therapist.
Thus, when the patient is in an unrelenting, righteous, powerful rage,
and the therapist feels resultingly threatened and helpless, it may be
deeply affirming for the client to be told, "I know that what you're in
touch with is how angry you are, but I sense that in addition to that
anger, you're coping with profound feelings of fear and helplessness."
Even if one is wrong, the client hears that the therapist wants to
understand what is creating such severe upset.

Third, one can frequently help patients suffering from an increase in
paranoid reactions by identifying what has happened in their recent
experience to upset them. Such triggers often involve separation (a
child has started school, a friend has moved away, a parent has not
answered a letter), failure, or---paradoxically---success (failures are
humiliating; successes involve omnipotent guilt and fears of envious
attack). One of my patients tends to go on long paranoid tirades, during
which I can usually figure out what he is reacting to only after 20 or
30 minutes. If I assiduously avoid confronting his paranoid operations
and instead comment on how he may be underestimating how bothered he is
by something that he mentioned in passing, his paranoia tends to lift
without any analysis of that process at all. Educating people to notice
their states of arousal and to look for triggers often preempts the
paranoid process altogether. And I have found that especially if one can
tap into underlying grief and bear gentle witness to the client's pain,
paranoia may evaporate.

One should usually avoid direct confrontation of the content of a
paranoid idea. Paranoid people are acutely perceptive about emotion and
attitude; where they get mixed up is on the level of interpretation of
the meaning of these manifestations (Josephs & Josephs, 1986; Meissner,
1978; D. Shapiro, 1965; Sullivan, 1953). When one challenges their
interpretations, they tend to believe that one is telling them they are
crazy for having seen what they saw, rather than suggesting that they
have misconstrued its implications. Hence, although it is tempting to
offer alternative interpretations, if one does this too readily, the
patient feels dismissed, disparaged, and robbed of the astute
perceptions that stimulated the paranoid interpretation.

When a paranoid client is brave enough to ask outright whether the
clinician agrees with his or her understanding of something, the
therapist can offer other interpretive possibilities with suitable
tentativeness ("I can see why you thought the man intended to cut you
off, but another possibility is that he'd had a fight with his boss and
would have been driving like a maniac no matter who was on the road").
Note that the therapist in this example has not substituted a more
benevolent motive for the paranoid person's self-referential one
("perhaps he was swerving to avoid hitting an animal") because if
paranoid people think one is trying to pretty up intentions that they
know are debased, they will get more anxious. Note also that the comment
is made in the tone of a throwaway line, so that the patient can either
take it or leave it. With paranoid patients one should avoid asking them
to explicitly accept or reject the therapist's ideas. From their
perspective, acceptance may equal a humiliating submission, and
rejection may invite retribution.

Fourth, one can make repeated distinctions between thoughts and actions,
holding up the most heinous fantasies as examples of the remarkable,
admirable, creative perversity of human nature. The therapist's capacity
to feel pleasure in hostility, greed, lust, and similar
less-than-stellar tendencies without acting them out helps the patient
to reduce fears of an out-of-control, evil core. Lloyd Silverman (1984)
stressed the general value of going beyond interpretation of feelings
and fantasies to the recommendation that one *enjoy* them, a
particularly important dimension of work with paranoid people. Sometimes
without this aspect of treatment, patients get the idea that the purpose
of therapy is to get them to expose such feelings and be humiliated, or
to help them purge themselves of them, rather than to embrace them
together as part of the human condition.

When my older daughter was about 3, a nursery school teacher promulgated
the idea that virtue involves "thinking good thoughts and doing good
deeds." This troubled her. She was relieved when I commented that I
disagreed with her teacher and felt that thinking bad thoughts is a lot
of fun, especially when one can do good deeds in spite of those
thoughts. For months afterward, especially when she was trying not to
abuse her infant sister, she would get a mischievous expression on her
face and announce, "I'm doing good deeds and thinking very bad
thoughts!" Although she was a much quicker study than a person with a
lifetime of confusion about fantasy and reality, what I was trying to
teach her is the same message that is healing to paranoid clients.

Fifth, one must be hyperattentive to boundaries. Whereas one might
sometimes lend a book or spontaneously admire a new hairstyle with
another kind of patient, such behaviors are rife with complication when
enacted with a paranoid person. Paranoid clients are perpetually worried
that the therapist will step out of role and use them for some end
unrelated to their psychological needs. Even those who develop intensely
idealizing transferences and insist that they want a "real" friendship
with the therapist---perhaps especially these clients---may react with
terror if one acts in a way that seems uncharacteristically
self-extending.

Consistency is critical to a paranoid person's sense of security;
inconsistency stimulates fantasies that wishes have too much power.
Exactly what the individual therapist's boundaries are (e.g., how missed
sessions or phone calls to the therapist's home are handled) matters
less than how reliably they are observed. It is much more therapeutic
for a paranoid person to rage and grieve about the limits of the
relationship than to worry that the therapist can actually be seduced or
frightened out of his or her customary stance. While a surprising
deviation that speaks for the therapist's caring can light a spark of
hope for a depressive person, it may ignite a blaze of anxiety in a
paranoid patient.

On this topic, I should mention the risk of pseudoerotic transference
storms in paranoid clients. Same-sex therapists may have to be even more
carefully professional than opposite-sex ones, on account of the
vulnerability of many paranoid people to homosexual panic, but both may
find themselves suddenly the target of an intense sexualized hunger or
rage. The combination of extreme psychological deprivation and cognitive
confusion (affection with sex, thoughts with action, inside with
outside) often produces erotized misunderstandings and fears. The best
the therapist can do is to restore the therapeutic frame, tolerate the
outburst, normalize the feelings behind the eruption, and differentiate
between those feelings and the behavioral limits that make psychotherapy
possible.

Finally, it is critical that one convey both personal strength and
unequivocal frankness to paranoid clients. Because they are so full of
hostile and aggressive strivings, so confused about where thoughts leave
off and actions begin, and so plagued with feelings of destructive
omnipotence, their greatest worry in a therapy relationship is that
their evil inner processes will injure or destroy the therapist. They
need to know that the person treating them is stronger than their
fantasies. Sometimes what matters more than what is said to a paranoid
person is how confidently, forthrightly, and fearlessly the therapist
delivers the message.

Most people who have written about the actual experience of treating
paranoid people (as opposed to the much larger literature theorizing
about the origins of paranoid processes) have stressed respect,
integrity, tact, and patience (Arieti, 1961; Fromm-Reichmann, 1950;
Hammer, 1990; Karon, 1989; MacKinnon et al., 2006; Searles, 1965). Some,
especially those who have worked with psychotic clients, have
recommended joining in the patient's view of reality, in order to create
enough affirmation that the patient can start shedding the paranoid
constructions that therapist and client now seem to share (Lindner,
1955; Spotnitz, 1969). Most writers, however, feel one can convey
respect for the client's view of the world without going that far.

Because of their excruciating sensitivity to insult and threat, it is
not possible to treat paranoid patients without some debacles.
Periodically, the therapist will be made into a monster (Reichbart,
2010), as the client makes what Sullivan (1953) called "malevolent
transformations" and suddenly experiences the therapist as dangerous or
corrupt. Sometimes the therapy work seems like an endless exercise in
damage control. In the short run, one has to tolerate a protracted
feeling of standing alone, since people with paranoid psychologies are
not inclined to confirm, by verbal acknowledgment or visible
appreciation, one's exertions in the service of understanding. But a
devoted, reasonably humble, honest practitioner can make a radical
difference over the years with a paranoid person, and will find beneath
all the client's rage and indignation a deep well of warmth and
gratitude.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

The diagnosis of paranoid personality structure is usually easy to make,
except, as noted previously, in instances in which a person is high
functioning and trying to keep the extent of his or her paranoia hidden
from the interviewer. As with schizoid clients, attention to the
possibility of psychotic processes in a manifestly paranoid patient is
warranted.

**Paranoid versus Psychopathic Personality**

In [Chapter 7](#part0017.html){.calibre9} I commented on the
differential importance of guilt as a central dynamic in the respective
psychologies of paranoid and antisocial people. I should also mention
love. If a paranoid person feels that you and he or she share basic
values, and that you can be counted upon in adversity, there is
virtually no limit to the loyalty and generosity of which the person may
be capable. Projective processes are common in antisocial people, but
where psychopaths are fundamentally unempathic, paranoid people are
deeply object related. The main threat to long-term attachment in
paranoid people is not lack of feeling for others but rather experiences
of betrayal; in fact, they are capable of cutting off a relationship of
30-years' duration when they feel wronged. Because they connect with
others on the basis of similar moral sensibilities and hence feel that
they and their love objects are united in an appreciation of what is
good and right, any perceived moral failing by the person with whom they
are identified feels like a flaw in the self that must be eradicated by
banishing the offending object. But a history of aborted relationships
is not the same thing as an inability to love.

**Paranoid versus Obsessive Personality**

Obsessive people share with paranoid individuals a sensitivity to issues
of justice and rules, a rigidity and denial around the "softer"
emotions, a preoccupation with issues of control, a vulnerability to
shame, and a penchant for righteous indignation. They also scrutinize
details and may misunderstand the big picture because of their fixation
on minutia. Further, obsessional people in the process of decompensating
into psychosis may slide gradually from irrational obsessions into
paranoid delusions. Many people have both paranoid and obsessional
features.

People in these respective diagnostic categories differ, however, in the
role of humiliation in their histories and sensitivities; the obsessive
person is afraid of being controlled but lacks the paranoid person's
fear of physical harm and emotional mortification. Obsessive patients
are more likely to try to cooperate with the interviewer despite their
oppositional qualities, and therapists working with them do not suffer
the degree of anxiety that paranoid patients induce. Standard
psychoanalytic technique is usually helpful to obsessive clients; rage
reactions to conventional clarifications and interpretations in a
patient one has believed to be obsessional may be the first sign that
his or her paranoid qualities predominate.

**Paranoid versus Dissociative Psychology**

Many people with dissociative identity disorder have an alter
personality that carries the paranoia for the personality system and may
impress an interviewer as representative of the whole person. Because
emotional mistreatment is implicated in the etiologies of both paranoia
and dissociation, the coexistence in individual people of these
processes is common. In [Chapter 15](#part0025.html){.calibre9} I
discuss the diagnosis of dissociative disorders thoroughly enough that
it will be clear how to discriminate an individual with a paranoid
personality from a dissociative person with a paranoid alter personality
or paranoid tendencies.

**SUMMARY**

I have described the manifest and latent qualities of people whose
personalities are predominantly paranoid, stressing their reliance on
projection. Possible etiological variables include innate aggressiveness
or irritability, and consequent susceptibilities to fear, shame, envy,
and guilt. I considered the role of formative experiences of threat,
humiliation, and projective processes in the family system, and
anxiety-ridden, contradictory messages in the development of this type
of personality organization, and I described the paranoid person's sense
of self as alternately helplessly vulnerable and omnipotently
destructive, with ancillary preoccupations resulting from a core
fragility in identity and self-esteem. Finally, I discussed the
intensity of transference and countertransference processes, especially
those involving rage.

I recommended that therapists of paranoid patients demonstrate a
good-humored acceptance of self and an amused appreciation of human
foibles; work with affect and process rather than defense and content;
identify specific precipitants of symptomatic upset, avoiding frontal
assaults on paranoid interpretations of experience; distinguish between
ideas and actions; preserve boundaries; and convey attitudes of personal
power, authenticity, and respect. Finally, I differentiated people with
predominantly paranoid psychologies from those with psychopathic,
obsessive, and dissociative types of personality organization.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

The most comprehensive book on paranoia may be Meissner's *The Paranoid
Process* (1978). But D. Shapiro's (1965) chapter on the paranoid style
is better written, shorter, and livelier. Much recent psychoanalytic
writing on paranoia has addressed social justice issues or commented on
political phenomena, as paranoia is central to the process by which
groups achieve cohesion by exploiting fears of other groups. The journal
*Psychoanalytic Review* recently devoted an interesting issue (2010,
vol. 97\[2\]) to this topic, in which I have an essay.

[]{#part0021.html}

**11**

Depressive and\
Manic Personalities

[I]{.dropcap}n this chapter I discuss people with character patterns
shaped by depressive dynamics. I also address briefly the psychologies
of those whose personalities are characterized by the denial of
depression; that is, those who have been called manic, hypomanic, and
cyclothymic. Whereas people in the latter diagnostic groups approach
life with strategies antithetical to those used unconsciously by
depressive people, the basic organizing themes, expectations, wishes,
fears, conflicts, and unconscious explanatory constructs of depressive
and manic people are similar. Many people experience alternating manic
and depressive states of mind; those with psychotic-level conditions
used to be described as having a "manic--depressive" illness, a term
that implied delusion and suicidality. Yet many people who never become
psychotic or suicidal undergo marked cycles of mania and dysthymia.
Currently, they tend to be diagnosed as bipolar.

Individuals who are mainly depressive, those who are mainly manic, and
those who swing from one pole to the other all exist at every point on
the severity continuum. Although Kernberg (1975) considers hypomanic
personality disorder to be a definitionally borderline condition because
it reflects the primitive defense of denial, this observation applies
only to instances when a person's character is problematic enough to be
seen as a personality *disorder* rather than just a personality *type*.
I have known people with core hypomanic dynamics whose denial exists
alongside too integrated an identity and too keen a self-observing
capacity to be considered borderline.

**DEPRESSIVE PERSONALITIES**

A serious impediment to our collective understanding of depressive
psychology arose when the formulators of DSM-III elected to put all
depressive and manic conditions under the heading of Mood Disorders (see
Frances & Cooper, 1981; Kernberg, 1984). With this decision, they
privileged the affective aspects of dysthymic states over the imaginal,
cognitive, behavioral, and sensory components that are equally important
in the phenomenology of depression. They also dispensed with the
clinically and empirically long-established diagnosis of depressive
personality disorder and diverted us from attending to the internal
processes that characterize depressive people even when they are not in
a clinically depressed state. I was recently told that every member of
the work group who made this call had some connection with a drug
company. I do not think they were corrupt people, but such involvements
raise the question of unconscious influence on putatively "scientific"
decisions. Pharmaceutical companies generally prefer to construe mental
suffering in terms of discrete disorders rather than as longstanding
personality patterns that are notoriously unresponsive to pharmacology.

A clinical depression is pretty unmistakable. Many of us have had the
bad luck to have suffered the unremitting sadness, lack of energy,
anhedonia (inability to enjoy ordinary pleasures), and vegetative
disturbances (problems in eating, sleeping, and self-regulating) that
characterize the disorder. Freud (1917a) was the first writer to compare
and contrast depressive ("melancholic") conditions with normal mourning;
he observed that the significant difference between the two states is
that in ordinary grief, the external world is experienced as diminished
in some important way (e.g., it has lost a valuable person), whereas in
depression, what feels lost or damaged is a part of the self. Grief
tends to come in waves; between the episodes of acute pain when one is
reminded of a loss, one can function almost normally, whereas depression
is relentless and deadening. The mourning process ends in slow recovery
of mood, whereas depression can go on and on.

In some ways, then, depression is the opposite of mourning; people who
grieve normally tend not to get depressed, even though they can be
overwhelmingly sad during the period that follows bereavement or loss.
The cognitive, affective, imaginal, and sensory processes that are so
striking in a clinical depression operate in a subtle, chronic,
organizing, self-perpetuating way in the psyches of those of us with
depressive personalities (Laughlin, 1956, 1967). Given the intended
audience of this book, the phrase "those of us" may be apposite, since
it appears that a substantial proportion of psychotherapists are
characterologically depressive (Hyde, 2009). We empathize with sadness,
we understand wounds to self-esteem, we seek closeness and resist loss,
and we ascribe our therapeutic successes to our patients' efforts and
our failures to our personal limitations.

Greenson (1967), commenting on the connection between a depressive
sensibility and the qualities of successful therapists, went so far as
to argue that analysts who have not suffered a serious depression may be
handicapped in their work as healers. Greenson might reasonably have
considered himself an exemplar of someone at the healthy end of the
depressive continuum, along with more visibly anguished historical
figures like Abraham Lincoln. At the highly disturbed end of the
spectrum one finds the delusional and ruthlessly self-hating mental
patients who, until the discovery of antidepressive medicines, could
absorb years of a devoted therapist's efforts and still believe
uncritically that the best way to save the world is to destroy the self.

Since writing the first edition of this book I have become more familiar
with Sidney Blatt's work (Blatt, 2004, 2008; Blatt & Bers, 1993) on
subtypes within the depressive spectrum. In brief, Blatt has studied the
different internal experiences and different therapeutic needs of people
who formulate their depressive state as "I'm not good enough, I'm
flawed, I'm self-indulgent, I'm evil" (the "introjective" version)
versus those whose subjective world feels like "I'm empty, I'm hungry,
I'm lonely, I need a connection" (the "anaclitic" version, from the
Greek word for "to lean on"). In the 1994 edition, this chapter assumed
a more introjective version of depressive psychology; I think I
implicitly construed the more anaclitic version as a dependent
personality style or disorder. In this rewriting I have tried to
accommodate both subtypes, especially in the section on therapy.

When he examined those polarities beyond the depressive realm, Blatt
(2008) renamed them as "self-definition" and "self-in-relationship"
inclinations. We all have both self-definitional and relational needs,
and one aspect of overall mental health is surely having some balance
between the two. But just as people with narcissistic personalities,
despite both devaluing others and craving their attention, tilt toward
either the more arrogant (self-definition) or depleted
(self-in-relationship) pole, depressive people tend to lean more one way
than the other. Members of the Personality Task Force for the
*Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual* (PDM Task Force, 2006) discovered that
where there is longstanding clinical lore about personality subtypes,
those subtypes map nicely onto Blatt's polarity. His differentiation
will come up again in later chapters.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT IN DEPRESSION**

That one can inherit a vulnerability to depression has long been
suggested by studies of family histories, twins, and adoptees (Rice et
al., 1987; Wender et al., 1986). Depression clearly runs in families,
although no one can yet confidently evaluate the extent to which the
transmission of depressive tendencies is genetically determined versus
the extent to which depressed parents behave in ways that set up their
children for dysthymic reactions. Research with other mammals has
identified patterns of reaction to early maternal loss or rejection that
look identical to depression in humans (Panksepp, 2001). That a
prototype for loss and its accompanying affect, cognition, and bodily
experience could be set down in one's youngest days, could then
permanently affect one's brain function, and could then be reenacted
with one's children because of how one's brain got structured suggests
that what may look simply genetic may be more complex.

Freud (1917a) speculated, and Abraham (1924) subsequently elaborated,
that an important precursor to depressive states is the experience of
premature loss. In line with the classical theory that people who are
either overindulged or deprived become fixated at the infantile stage
when this happened, depressive individuals were initially understood as
having been weaned too soon or too abruptly, or as having suffered some
other early frustration that overwhelmed their capacities to adapt (see
Fenichel, 1945). The "oral" qualities of people with depressive
characters influenced this construction; it was noted that depressive
people were often overweight, that they usually liked eating, smoking,
drinking, talking, kissing, and other oral gratifications, and that they
tended to describe their emotional experience in analogies about food
and hunger. The idea that depressive people are orally fixated has not
completely disappeared, probably more because of the intuitive appeal of
such a formulation than because of its theoretical status. When one of
my supervisors commented that I see everybody as hungry, thus
confronting my tendency to project my depressive issues on all my
clients, I was able to start discriminating between those who needed to
be emotionally fed and those who needed to be asked why they had not
learned to cook.

An early psychodynamic way of describing a depressive process, and one
that has been thoroughly popularized, illustrates the application of
drive theory to specific clinical problems. Freud (1917a) noted that
people in depressed states aim negative affect away from others and
toward the self, hating themselves out of all proportion to their actual
shortcomings. At a time when psychological motivation was translated
into libido and aggression, this phenomenon was described as "sadism
(aggression) against the self" or as "anger turned inward." Because of
its clinical promise, this formulation was embraced eagerly by Freud's
colleagues, who began trying to help their patients to identify things
that had angered them so that the pathological process could be
reversed. It fell to later theorists to explain why a person would have
learned to turn angry reactions against the self and what functions
would be served by maintaining such a pattern.

The aggression-inward model is consistent with observations that
depressive people seldom feel spontaneous or unconflicted anger on their
own behalf. Instead, especially if their version of depressive
personality is more introjective, they feel guilt. Not the denied,
defensively reinterpreted guilt of the paranoid person, but a partly
conscious, ego-syntonic, pervasive sense of culpability. Author William
Goldman once quipped to an interviewer, "When I'm accused of a crime I
didn't commit, I wonder why I have forgotten it." Depressive people are
agonizingly aware of every sin they have committed, every kindness they
have neglected to extend, every selfish inclination that has crossed
their minds.

Sadness, the dominant feeling in anaclitic depressives, is the other
major affect of people with a depressive psychology. Evil and injustice
distress them but rarely produce in them the indignant anger of the
paranoid, the moralization of the obsessive, the undoing of the
compulsive, or the anxiety of the hysterical person. The sorrow of
someone who is clinically depressed is so palpable and arresting that in
the public mind---and evidently now in the professional mind as
well---the terms "sadness" and "depression" have become virtually
synonymous (Horowitz & Wakefield, 2007). Since many people who are free
of dysthymic symptoms have depressive personalities, and since grief and
depression are in at least one respect mutually exclusive conditions,
this equation is misleading; yet even a psychologically robust,
high-spirited person with a depressive character will convey to a
perceptive listener the hint of an inner melancholy.

Monica McGoldrick's (2005) brilliant depiction of the Irish, a group
famous for having a song in the heart and a tear in the eye, captures
the ambience of a whole ethnic subculture with a depressive soul. Unless
they are so disturbed that they cannot function normally, most
depressive people are easy to like and admire. Because they aim hatred
and criticism inward rather than outward, they are usually generous,
sensitive, and compassionate to a fault. Because they give others the
benefit of any doubt, and strive to preserve relationships at any cost,
they are natural appreciators of therapy. In a later section I discuss
how to prevent these appealing qualities from working to their
detriment.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN DEPRESSION**

The most powerful and organizing defense used by introjectively
depressive people is, not surprisingly, introjection. Clinically, it is
the most important operation to understand in order to reduce their
suffering and modify their depressive tendencies. As psychoanalytic
clinical theory developed, simpler energic concepts (aggression-in vs.
aggression-out) yielded to reflections on the internalization processes
that Freud had begun to describe in "Mourning and Melancholia" (1917a)
and that Abraham (1911) had noted as the depressive person's
"identification with the lost love object." As analysts began
emphasizing the importance of incorporative processes in depression
(Bibring, 1953; Blatt, 1974; Jacobson, 1971; Klein, 1940; Rado, 1928),
they added immeasurably to our therapeutic power in the face of
depressive misery.

In working with introjectively depressive patients, one can practically
hear the internalized object speaking. When a client says something
like, "It must be because I'm selfish," a therapist can ask, "Who's
saying that?" and be told, "My mother" (or father, or grandparent, or
older sibling, or whoever is the introjected critic). Often the
therapist feels as if he or she is talking to a ghost, and as if
therapy, to be effective, will have to include an exorcism. As this
example shows, the kind of introjection that characterizes depressive
people is the unconscious internalization of the more hateful qualities
of an old love object. That person's positive attributes are generally
remembered fondly, whereas negative ones are felt as part of the self
(Klein, 1940).

As I noted in [Chapter 2](#part0011.html){.calibre9}, the internalized
object does not have to be a person who in reality was hostile,
critical, or negligent (though this is often the case, and it encumbers
therapy with extra challenges) for the patient to have experienced the
object that way and internalized such images. A young boy who feels
deserted by a father who deeply loves him---perhaps he suddenly had to
work two jobs to make ends meet or was deployed to a war zone or was
hospitalized for a serious illness---will feel hostility over his
abandonment but will also yearn for him and feel self-rebuke for not
having appreciated him sufficiently when he was around. Children project
their reactions onto love objects who desert them, imagining that they
left feeling angry or hurt. Then such images of a malevolent or injured
abandoner, because they are too painful to bear and because they
interfere with hopes for a loving reunion, are driven out of awareness
and felt as a bad part of the self.

A child may thus emerge from experiences of traumatic or premature loss
with an idealization of the lost object and a relegation of all negative
affect into his or her sense of self. These well-known depressive
dynamics create a pervasive feeling that one is bad, has driven away a
needed and benevolent person, and must work very hard to prevent one's
badness from provoking future desertions. The reader can see that this
formulation is not inconsistent with the older anger-inward model; in
fact, it accounts for why someone could get into the habit of handling
hostile feelings in precisely this way. If one emerges from painful
separations believing that it is one's badness that drove the beloved
objects away, one may try very hard to feel nothing but positive affects
toward those who are loved. The resistance of depressive people toward
acknowledging ordinary and natural hostility and criticism is
comprehensible in this context, as is the upsetting and much-remarked
phenomenon of the person who stays with an inconsiderate or abusive
partner, believing that if only he or she were somehow good enough, the
partner's mistreatment would stop.

Turning against the self (A. Freud, 1936; Laughlin, 1967), a related
defense mechanism in introjectively depressive people, is a less archaic
outcome of these dynamics. Introjection as a concept covers the more
total experience of feeling incomplete without the object and taking
that object into one's sense of self in order to feel whole, even if
that means taking into one's self-representation the sense of badness
that comes from painful experiences with the object. Turning against the
self gains a reduction in anxiety, especially separation anxiety (if one
believes it is one's anger and criticism that ensure abandonment, one
feels safer directing it against the self), and also maintains a sense
of power (if the badness inheres in me, I can change this disturbing
situation).

Children are existentially dependent. If those on whom they must depend
are unreliable or badly intentioned, they have a choice between
accepting that reality or denying it. If they accept it, they may
generalize that life is empty, meaningless, and uninfluenceable, and
they are left with a chronic sense of incompleteness, emptiness,
longing, futility, and existential despair. This is the anaclitic
version of depressive suffering. If instead they deny that those they
must depend upon are untrustworthy (because they cannot bear living in
fear), they may decide that the source of their unhappiness lies within
themselves, thereby preserving hope that self-improvement can alter
their circumstances. If only they can become good enough, can rise above
the selfish, destructive person they know themselves to be, life will
get better (Fairbairn, 1943). This is the introjective dyanmic. Clinical
experience attests resoundingly to the human propensity to prefer the
most irrational guilt to an admission of impotence. The introjective
depressive person feels bad but powerful in that badness, whereas the
anaclitically depressed person feels victimized, powerless, and passive.

Idealization is the other defense important to note in depressive
patients. Because their self-esteem has been damaged by the effects of
their experiences (either by feeling chronically empty or feeling
secretly bad), the admiration with which they view others is
correspondingly increased. Self-perpetuating cycles of holding others in
excessively high regard, then feeling diminished in comparison, then
seeking idealized objects to compensate for the diminution, feeling
inferior to those objects, and so on, are typical for depressive people.
This idealization differs from that of narcissistic people in that it
constellates around moral concerns rather than status and power.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN DEPRESSIVE PSYCHOLOGY**

The above section on ego processes suggests some important themes in the
object relations of depressive patients. First, there is the role of
early and/or repeated loss. The striking affective correspondences
between depression and mourning have prompted theorists at least as far
back as Freud to look for the origins of dysthymic dynamics in painful,
premature experiences of separation from a love object. And such
experiences are usually easy to find in the histories of depressive
clients. Early loss is not always concrete, observable, and empirically
verifiable (e.g., death of a parent); it may be more internal and
psychological, as in the case of a child who yields to pressure to
renounce dependent behaviors before he or she is emotionally ready to do
so.

Erna Furman's (1982) deceptively modest essay "Mothers Have to Be There
to Be Left" explores this second kind of loss. In a respectful but
trenchant critique of classical ideas about the mother's responsibility
to wean infants when they are ready to accept the loss of a
need-gratifying object, Furman stressed that unless they are hurried,
children wean themselves. The striving for independence is as primary
and powerful as the wish to depend; separation is naturally sought by
youngsters who are confident of the availability of the parent if they
need to regress and "refuel" (Mahler, 1972a, 1972b). Furman's recasting
of the separation process in terms of the child's natural movement
forward challenges a persistent Western notion (reflected in older
psychoanalytic thinking and in many popular books on child rearing) that
parents must titrate frustrations because left to themselves, youngsters
will prefer regressive satisfactions.

According to Furman (1982), it is ordinarily the mother, not the baby,
who feels keenly the loss of a gratifying instinctual satisfaction at
weaning---and by analogy at other times of separation. Along with her
pleasure and pride in her child's growing autonomy, she suffers some
pangs of grief. Normal children appreciate these pangs; they expect
their parents to shed a tear on the first day of school, at the first
prom, at graduation. The separation--individuation process eventuates in
depressive dynamics, Furman believed, only when the mother's pain about
her child's growth is so great that she either clings and induces guilt
("I'll be so lonely without you") or pushes the child away defensively
("Why can't you play by yourself?!"). Children in the former situation
are left feeling that normal wishes to be aggressive and independent are
hurtful; in the latter, they learn to hate their natural dependent
needs. Either way, an important part of the self is experienced as bad.

Not just early loss but conditions that make it difficult for the child
to understand realistically what happened, and to grieve normally, may
engender depressive tendencies. One such condition is developmental.
Two-year-olds are simply too young to fathom fully that people die, and
why they die, and are incapable of appreciating complex interpersonal
motives such as "Daddy loves you, but he is moving out because he and
Mommy don't get along." The world of the 2-year-old is still magical and
categorical. At the height of conceiving things in gross categories of
good and bad, the toddler whose parent disappears may generate
assumptions about badness that are impossible to counteract, even with
reasonable educative comments. A major loss in the
separation--individuation phase virtually guarantees some depressive
dynamics.

Other circumstances include family members' neglect of their children's
needs when they are beset by difficulties and their ignorance of the
degree to which children require explanations that counteract their
self-referential and moralistic interpretations. Judith Wallerstein's
long-term research on the outcome of divorce (Wallerstein & Blakeslee,
1989; Wallerstein & Lewis, 2004) has demonstrated that along with lack
of abandonment by the noncustodial parent, the best predictor of a
nondepressive adaptation to parental divorce is the child's having been
given an age-appropriate, accurate explanation of what went wrong in the
marriage.

Another circumstance that encourages depressive tendencies is a family
atmosphere in which mourning is discouraged. When parents and other
caregivers model the denial of grief, or insist (e.g., after an
acrimonious divorce) that the child join in a family myth that everyone
is better off without the lost object, or need the child to reassure
them that he or she is not in pain, mourning can go underground and
eventually take the form of the belief that there is something wrong in
the self. Sometimes children feel intense, unspoken pressures from an
emotionally overburdened parent to protect the adult from further grief,
as if acknowledging sorrow were equivalent to falling apart. The child
naturally concludes that grief is dangerous and that needs for comfort
are destructive.

Sometimes in a family system the prevailing morality is that mourning
and other forms of self-care and self-comfort are "selfish" or
"self-indulgent," or "just feeling sorry for yourself," as if such
activities were prima facie contemptible. Guilt induction of this sort,
and associated admonishments to a stricken child to stop whining and get
over it, instill both a need to hide any vulnerable aspects of the self
and, out of identification with the critical parent, an eventual hatred
of those aspects of oneself. Many of my depressive patients were called
names whenever they could not control their natural regressive reactions
to family difficulties; as adults, they abused themselves
psychologically in parallel ways whenever they were upset.

The combination of emotional or actual abandonment with parental
criticism is particularly likely to create depressive dynamics. A
patient of mine lost her mother to cancer when she was 11 and was left
with a father who repeatedly complained that her unhappiness was
aggravating his ulcer and hastening his death. Another client was called
a sniveling baby by her mother when she cried because, at age 4, she was
being shipped away to overnight camp for several weeks. A depressive man
I worked with whose mother was severely depressed and unavailable
emotionally during his early years was told that he was selfish and
insensitive for wanting her time, and that he should be grateful she was
not sending him to an orphanage. In such instances it is easy to see
that angry reactions to emotional abuse by the parent would have felt
too dangerous to the child, who already feared rejection.

Some depressive patients I have worked with appear to have been the most
emotionally astute person in their family of origin. Their reactivity to
upsetting situations that other family members handled by denial got
them branded "hypersensitive" or "overreactive," labels they continued
to carry internally and to connect with their general sense of
inferiority. Alice Miller (1975) described how families can unwittingly
exploit the emotional talent of a particular child, with the result that
he or she eventually feels valued only for serving a particular family
function. If the child is also scorned and pathologized for the
possession of emotional gifts, depressive dynamics will be even stronger
than if he or she is simply used as a kind of family therapist.

Finally, a powerful causative factor in depressive dynamics is
significant depression in a parent, especially in a child's earliest
years. A seriously depressed mother with no one to help out will give a
baby only the most custodial kind of care, no matter how sincerely she
wishes to help it start life on the best possible footing. The more we
learn about infants, the more we know about how critical their earliest
experience is in establishing their basic attitudes and expectations
(Beebe et al., 2010; Cassidy & Shaver, 2010; M. Lewis & Haviland-Jones,
2004; D. N. Stern, 2000). Children are deeply bothered by a parent's
depression; they feel guilty for making normal demands, and they come to
believe that their needs drain and exhaust others. In general, the
earlier their dependence on someone who is deeply depressed, the greater
is their emotional privation.

Numerous different pathways can thus lead to a depressive accommodation.
Both loving and hateful families can breed depressive dynamics out of
infinitely varied combinations of loss and insufficient psychological
processing of that loss. In a society where adults fail to make enough
time to listen sensitively to the concerns of children, where people
move their residence routinely, where family breakups are common, and
where painful emotions can be ignored because drugs will counteract
them, it is not surprising that our rates of youthful depression and
suicide have skyrocketed, that counterdepressive compulsions like
prescription drug abuse, obesity, and gambling are on the rise, that we
are seeing an explosion of popular movements in which the "lost child"
or the "child within" is rediscovered, and that self-help groups that
reduce feelings of isolation and fault are widely sought. Human beings
seem not to have been designed to handle as much instability in their
relationships as contemporary life provides.

**THE DEPRESSIVE SELF**

People with introjective depressive psychologies believe that at bottom
they are bad. They lament their greed, their selfishness, their
competition, their vanity, their pride, their anger, their envy, their
lust. They consider all these normal aspects of experience to be
perverse and dangerous. They worry that they are inherently destructive.
These anxieties can take a more or less oral tone ("I'm afraid my hunger
will destroy others"), or an anal-level one ("My defiance and sadism are
dangerous"), or a more oedipal dimension ("My wishes to compete for and
win love are evil").

Depressive people have made sense out of their experiences of unmourned
losses by the belief that it was something in them that drove the object
away. The fact that they felt rejected has been converted into the
unconscious conviction that they deserved rejection, that their faults
provoked it, and that future rejection is inevitable if anyone comes to
know them intimately. They try very hard to be "good," but they fear
being exposed as sinful and discarded as unworthy. One of my patients
became convinced at one point that I would refuse to see her again after
hearing about her childhood death wishes toward a younger sibling. She,
like many sophisticated psychotherapy clients today, knew at the
conscious level that such wishes are an expectable part of the
psychology of the displaced child, yet in her deeper experience she was
still awaiting condemnation.

The guilt of the introjectively depressive person is at times
unfathomable. Some guilt is simply part of the human condition, and is
appropriate to our complex and not entirely benign natures, but
depressive guilt has a certain magnificent conceit. In someone with a
psychotic depression it can emerge as the conviction that some disaster
was caused by one's sinfulness---police departments are accustomed to
delusional depressives calling up to claim responsibility for highly
publicized crimes they could not possibly have committed---but even in
expansive, high-functioning adults with a depressive character structure
similar ideas will emerge in psychotherapy. "Bad things happen to me
because I deserve them" may be a consistent underlying theme.
Introjective depressive clients may even have a paradoxical kind of
self-esteem based on the grandiose idea that "No one is as bad as I am."

Because of their readiness to believe the worst about themselves, they
can be very thin-skinned. Criticism may devastate them; in any message
that includes mention of their shortcomings they tend to hear only that
part of the communication. When criticism is intended constructively, as
in an evaluation at work, they may feel so exposed and wounded that they
miss or minimize any complimentary facets of the report. When they are
subject to genuinely mean-spirited attacks, they are incapable of seeing
beyond any grains of truth in the content to the fact that no one
deserves to be treated abusively, no matter how legitimate are the
persecutor's complaints.

Introjectively depressive people often handle their unconscious dynamics
by helping others, by philanthropic activity, or by contributions to
social progress that have the effect of counteracting their guilt. It is
one of the great ironies of life that it is the most realistically
benevolent people who seem most vulnerable to feelings of moral
inferiority. Many individuals with depressive personalities are able to
maintain a stable sense of self-esteem and avoid depressive episodes by
doing good. In researching characterological altruism (McWilliams,
1984), I found that the only times my charitable subjects had
experienced depression were when circumstances had made it temporarily
impossible for them to carry on their humanitarian activities.

Psychotherapists, as previously noted, often have significant
introjective dynamics. They seek opportunities to help others so that
their unconscious anxieties about their destructiveness will be kept at
bay. Since it is hard to help people psychologically, at least as fast
as we would all wish, and since we cannot avoid inflicting temporary
pain on patients in the service of their growth or when we simply make a
mistake, feelings of exaggerated responsibility and disproportionate
self-criticism are common in beginning therapists. Supervisors can
confirm how often such dynamics get in the way of their trainees'
learning of their craft. One of my depressive patients, a therapist,
responded to any setback with a client, especially if it provoked
negative feelings in her, with a search for her own role in the
problem---to such a degree that she ignored opportunities to learn about
the ordinary vicissitudes of working with that particular kind of
patient. The fact that therapy is a two-person process, where
intersubjectivity is a given, was converted by her into a quest for
self-purification and a terror that she was somehow basically unsuited
to helping people.

Parenthetically, I think training to be a therapist tends to create
depression even if one lacks powerful introjective and anaclitic
dynamics. In the program where I teach, I have noticed that most
students go through a depressive period some time around their second
year. Graduate training can be a breeding ground for dysthymic
reactions, since one has the worst of both adult and child roles (one is
expected to be responsible, autonomous, and original, but one has no
power; one is dependent on one's "elders" in the field, yet with no
accompanying protection and comfort). Training in therapy additionally
confronts people with the fact that learning an art is very different
from mastering a content area. Students who come to our program as stars
in their prior roles find the transition to self-exposure and critical
feedback on their work to be emotionally jarring.

So far I have talked mostly about the introjectively depressive self.
Anaclitically depressive individuals experience themselves not so much
as actively bad; they see themselves as chronically inadequate and
longing, but destined to a life of disappointment. They are more likely
to suffer shame (because no one wants them) than to react with guilt
that they get love they feel they do not deserve. They may view their
yearning for closeness without self-hatred but still see it as futile.
They may try to talk the therapist into sharing their view that "life
sucks and then you die," because anything better than that is not in
their future, and they would feel unbearable envy if they were to
imagine other possibilities. One of my patients told me she couldn't
stand my tendency to frame issues as problems to be solved; the closest
she had come in her history to feeling connected with friends and
relatives was via a "misery loves company" bemoaning of how fate had
treated them. Any effort to change what was fated threatened the
sweetness of their mutual lamentation.

Women seem more at risk of depressive solutions to emotional problems
than men. In the 1970s and 1980s, feminist theorists (e.g., Chodorow,
1978, 1989; Gilligan, 1982; J. B. Miller, 1984; Surrey, 1985) accounted
for this phenomenon by reference to the fact that in most families, the
primary caregiver is female. Male children consequently attain a sense
of gender identity from being different from the mother, and females
derive it from identification with her. An outcome of this imbalance in
early parenting is that men use introjection less, as their masculinity
is confirmed by separation rather than by fusion, and women use it more,
because their sense of femaleness comes from connection. When feeling
internally empty, men may be more likely to use denial and to behave
counterdependently than to experience themselves anaclitically as needy
and longing.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH DEPRESSIVE PATIENTS**

Depressive clients are often easy to love. They attach quickly, ascribe
benevolence to the therapist's aims even when fearing criticism, are
moved by empathic responsiveness, work hard to be "good" in the patient
role, and appreciate bits of insight as if they were morsels of
life-sustaining food. They tend to idealize the clinician (as morally
good, in contrast to their subjective badness, or as filling their
internal emptiness), but not in the emotionally unconnected way typical
of more narcissistically structured patients. Depressive people are
highly respectful of the therapist's status as a separate, real, and
caring human being, and they try hard not to be burdensome.

At the same time, introjectively depressive people project on to the
therapist their internal critics, voices that have variously been
conceptualized in the psychoanalytic literature as a harsh, sadistic, or
primitive superego (Abraham, 1924; Freud, 1917a; Klein, 1940; Rado,
1928; Schneider, 1950). It can be startling to see a patient writhe in
miserable anticipation of disapproval when confessing some minor crime
of thought. Depressive clients are subject to the chronic belief that
the therapist's concern and respect would vanish if he or she *really*
knew them. This belief can persist over months and years, even in the
face of their having volunteered every negative thing they can think of
about themselves, and having encountered only steadfast acceptance.

Anaclitically depressive individuals are more likely to feel initially
comfortable in treatment. Blatt (2004) found that their pleasure in
having a therapist's warm, noncritical attention had immediate positive
effects, including reduction of their depressive symptoms. This makes
intuitive sense: If my internal experience of depression is that I am
desperate for a warm attachment, and I get one from a therapist, I may
feel better immediately. Anaclitically depressive people are more likely
to develop a benign idealization and to assume that a therapist is
taking care of them. Difficulties in the transference and
countertransference tend not to arise until the therapist begins
confronting the client about making real-world changes.

As introjectively depressive patients progress in therapy, they project
their hostile attitudes less and experience them more directly as anger
and criticism toward the therapist. At this point in treatment, their
negativity may take the form of comments that they do not really expect
to be helped and that nothing the therapist is doing is making a
difference. It is important to tolerate this phase without taking their
criticisms too personally, and to console oneself that in the process,
they are getting out from under all the self-directed complaining that
was previously keeping them unhappy. As anaclitically oriented clients
progress, they tend to get critical, too, because they have to confront
the painful fact that even though they now have a warm connection, there
are things they have to work on. I have noticed that the more their
complaints are welcomed, the more likely they are afterward to take
positions on their own behalf outside the treatment room.

State-of-the-art psychopharmacology now enables us to work with
depressive people at all levels of disturbance and to analyze depressive
dynamics even in psychotic clients. Before the discovery of the
antidepressive properties of lithium and other chemicals, many patients
with borderline and psychotic structure were so firmly convinced of
their badness, so sure of the therapist's inevitable hatred of them, or
so despairing of real devotion, that they could not tolerate the pain of
attachment. Sometimes they would commit suicide after years of treatment
because they could not bear to start feeling hope and thereby risk
another devastating disappointment.

Healthier introjective clients tend to be easy to work with because
their convictions about their basic flaws are mostly unconscious and are
ego alien when brought into awareness. People who are more troubled may
need medication to reduce the intensity of their depressive feelings and
convictions. The ruthless, implacable states of self-loathing by which
borderline and psychotic depressive people can be possessed are
infrequent in medicated patients. It is as if their depressive dynamics
have been made chemically ego dystonic. The shadows of self-hatred that
remain after they are established on an appropriate medication can then
be addressed as one would analyze pathological introjects with
neurotic-level depressive people.

Healthier anaclitic clients are also easy to work with, though their
underlying passivity can be irritating. At borderline and psychotic
levels, they can be very difficult because their sense that the
therapist should simply fix things for them can be deeply ego syntonic,
and the experience of being medicated reinforces their sense that help
has to come from outside because their internal resources are completely
inadequate.

Countertransference with depressive individuals runs the gamut from
benign affection to omnipotent rescue fantasies, depending upon the
severity of the depressive issues. Such reactions constitute a
complementary countertransference (Racker, 1968); the therapeutic
fantasy is that one can be God, or the "Good Mother," or the sensitive,
accepting parent that the client never had. These longings can be
understood as a response to the patient's unconscious belief that the
cure for depressive dynamics is unconditional love and total
understanding. (There is a lot of truth in this idea, but as I will
spell out shortly, it is also dangerously incomplete.)

There is also a concordant countertransference familiar to therapists of
depressive patients: One can feel incompetent, blundering, damaging,
"not good enough" (the introjective elements) or hopeless, incompetent,
demoralized, and futile (the anaclitic elements). Depressive attitudes
are contagious. I first became aware of this when I was working in a
mental health center and (naively) scheduled four severely depressed
people in a row. By the time I came shambling to the office coffee pot
after the fourth session, the clinic secretaries were offering me
chicken soup and a shoulder to cry on. One can easily conclude during
work with depressive people that one is simply an inadequate therapist.
These feelings can be mitigated if one is fortunate enough to have
plentiful sources of emotional gratification in one's personal life (see
Fromm-Reichmann, 1950; McWilliams, 2004). They also tend to diminish
over one's professional lifetime as it becomes incontrovertible that one
has succeeded in helping even relentlessly depressive patients.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF DEPRESSIVE PERSONALITY**

The most important condition of therapy with a depressed or depressively
organized person is an atmosphere of acceptance, respect, and
compassionate efforts to understand. Most writings about
therapy---whether they express a general humanistic stance, a
psychodynamic orientation, or a cognitive-behavioral
preference---emphasize a style of relatedness that is particularly
adapted to the treatment of depressive clients. Although a basic tenet
of this book is that this generic attitude is insufficient to the task
of therapy for some diagnostic groups (e.g., psychopathic and paranoid),
I want to stress how critical it is to helping depressive people.
Because they have radar for the slightest verification of their fears of
criticism and/or rejection, a therapist working with depressive patients
must take special pains to be nonjudgmental and emotionally constant.

With introjectively depressive clients, addressing undercurrent
presumptions about inevitable rejection, including understanding
counteractive efforts to be "good" in order to forestall it, constitutes
much of the work. Blatt and Zuroff (2005) discovered, in an analysis of
data collected for an ambitious National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH) study of major depression, that improvement in the introjective
patients was centrally related to the therapist's addressing the
patient's presumed internal beliefs about badness and its role in any
losses they had had. Whether the clinician came at the topic from a
cognitive perspective (as in Beck's \[e.g., 1995\] focus on "irrational
cognitions") or from a psychodynamic one (as in the control--mastery
emphasis on "pathogenic beliefs"), the critical issue was to expose and
challenge the person's implicit thoughts.

For higher-functioning introjective patients, the famous analytic couch
is useful because it brings such themes quickly into focus. A woman I
treated (who had no overt depressive symptoms but whose character was
depressively organized) was an expert at reading my expressions. When we
worked face to face, she so rapidly disconfirmed expectations that I was
critical and rejecting that she was not even aware she had had such
apprehensions. Neither was I; she was so skilled at this monitoring that
my usual mindfulness of someone's searching gaze was not aroused. When
her decision to use the couch deprived her of eye contact, she was
amazed to find herself suddenly hesitant to talk about certain topics
because of the conviction that I would not approve of her. When the
couch is not an option, there are ways of sitting and talking that
minimize opportunities for visual search so that clients can get in
touch with how chronic and automatic is their vigilance.

In the case of anaclitic patients, Blatt and Zuroff (2005) found that
they got better quite quickly in therapy almost no matter what they
talked about with their therapists. Not surprisingly, given that their
experience of depression centered on the need to attach, as soon as they
felt safely connected with a caring person, their symptoms diminished.
The bad news with this group was that when the relatively brief therapy
covered by the NIMH study ended, they became symptomatic again. This
finding suggests that therapy with anaclitically depressed clients may
have to be long term or at least open ended in order to avoid recreating
a situation in which they make an attachment and then lose it
prematurely under circumstances beyond their control. It takes time to
internalize the therapist's presence as a reliable positive inner voice.

Since short therapies are often presented by insurance companies or
clinics as the treatment of choice, patients whose only option is brief
treatment may conclude that they are sicker than they thought. The
assumption that "this obviously works for other patients but not for a
bottomless pit like me" will undermine self-esteem even if the therapy
temporarily improves the person's mood. In working with depressive
clients under conditions that force termination, it is especially
important to predict preemptively the patient's expectable
interpretation of the meaning of the loss. Treatments that are
arbitrarily limited to a certain number of sessions may provide welcome
comfort during a painful episode of clinical depression, but the
time-limited experience may be ultimately assimilated unconsciously by
the depressive person as another relationship that was traumatically cut
short---further evidence that the patient is a failure in maintaining
attachments.

Effective therapy with either anaclitic or introjective depressive
patients in the borderline and psychotic ranges may require a
particularly long period of building a safe alliance with a real,
visible, emotionally responsive person. Their presumptions of their
unlovability and terrors of rejection are so profound and ego syntonic
that without the freedom to scrutinize the therapist's face and
invalidate their worst fears, they are apt to be too anxious to talk
freely. The therapist may have to log a great deal of time demonstrating
acceptance before even the conscious expectations of rejection in a
depressive client can become open to scrutiny and eventual invalidation.

It is critical with depressive patients of both types to explore and
interpret their reactions to separation, even to the separation of brief
silence from the therapist. (Long silences should be avoided; they
arouse the feelings of being uninteresting, valueless, adrift,
hopeless.) Depressive people are deeply sensitive to abandonment and are
unhappy being alone. More important, they may experience loss---usually
unconsciously, but especially those introjectively depressive people
with psychotic tendencies, sometimes consciously---as evidence of their
badness or inadequacy. "You must be going away because you're disgusted
with me," or "You're leaving to escape my insatiable hunger," or "You're
taking off to punish me for my sinfulness" are all variants on the
depressive theme of basic unlovability. Hence it is critical not only to
be attuned to how bothersome ordinary losses are to a depressive
patient---this will come up naturally in anticipation of the therapist's
vacations or when the therapist cancels a session---but also to how the
client interprets them.

While basic nonjudgmental acceptance is a necessary condition of therapy
with a depressive person, it is not a sufficient one, especially with
introjective individuals. I have noted in beginning therapists treating
depressive clients a tendency to avoid taking vacations or imposing
cancellations that are not rescheduled out of a wish to spare the
patient unnecessary pain. Most of us in the field probably started out
being neurotically flexible and generous in an effort to protect our
depressive patients from suffering. But what depressive people really
need is not uninterrupted care. What they need is the experience that
the therapist returns after a separation. They need to know that their
anger at being abandoned did not destroy the relationship and that their
hunger did not permanently alienate the therapist. One cannot learn
these lessons without enduring a loss in the first place.

On being encouraged to get in touch with negative feelings, depressive
patients may protest that they cannot take the risk of noticing
hostility toward the therapist: "How can I get angry at someone I need
so much?" It is important not to join in this elliptical thinking.
(Unfortunately, because their dynamics are similar to those of the
patient, therapists with depressive sensibilities may regard such
remarks as making perfect sense.) One can point out that the question
contains the unexamined assumption that anger drives people apart. It
may come as a revelation to depressive individuals that the freedom to
admit negative feelings increases intimacy, unlike being false or out of
touch. Anger interferes with normal dependency only if the person one is
depending upon has pathological reactions to it---a circumstance that
defines the childhood experience of many depressive clients but not the
possibilities for adult relationships.

Therapists often find that their efforts to improve their depressive
patients' self-esteem are either ignored or received paradoxically.
Supportive comments to a person immersed in self-loathing may provoke
increased depression, via the internal transformation: "Anyone who
*really* knew me could not possibly say such positive things. I must
have duped this therapist into thinking I am okay. I'm bad for
misleading such a nice person. And I can't trust support from this
direction because this therapist is easily fooled." Hammer (1990) is
fond of quoting Groucho Marx here, who used to insist that he would not
be interested in joining any club that would have him for a member.

If support backfires, as it almost always will, especially with
introjective clients, what can one do to improve the self-esteem of a
depressive person? The ego psychologists had a useful prescription:
Don't support the ego; attack the superego. If a man is berating himself
for the crime of envying a friend's success, and the therapist responds
that envy is a normal emotion, and that especially since the patient did
not act it out, he might congratulate himself rather than running
himself down, the patient may respond with silent skepticism. But if the
therapist says, "So what's so terrible about that?" or teases him for
trying to be purer than God, or tells him good-naturedly to "Join the
human race!" the patient may be able to take the message in. When
interpretations are put in a critical tone, they are more easily
tolerated by depressive people ("If she's criticizing me, there must be
some truth in what she says, since I know I'm bad in some way"), even
when what is being criticized is a critical introject.

Another aspect of sensitive treatment of depressive patients is the
therapist's willingness to appreciate, as achievements, behaviors that
would signify resistance in other clients. For example, many therapy
patients express their negative reactions to treatment by canceling
sessions or failing to bring a check. Depressive people work so hard to
be good that they are usually exemplary in the patient role---so much so
that their compliant behavior may be legitimately considered part of
their pathology. One can make small dents in a depressive mentality by
interpreting a client's cancellation or temporary nonpayment as a
triumph over the fear that the therapist will retaliate at the slightest
sign of opposition. One is tempted with excessively cooperative patients
just to relax and appreciate one's luck, but if a depressive person
never behaves in adversarial or selfish ways in treatment, the therapist
should bring that pattern up as worthy of investigation.

Overall, therapists of characterologically depressive patients must
accept and even welcome the client's removing their halo. It is nice to
be idealized, but it is not in the patient's best interest. Therapists
in the earliest days of the psychoanalytic movement knew that it
signified progress when a depressed patient became critical or angry or
disappointed with the clinician; while they understood this more or less
hydraulically (angry energy turned outward instead of inward),
contemporary analysts appreciate it from the standpoint of
self-valuation. Depressive patients need eventually to leave the
"one-down" position and to see the therapist as an ordinary, flawed
human being. Retaining idealization inherently retains an inferior
self-image.

Finally, where circumstances permit, it is more important with
depressive patients than with others to leave decisions about
termination up to them. It is also advisable to leave an open door for
further treatment and to analyze ahead of time any inhibitions the
client may have about asking for help in the future (one often hears
that coming back for a psychological "tune-up" would be admitting
defeat, or that the therapist might be disappointed with a less than
complete "cure"). Since the causes of a depressive sensibility so
frequently include irreversible separations---which forced the growing
child to cut all ties and suppress all regressive longings, instead of
feeling secure in the availability of an understanding parent---the
termination phase with depressive patients must be handled with special
care and flexibility.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

The two dispositions most commonly confused with depressive psychology
are narcissism (the depleted version) and masochism. It is my impression
that misdiagnoses are more often made in the direction of construing as
depressive someone who is more basically either narcissistic or
masochistic than in the direction of misunderstanding an essentially
depressive person as either of the others. The tendency of therapists to
misread a narcissistic or masochistic patient as depressive seems to me
attributable to two factors. First, depressively inclined therapists may
project their own dynamics onto people whose core internal story is
different. Second, people with either narcissistic or masochistic
personality structure frequently have symptoms of clinical depression,
especially dysthymic mood. Either misreading can have unfortunate
clinical consequences.

**Depressive versus Narcissistic Personality**

In [Chapter 8](#part0018.html){.calibre9} I described people with
depressed--depleted forms of narcissistic personality. There is some
overlap between people with this psychology and people with the
anaclitic version of depressed dynamics. As there are no clean
boundaries in personality differences, many of us have both tendencies.
The more narcissistic person is subjectively less hungry, however, less
valuing of relationship, and defends more against shame than the
anaclitically depressive person, who may also express feelings of
emptiness, meaninglessness, and existential despair. The subjective
*sense* of emptiness of the anaclitic depressive is not the same thing
as the therapist's inference of an *actual* emptiness at the core of the
self in narcissistic clients. Narcissistically depressed people tend to
have self-object transferences, whereas those with depressive character
have object transferences. Countertransference with the former tends to
be vague, irritated, affectively shallow; with the latter it is much
clearer, warmer, and more powerful, usually involving rescue fantasies.

Explicitly sympathetic, encouraging reactions can be comforting to a
narcissistically organized person, but to whatever extent a depressive
person has introjective dynamics, they may be demoralizing. Because
self-attack is not central to the narcissistic dynamism, attacking the
presumed superego---even in gentle ways such as commenting on possible
self-reproach---will not likely help a person whose basic structure is
narcissistic. Interpretations that redefine affective experience in the
direction of anger rather than more passive emotional responses will
similarly fizzle with narcissistic patients because anger is not a core
affect state for them. Such interpretive efforts may, however, relieve
and even energize introjective clients, whose responsiveness can make
the old anger-in-versus-anger-out formulations look uncannily apt.

Interpretive reconstructions that emphasize critical parents and
injurious separations will generally fall on deaf ears with narcissistic
clients, no matter how depressed they are, because rejection and trauma
are not the main internal narrative in narcissistic dynamics. But they
may be gratefully received by depressive patients as an alternative to
their longstanding habit of attributing all their pain to their personal
shortcomings. With a narcissistic person, attempts to work "in the
transference" may be shrugged off, belittled, or absorbed into an
overall idealization, but a depressive patient will appreciate the
traditional approach and make good use of it.

The difference between introjectively depressive and narcissistically
depressed individuals, even though their observable symptoms may be the
same, comes down to the metaphorical understanding of narcissistic
clients as pathologically empty and depressive ones as pathologically
filled with hostile introjects. Therapy must be tailored to these
contrasting subjective worlds.

**Depressive versus Masochistic Personality**

Depressive and self-defeating (masochistic) patterns are closely
connected, since both orientations may be adaptations to unconscious
guilt. They coexist so frequently, in fact, that Kernberg (e.g., 1984),
in acknowledgment of Laughlin's (1967) seminal observations, considers
the "depressive--masochistic personality" to be one of three common
neurotic-level kinds of character organization. In spite of their
frequent coexistence and synergism, I prefer to differentiate carefully
between depressive and masochistic psychologies. An organizing principle
of this text has been to attend to those differences among people that
have an established conceptual status in the psychoanalytic tradition
and that have significant implications for psychotherapy technique. In
[Chapter 12](#part0022.html){.calibre9} I explore the differences
between predominantly depressive and predominantly masochistic
personalities and elaborate on the implications of those differences for
treatment.

**HYPOMANIC (CYCLOTHYMIC) PERSONALITIES**

Mania is the flip side of depression. People with hypomanic
personalities have a fundamentally depressive organization, counteracted
by the defense of denial. Because most people with manic tendencies
suffer from episodes in which their denial fails and their depression
surfaces, the term "cyclothymic" has sometimes been used to describe
their psychology. In the second edition of the DSM (DSM-II; American
Psychiatric Association, 1968), both depressive and cyclothymic
personality disorders were accepted diagnoses.

Hypomania is not a state that simply contrasts with depression; point
for point, it is a mirror image of it. The hypomanic individual is
elated, energetic, self-promoting, witty, and grandiose. Akhtar (1992)
describes the individual with hypomanic personality disorder as follows:

::: calibre1
 
:::

The individual with hypomanic personality is overtly cheerful, highly
social, given to idealization of others, work-addicted, flirtatious, and
articulate, while covertly guilty about aggression toward others,
incapable of being alone, defective in empathy, unable to love,
corruptible, and lacking a systematic approach in his cognitive style.
(p. 193)

Many individuals with characterological hypomania, however, have more
mild versions than the personality *disorder* Akhtar is describing, and
are able to love and to behave with integrity.

People in a manic state or with a manic personality are famous for grand
schemes, racing thoughts, and extended freedom from ordinary physical
requirements, such as food and sleep. They seem constantly "up"---until
exhaustion eventually sets in. Because the person experiencing mania
literally cannot slow down, drugs like alcohol, barbiturates, and
opiates that depress the central nervous system may be highly
attractive. Many comics and humorists appear to have hypomanic
personalities; their relentless wit can sometimes be quite wearing.
Sometimes the dysthymic side of a very funny person is more visible, as
with Mark Twain, Ambrose Bierce, Lenny Bruce, or Robin Williams, all of
whom suffered serious depressive episodes.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT IN MANIA**

People with hypomanic psychologies are notable for high energy,
excitement, mobility, distractibility, and sociability. They are often
great entertainers, storytellers, punsters, mimics---treasures to their
friends, who nevertheless sometimes complain that because they turn all
serious remarks into occasions for humor, they are hard to get close to
emotionally. When negative affect appears in people with manic and
hypomanic psychologies, it tends to manifest itself not as sorrow and
disappointment, but as anger, sometimes in the form of episodes of
sudden, uncontrolled rage.

Like their counterparts in the depressive realm, they have struck
psychoanalytic observers as organized along oral lines (Fenichel, 1945):
They may talk nonstop, drink recklessly, bite their nails, chew gum,
smoke, gnaw on the insides of their mouth. Especially at the disturbed
end of the manic continuum, many are overweight. Their perpetual motion
suggests considerable anxiety, despite their often markedly elevated
mood. The delight they display and, by contagion, bestow, has a somewhat
fragile, undependable quality; their acquaintances often harbor worries
about their stability. Whereas exhilaration is a familiar condition for
hypomanic individuals, a calm serenity or a Lacanian *juissance* may be
completely outside their experience (Akiskal, 1984).

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN MANIA**

The core defenses of manic and hypomanic people are denial and acting
out. Denial is conspicuous in their tendency to ignore (or to transform
into humor) events that would distress or alarm others. Acting out often
takes the form of flight: They run from situations that might threaten
them with loss. They may escape painful affects by sexualization,
intoxication, provocation, and even acts that appear psychopathic, such
as theft; hence, some analysts have questioned the stability of the
reality principle in manic clients (Katan, 1953). Manic people also
devalue, a process isomorphic with the depressive tendency to idealize,
especially when they contemplate making loving attachments that they
fear will disappoint.

For a manic person, anything that distracts is preferable to emotional
suffering. Those with severe personality disorders and those in a
temporarily psychotic state may also use the defense of omnipotent
control; they may feel invulnerable, immortal, convinced of the assured
success of some grandiose scheme. Acts of impulsive exhibitionism, rape
(usually of a spouse or intimate), and authoritarian control are not
unknown during a manic psychotic break.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN MANIC PSYCHOLOGY**

In the histories of hypomanic people, perhaps even more strikingly than
in those of depressive individuals, one finds a pattern of repeated
traumatic separations with no opportunity for the child to process them
emotionally. Deaths of important people who went unmourned, divorces and
separations that no one addressed, and family relocations for which
there was no preparation litter their childhoods. One hypomanic man I
worked with had moved 26 times during his first 10 years; more than once
he arrived home after school to find the moving van in the driveway.

Criticism and abuse, emotional and sometimes physical, are also common
in the backgrounds of manic and hypomanic individuals. I have already
discussed this combination of traumatic separation and emotional neglect
and mistreatment as it applies to depressive outcomes; it may be that in
the histories of manic people the losses were more extreme, or that
attention to their emotional significance by the child's caregivers was
even scarcer than it is in the backgrounds of depressive people.
Otherwise it is hard to explain the need for a defense as extreme as
denial.

**THE MANIC SELF**

One of my hypomanic patients described herself as a spinning top. She
was keenly aware of her need to keep moving lest she feel something
painful. People with a hypomanic pattern are frightened of attachment,
because to care about someone means that losing that person will be
devastating. The manic continuum from psychotic to neurotic structure
loads more heavily in the borderline and psychotic areas because of the
primitivity of the processes involved; a consequence of this is that
many hypomanic and cyclothymic people are at risk of the subjective
experience of self-disintegration that self psychologists refer to as
fragmentation. It is as if they fear that if they do not keep moving,
they will fall apart. Often they come to therapy right after a
depressive experience of profound self-fragmentation, when their manic
defenses failed.

Self-esteem in hypomanic people may be maintained, somewhat tenuously,
by a combination of success at avoiding pain and elation at captivating
others. Some individuals with manic defenses are masterful at attaching
other people to themselves emotionally without reciprocating an
investment of comparable depth. Because they are often brilliant and
witty, their friends and colleagues---especially those holding the
common but fallacious belief that intelligence and severe
psychopathology are mutually exclusive---can be nonplussed to learn of
their psychological vulnerabilities. Suicide attempts and flagrantly
psychotic behavior can suddenly invade a manic fortress if some loss
becomes too painful to deny.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH MANIC PATIENTS**

Manic clients can be winsome, insightful, and fascinating. They also
tend to be confusing and exhausting. Once while working with a hypomanic
young woman, I became aware of the fantasy that my head was in a clothes
dryer, the kind in the laundromat that whirl garments in full view but
too fast to track. Sometimes in an initial interview one is aware of a
nagging feeling that with such a turbulent history, the patient should
be showing more emotionality in recounting it. At other times one is
aware of somehow not being able to put all the pieces together.

Perhaps the most dangerous countertransference tendency in therapists
working with hypomanic people is underestimating the degree of suffering
and potential disorganization that lies beneath their engaging
presentation. What may appear to be a congenial observing ego and a
reliable working alliance may be manic denial and defensive charm. More
than one therapist has been shocked by the results of projective testing
with an appealing hypomanic client; the Rorschach often picks up a level
of psychopathology that no one on the intake team suspected.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF HYPOMANIC PERSONALITY**

One's primary concern with a hypomanic patient must be the prevention of
flight. Unless the therapist discusses this in an early session,
interpreting the person's defensive need to escape from meaningful
attachments (which will be evident from the history) and contracting
with the client to remain for a certain period after feeling the impulse
to bolt, there will be no therapy because there will be no patient. One
can do this as follows:

"I notice that every important relationship in your life has been
disrupted abruptly, usually at your initiative. There's no reason why
that won't also happen in this relationship---especially because in
therapy so many painful things get stirred up. When life gets painful,
your pattern is to flee. I want you to make a deal with me up front that
no matter how reasonable it seems, if you suddenly decide to break off
your therapy at any point, you'll come back for at least six more
sessions \[or any other number that seems reasonable or can be
negotiated\], so that we can understand in depth your decision to go and
have a chance to process the ending in an emotionally appropriate way."

This may be the first time the patient has been confronted with the fact
that there is an emotionally appropriate way to end relationships; that
is, one has to deal with grief and other expectable feelings that
surround endings. A constant focus on the denial of grief and negative
emotions in general should inform the therapy work. Most analysts (e.g.,
Kernberg, 1975) have considered the prognosis for hypomanic patients to
be guarded at best, even when the therapist takes every precaution to
prevent flight, because of these clients' extreme difficulties
tolerating grief. Sometimes more manifestly "sick" manic patients are
easier to help, because the degree of their psychological discomfort
supports their motivation to stay in treatment.

With more disturbed manic patients, as with more seriously ill
depressive ones, psychotropic medicine has been a godsend. Current
psychiatric sophistication makes it possible to adjust type and dosage
of medication to the specific needs of the patient; the days when
lithium was the only effective drug for mania are long gone. I have
found it important, however, to be sure that the prescribing physician
takes a careful, individualized approach to each patient; clients with
manic tendencies are as variable as anyone else and often have
idiosyncratic physical sensitivities, addictions, and allergies. A
dependable relationship with their physician as well as their
psychotherapist, and a mutually supportive relationship between these
practitioners, supports their recovery. Contrary to some conventional
wisdom, psychotherapy is valuable and effective with manic patients;
without it, they fail to work through their experiences of ungrieved
loss and to learn how to love with less fear. They also stop taking
their medicine.

Healthier hypomanic people tend to come to therapy later in life, when
their energies and drives have lessened, and when they can see clearly
in retrospect how fragmented and unsatisfying their histories are. They
sometimes come for individual help after a long stint of work on an
addiction in a 12-step program, when their self-destructiveness has
lessened and they want to make sense of their life. Like narcissistic
clients of the grandiose type, with whom they share some defensive
patterns, older hypomanic people are sometimes easier to help than their
younger counterparts (Kernberg, 1984). But they still need to contract
against premature flight. The dearth of literature on the
psychotherapeutic treatment of hypomanic personalities may reflect the
fact that many therapists learn the hard way that they should have made
such an agreement.

Some considerations applicable to the treatment of paranoid patients
also apply to hypomanic ones. Frequently one must "go under" a defense;
for example, aggressively confronting denial and naming what is denied
rather than inviting the patient to explore this intrinsically rigid,
inflexible defense. The therapist must be strong and devoted. He or she
should interpret upward, educating the hypomanic person about normal
negative affect and its lack of catastrophic effects.

Because of manic terrors of grief and self-fragmentation, therapy must
move slowly. The clinician who demonstrates deliberateness offers a
spinning client a different model of how to live in the world of
feelings. Treatment should also be conducted in an especially forthright
tone. In their efforts to avoid psychic pain, most hypomanic people have
learned to say whatever works. Emotional authenticity may be a struggle
for them. The therapist must therefore inquire periodically whether they
are telling the truth, as opposed to explaining away, entertaining, or
temporizing. Like paranoid people, hypomanic clients need a therapist
who is active and incisive, and who is notably lacking in cant,
hypocrisy, and self-deception.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

I noted the main obstacle to identification of hypomanic clients in the
section on transference and countertransference: Therapists may
misperceive these initially appealing people as having more mature
defenses, more ego strength, and better identity integration than they
do, a mistake that may alienate a sensitive hypomanic person after only
one interview. Manically organized clients outside the psychotic range
are most commonly diagnosed as hysterical, narcissistic, or compulsive,
or as having attention-deficit disorder (ADD). Those with psychotic
symptoms are most frequently misunderstood as schizophrenic.

**Hypomanic versus Hysterical Personality**

Because of their charm, their seeming capacity to engage warmly, and
their apparent insightfulness, hypomanic clients, especially women, can
be misunderstood as hysterical. This error risks losing the patient
quickly, since the therapeutic style that helps people with hysterical
organization may make the hypomanic person feel insufficiently "held"
and only superficially understood. The unconscious conviction that
anyone who seems to like them has been duped exists in manically
structured people just as in introjectively depressive ones; it will
issue in devaluation of and flight from the therapist unless addressed
directly in ways that would be contraindicated with a hysterically
structured patient. Evidence of abruptly ended relationships with people
of both sexes, a history of traumatic and unmourned losses, and absence
of the hysterical person's concern with gender and power are some of the
areas that differentiate hypomanic from hysterical people.

**Hypomanic versus Narcissistic Personality**

Because grandiosity is a central feature of manic functioning, it is
easy to misconstrue a hypomanic or cyclothymic person as the more
grandiose kind of narcissistic patient---again, in remarkable parallel
to confusions between depressive patients and the depressed--depleted
type of narcissistic person. A good history should highlight the
disparity; narcissistically structured people lack the turbulent,
driven, catastrophically fragmented backgrounds of most hypomanic
clients.

The intrapsychic difference is between inner emptiness in the
narcissistic person and the presence of savagely negative
introjects---managed by denial---in the hypomanic one. Although an
arrogant narcissistic person can be difficult to treat, and resists
attachment in many ways, the threat of immediate flight is less severe.
Misconstruing a hypomanic individual as narcissistic can thus cost one a
patient. The two groups have an affinity, however, in that both become
more accessible therapeutically when older; moreover, analysts who
understand grandiose narcissism in introjective terms (e.g., Kernberg,
1975) advocate a similar approach to each type of client.

**Hypomanic versus Compulsive Personality**

The driven qualities of the hypomanic person invite comparison with
characterological compulsivity. Both compulsive and hypomanic people are
ambitious and demanding, and on this basis, they have sometimes been
compared (Akiskal, 1984; Cohen, Baker, Cohen, Fromm-Reichmann, &
Weigart, 1954). Their similarities are mostly superficial, however.
Akhtar (1992), contrasting the hypomanic person with the compulsive
client (whom he construes, following Kernberg (1984), as being by
definition at the neurotic level of personality organization),
summarizes:

 

Unlike the hypomanic, the compulsive individual is capable of deep
object relations, mature love, concern, genuine guilt, mourning, and
sadness. . . . The compulsive is capable of lasting intimacy but is
modest and socially hesitant. The hypomanic, on the contrary, is
pompous, loves company, and rapidly develops rapport with others only to
lose interest in them soon afterward. The compulsive loves details,
which the hypomanic casually disregards. The compulsive is tied down by
morality and follows all rules, while the hypomanic, like the "perverse
character" (Chasseguet-Smirgel, 1985), cuts corners, defies
prohibitions, and mocks conventional authority. (pp. 196--197)

 

Thus, as is the case with the distinction between hypomania and
hysteria, it is critical to notice the difference between the internal
meaning and the manifest content of behavior.

**Mania versus Schizophrenia**

A person in a manic psychotic condition can look very much like a
schizophrenic in an acute hebephrenic episode. This differential is
important for medication purposes. Popular impressions aside, the fact
that someone is overtly psychotic does not equate to his or her being
schizophrenic. To determine the nature of a person's disorganization,
especially with younger patients having an initial psychotic break, it
is important to take a good history (from the client's family if the
client is too delusional to talk), to assess underlying flatness of
affect and to evaluate the capacity to abstract. The conditions we
sometimes call "schizoaffective" comprise psychotic-level reactions that
have both manic--depressive and schizophrenic features and consequently
require especially sensitive pharmacological treatment.

**Mania versus Attention-Deficit Disorder**

In recent years there has been a lot of attention to adult ADD and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). I assume that this
trend reflects the fact that contemporary life presents us with
countless competing stimuli, reinforcing any tendencies we have toward
distractedness, and that this diagnostic tendency has arisen because we
now have so many medications that reduce distractibility. The
characterologically manic person is highly distractible and can be
easily assumed to be suffering from ADD. But internal themes of loss,
longing, and self-hatred, countered by the defense of denial, can
discriminate a personality tendency from the symptomatic difficulties of
people with adult ADD. Of course, it is possible to have a hypomanic
personality and also have an attention-deficit problem; physicians
medicating in this situation should be particularly careful not to
prescribe a drug with known risks of triggering a manic state.

**SUMMARY**

In this chapter I have discussed patients who are organized
characterologically along depressive lines, whatever their experience
with the disorders of mood that we define as clinical depression. I
followed Blatt (2004, 2008) in differentiating between the anaclitic or
longing version of depressive personality and the introjective or
self-attacking version. In terms of drive, emotion, and temperament, I
emphasized orality, unconscious guilt, and exaggerated sorrow or joy,
depending on whether the patient is depressively or manically inclined.
I covered the ego processes of introjection, turning against the self,
and idealization in predominantly depressive structure, and denial,
acting out, and devaluation in predominantly manic organization. I
framed object relations in terms of traumatic loss, inadequate mourning,
and parental depression, criticism, abuse, and misunderstanding. I
characterized introjective depressive images of self as irredeemably bad
and anaclitic images as insatiably hungry. In the sections on
transference and countertransference, I noted the appealing qualities of
depressive and manic people, and the associated rescue wishes and
potential demoralization of the therapist who cannot rescue fast enough.

As for treatment style, in addition to a sustained empathic attitude, I
recommended the vigorous interpretation of explanatory constructs,
persistent exploration of reactions to separation, attacks on the
superego, and in manic patients, flight-prevention contracts and a
persistent demand for honest self-expression. Diagnostically, I
distinguished depressive clients from narcissistically and
masochistically oriented patients; I differentiated hypomanic and manic
clients from hysterical, narcissistic, compulsive, and schizophrenic
people and from those with ADD and ADHD.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

Laughlin's (1967) chapter on the depressive personality is excellent,
though hard to find these days. Gaylin's (1983) anthology on depression
contains a fine summary of psychoanalytic thinking on depression. The
only recent essay I know of on the hypomanic personality is in Akhtar's
*Broken Structures* (1992). Again, Fenichel (1945) is worth reading on
both depressive and manic conditions for those who are not put off by
his somewhat arcane terminology. Although they do not describe so much
the personality attributes as the clinical phenomenon of major
depression or bipolar illness, I think the best window into the
subjective experience of the person with depressive and/or manic
psychology can be found in memoirs. Those of William Styron, Kay
Redfield Jamison, and Andrew Sullivan are particularly compelling.

At the end of [Chapter 9](#part0019.html){.calibre9}, I mentioned two
DVDs that the American Psychological Association plans to release in
2011 and suggested watching the session I had had with a man whose
psychology I saw as schizoid (Beck, Greenberg, & McWilliams, in
press-b). The woman who volunteered to be the patient in the other
demonstration video (Beck, Greenberg, & McWilliams, in press-a) seemed
to me to have some hypomanic dynamics. Chi Chi was sensitive and funny
and talented, and she related with immediate warmth. She and I had
unexpectedly bonded before the filming, when I had a meltdown about my
professionally done makeup (I looked in the mirror and saw Cruella de
Ville).

Chi Chi complained of a pattern of dropping or sabotaging things,
including relationships, whenever she got emotionally invested. The
daughter of a diplomat, she had been uprooted again and again during her
childhood, and her critical mother had tolerated no grief or yearning
for lost connection. When I asked why she had volunteered to be filmed,
she told me she had been the patient in several *Master Clinician*
videos, that she liked being on stage. I wondered if her fear to attach
deeply had left her trying to address her underlying depressive
tendencies by getting therapy in bits and pieces, unconsciously
replicating the dislocations of her history. During the second session
with her, I speculated about her fear of intimate connection and,
despite her expressed discomfort with exploratory therapies, tried to
talk her into considering long-term work with a carefully chosen
therapist. She seemed dubious, and in a follow-up interview she said
that she had not felt safe with me---perhaps because I was trying to
demonstrate a psychoanalytic idea rather than staying in her comfort
zone. So I feel some pain about this DVD, but readers who would like to
view me trying to be of help to a client with hypomanic defenses may
find it illuminating.

[]{#part0022.html}

**12**

Masochistic (Self-Defeating) Personalities

[P]{.dropcap}eople who seem to be their own worst enemies pose
fascinating questions for students of human nature. When someone's
history is filled with decisions and actions antithetical to that
person's well-being, we find it hard to grasp. Freud saw self-defeating
behavior as the most vexing problem addressed by his theory, since he
had founded it (in conformance with the biological theory of his day) on
the premise that organisms try to maximize pleasure and minimize pain.
He emphasized how in normal development, infantile choices are
determined by the pleasure principle, later modified by the reality
principle (see [Chapter 2](#part0011.html){.calibre9}). Because some
choices seem at face value to observe neither the pleasure nor the
reality principle, Freud did a lot of stretching and revising of his own
metapsychology to account for self-defeating or "masochistic" behavior
patterns (Freud, 1905, 1915a, 1916, 1919, 1920, 1923, 1924).

Early analytic theory needed to account for the erotic practices of
those who, like the Austrian writer Leopold von Sacher-Masoch, sought
orgasm via torment and humiliation. Sexual excitement in suffering pain
had already been named after Sacher-Masoch, just as pleasure in
inflicting it (sadism) had been named after the Marquis de Sade
(Krafft-Ebing, 1900). To Freud, who emphasized the ultimate sexual
origins of most behavior, it followed naturally to apply the term
"masochism" to ostensibly nonsexual patterns of self-created pain (see
LaPlanche & Pontalis, 1973; Panken, 1973).

To distinguish a general pattern of suffering in the service of some
ultimate goal from the narrow sexual meaning of masochism, Freud (1924)
coined the phrase "moral masochism." By 1933 the concept was accepted
widely enough that Wilhelm Reich included the "masochistic character" in
his compilation of personality types, stressing patterns of suffering,
complaining, self-damaging and self-depreciating attitudes, and an
inferred unconscious wish to torture others with one's pain. Moral
masochism and masochistic personality dynamics have intrigued analysts
for a long time (Asch, 1985; Berliner, 1958; Grossman, 1986; Kernberg,
1988; Laughlin, 1967; Menaker, 1953; Reik, 1941; Schafer, 1984) and have
interested the larger community as well; for example, Millon (1995)
describes an "aggrieved" self-defeating personality style, and the
American Psychiatric Association (1994) considered including
"self-defeating personality disorder" in DSM-IV.

The concept remains vital: In a 1990 paper that attained iconic status
within contemporary relational psychoanalysis, Emmanuel Ghent argued
that masochism is a perversion of the natural wish to surrender, a
challenge to the Western assumption that surrender is synonymous with
defeat. Comparably, a Jungian perspective on masochism frames it as the
"shadow side" of our archetypal need to venerate and worship (Gordon,
1987). Gabriel and Beratis (1997) have related masochistic patterns to
early trauma.

Like other phenomena covered in this book, masochistic behavior is not
necessarily pathological, even though it is, in the narrowest sense,
self-abnegating. Sometimes morality dictates that we suffer for the sake
of something worthier than our short-term individual comfort (see C.
Brenner, 1959; de Monchy, 1950; Kernberg, 1988). This is the spirit in
which Helena Deutsch (1944) observed that motherhood is inherently
masochistic; mammals put the welfare of their young ahead of their
personal survival. This may be "self-defeating" for an individual animal
but not for the offspring and the species. Even more praiseworthy
instances of masochism occur when people risk their lives, health, and
safety in the service of a greater social good, like the survival of
their culture or values. Some people---Mahatma Gandhi and Mother Teresa
come to mind---who may have had masochistic trends in their
personalities, have demonstrated heroic, even saintly devotion to causes
greater than their individual selves.

The term "masochistic" is sometimes used to refer to nonmoralized
patterns of self-destructiveness, as with people who are accident prone,
or with those who mutilate or otherwise harm themselves deliberately but
without suicidal intent. Implied in this use of the word is that there
is some method behind the self-destructive person's apparent madness,
that some objective is being pursued that makes physical suffering pale,
in the mind of the self-injurer, when evaluated next to the emotional
relief being sought through these improbable means. Self-cutters, for
example, will typically explain that the sight of their own blood makes
them feel alive and real, and that the anguish of feeling nonexistent or
alienated from sensation is profoundly worse than any temporary physical
discomfort. Masochism thus exists in varying degrees and tones.
Self-destructiveness can characterize anyone from the psychotic
self-mutilator to the workaholic. Moral masochists range from the
Christian martyrs of legend to the Jewish mothers of lore.

Everyone behaves masochistically under certain circumstances (see
Baumeister, 1989; Salzman, 1960), often to good effect. Children learn
on their own that one way to get attention from caregivers is to get
themselves in trouble. A colleague of mine described his initiation into
the dynamics of normal masochism when his 7-year-old daughter, angry at
him for not having spent any time with her, announced her intention to
go upstairs and break all her toys. A modus operandi of moral triumph
through self-imposed suffering may become so habitual in a person that
he or she may be legitimately seen as having a masochistic character.
Richard Nixon, for instance, has been regarded as a moral masochist by
many observers (see Wills, 1970) on the basis of his aggrieved,
self-righteous tone, his predilection to present himself as suffering
nobly, and his questionable judgment in situations in which his welfare
was at stake (e.g., his failure to destroy the Watergate tapes that
eventually destroyed his presidency).

I want to stress that the term "masochism" as used by psychoanalysts
does not connote a love of pain and suffering. The person who behaves
masochistically endures pain and suffering in the hope, conscious or
unconscious, of some greater good. When an analytic observer comments
that a battered wife is behaving masochistically in staying with an
abusive man, the commentator is not accusing her of liking to be beaten
up. The implication is rather that her actions betray a belief that
tolerating abuse either accomplishes some goal that justifies her
suffering (such as keeping her family together), or averts some even
more painful eventuality (such as complete abandonment), or both. The
remark also suggests that her calculation is not working, that her
staying with an abuser is objectively more destructive or dangerous than
her leaving would be, yet she continues to behave as if her ultimate
well-being were contingent on her enduring mistreatment. I emphasize
this because in discussions about whether the DSM should include a
self-defeating personality disorder, it became apparent that many people
regard the attribution of masochism or self-destructiveness as
equivalent to accusing someone of enjoying pain---of "blaming the
victim" as if he or she consciously provoked abuse for the sake of some
perverse form of enjoyment.

When anyone's character is problematic enough to be considered a
personality disorder, there is by definition something masochistic about
it. If one's core ways of thinking, feeling, relating, coping, and
defending are repeatedly maladaptive, one's personality patterns have
become self-defeating. People whose masochism is in the *foreground* of
their repetitive patterns, rather than being a by-product of other
dynamics, are the ones analysts may consider masochistic personalities.
As with depressively organized people, their dynamics range from more
anaclitic (self-in-relation) to more introjective (self-definition)
(Blatt, 2008). Masochistic people with intense anaclitic needs are
sometimes called relational masochists; that is, their self-defeating
actions result from efforts to keep an attachment at any cost. The term
"moral masochist" is more commonly applied to more introjectively
organized people who have organized their self-esteem around their
capacity to tolerate pain and sacrifice. In the latter category I would
put the exhausted intensive-care nurse to whom I suggested working fewer
than 80 hours a week. "Well, maybe *some* professionals have low
standards," she announced, looking intently at me, "but I'm not one of
them."

Masochistic and depressive character patterns overlap considerably,
especially at the neurotic-to-healthy level; most people with one have
aspects of the other. Kernberg (1984, 1988) regards the
depressive--masochistic personality as one of the most common types of
neurotic character. I am emphasizing the differences between the two
psychologies because, especially at the borderline and psychotic levels,
they require significantly contrasting therapeutic styles. Much damage
can be done when, with the best intentions, a therapist misunderstands a
predominantly masochistic person as basically depressive, and vice
versa. I recently found that Richard Friedman (1991), coming from a
different disciplinary tradition from mine, has made similar
observations, distinguishing depression that is "integrally associated
with characterological masochism" from depression that is not, and
arguing that "masochistic depressed patients constitute one important,
presently hidden, subgroup among those who are chronically depressed.
They are particularly likely to be found among chronically depressed
patients whose treatment response is suboptimal" (p. 11).

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT IN MASOCHISM**

In interesting contrast with depressive conditions, self-defeating
patterns have not been subject to extensive empirical research, possibly
because the concept of masochism has not been widely embraced beyond the
psychoanalytic community. Consequently, little is known about
constitutional contributions to masochistic personality organization.
Except for Krafft-Ebing's (1900) conclusion that sexual masochism is
genetic and some speculations about the role of oral aggression (e.g.,
L. Stone, 1979), few hypotheses have been made about innate temperament.
Clinical experience suggests that the person who becomes
characterologically masochistic may be (as may also be true of those who
develop a depressive character) more constitutionally sociable or
object-seeking than, say, the withdrawing infant who inclines toward a
schizoid style.

The question of constitutional vulnerability to masochism is thus still
open. A topic that has claimed more professional attention concerns
gender. Many scholarly observers (e.g., Galenson, 1988) have the
impression that childhood trauma and maltreatment have different effects
on children of different sexes: abused girls tend to develop a
masochistic pattern, whereas abused boys are more likely to identify
with the aggressor and to develop in a more sadistic direction. Like all
generalizations, this one has many exceptions---masochistic men and
sadistic women are not rare. But perhaps the greater physical strength
of adult males, and the anticipation of that advantage by little boys,
disposes them to master trauma by proactive means and leaves their
sisters with a disposition toward stoicism, self-sacrifice, and moral
victory through physical defeat---time-honored weapons of the weak.
Differential secretions of hormones such as testosterone, dopamine, and
oxytocin may also play a role in such sex differences.

The affective world of the masochistic person is similar to that of the
depressive, with a critical addendum. Conscious sadness and deep
unconscious guilt feelings are common, but in addition, most masochistic
people can easily feel anger, resentment, and even indignation on their
own behalf. In such states, self-defeating people have more in common
with those disposed to paranoia than with their depressive counterparts.
In other words, many masochistic people see themselves as suffering, but
unfairly; as victimized or just ill-starred, cursed through no fault of
their own (as in "bad karma"). Unlike those with simply depressive
themes, who are at some level resigned to their unhappy fate because it
is all they think they deserve, masochistic people may rail against it
like Shakespeare's lover who troubled deaf Heaven with his bootless
cries.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN MASOCHISM**

Like depressive people, masochistic ones may employ the defenses of
introjection, turning against the self, and idealization. In addition,
they rely heavily on acting out (by definition, since the essence of
masochism lies in self-defeating actions). Moral masochists also use
moralization (again, definitionally) to cope with their inner
experiences. For reasons that I will cover shortly, people with
self-defeating personalities are more active in general than depressive
individuals, and their behavior reflects their need to do something with
their depressive feelings that counteracts states of demoralization,
passivity, and isolation.

The hallmark of masochistic personality is defensive acting out in ways
that risk harm. Most unconsciously driven, self-defeating actions
include the element of an effort to master an expected painful situation
(R. M. Loewenstein, 1955). If one is convinced that, for example, all
authority figures will sooner or later capriciously punish those who
depend on them, and if one is in a chronic state of anxiety waiting for
this to happen, then provoking the expected punishment will relieve the
anxiety and provide reassurance about one's power: At least the time and
place of one's suffering is self-chosen. Therapists with a
control--mastery orientation (e.g., Silberschatz, 2005) refer to this
behavior as "passive-into-active transformation."

Freud (1920) was initially impressed with the power of what he called
the repetition compulsion in instances of this type. Life is unfair:
Those who suffer most in childhood usually suffer most as adults, and in
scenarios that uncannily mirror their childhood circumstances. To add
insult to injury, the adult situations seem to observers to be of the
sufferer's own making, though that is hardly the conscious experience of
that person. As Sampson, Weiss, and their colleagues have pointed out
(e.g., Weiss, Sampson, & the Mount Zion Psychotherapy Research Group,
1986), repetitive patterns characterize everyone's behavior; if one is
lucky enough to have had a safe and affirming childhood, one's
repetitive patterns are fairly invisible, since they fit comfortably
with realistic opportunities in life and tend to reproduce emotionally
positive situations. When one has had a frightening, negligent, or
abusive background, the need to recreate those circumstances in order to
try to master them psychologically can be both visible and tragic.

A self-cutting patient I treated for many years eventually located the
sources of her masochism in early abuse by her mother, including once
when this deeply disturbed woman had, in a blind rage, cut my patient
with a knife. As memories came back, and as she grieved over her prior
helplessness and began discriminating between present and past
realities, her self-mutilation gradually ceased. But not before she had
scarred her skin irreversibly and had created traumatic scenes for other
people. Because she was at the psychotic level of personality
organization, the work was slow and precarious, though ultimately
successful.

A much healthier woman I worked with used to announce her latest
financial extravagances to her frugal husband whenever their
relationship began to feel warm and comfortable. This would reliably
send him into a fury. We figured out together that this provocative
habit revealed the enduring power of a conclusion she had drawn as a
child that whenever things are calm, a storm is about to break. When her
marriage was going well, she would begin unconsciously to worry that
like her explosive father, her husband was about to destroy their
happiness with an outburst. She was thus behaving in a way that she
viscerally knew would bring it on, in order to get it over with and
restore a pleasurable connection. Unfortunately, from her husband's
standpoint she was not reinstating pleasure, she was causing pain.

Reik (1941) explored several dimensions of masochistic acting out,
including (1) provocation (as in the preceding vignette), (2)
appeasement ("I'm already suffering, so please withhold any further
punishment"), (3) exhibitionism ("Pay attention: I'm in pain"), and (4)
deflection of guilt ("See what you made me do!"). Most of us use minor
masochistic defenses frequently for one or more of these reasons.
Therapists in training who approach supervision in a flood of
self-criticism are often using a masochistic strategy to hedge their
bets: If my supervisor thinks I made a major error with my client, I've
already shown that I'm aware of it and have been punished enough; if
not, I get reassured and exonerated.

Self-defeating behavior in relational masochism can be understood as a
defense against separation anxiety (Bach, 1999). It has a way of
engaging others and involving them in the masochistic process. Once in a
therapy group I belonged to, a member kept bringing the group's
criticism down upon himself in a relentlessly predictable way, of which
he seemed naively unaware. When confronted with the evidence that his
whining, self-abasing stance evoked exasperation and attack from others,
he became uncharacteristically subdued and admitted, "I'd rather be hit
than not touched at all." I say more about this dynamic in the object
relations section.

With those whose masochism is more introjective, moralization can be an
exasperating defense. Often they are much more interested in winning a
moral victory than in solving a practical problem. It took me weeks of
work to get one self-defeating patient to consider writing a letter to
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) that would get her the large refund
to which she was legally entitled. She spent her therapy hours trying to
convince me that the IRS had handled her tax return ineptly---which was
emphatically true but completely beside the point if the point was to
get her money back. She much preferred my sympathetic indignation to my
attempts to help her get recompensed. Left to herself, she would have
gone on collecting and bemoaning injustices rather than eliminating one.

Part of the dynamic here seems to be a special way of handling the
introjective depressive conviction that one is bad. The need to get
listeners to validate that it is others who are guilty can be great
enough to overwhelm the practical objectives to which most people give
priority. One reason that children with a stepparent---even a kind and
well-meaning one---tend to behave masochistically (acting resentful or
defiant, and inciting punitive responses) may pertain to unconscious
guilt. Youngsters who have lost a parent tend to worry that their
badness drove that parent away. Preferring a sense of guilty power to
helpless impotence, they try to convince themselves and others that it
is the substitute parent who is bad, thus deflecting attention from
their own felt wrongdoing. They may provoke until the stepparent's
behavior supports their conviction.

These dynamics may explain why it is often hard to influence a
stepfamily system in a purely behavioral way. The agenda of an angry and
guilt-driven party may have much more to do with continuing to suffer
(so that someone else is seen as culpable) than with improving the
family atmosphere. This phenomenon is of course not exclusive to
children or to reconstituted families. Any elementary school teacher has
a reservoir of anecdotes about biological parents who presented
themselves as long-suffering martyrs to their child's misbehavior yet
could not implement any suggestions for improving it. One gets the
feeling that their need to be confirmed in a perception of the child as
bad, and in their own role as enduring stolidly, outranks other
considerations.

Another frequent defense is denial. Masochistically organized people
frequently demonstrate by their words and behavior that they are
suffering, or that someone is abusing them, yet they may deny that they
are feeling any particular discomfort and protest the good intentions of
the perpetrator. "I'm sure she means well and has my best interests at
heart," one of my clients once remarked about an employer who obviously
disliked him and had humiliated him in front of all his colleagues. "How
did you feel about her treatment of you?" I asked. "Oh, I figured she
was trying to teach me something important," he responded, "so I thanked
her for her efforts."

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN MASOCHISTIC PSYCHOLOGY**

Emmanuel Hammer was fond of saying that a masochistic person is a
depressive who still has hope. What he meant is that in the etiology of
masochistic as opposed to depressive conditions, the deprivation or
traumatic loss that led to a depressive reaction was not so devastating
that the child simply gave up on the idea of being loved (see Berliner,
1958; Bernstein, 1983; Lax, 1977; Salzman, 1962; Spitz, 1953). Many
parents who are barely functional can nevertheless be jarred into action
if their child is hurt or endangered. Their children learn that although
they generally feel abandoned and therefore worthless, if they are
suffering enough, they may get some care (Thompson, 1959). To a child,
any parental attention can feel safer than neglect, a reality that
Wurmser captured in a book titled *Torment Me but Don't Abandon Me*
(2007).

One woman I assessed had an extraordinary history of injury, illness,
and misfortune. She had also had a psychotically depressed mother. When
I asked for her earliest memory, she cited an incident from age 3 when
she had knocked over an iron, burned herself, and received a rare
infusion of maternal solace. Usually the history of a masochistic person
sounds like the history of a depressive one, with unmourned losses,
critical or guilt-inducing caregivers, role reversals where the child
feels responsible for the parents, instances of trauma and abuse, and
depressive models (Dorpat, 1982). Yet if one listens carefully, one also
hears a theme of people having been responsive when the client was in
deep enough trouble. Whereas depressive people feel that there is no one
there for them, masochistic ones may feel that if only they can
demonstrate sufficiently their need for sympathy or care, they may not
have to endure complete emotional abandonment.

Esther Menaker (e.g., 1953) was one of the first analysts to describe
how the origins of masochism lie in unresolved dependency issues and
fears of being alone. "Please don't leave me; I'll hurt myself in your
absence" is the essence of many masochistic communications, as it was in
the example of my colleague's daughter who threatened to destroy all of
her toys. In a fascinating research project on the psychologies of
severely and repeatedly battered women, the ones who drive women's
shelter personnel to tear their hair out because they keep returning to
partners who barely stop short of killing them, Ann Rasmussen (1988)
learned that these gravely endangered people fear abandonment much more
than they fear pain or even death. She notes:

::: calibre1
 
:::

When separated from their batterers, most of the subjects fell into an
abyss of such acute despair that they succumbed to Major Depressions and
could barely function\.... Many described being incapable of feeding
themselves, getting out of bed, and interacting with others. As one
subject put it, "when we were apart I didn't know how to get up in the
morning \... my body forgot how to eat, each bite was like a rock in my
stomach." The depths to which they sank when alone were unrivaled by any
states of distress they experienced when with their abusive mates. (p.
220)

 

It is not uncommon to learn from masochistic patients that the only time
a parent was emotionally invested in them was when they were being
punished. An association of attachment and pain is inevitable under
these circumstances. Teasing, that peculiar combination of affection and
cruelty, can also breed masochism (Brenman, 1952). Especially when
punishment has been excessive, abusive, or sadistic, the child learns
that suffering is the price of relationship. And children crave
relationship even more than physical safety. Victims of childhood abuse
usually internalize their parents' rationalization for the mistreatment,
because it feels better to be beaten than to be neglected. Another
subject in Rasmussen's (1988) study confided: "I have had the feeling I
wished I was little again. I wish I was still up under my mother's care.
I wish I could be whipped now, because whipping is a way of making
people listen and to know in the future. If I had a mother to whip me
more, I could keep myself in line" (p. 223).

One other aspect of the history of many people whose personalities
become masochistically structured is that they have been powerfully
rewarded for enduring tribulation gallantly. When she was 15, a woman I
know lost her mother to cancer of the colon. The mother lived at home in
the months she was dying, wasting away in an increasingly comatose and
incontinent state. Her daughter took over the role of nurse, changing
the dressings on her colostomy, washing the bloody sheets daily, and
turning her mother's body to prevent bedsores. The mother's mother,
deeply touched by such devotion, expounded fulsomely on how brave and
unselfish her granddaughter was, how God must be smiling on her, how
uncomplainingly she gave up normal adolescent pursuits to care for her
dying mother. All this was true, but the long-term effect of her having
received so much reinforcement for self-sacrifice, and so little
encouragement to take some time off to meet her own needs, set her up
for a lifetime of masochism: She handled every subsequent developmental
challenge by trying to demonstrate her generosity and forbearance.
Others reacted to her as tiresomely self-righteous, and they chafed at
her repeated efforts to mother them.

In their everyday relationships, self-defeating people tend to attach to
friends of the misery-loves-company variety, and if they are of the
moral masochistic variety of sufferer, they gravitate toward those who
will validate their sense of injustice. They also tend---battered
partners being only the most extreme example---to recreate relationships
in which they are treated with insensitivity or even sadism. Some
sadomasochistic attachments seem to be a result of the self-defeating
person's having chosen a mate with a preexisting tendency to abuse; in
other instances it appears that the person enduring mistreatment has
connected with an adequately kind partner and managed to bring out the
worst in him or her.

Nydes (1963) argued (cf. Bak, 1946) that people with masochistic
personalities have certain commonalities with paranoid people, and that
some individuals swing cyclically from masochistic to paranoid
orientations. The source of this affinity is their common orientation to
threat. Both paranoid and self-defeating people feel in constant danger
of attacks on their self-esteem, security, and physical well-being. The
paranoid solution in the face of this anxiety is something like "I'll
attack you before you attack me," whereas the masochistic response is
"I'll attack myself first so you don't have to do it." Both masochistic
and paranoid people are unconsciously preoccupied with the relationship
between power and love. The paranoid person sacrifices love for the sake
of a sense of power; the masochistic one does the reverse. Especially at
the borderline level of personality organization, these different
solutions may present as alternating self-states, leaving a therapist
confused as to whether to understand the patient as a frightened victim
or a menacing antagonist.

Masochistic dynamics may permeate the sexual life of someone with a
self-defeating personality (Kernberg, 1988), but many
characterologically masochistic people are not sexual masochists (in
fact, whereas their masturbation fantasies may contain masochistic
elements in order to magnify excitement, they are often turned off
sexually by any note of aggression in their partner). Conversely, many
people whose particular sexual history gave them a masochistic erotic
pattern are not self-defeating personalities. One unfortunate legacy of
early drive theory, which connected sexuality so intimately with
personality structure at the conceptual level, has been a glib
assumption that sexual dynamics and personality dynamics are always
isomorphic. Often, they are. But, perhaps luckily, people are frequently
more complex.

**THE MASOCHISTIC SELF**

The self-representation of the masochistic person is also comparable, up
to a point, with that of the depressive: unworthy, guilty, rejectable,
deserving of punishment. In addition, there may be a pervasive and
sometimes conscious sense of being needy and incomplete rather than
simply bereft, and a belief that one is doomed to be misunderstood,
unappreciated, and mistreated. People with a moral--masochistic
personality structure often impress others as grandiose and scornful,
exalted in their suffering and scornful of those lesser mortals who
could not endure equivalent tribulation with so much grace. Although
this attitude makes moral masochists look as if they are enjoying their
suffering, a better formulation would be that they have found a
compensatory basis in it for supporting their self-esteem (Cooper, 1988;
Kohut, 1977; Schafer, 1984; Stolorow, 1975).

Sometimes when masochistic clients are recounting instances of
mistreatment by others, one sees traces of a sly smile on their
otherwise aggrieved features. It is easy to infer that they are feeling
some sadistic pleasure in defaming their tormenters so soundly. This may
be another source of the common assumption that self-defeating people
enjoy their misery. It is more accurate to say that they derive some
secondary gain from their attachment-through-suffering solutions to
their interpersonal dilemmas. For those who tilt toward moral masochism,
they may be fighting back by not fighting back, exposing their abusers
as morally inferior for showing their aggression, and savoring the moral
victory that this stratagem achieves.

Those who lean more relationally may be smiling because their
masochistic behavior is expected to elicit more connection with the
person to whom they are relating. Psychiatrists are painfully familiar
with the returning patient who comes in looking disappointed, but with a
tiny smile at the corner of the mouth, while announcing, "That
medication didn't work either, it seems." Most therapists are familiar
with clients who complain piteously about mistreatment by a boss,
relative, friend, or mate, yet when encouraged to do something to remedy
their situation, look disappointed, change the subject, and switch their
grievances to another arena. When self-esteem is enhanced, and/or a
relationship is felt to be reinforced, by bearing misfortune
courageously, and when these goals are seen as less achievable if one
acts on one's own behalf ("selfishly"), it is difficult to reframe an
unpleasant situation as requiring corrective measures.

Unlike most depressively organized people, who tend to retreat into
loneliness, masochistic individuals may handle their felt badness by
projecting it onto others and then behaving in a way that elicits
evidence that the badness is outside rather than inside. This is another
way in which self-defeating patterns and paranoid defenses are similar.
Masochistic people usually have less primitive terror than paranoid
ones, however, and do not require as many defensive transformations of
affect in order to eject their unwanted aspects. And unlike paranoids,
who may be reclusive, they need other people close at hand to be the
repositories of their disowned sadistic inclinations. A paranoid person
can resolve anxiety by attributing projected malevolence to vague forces
or distant persecutors, but a masochistic one attaches it to someone
nearby, whose observable behavior demonstrates the rightness of the
projector's belief in the moral turpitude of the object.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH MASOCHISTIC PATIENTS**

Masochistic clients tend to reenact with a therapist the drama of the
child who needs care but can only get it if he or she is demonstrably
suffering. The therapist may be seen as a parent who must be persuaded
to save and comfort the patient, who is too weak, threatened, and
unprotected to handle life's challenges without help. If the client has
gotten into some truly disturbing, dangerous situations, and seems
clueless as to how to get extricated, it is not uncommon for a therapist
to feel that before treatment can begin, the person's safety must be
secured. In less extreme examples of masochistic presentations, there is
still some communication of helplessness in the face of life's insults,
along with evidence that the only way the client knows how to cope with
difficulty is by trying to be tolerant, stoic, or even cheerful in the
face of misfortune.

Masochistic clients often try to persuade the therapist that they need
to be, and deserve to be, rescued. Coexisting with these aims is the
fear that the therapist is an uncaring, distracted, selfish, critical,
or abusive authority who will expose the client's worthlessness, blame
the victim for being victimized, and abandon the relationship. The
rescue agendas and fears of maltreatment may be either conscious or
unconscious, ego syntonic or ego alien, respectively, depending on the
client's level of organization. In addition, self-defeating people live
in a state of dread, almost always unconscious, that an observer will
discern their shortcomings and reject them for their sins. To combat
such fears, they try to make obvious both their helplessness and their
efforts to be good.

There are two common countertransferences to masochistic dynamics:
countermasochism and sadism. Usually both are present. The most frequent
pattern of practitioner response, especially for newer therapists, is
first to be excessively (and masochistically) generous, trying to
persuade the patient that one appreciates his or her suffering and that
one can be trusted not to attack. Then, when that approach only seems to
make the patient more helpless and wretched, the therapist notices
ego-alien feelings of irritation, followed by fantasies of sadistic
retaliation toward the client for being so intractably resistant to
help.

Because therapists often have depressive psychologies, and because it is
easy---especially early in treatment---to misunderstand a predominantly
masochistic person as a basically depressive one, clinicians often seek
to do for the patient what would be helpful to themselves if they were
in the patient role. They emphasize in their interpretations and their
conduct that they are available, that they appreciate the extent of the
person's unhappiness, and that they will take extra pains to be of help.
Therapists have been known to reduce the fee, schedule extra sessions,
take phone calls around the clock, and make other special accommodations
in the hope of increasing a therapeutic alliance with a patient who is
stuck in a dismal morass. Such actions, which might facilitate work with
a depressive person, are counterproductive with a masochistic one in
that they invite regression. The patient learns that self-defeating
practices pay off: The more pronounced the suffering, the more giving
the response. The therapist learns that the harder he or she tries, the
worse things get---a perfect mirror of the masochistic person's
experience of the world.

I have observed in myself and my students that we all learn the hard way
how to work with masochistic clients, how to avoid acting out
masochistically and suffering upsetting sadistic reactions to people for
whom we would rather feel sympathy. Most therapists recall vividly the
client with whom they learned to set limits on masochistic regression
rather than to reinforce it. In my own case, I am embarrassed to report
that in the flush of a rescue fantasy toward one of my first deeply
disturbed patients, a paranoid--masochistic young man in the psychotic
range, I was so eager to prove I was a good object that, on hearing his
sad story about how there was no way for him to get to work anymore, I
lent him my car. Not surprisingly, he drove it into a tree.

In addition to the common inclination to support rather than confront
masochistic reactions, therapists usually find it hard to admit to
sadistic urges. Because feelings that go unacknowledged are likely to be
acted out, this inhibition can be dangerous. The sensitivity of
consumers of mental health services to the possibility of therapists'
blaming the victim is probably not accidental; it may derive from the
sense of many former patients that they were subjected to unconscious
sadism from therapists when they were in a vulnerable role. If one has
extended oneself to the point of resentment with a client who only
becomes more dysphoric and whiny, it gets easy to rationalize either a
punitive interpretation or a rejection ("Perhaps this person needs a
different therapist").

Masochistic clients can be infuriating. There is nothing more toxic to a
therapist's self-esteem than a client who radiates the message, "Just
try to help me---I'll only get worse." This negative therapeutic
reaction (Freud, 1937) has long been related to unconscious masochism,
but understanding that intellectually and going through it emotionally
are two different things. It is hard to maintain an attitude of benign
support in the face of someone's stubbornly self-abasing behavior (see
Frank et al., 1952, on the "help-rejecting complainer"). Even in writing
this chapter I am aware of slipping into a mildly affronted tone as I
try to describe the masochistic process; some analysts (e.g., Bergler,
1949) writing about self-defeating patients have sounded outright
contemptuous. The ubiquity of such feelings highlights the need for
careful self-monitoring. Masochistic and sadistic countertransference
reactions need not burden treatment unduly, though a therapist who
denies feeling them will almost certainly run into trouble.

Finally, because masochistic patients tend to view their
self-destructive behaviors with emotional denial of their implications,
therapists are left holding the anxiety that would normally accompany
the danger of self-harm. I have often noticed, as I try to explore the
possible consequences of a masochistic person's behavior, that as I am
getting more anxious about what the client is risking, he or she is
getting more casual, matter-of-fact, and minimizing. "Were you worried
that you might contract HIV?" may elicit a vague "I don't think that's
going to happen" or "That was just one time" or "Maybe a little, but
that's not what I want to talk about right now."

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF MASOCHISTIC PERSONALITY**

Freud and many of his early followers wrote about masochistic dynamics,
describing their origins and functions, their unconscious objectives,
and their hidden meanings, but without comment on particular treatment
implications. Esther Menaker (1942) was the first to observe that many
aspects of classical treatment, such as the patient's lying supine and
the analyst's interpreting in an authoritative manner, can be
experienced by masochistic clients as replicating humiliating
interactions of dominance and submission. She recommended technical
modifications such as face-to-face treatment, emphasis on the real
relationship as well as on the transference, and avoidance of all traces
of omnipotence in the analyst's tone. Without the elimination of all
potentially sadomasochistic features of the therapy situation, Menaker
felt that patients would be at risk of feeling only a repetition of
subservience, compliance, and the sacrifice of autonomy for closeness.

This argument still holds, though perhaps more in the spirit than the
letter of Menaker's (1942) recommendations. Her remarks about the couch
have become somewhat moot, since in current psychoanalytic practice,
only high-functioning patients would be encouraged to lie down and free
associate (and presumably the neurotic-level masochistic person would
have a strong enough observing ego to appreciate that relaxing on a
couch does not equate to accepting a humiliating defeat). But her stress
on the centrality of the real relationship stands. Because the
masochistic person urgently needs an exemplar of healthy self-assertion,
the quality of the therapist as a human being, expressed in the way he
or she structures the therapeutic collaboration, is critical to the
prognosis of a self-defeating patient. The therapist's unwillingness to
be exploited or to extend generosity to the point of inevitable
resentment may open up whole new vistas to someone who was brought up to
sacrifice all self-regarding concerns for the sake of others. Hence, the
first "rule" for treating self-defeating clients is not to model
masochism.

Years ago, one of my supervisors, knowing I had a commitment to serving
people of limited means, told me that it was fine to let most patients
run up a bill if they suffered financial reverses, but stressed that I
should never be lenient in this way with a masochistic client. As I seem
to be constitutionally incapable of taking good advice until I make the
mistake that illuminates its wisdom, I disregarded his warning in the
case of a diligent, earnest, and appealing man who convincingly
described a money crisis that seemed outside his control. I offered to
"carry" him until he got back on his feet financially. He proceeded to
get more and more incompetent with money, I got more and more aggrieved,
and eventually we had to rectify my mistake with a headache of a plan
for repayment. I have not made this error since, but I notice that my
students typically learn this piece of wisdom through bitter experience,
just as I did. It would not be so upsetting if the therapist were the
only one to pay the price of misguided generosity, but as the harm to
the patient becomes obvious, one's confidence as a healer can suffer as
much as one's pocketbook.

It is thus no service to self-defeating clients to demonstrate
"therapeutic" self-sacrifice. It makes them feel guilty and undeserving
of improvement. They can scarcely learn how to exert their prerogatives
if the therapist exemplifies self-effacement. Rather than trying to give
a masochistic person a break with the fee, one should charge an amount
that is adequate recompense for the skill needed to work with a
challenging dynamic, and then receive payment in the spirit of feeling
entitled to it. Nydes (1963) would intentionally show masochistic
patients his pleasure in being paid, fondling their bills happily or
pocketing their checks with obvious relish.

The resistance of most therapists to showing appropriate amounts of
self-concern and self-protectiveness, despite the clear need of
masochistic patients to have a model of reasonable self-care, probably
comes not only from possible internal inhibitions about
self-interest---always a good bet with therapists---but also from
accurate forebodings that self-defeating patients will react to their
limits with anger and criticism. In other words, they will be punished
for selfishness, in the same way many masochistic people were punished
by their early objects. This is true. It is also to be hoped for.
Self-destructive people do not need to learn that they are tolerated
when they smile bravely; they need to find out that they are accepted
even when they are losing their temper.

Moreover, they need to understand that anger is natural when one does
not get what one wants and can be simply understood as such by others.
It does not have to be fortified with self-righteous moralism and
exhibitions of suffering. Masochistic people may believe they are
entitled to feel hostility only when they have been clearly wronged, a
presumption that costs them countless hours of unnecessary psychological
exertion. When they feel some normal disappointment, anger, or
frustration, they may either deny or moralize in order not to feel
shamefully selfish. When therapists act self-concerned, and treat their
masochistic patients' reactive outrage as natural and interesting, some
of these patients' most cherished and damaging internal categories get
reshuffled.

For this reason, experienced therapists may advise "No rachmones" (no
expressions of sympathy) with masochistic patients (Hammer, 1990; Nydes,
1963). This does not mean that one blames them for their difficulties,
or returns sadism for their masochism, but it does mean that instead of
communications that translate into "You poor thing!" one tactfully asks,
"How did you get yourself into that situation?" The emphasis should
always be on the client's capacity to improve things. These
ego-building, noninfantilizing responses tend to irritate self-defeating
people, who may believe that the only way to elicit warmth is to
demonstrate helplessness. Such interventions provide opportunities for
the therapist to welcome the expression of normal anger, to show
acceptance of the client's negative feelings, and to feel relief in an
increase in authenticity.

Similarly, one should not rescue. One of my most disturbed masochistic
patients, whose symptoms ranged from bulimia to multiple addictions to
anxieties of psychotic proportions, used to go into a paralysis of panic
whenever she feared that an expression of her anger had alienated me. On
one such occasion, she became so frantic that she persuaded the staff of
the local mental health center to hospitalize her and signed herself in
for 72 hours. Within half a day, having calmed down and now wanting no
part of an in-patient experience, she got a psychiatrist to agree that
if she obtained my permission, she could be discharged early. "You knew
you were signing yourself in for 3 days when you did this," I responded,
"so I would expect you to keep your commitment." She was livid. But
years later, she confided that that had been the turning point in her
therapy, because I had treated her like a grown-up, a person capable of
living with the consequences of her actions.

In the same vein, one should not buy into guilt and self-doubt. One can
feel powerful pressure from masochistic clients to embrace their
self-indicting psychology. Guilt-provoking messages are often strongest
around separations. A person whose self-destructiveness escalates just
when the therapist is about to take a vacation (a common scenario) is
unconsciously insisting that the therapist is not allowed to enjoy
something without agonizing over how it is hurting the patient.
Behaviors that translate into "Look what you made me suffer!" or "Look
what you made me do!" are best handled by empathic reflection of the
client's pain, combined with a cheerful unwillingness to let it rain on
one's parade.

Setting an example that one takes care of oneself without feeling guilt
about the neurotic reactions of others may elicit moralistic horror from
masochistic people, but it may inspire them to experiment with being a
bit more self-respectful. I originally learned this while working with a
group of young mothers whose shared masochism was formidable (McWilliams
& Stein, 1987). My co-leader was the target of oppressive nonverbal
broadcasts that her upcoming vacation was wounding the group members.
These messages were delivered with disingenuous maternal reassurances
that she should not feel too bad about forsaking them. In response, she
announced that she did not feel the slightest bit guilty, that she was
looking forward to having a good time and not having to think about the
group at all. The women became incensed but were animated and honest
again, as if pulled out of a quagmire of deadness, hypocrisy, and
passive aggression.

It is often helpful to resist the anxiety one feels about a masochistic
patient in a dangerous situation, and to address the upsetting material
in a casual, dispassionate tone. My friend Kit Riley taught me that when
one is trying to help a woman who keeps going back to a dangerous
abuser, expressing anxiety only allows the patient to feel magically
"rid" of worry---now it is in the therapist, not her. Instead, it can be
valuable to say, in a serious but matter-of-fact tone:

::: calibre1
 
:::

"I get that he doesn't want to kill you, and that he's contrite after he
attacks you, and that that shows his love, and that you love him and
want to go back. Fine. But of course we have to take seriously the
possibility that without intending to, he'll get into a state in which
he *does* kill you. So we should address this danger. Do you have a
will? Have you talked to your kids about who would take care of them if
you were murdered? Do you have life insurance? If your partner is the
beneficiary, you might want to change that. . . . "

 

When the therapist refuses to take on anxiety and simply talks reality,
such a client tends to feel in herself the anxiety she has failed to put
into her therapist and to have to face the implications of her
masochistic behavior.

Timing, of course, is critical. If one comes on too strong too fast,
before a reliable working alliance is in place, the patient will feel
criticized and blamed. The art of conveying a sympathetic appreciation
that the suffering of masochistic people is truly beyond their conscious
control (despite its appearing to be self-chosen) and at the same time
adopting a confrontational stance, one that respects their ability to
make their volition conscious and change their circumstances, cannot be
taught in a textbook. But any reasonably caring practitioner develops an
intuition about how and when to confront. If one's efforts wound the
client beyond a therapeutic level of discomfort, one should apologize
(E. S. Wolf, 1988), but without excessive self-recrimination.

In addition to behaving in ways that counteract the pathological
expectations of masochistic patients, the therapist should actively
interpret evidence for irrational but prized unconscious beliefs such as
"If I suffer enough, I'll get love," or "The best way to deal with my
enemies is to demonstrate that they are abusers," or "The only reason
something good happened to me was that I was sufficiently
self-punitive." It is common for self-defeating people to have magical
beliefs that connect assertiveness or confidence with punishment, and
self-abasement with eventual triumph. One finds in most religious
practices and folk traditions a connection between suffering and reward,
and masochistic people often support their pathology uncritically with
these ideas. Such beliefs may console us, softening our outrage about
suffering that may be both capricious and unambiguously destructive.
However, when these ideas get in the way of taking action that might be
effective, they do more harm than good.

Among the contributions of control--mastery theory to psychoanalytic
understanding is its emphasis on pathogenic beliefs and on the client's
repeated efforts to test them. In addition to passing these tests by
such means as refusing to act masochistically in the role of therapist,
the clinician must help the client become aware of what the tests are,
and what they reveal about the person's underlying ideas about the
nature of life, human beings, the pursuit of happiness, and so on. This
part of treatment, though not as emotionally challenging as controlling
one's countertransferences, is the hardest to effect. Omnipotent
fantasies behind masochistic behaviors die hard. One can always find
evidence in random events that one's successes have been punished and
one's sufferings rewarded.

The therapist's persistance in exposing irrational beliefs often makes
the difference between a "transference cure"---the temporary reduction
of masochistic behaviors based on idealization of and identification
with the therapist's self-respecting attitude---and a deeper and lasting
movement away from self-abnegation.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

As I noted earlier, there is a masochistic component in all the
personality configurations discussed in this book---at least when they
approach a pathological level of defensive rigidity or developmental
arrest sufficient to establish them as character *disorders* rather than
simply character. But the masochistic function of any type of pattern is
not identical to masochism as an organizing personality theme. The types
of individual psychology most easily confused with the kind of
characterological masochism covered here are depressive and dissociative
psychologies.

**Masochistic versus Depressive Personality**

Many people have a combination of depressive and masochistic dynamics,
and are reasonably regarded as depressive--masochistic characters. In my
experience, however, in most individuals the balance between these
elements tilts in one direction or the other. Because the optimal
therapeutic style for each differs, it is important to discriminate
between these two depressively toned psychologies. The predominantly
depressive person needs above all else to learn that the therapist will
not judge, reject, or abandon, and will, unlike the internalized objects
that maintain depression, be particularly available when the client is
suffering. The more masochistic person needs to find out that
self-assertion, not helpless suffering, can elicit warmth and
acceptance, and that the therapist, unlike the parent who could be
brought to reluctant attention if a disaster was in progress, is not
particularly interested in the details of the patient's current misery.

If one treats a depressive person as masochistic, one may provoke
increased depression and even suicide, as the client will feel both
blamed and abandoned. If one treats a masochistic person as depressive,
one may reinforce self-destructiveness. At the most concrete level, most
experienced clinicians have found that when antidepressant medication is
given to someone with a masochistic personality, even if that person has
diagnosable Axis I depression, the medicine does very little other than
to feed the patient's pathogenic belief that to feel better, one needs
authorities and their magic. When seeing a person with both depressive
and masochistic tendencies, the therapist must keep assessing whether a
more depressive or more masochistic dynamic is currently active, so that
the tone of one's interventions is appropriate to the primary defensive
process in the patient.

**Masochistic versus Dissociative Psychology**

Over the past several decades there has been an explosion in our
knowledge about dissociation. Acts that we used to understand
exclusively according to theories of masochism have been reinterpreted
in more specific ways for patients with a history of traumatic abuse and
neglect (Gabriel & Beratis, 1997; Howell, 1996). Many people are subject
to dissociated states in which they repeat, symbolically or concretely,
prior harm to themselves. The most dramatic exemplar of a vulnerability
to dissociated self-injury is the client who switches self-states by
self-hypnotic means and then engages in a reenactment of early tortures.
Investigation may reveal the existence of an alter personality,
identified with the original tormentor, for whom the main personality is
amnesic.

The general dynamic in such cases is indeed masochistic, but if the
therapist misses the fact that the self-injury was carried out in a
dissociated state by a part of the person not always in consciousness,
interpretations will be futile. [Chapter 15](#part0025.html){.calibre9}
addresses treatment for dissociative people; for now, readers should
note that especially in more bizarre cases of self-harm, the patient
should be asked matter-of-factly if he or she remembers doing it. If the
client does recall inflicting the injuries, one can inquire about the
degree to which he or she felt de-personalized or disembodied. Until
such a patient has access to the state of mind in which a
self-destructive act was committed, interventions aimed at reducing
dissociation take priority over interpretations of masochism.

**SUMMARY**

I have given a brief history of the concept of masochism and related
self-defeating patterns, distinguishing them from lay conceptions of
masochism as joy in pain. I differentiated moral from relational
masochism and mentioned gender predispositions (to masochism in women
and sadism in men) while stressing that masochistic personality
organization is common in people of both sexes. I construed masochism as
involving the main depressive affects plus anger and resentment, and
noted that masochistic ego processes include the depressive defenses
plus acting out, moralization, and denial. I argued that masochistic
relationships may parallel early experiences with objects who attended
to the growing child negligently or abusively, yet with occasional
warmth when he or she was suffering. The masochistic self is similar to
that of the depressive self, with the addition that self-esteem is
regulated through enduring mistreatment bravely.

I characterized transferences of self-defeating patients as reflecting
wishes to be valued and rescued, and I discussed countertransferences of
masochism and sadism. In terms of treatment style, I recommended
attention to the real relationship (specifically the therapist's
modeling of healthy self-regard), respect for the patient's capability
and responsibility for problem solving, and persistence in exposing,
challenging, and modifying pathogenic beliefs. Finally, I distinguished
masochism from depressive and dissociative psychologies.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

Reik's (1941) study of moral masochism, though dated, is still worth
reading and is not so mired in difficult metapsychology that a beginner
would be put off. Stolorow's (1975) essay examines masochism from a self
psychology perspective. Cooper's (1988) article on the
narcissistic--masochistic character is a classic. Jack and Kerry Kelly
Novick (e.g., 1991) have examined the concept developmentally in
readable ways. An edited volume on masochism by Glick and Meyers (1988)
includes several good essays, most of which concern characterological
patterns; *Essential Papers on Masochism* (Hanley, 1995) is also a nice
compilation. The books I cited in this chapter by Leon Wurmser (2007)
and Sheldon Bach (1999) are both excellent. Finally, I strongly
recommend the relational classic by Emmanuel Ghent (1990) for a subtle
and wide-ranging exploration of how different the valuable experience of
surrender is from masochistic submission.

I did a DVD in the *Master Clinicians* series for the American
Psychological Association (McWilliams, 2007) that involved an interview
with a patient I saw as having a predominantly masochistic personality.
This is available at *www.apa.org/videos.*

[]{#part0023.html}

**13**

Obsessive and\
Compulsive Personalities

[P]{.dropcap}eople with personalities organized around thinking and
doing abound in Western societies. The idealization of reason and the
faith in progress through human action that were hallmarks of
Enlightenment thinking still permeate our collective psychology. Western
civilizations, in conspicuous contrast to some Asian and Third World
societies, esteem scientific rationality and "can-do" pragmatism above
most other attributes. Many individuals thus place the highest value on
their logical faculties and their abilities to solve practical problems.
Pursuing pleasure and attaining pride by thinking and doing are so
normative in our society that we scarcely think about the complex
implications of their being such esteemed and privileged activities.

Where both thinking and doing propel someone psychologically, in marked
disproportion to feeling, sensing, intuiting, listening, playing,
daydreaming, enjoying the creative arts, and other modes that are less
rationally driven or instrumental, we may infer an obsessive--compulsive
personality structure. Many highly productive and admirable people are
in this category. An attorney who loves to construct and deliver legal
arguments operates psychologically by reason and action; an
environmental activist who derives self-esteem from political
involvement may be similarly impelled. Among people so rigidly organized
that they meet the DSM criteria for obsessive--compulsive personality
disorder, many combine roughly equal amounts of thinking and doing,
often in an obviously defensive way. The "workaholic" and the "Type A
personality" are popularly acknowledged variations on the
obsessive--compulsive theme.

There are also people who are strongly invested in thinking yet who are
relatively indifferent to doing, and vice versa. Professors of
philosophy sometimes have obsessional but not compulsive character
structure; they get pleasure and self-esteem from mentation, and feel no
press to implement their ideas. People drawn to carpentry or accounting
frequently have compulsive but not obsessive styles; their
gratifications come from accomplishing specific and detailed tasks,
often with little cognitive elaboration. Some people with no tendencies
toward compulsive rituals come to therapists to get rid of intrusive
thoughts, and some come with the converse complaint. Because we are so
accustomed, after a century of Freudian thinking about the connections
between obsessive and compulsive symptoms, to putting the two phenomena
together, it is easy to miss the fact that they are conceptually and
sometimes clinically separate.

I have followed convention in putting obsessive and compulsive
personalities in the same chapter. Obsessive and compulsive trends often
coexist in a person, and analytic explorations of their respective
origins have revealed similar dynamics. Note, however, that this is a
somewhat artificial coupling with respect to character. As *symptoms*,
obsessions (persistent, unwanted thoughts) and compulsions (persistent,
unwanted actions) can occur in anyone, not just in those who are
characterologically obsessive and compulsive. And not all obsessive and
compulsive individuals suffer recurrent intrusive thoughts or engage in
irresistible actions. We refer to them as obsessive--compulsive because
their coping style involves the same defenses that are implicated in
obsessive and compulsive symptoms (Nagera, 1976). Complex biological
processes are also implicated in obsessive--compulsive disorders, but
like many other analysts (e.g., Chessick, 2001; Gabbard, 2001; Zuelzer &
Mass, 1994) I feel we have become too reductive in neglecting the
psychological side of such conditions simply because we now know more
about their biology.

In obsessive--compulsive disorders (in older language, neuroses), the
repetitive thoughts and irresistible actions are ego alien; they disturb
the person who has them. In obsessive--compulsive character structure,
they are ego syntonic (D. Shapiro, 2001). Obsessive--compulsive
personality has been recognized for a long time as a common or "classic"
neurotic-level organization. Salzman (1980) summarizes early
observations about obsessive--compulsive psychology as follows:

::: calibre1
 
:::

Obsessive character structures were described by Freud as orderly,
stubborn, and parsimonious; others have described them as being
obstinate, orderly, perfectionistic, punctual, meticulous, parsimonious,
frugal, and inclined to intellectualism and hair-splitting discussion.
Pierre Janet described such people as being rigid, inflexible, lacking
in adaptability, overly conscientious, loving order and discipline, and
persistent even in the face of undue obstacles. They are generally
dependable and reliable and have high standards and ethical values. They
are practical, precise, and scrupulous in their moral requirements.
Under conditions of stress or extreme demands, these personality
characteristics may congeal into symptomatic behavior that will then be
ritualized. (p. 10)

 

He might have added that Wilhelm Reich (1933) depicted them as "living
machines," on the basis of their rigid intellectuality (D. Shapiro,
1965). Woodrow Wilson or Hannah Arendt or Martin Buber could be
considered representative of a high-functioning person in this
diagnostic group, whereas Mark Chapman, whose obsession with John Lennon
led to a compulsion to assassinate him, might be seen as at the
psychotic end of the obsessive--compulsive continuum.

As was true for masochism as an overall concept, most behavior that we
tend to see as pathological is by definition compulsive: The doer seems
driven to act again and again in ways that prove futile or harmful. The
schizoid person is compelled to avoid people, the paranoid to distrust,
the psychopath to use, and so on. Only when *undoing* is prominent is an
action compulsive in the narrower sense of an obsessive--compulsive
dynamism or a compulsive personality organization.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT IN OBSESSION\
AND COMPULSION**

Freud (1908) believed that people who develop obsessive--compulsive
disorders were rectally hypersensitive in infancy, physiologically and
constitutionally. Contemporary analysts question such an assumption,
although they may agree with Freud (e.g., Rice, 2004) that there seems
to be a genetic contributant to obsessionality. Still, most would
probably say that "anal" issues color the unconscious worlds of people
who obsess and act on compulsions. Freud's (1909, 1913, 1917b, 1918)
emphasis on fixation at the anal phase of development (roughly 18 months
to 3 years), particularly on aggressive urges as they become organized
during that period, was novel, seminal, and far less outlandish than
debunkers of psychoanalysis would have it.

First, Freud (1908, 1909, 1913) noted that many of the features that
typically hang together in people with obsessive--compulsive
personalities---cleanliness, stubbornness, concerns with punctuality,
tendencies toward withholding---are the salient issues in a
toilet-training scenario. Second, he found anal imagery in the language,
dreams, memories, and fantasies of obsessive--compulsive patients. I
have found this, too: The earliest memory of one obsessive man I treated
was of sitting on the toilet refusing to "produce." When I invited him
to free associate, he described himself as "tightening up" and "keeping
everything inside."

Third, Freud observed that the people he treated for obsessions and
compulsions had been pushed toward bowel control prematurely or harshly
or in the context of parental overinvolvement (Fenichel, 1945). (Since
the rectal sphincter does not mature until around 18 months,
authoritative advice to Western middle-class parents in the early 20th
century to start toilet training in children's first year was most
unfortunate. It promoted coercion in the name of parental diligence and
transformed a benign process of mastery into a dominance--submission
contest. If one considers the popularity in that era of subjecting young
children to enemas, an intrinsically traumatic procedure usually
rationalized in the name of "hygiene," one cannot fail to be impressed
with the sadistic implications of the culturally sanctioned rush toward
premature anal control.)

Connections between anality and obsessionality have been supported by
empirical research (e.g., Fisher, 1970; Fisher & Greenberg, 1996;
Noblin, Timmons, & Kael, 1966; Rosenwald, 1972; Tribich & Messer, 1974)
as well as by clinical reports of obsessive--compulsive preoccupations
with the anal issues of dirt, time, and money (MacKinnon, Michels, &
Buckley, 2006). Classical formulations about obsessive and compulsive
dynamics that center on early body experience are still alive and well
(e.g., Benveniste, 2005; Cela, 1995; Shengold, 1988).

Freud reasoned that toilet training usually constitutes the first
situation in which the child must renounce what is natural for what is
socially acceptable. The responsible adult and the child who is being
trained too early or too strictly or in an atmosphere of lurid parental
overconcern enter a power struggle that the child is doomed to lose. The
experience of being controlled, judged, and required to perform on
schedule creates angry feelings and aggressive fantasies, often about
defecation, that the child eventually feels as a bad, sadistic, dirty,
shameful part of the self. The need to feel in control, punctual, clean,
and reasonable, rather than out of control, erratic, messy, and caught
up in emotions like anger and shame, becomes important to the
maintenance of identity and self-esteem. The kind of harsh,
all-or-nothing superego created by these kinds of experiences manifests
itself in a rigid ethical sensibility that Ferenczi (1925) wryly called
"sphincter morality."

The basic affective conflict in obsessive and compulsive people is rage
(at being controlled) versus fear (of being condemned or punished). But
what especially strikes those of us who work with them is that affect is
unformulated, muted, suppressed, unavailable, or rationalized and
moralized (MacKinnon et al., 2006). Many contemporary writers construe
the obsessive allergy to affect as a type of dissociation (e.g., Harris
& Gold, 2001).

Obsessive and compulsive people use words to conceal feelings, not to
express them. Most therapists can recall instances of asking such a
client how he or she *felt* about something and getting back what he or
she *thought*. An exception to the rule of concealed affect in this
diagnostic group concerns rage: If it is seen as reasonable and
justified, anger is acceptable to the obsessional person. Righteous
indignation is thus tolerable, even admired; being annoyed because one
did not get what one wanted is not. Therapists frequently feel the
presence of normal reactive anger in an obsessive person, but the
patient typically denies it---despite sometimes being able to
acknowledge intellectually that some behavior (forgetting the check for
the third time, or interrupting the therapist in midsentence, or
pouting) could denote a passive--aggressive or hostile attitude.

Shame is the other exception to the general picture of affectlessness in
obsessive--compulsive people. They have high expectations for
themselves, project them onto the therapist, and then feel embarrassed
to be seen falling short of their own standards for proper thoughts and
deeds. Shame is generally conscious, at least in the form of mild
feelings of chagrin, and if gently treated, can usually be named and
investigated by the therapist without the protest and denial that may be
evoked by efforts to explore other feelings.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN OBSESSION AND COMPULSION**

As the preceding paragraphs imply, the organizing defense of
predominantly obsessive people is isolation of affect (Fenichel, 1928).
In compulsive people, the main defensive process is undoing. Those who
are obsessive and compulsive employ both isolation and undoing.
Higher-functioning obsessional people do not usually use isolation in
its most extreme forms; they instead prefer more mature versions of the
separation of affect from cognition: rationalization, moralization,
compartmentalization, and intellectualization. Finally, people in this
clinical group rely heavily on reaction formation. Obsessional people at
all developmental levels may also use displacement, especially of anger,
in circumstances in which by diverting it from its original source to a
"legitimate" target, they can own such a feeling without shame.

**Cognitive Defenses against Drives, Affects, and Wishes**

Obsessive--compulsive individuals idealize cognition and mentation. They
tend to consign most feelings to a devalued realm associated with
childishness, weakness, loss of control, disorganization, and dirt. (And
sometimes femininity; men with obsessive and compulsive personalities
may fear that expressing tender emotions regresses them to an early,
disowned, premasculine identification with Mother.) They are thus at a
great disadvantage in situations where emotions, physical sensations,
and fantasy have a powerful and legitimate role. The widow who ruminates
ceaselessly about the details of her husband's funeral, keeping a stiff
upper lip and converting all mourning into frenetic busyness, not only
fails to process her grief effectively but also deprives others of the
consolations of offering comfort. Obsessional people in executive
positions deny themselves adequate release and recreation, and hurt
their employees by making drivenness the company rule.

People with obsessive characters are often effective in formal, public
roles yet out of their depth in intimate, domestic ones. Although they
are capable of loving attachments, they may not be able to express their
tenderer selves without anxiety and shame; consequently, they may turn
emotionally toned interactions into oppressively cognitive ones. In
therapy and elsewhere, they may lapse into second-person locutions when
describing emotions ("How did you feel when the earthquake hit?" "Well,
you feel kind of powerless"). Not every human activity should be
approached from the standpoint of rational analysis and problem solving.
One man with whom I did an intake interview responded to my question
about the quality of his sexual relationship with his wife with the
somber assertion, "I get the job done."

Obsessional people in the borderline and psychotic ranges may use
isolation so relentlessly that they look schizoid. The prevalent
misconception of the schizoid person as unfeeling may be based on
observations of regressed obsessional people who have become wooden and
robotic, so deep is the gulf between their cognition and emotion.
Because the distance between an extreme obsession and a delusion is
slight, more disturbed obsessional people border on paranoia. I have
been told that in the era before antipsychotic medication, a common way
to differentiate between an extremely rigid, nonpsychotic
obsessive--compulsive person and a barely defended paranoid
schizophrenic was to put the patient into a protected room and emphasize
that now he or she was safe. Thus invited to suspend obsessional
defenses, a schizophrenic person would begin to talk about paranoid
delusions, whereas an obsessive--compulsive one would set about cleaning
the room.

**Behavioral Defenses against Drives, Affects, and Wishes**

Undoing is the defining defense mechanism for the kind of compulsivity
that characterizes obsessive and compulsive symptoms and personality
structure. Compulsive people undo by actions that have the unconscious
meaning of atonement and/or magical protection. Compulsivity differs
from impulsivity in that a particular action is repeated over and over
in a stylized and sometimes escalating way. Compulsive actions also
differ from "acting out," strictly speaking, in that they are not so
centrally driven by the need to master unprocessed past experiences by
recreating them.

Compulsive activity is familiar to all of us. Finishing the food on our
plate when we are no longer hungry, cleaning the house when we should be
studying for an exam, criticizing someone who offends us even though we
know it will have no effect other than making an enemy, throwing "just
one more" quarter into the slot machine. Whatever one's compulsive
patterns, the disparity between what one feels impelled to do and what
is reasonable to do can be glaring. Compulsive activities may be harmful
or beneficial; what makes them compulsive is not their destructiveness
but their drivenness. Florence Nightingale was probably compulsively
helpful; Jon Stewart may be compulsively funny. People rarely come to
treatment for their compulsivity if it works on their behalf, but they
do come with related problems. Knowing that these clients are organized
compulsively can aid us in helping them with whatever they are looking
to do in therapy.

Compulsive actions often have the unconscious meaning of undoing a
crime. Lady Macbeth's handwashing is a famous literary example of this
dynamic, though in her case the crime had actually been committed. In
most instances, the compulsive person's crimes exist mainly in fantasy.
One of my patients, a married oncologist who knew very well that AIDS is
not easily transmitted by mouth-to-mouth contact, felt helplessly
compelled to get tested repeatedly for HIV antibodies after she had
kissed a man with whom she was tempted to have an affair. Even some
compulsions that are manifestly free of a sense of guilt can be found to
have originated in guilt-inducing interactions; for example, most people
who compulsively clean their plates were made to feel guilty as children
about rejecting food when, somewhere in the world, people are starving.

Compulsive behavior also betrays unconscious fantasies of omnipotent
control. This dynamic is related to preoccupations with one's presumed
crimes in that a determination to control, like the need to undo,
derives from beliefs that originated before thoughts and deeds were
differentiated. If I think my fantasies and urges are dangerous, that
they are equivalent to powerful actions, I will try to restrain them
with a comparably powerful counterforce. In prerational cognition
(primary process thought), the self is the center of the world, and what
happens to oneself is the result of one's own activity, not the chance
twists of fate. The baseball player who performs a ritual before each
game, the priest who gets anxious if he left something out of a prayer,
the pregnant woman who keeps packing and repacking her suitcase for the
hospital---all think at some level that they can control the
uncontrollable if only they do the right thing.

**Reaction Formation**

Freud believed that the conscientiousness, fastidiousness, frugality,
and diligence of obsessive--compulsive people were reaction formations
against wishes to be irresponsible, messy, profligate, and rebellious,
and that one could discern in the overresponsible style of such
individuals a hint of the inclinations against which they struggled. The
incessant rationality of the obsessional person, for example, can be
seen as a reaction formation against a superstitious, magical kind of
thinking that obsessional defenses do not fully succeed in obscuring.
The man who stubbornly insists on driving even though he is exhausted
betrays the conviction that averting an accident depends on his being in
charge of the car, not on a combination of an alert driver and some good
fortune. In insisting on so much control, he is out of control in every
significant way.

In [Chapter 6](#part0015.html){.calibre9} I talked about reaction
formation as a defense against tolerating ambivalence. In working with
obsessive and compulsive people, one is struck by their fixation on both
sides of conflicts between cooperation and rebellion, initiative and
sloth, cleanliness and slovenliness, order and disorder, thrift and
improvidence, and so forth. Every compulsively organized person seems to
have at least one messy drawer. Paragons of virtue may have a
paradoxical island of corruption: Paul Tillich, the eminent theologian,
had an extensive pornography collection; Martin Luther King Jr. was a
womanizer. People who are strongly preoccupied with being upright and
responsible may be struggling against more powerful temptations toward
self-indulgence than most of us face; if this is so, it should not
surprise us when they are only partially able to counteract their darker
impulses.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN OBSESSIVE\
AND COMPULSIVE PSYCHOLOGIES**

One route by which individuals emerge with obsessive and compulsive
psychologies involves parental figures who set high standards of
behavior and expect early conformity to them. Such caregivers tend to be
strict and consistent in rewarding good behavior and punishing
malfeasance. When they are basically loving, they produce emotionally
advantaged children whose defenses lead them in directions that
vindicate their parents' scrupulous devotion. The traditional American
child-rearing style documented in McClelland's (1961) classic studies of
achievement motivation tends to produce obsessive and compulsive people
who expect a lot of themselves and have a good track record for
realizing their goals.

When caregivers are unreasonably exacting, or prematurely demanding, or
condemnatory not only of unacceptable behavior but also of accompanying
feelings, thoughts, and fantasies, their children's obsessive and
compulsive adaptations can be more problematic. One man I worked with
had been raised in a stern midwestern Protestant family of deep
religious conviction but shallow emotional capacity. His parents hoped
he would become a minister and began working on him early to forgo
temptation and banish all thoughts of sin. This message gave him no
trouble---in fact, he found it easy to imagine assuming the morally
elevated role into which they were so eager to cast him---until he
reached puberty and found that sexual temptation is not nearly so
abstract a danger as it had previously seemed. From then on, he
overdosed with self-criticism, conducted incessant rationalistic
ruminations about sexual morality, and launched heroic efforts to
counteract erotic feelings that another boy would have simply learned to
enjoy and master.

From an object relations perspective, what is notable about obsessive
and compulsive people is the centrality of issues of *control* in their
families of origin. Whereas Freud (1908) depicted the anal phase as
engendering a prototypical battle of wills, people with an object
relations perspective emphasize that the parent who was unduly
controlling about toilet training was probably equally controlling about
oral- and oedipal-phase issues (and subsequent ones, for that matter).
The mother who laid down the law in the bathroom is likely to have fed
her child on a schedule, demanded that naps be taken at particular
times, inhibited spontaneous motor activity, prohibited masturbation,
insisted on conventional sex-role behavior, punished loose talk, and so
on. The father who was forbidding enough to provoke regressions from
oedipal to anal concerns was probably also reserved toward his infant,
stern with his toddler, and authoritarian with his school-age child.

Meares (2001), citing research about the frequency of contamination
fears in obsessional people in disparate cultures (e.g., India, Japan,
Egypt), relates them to separation anxiety that is created by parental
overinvolvement and overprotection. Rooting his observations in
theoretical and empirical literature about cognitive development, he
argues that overprotective parents get in the way of a young child's
taking the small risks that are necessary to develop a sense of the
boundary of self, and accounts for the omnipotent, magical thinking
found in obsessive and compulsive people in terms of the lack of this
boundary.

There is a version of obsessive and compulsive personality that is more
introjective, or self-definition oriented, and one that is more
anaclitic, or self-in-relation oriented (Blatt, 2008). The Freudian
obsessive--compulsive (Freud, 1913) was definitely the former. When I
refer to "traditional" or "old-fashioned" obsessive and compulsive
dynamics, I am referring to a guilt-dominated psychology, which was
common in Freud's era and culture. It can be found in many contemporary
cultures and subcultures but now seems rarer in mainstream North
American communities. In those, about which I say more shortly, we tend
to see obsessive behaviors that are more shame based, more focused on
looking perfect to others rather than responding to one's morally
perfectionistic internal gyroscope. In the first edition of this book, I
followed Kernberg's (1984) formulation that the second type is a subset
of narcissistic personalities, but another way of construing less
guilt-prone obsessive--compulsive people is as having an anaclitic
version of obsessional psychology.

In old-fashioned obsessive--compulsive-breeding families, control may be
expressed in moralized, guilt-inducing terms, as in "I'm disappointed
that you were not responsible enough to have fed your dog on time," or
"I expect more cooperative behavior from a big girl like you," or "How
would you like it if somebody treated *you* that way?" Moralization is
actively modeled. Parents explain their own actions on the basis of what
is right ("I don't enjoy punishing you, but it's for your own good").
Productive behavior is associated with virtue, as in the "salvation
through work" theology of Calvinism. Self-control and deferral of
gratification are idealized.

There are still many families that operate this way, but in Western
industrialized cultures, pop-Freudian ideas about the inhibiting effects
of too moralistic an upbringing, in combination with 20th-century
dangers and cataclysms that suggest the wisdom of "getting it while you
can" rather than postponing gratification, have changed child-rearing
practices. We see fewer obsessive and compulsive people of the morally
preoccupied type common in Freud's day. Many contemporary families that
emphasize control foster obsessive and compulsive patterns through
shaming rather than guilt induction. Messages like "What will people
think of you if you're overweight?" or "The other kids won't want to
play with you if you behave like that," or "You'll never get into an Ivy
League college if you don't do better" have, according to many
clinicians and societal observers, become more common messages in the
West than communications stressing the primacy of individual conscience
and the moral implications of one's behavior.

It is important to appreciate this change if one is working with more
contemporary obsessive and compulsive psychopathologies such as eating
disorders (not that anorexia and bulimia nervosa were unknown at the
turn of the century, but they were almost certainly less prevalent).
Freudian accounts of compulsion are insufficient in accounting for
anorectic and bulimic compulsivity; post-Freudian writers drawing on
object relations theory and on research on attachment, addiction, and
dissociation have provided more clinically useful formulations (e.g.,
Bromberg, 2001; Pearlman, 2005; Sands, 2003; Tibon & Rothschild, 2009;
Yarock, 1993).

Another kind of family background has been associated with obsessive and
compulsive personality and, as is typical in psychoanalytic observation,
it is the polar opposite of the overcontrolling, moralistic ambiance.
Some people feel so bereft of clear family standards, so unsupervised
and casually ignored by the adults around them, that in order to push
themselves to grow up they hold themselves to idealized criteria of
behavior and feeling that they derive from the larger culture. These
standards, since they are abstract and not modeled by people known
personally to the child, tend to be harsh and unbuffered by a humane
sense of proportion. One of my patients, for example, whose father was a
melancholy alcoholic and whose mother was overburdened and distracted,
grew up in a house where nothing ever got done. The roof leaked, the
weeds proliferated, the dishes sat in the sink. He was deeply ashamed of
his parents' ineptitude and developed an intense determination to be the
opposite: organized, competent, in control. He became a successful tax
advisor, but a driven workaholic who lived in fear that he would betray
himself as a fraud who was somehow in essence as ineffectual as his
father and mother.

Early psychoanalysts noted with great interest the phenomenon of
obsessive--compulsive character in underparented children; it challenged
Freud's (1913) model of superego formation, which postulates the
presence of a strong and authoritative parent with whom the child
identifies. Many analysts were finding that their patients with the
harshest superegos had been the most laxly parented (cf. Beres, 1958).
They concluded that having to model oneself after a parental image that
one invents oneself, especially if one has an intense, aggressive
temperament that is projected into that image, can create
obsessive--compulsive dynamics. Later, Kohut (1971, 1977, 1984) and
other self psychologists made similar observations from the standpoint
of their emphasis on idealization.

**THE OBSESSIVE--COMPULSIVE SELF**

Introjectively oriented obsessive and compulsive people are deeply
concerned with issues of control and moral rectitude. They tend to
define the latter in terms of the former; that is, they equate righteous
behavior with keeping aggressive, lustful, and needy parts of the self
under strict rein. They are apt to be seriously religious, hard-working,
self-critical, and dependable. Their self-esteem comes from meeting the
demands of internalized parental figures who hold them to a high
standard of behavior and sometimes thought. They worry a lot, especially
in situations in which they have to make a choice, and they can be
easily paralyzed when the act of choosing has portentous implications.
Anaclitically oriented obsessive individuals worry a lot, too, though
the focus of their concern is more external: The "perfect" decision is
one that no witness can criticize.

This paralysis is one of the most unfortunate effects of the reluctance
of obsessional people to make a choice. Early analysts christened this
phenomenon the "doubting mania." In the effort to keep all their options
open, so that they can maintain (fantasied) control over all possible
outcomes, they end up having no options. An obsessive--compulsive woman
I know, on becoming pregnant, lined up two different obstetricians who
worked at two different medical centers with opposing philosophies about
childbirth. All through her pregnancy she ruminated about which person
and which facility was preferable. When she went into labor, not having
resolved this question, it took her so long to decide whether her
condition warranted going to the hospital, and which hospital it should
be, that she was suddenly in the later stages of giving birth and had to
go to the nearest clinic and be delivered by the resident on duty. All
her painstaking obsessing was rendered futile when reality finally
enforced its own resolution of her ambivalence.

Her experience exemplifies the tendency of obsessively structured people
to postpone decision making until they can see what the "perfect" (i.e.,
guilt and uncertainty free) decision would be. It is common for them to
come to therapy trying to resolve ambivalence over two boyfriends, two
competing graduate programs, two contrasting job opportunities, and the
like. The client's fear of making the "wrong" decision and tendency to
cast the process of deciding in purely rationalistic terms---lists of
pros and cons are typical---often seduce the therapist into offering an
opinion about which choice would be preferable, at which point the
patient immediately responds with counterarguments. The "Yes, but"
stance of the obsessive person may be seen as, at least in part, an
effort to avoid the guilt that inevitably accompanies action. Obsessive
people often postpone and procrastinate until external circumstances
like the rejection by a lover or the passing of a deadline determine
their direction. In standard neurotic fashion, then, their
overzealousness to preserve their autonomy or sense of agency serves
eventually to disable it.

Where the obsessive person postpones and procrastinates, the compulsive
one speeds ahead. People with compulsive psychologies have a similar
problem with guilt or shame and autonomy, but they solve it in the
opposite direction: They jump into action before considering
alternatives. For them, certain situations have "demand characteristics"
requiring certain behaviors. These are not always foolish (like knocking
on wood every time one makes an optimistic prediction) or
self-destructive (jumping into bed every time a situation becomes
sexually tinged); some people are compulsively helpful (McWilliams,
1984). Some drivers will risk their own safety and wreck their cars
before hitting an animal, so automatic is their compulsion to preserve
life.

The compulsive person's rush to action has the same relationship to
autonomy as the obsessive person's avoidance of action. Instrumental
thinking and expressive feeling are both circumvented lest the person
notice that he or she is actually making a choice. Choice involves
responsibility for one's actions, and responsibility involves tolerance
of normal levels of both guilt and shame. Non-neurotic guilt is a
natural reaction to exerting power, and a vulnerability to shame comes
with the territory of taking deliberate action that can be seen by
others. Both obsessive and compulsive people may be so saturated with
irrational guilt and/or shame that they cannot absorb any more of these
feelings.

As I mentioned earlier, obsessive people support their self-esteem by
thinking; compulsive ones by doing. When circumstances make it hard for
obsessive or compulsive individuals to feel good about themselves on the
basis of what they are figuring out or accomplishing, respectively, they
become depressed. Losing a job is a disaster for almost anybody, but it
is catastrophic for compulsive individuals because work is often the
primary source of their self-esteem. I do not know if we have any
research on this yet, but I assume that people with the guilt-ridden
version of obsessive and compulsive dynamics are subject to more
introjective depressions, with an actively bad (uncontrolled,
destructive) self-concept gaining ascendancy, and that shame-prone
obsessive and compulsive clients suffer more anaclitic depressive
reactions (see [Chapter 11](#part0021.html){.calibre9}).

Obsessive and compulsive people fear their own hostile feelings and
suffer inordinate self-criticism over both actual and purely mental
aggression. Depending on the content of their family's messages, they
may be equally nervous about giving in to lust, greed, vanity, sloth, or
envy. Rather than accepting such attitudes and basing their self-respect
or self-condemnation solely on how they behave, they typically regard
even feeling such impulses as reprehensible. Like moral masochists, with
whom they share tendencies toward overconscientiousness and indignation,
introjective obsessive patients may nurture a kind of private vanity
about the stringency of their demands on themselves. They value
self-control over most other virtues and emphasize attributes like
discipline, order, reliability, loyalty, integrity, and perseverance.
Their difficulties in suspending control diminish their capacities in
areas like sexuality, play, humor, and spontaneity in general.

Finally, obsessive--compulsive people are noted for avoidance of
affect-laden wholes in favor of separately considered minutia (D.
Shapiro, 1965). People with obsessional psychologies hear all the words
and none of the music. In an effort to bypass the overall import of any
decision or perception, the appreciation of which might arouse guilt,
they become fixed on specific details or implications ("What if . . .
?"). On the Rorschach test, obsessional subjects avoid whole percept
responses and expound on the possible interpretations of small
particulars of the inkblots. They cannot (unconsciously, will not) see
the forest for the proverbial trees.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH OBSESSIVE AND COMPULSIVE PATIENTS**

Obsessive and compulsive people tend to be "good patients" (except
toward the lower end of the severity continuum, where the rigidity of
their isolation of affect or the driving immediacy of their compulsions
interfere with therapeutic collaboration). They are serious,
conscientious, honest, motivated, and hard-working. Nonetheless, they
have a reputation for being difficult. It is typical for obsessional
clients to experience the therapist as a devoted but demanding and
judgmental parent, and to be consciously compliant and unconsciously
oppositional. Despite all their dutiful cooperation, they convey an
undertone of irritability and criticism. When a therapist comments on
possible negative feelings, they are usually denied. As Freud (1908)
originally noted, obsessional patients tend to be subtly or overtly
argumentative, controlling, critical, and resentful about parting with
money. They wait impatiently for the therapist to speak and then
interrupt before a sentence is completed. And at a conscious level, they
seem utterly innocent of their negativity.

Thirty-five years ago I treated a man for severe obsessions and
compulsions. Today I might send him for concurrent exposure therapy and
possibly medication; at the time, those treatments had not been
developed. He was an engineering student from India, lost and homesick
in an alien environment. In India, deference to authority is a
powerfully reinforced norm, and in engineering, compulsivity is adaptive
and rewarded. But even by the standards of these comparatively obsessive
and compulsive reference groups his ruminations and rituals were
excessive, and he wanted me to tell him definitively how to stop them.
When I reframed the task as understanding the feelings behind his
preoccupations, he was visibly dismayed. I suggested that he might be
disappointed that my way of formulating his problem did not permit a
quick, authoritative solution. "Oh, no!" he insisted; he was sure I knew
best, and he had only positive reactions to me.

The following week he came in asking how "scientific" the discipline of
psychotherapy is. "Is it like physics or chemistry, an exact science?"
he wanted to know. No, I replied, it is not so exact and has many
aspects of an art. "I see," he pondered, frowning. I then asked if it
troubled him that there is not more scientific accuracy in my field.
"Oh, no!" he insisted, absentmindedly straightening up the papers on the
end of my desk. Did the disorder in my office bother him? "Oh, no!" In
fact, he added, it is probably evidence that I have a creative mind. He
spent our third session educating me about how different things are in
India, and wondering abstractedly about how a psychiatrist from his
country might work with him. Did he sometimes wish I knew more about his
culture, or that he could see an Indian therapist? "Oh, no!" He is very
satisfied with me.

His was, by clinic policy, an eight-session treatment. By our last
meeting, I had succeeded, mostly by gentle teasing, in getting him to
admit to being occasionally a little irritated with me and with therapy
(not angry, not even aggravated, just slightly bothered, he carefully
noted). I thought the treatment had been largely a failure, though I had
not expected to accomplish much in eight meetings. But 2 years later he
came back to tell me that he had thought a lot about feelings since he
had seen me, particularly about his anger and sadness at being so far
from his native country. As he had let in those emotions, his obsessions
and compulsions had waned. In a manner typical of people in this
clinical group, he had found a way to feel that he was in control of
pursuing insights that came up in therapy, and this subjective autonomy
was supporting his self-esteem.

Countertransference with obsessional clients often includes an annoyed
impatience, with wishes to shake them, to get them to be open about
ordinary feelings, to give them a verbal enema or insist that they "shit
or get off the pot." Their combination of excessive conscious submission
and powerful unconscious defiance can be maddening. Therapists who have
no personal inclination to regard affect as evidence of weakness or lack
of discipline are mystified by the obsessional person's shame about most
emotions and resistance to admitting them. Sometimes, one can even feel
one's rectal sphincter muscle tightening, in identification with the
constricted emotional world of the patient (concordant), and in a
physiological effort to contain one's retaliatory wish to "dump" on such
an exasperating person (complementary).

The atmosphere of veiled criticism that an obsessive--compulsive person
emits can be discouraging and undermining. In addition, clinicians
easily feel bored or distanced by the client's unremitting
intellectualization. With one obsessive--compulsive man I treated, I
used to find myself having a vivid image that his head was alive and
talking, but his body was a life-sized cardboard cutout like the ones
amusement parks provide for customers to put their heads through to be
photographed. Feelings of insignificance, boredom, and obliteration are
relatively rare when one works with introjective obsessional clients,
but they may vex the therapist of a more anaclitically obsessive person.
Hearing endless ruminations about whether one should do the Atkins or
the South Beach diet, buy a poodle or a beagle, go by taxi or by foot
can be aggravating.

There is something very object related about the unconscious devaluation
of the more guilt-ridden obsessive--compulsive patients, something
touching about their efforts to be "good" in such childlike ways as
cooperating and deferring. Doubts about whether anything is being
accomplished in therapy are typical for the therapist as well as for the
obsessive or compulsive client, especially before the person is brave
enough to express such worries directly. But underneath all the
obstinacy of the obsessional individual is a capacity to appreciate the
therapist's patient, noncondemnatory attitude, and as a result, it is
not hard to maintain an atmosphere of basic warmth.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF OBSESSIVE OR COMPULSIVE PERSONALITY**

The first rule of practice with obsessive and compulsive people is
ordinary kindness. They are used to being exasperating to others, for
reasons they do not fully comprehend, and they are grateful for
nonretaliatory responses to their irritating qualities. Appreciation
for, and interpretation of, their vulnerability to shame is essential.
Refusal to advise them, hurry them, and criticize them for the effects
of their isolation, undoing, and reaction formation will foster more
movement in therapy than more confronting measures.
Countertransference-driven power struggles are common between therapists
and obsessional clients; they produce temporary affective movement, but
in the long run they only replicate early and detrimental object
relations.

At the same time that one carefully avoids the therapeutic equivalent of
becoming the demanding, controlling parent, one needs to keep relating
warmly. The degree of therapist activity will depend on the
client---some obsessional people will not let the clinician get a word
in edgewise until the last moments of a session, while others become
disorganized and frightened if one remains quiet. Refusing to control
should be distinguished from attitudes that will be felt as emotional
disengagement. Remaining silent with a person who feels a pressure in
silence is self-defeating, as is silence with a patient who feels
abandoned when he or she is not addressed. Asking the patient's
direction on how much the therapist should speak, like other respectful
inquiries about what is helpful, may resolve the therapist's problem
while supporting the client's sense of agency, human equality, and
realistic control.

An exception to the general rule of refusing to advise or control
concerns people whose compulsions are outright dangerous. With
self-destructive compulsivity, the therapist has two choices: either
tolerate anxiety about what the patient is doing until the slow
integration of the therapy work reduces the compulsion to act, or, at
the outset, make therapy contingent on the client's stopping the
compulsive behavior. An example of the former would be hearing about one
driven sexual affair after another while nonjudgmentally analyzing the
dynamics involved, until the patient becomes unable to rationalize the
defensive use of sexuality. An advantage of this position is its
implicit encouragement of honesty (if one sets behavioral conditions for
therapy, the patient will be tempted to hide it if he or she cheats).
When the person's self-destructiveness is not life threatening, I think
this choice is usually preferable.

Examples of the latter would include requiring that an addict go through
detox and rehab before starting psychotherapy, insisting that a
dangerously anorexic client first gain a given number of pounds in a
hospital-supervised regime, or making therapy of an alcohol abuser
conditional on attendance at AA meetings. When undoing is automatic, the
wishes, urges, and fantasied crimes being undone will not surface.
Moreover, by accepting compulsively self-harming people into treatment
unconditionally, the therapist may unwittingly contribute to their
fantasies that therapy will operate magically, without their having at
some point to exert self-control. This position is particularly
advisable when the patient's compulsion involves substance abuse; doing
therapy with someone whose mental processes are chemically altered is an
exercise in futility.

Many compulsions are not responsive to treatment until the driven person
encounters sharp negative consequences. Shoplifters and pedophiles tend
to get serious about therapy only after they have been arrested; addicts
often have to "bottom out" before getting help; cigarette smokers rarely
try to stop before they get scared about their health. As long as one is
"getting away with" compulsivity, there is little incentive to change.
The reader may wonder why anyone would want to go through psychotherapy
once the compulsive behavior is under control. The answer is that people
feel strongly the difference between being able to discipline a
compulsion (by efforts of will or submission to authority) and not
having one in the first place. Therapy with someone who has stopped
behaving compulsively allows that person to master the issues that drove
the compulsion, and to find internal serenity rather than a tenuous
achievement of self-control. The alcoholic who feels no more need to
drink is in a lot better shape than the one who, through constantly
reinforced efforts of will, can manage to stay sober despite temptation
(Levin, 1987). Individuals in recovery from compulsion are also helped
by understanding why they were vulnerable to addictive behavior.

The second important feature of good work with people in this diagnostic
group, especially the more obsessional ones, is the avoidance of
intellectualization. Interpretations that address the cognitive level of
understanding, before affective responses have been disinhibited, will
be counterproductive. I suspect we have all known people in
psychoanalytic therapy who can discuss their dynamics in the tone of an
auto mechanic detailing what is wrong with someone's motor, and who
appear not a bit better for all this knowledge. It was experience with
obsessive--compulsive people that infused analytic clinical theory with
warnings about the dangers of premature interpretation (e.g., Glover,
1955; Josephs, 1992; Strachey, 1934) and comments on the difference
between intellectual and emotional insight (e.g., Kris, 1956; Richfield,
1954).

Because it can feel like a power struggle (to both parties) for the
therapist to keep harping on the question "But how do you *feel*?" one
way to bring a more affective dimension into the work is through
imagery, symbolism, and artistic communication. Hammer (1990), in
exploring how obsessional people use words more to fend off feeling than
to express it, mentions the special value to this population of a more
poetic style of speech, rich in analogy and metaphor. With extremely
constricted patients, the combination of group therapy (where other
clients tend to attack the isolative defense head-on) and individual
treatment (where the therapist can help the person to process such
experiences privately) is sometimes therapeutic (Yalom & Leszcz, 2005).

A third component of good treatment with obsessionally and compulsively
structured people is the practitioner's willingness to help them express
their anger and criticism about therapy and the therapist. Usually one
cannot accomplish this right away, but one can pave the way for the
patient's eventual acceptance of such feelings by preparatory comments
such as "It can be exasperating that the therapy process does not work
as fast as we would both want it to. Don't be surprised if you find
yourself having resentful thoughts about coming here or about me. If you
were to notice you were feeling dissatisfied with our work, would
anything get in the way of your telling me that?" A frequent response to
these ground-laying comments is a protest that the client cannot imagine
being actively dissatisfied and critical. The therapist's position that
such a statement is very curious may begin the process of making ego
alien the automatic process of isolation.

To be useful to obsessive and compulsive people, one needs not only to
help them find and name their affects but also to encourage them to
enjoy them. Psychoanalytic therapy involves more than making the
unconscious conscious; it requires changing the patient's conviction
that what has been made conscious is shameful. Behind this
susceptibility to shame lie pathogenic beliefs about sinfulness that
propel both obsessive and compulsive mechanisms. That one could enjoy a
sadistic fantasy, not just own up to it, or derive comfort from
grieving, not just admit grudgingly that one is sad, may be news to
these clients. The sharing of the therapist's sense of humor may lighten
the guilt and self-criticism that weigh so heavily on them.

"What good will it do to feel that?" is a frequent query of individuals
with obsessive and compulsive psychologies. The answer is that harm is
being done in *not* feeling it. Emotions make one feel alive, energized,
and fully human, even if they express attitudes that the patient has
come to see as "not very nice." Especially with compulsive patients, it
is useful to comment on their difficulty tolerating just *being*, rather
than doing. It is no accident that 12-step programs, in their efforts to
arrest self-destructive compulsivity, discovered the Serenity Prayer.
Occasionally, one can appeal to the practical nature of obsessive and
compulsive people when they flee their feelings; for example, some
scientifically minded patients find it helpful to know that crying rids
the brain of certain chemicals associated with chronic mood
disturbances. If these patients can rationalize expressiveness as being
something other than pathetic self-indulgence, they may risk it sooner.
But ultimately, the therapist's quiet dedication to emotional honesty,
and the patient's growing experience that he or she will not be judged
or controlled, will move the work forward.

Via medications such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), and CBT techniques such as exposure, many people with
obsessive--compulsive *disorder* are now being helped more than
psychoanalytic therapy alone could help them previously. In those who
have obsessive--compulsive *personality*, with ego-syntonic ruminations
and compulsions, those approaches seem to be less effective. This
observation parallels what I said in [Chapter
11](#part0021.html){.calibre9} about characterologically depressive
patients, who seem less responsive to the drugs that mitigate major
depression or dysthymia than individuals who suffer a depression but
whose personality structure is not depressive. Nonetheless, many
analytic therapists (e.g., Lieb, 2001) working with clients with
obsessive and compulsive personalities report increased effectiveness
when they combine dynamic psychotherapy with both pharmacological and
cognitive-behavioral interventions.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

Ordinarily, obsessive and compulsive dynamics are easy to differentiate
from other kinds of psychology. Isolation and undoing are usually pretty
visible; compulsive organization is particularly conspicuous, since the
person's drivenness to act cannot be easily masked. Still, some kinds of
confusion occur. Obsessive structure is sometimes hard to distinguish
from schizoid psychology, especially at the lower-functioning end of the
developmental continuum, and from narcissistic personalities with
obsessive defenses. Sometimes it can be hard to differentiate obsessive
and compulsive dynamics from organic brain syndromes.

**Obsessive versus Narcissistic Personality**

In [Chapter 8](#part0018.html){.calibre9} I discussed narcissistic
versus obsessional character structure, with an emphasis on the damage
done when an essentially narcissistic person is misunderstood as
obsessive or compulsive, when the therapist accordingly looks for
unconscious anger, omnipotent fantasies, and guilt rather than
subjective emptiness and fragile self-esteem. The damage is probably
less serious when a mistake is made the other way, since all of us,
whatever our character, can profit from therapies that focus on issues
of self. Nevertheless, an old-fashioned, moralistic obsessive or
compulsive person being treated by someone who construes him or her as
narcissistic would be eventually distressed, demoralized, and even
insulted by being seen as needy rather than conflicted.

Obsessive and compulsive people with introjective dynamics have a strong
center of gravity psychologically; they are judgmental and
self-critical. A therapist who communicates empathic acceptance of their
subjective experience without evoking the deeper affects and beliefs
that shape that experience is depriving such patients of any empathy
worth its name. Sometimes interventions that a therapist conceives as
mirroring are received by obsessive and compulsive clients as
corrupting, in that the patient views the therapist as implicitly
condoning aspects of the self that the patient sees as indefensible.
Under these circumstances patients begin to doubt the moral credentials
of the therapist. Analysis of the rationalistic and moralistic defenses
of obsessive and compulsive clients should precede efforts to convey
acceptance of the troublesome feelings these defenses have been erected
to conceal.

**Obsessive versus Schizoid Personality**

In the symbiotic--psychotic range, some people who look schizoid may be
in fact regressed obsessional patients. Although a schizoid person
withdraws from the outer world, he or she tends to be conscious of
intense inner feelings and vivid fantasies. In contrast, a withdrawn
obsessional person uses isolation so completely that he or she may be
subjectively "blank" or wooden in appearance. Knowledge of the premorbid
functioning of someone for whom this differential applies will provide
clues about whether to communicate to the patient that it is safe to
express his or her intense inner experience, or to convey that it must
be terrible to feel so cold and dead inside.

**Obsessive--Compulsive versus Organic Conditions**

This book does not cover psychopathology of organic origin, but I should
note the frequency with which inexperienced interviewers---whether or
not they have had medical training---misconstrue behavior related to
brain damage as obsessive--compulsive. The perseverative thinking and
repetitive actions typical of organic brain syndromes (Goldstein, 1959)
can mimic "functional" obsessiveness and compulsivity, but dynamically
informed questioning will reveal that isolation of affect and undoing
are not involved. A good history, with inquiries about possible fetal
alcohol syndrome or maternal addiction during pregnancy, complications
at birth, illnesses with high fever (meningitis, encephalitis), head
injury, and so forth may suggest an organic diagnosis, which may be
confirmed by neurological examination.

Not all brain damage involves loss of intelligence. The practitioner
should not assume that because a person is bright and competent, he or
she could not suffer from organically based difficulties. This is a
critical differential, since therapy to uncover unconscious dynamics in
order to reduce a client's obsessive--compulsive inflexibility may be
radically different from treatment that emphasizes, to the organically
damaged person and to his or her family, the value of maintaining order
and predictability for the sake of the client's emotional security and
comfort.

**SUMMARY**

I have discussed in this chapter people who preferentially think and/or
act, in order to pursue emotional safety, reduce anxiety, maintain
self-esteem, and resolve internal conflicts. I reviewed classical
conceptions of obsessive--compulsive character structure, with emphasis
on Freud's (1908, 1909, 1913, 1931) formulations about the centrality of
anal-phase issues in its development and related struggles over
unconscious guilt and fantasies of omnipotence. I differentiated that
version of the phenomenon from more anaclitic manifestations of
obsessive--compulsive psychology. I noted that defensive processes in
obsessive and compulsive people (isolation and undoing, respectively,
and reaction formation in both) suppress or distract from most affects,
wishes, and drives, but unconscious guilt (over hostility) and conscious
susceptibility to shame (over falling short of standards) are easily
inferred. Family histories of people in this group are notable for
either overcontrol or lack of control; current relationships tend to be
formal, moralized, and somewhat juiceless, despite the basic capacity
for attachment that obsessive--compulsive people demonstrate.

I also addressed obsessive--compulsive perfectionism, ambivalence, and
avoidance of guilt by either procrastination or impulsivity and noted
that transference and countertransference issues center around noticing
and absorbing the patient's unconscious negativity. Therapeutic
inferences include being unhurried, avoiding power struggles,
discouraging intellectualization, inviting anger and criticism, and
modeling the enjoyment of devalued feelings and fantasies. I
differentiated obsessive and compulsive personalities from schizoid
patients, from narcissistically structured people with perfectionistic
and compulsive defenses, and from those with organic brain syndromes.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

Probably the most readable book on this topic is Salzman (1980). D.
Shapiro's (1965) naturalistic study of the obsessive--compulsive
personality style remains a classic; and his 1984 and 1999 books
followed it up with interesting chapters on obsessive and compulsive
rigidity.

Shengold's *Halo in the Sky* (1988) offers a brilliant exploration of
anality as a concept and metaphor. The second issue of the journal
*Psychoanalytic Inquiry* in 2001 (Bristol & Pasternack, 2001) contains
many relevant essays, some of which I have cited in this chapter, mostly
about obsessive--compulsive disorder but touching on
obsessive--compulsive personality and the evaluation of psychoanalytic
ideas about it in the context of recent research on neuroscience.

[]{#part0024.html}

**14**

Hysterical (Histrionic) Personalities

[P]{.dropcap}sychoanalysis began with the effort to understand
hysterical conditions and has returned to that problem regularly since
the 1880s, when Freud first tackled it. Inspired by the work of the
French psychiatrists Charcot, Janet, and Bernheim, who were
investigating hysterical afflictions via hypnosis, Freud first began
asking the kinds of questions that gave psychoanalytic theory its shape:
How can someone know and not know at the same time? What accounts for
forgetting important experiences? Does the body express what the mind
cannot fathom? What would explain such sensational symptoms as full
epileptic-like seizures in a person without epilepsy? Or blindness in
someone optically normal? Or paralysis when nothing is wrong with the
nerves?

At the time, hysterically ill women were being thrown out of physicians'
offices as malingerers. Whatever Freud's mistakes about female
psychology or sexual trauma, it is to his credit that he took these
women seriously and paid them the respect of trying to understand their
particular suffering. By doing so, he believed he would begin
comprehending processes that operate in the emotionally healthy as well
as in the emotionally disabled. Although this chapter is not about the
dramatic disturbances that were in Freud's day subsumed under the rubric
of hysterical neurosis (conversion, amnesia, inexplicable attacks of
anxiety, and other disparate phenomena), I review some psychoanalytic
history relevant to those conditions in the service of eventually
focusing on the personality structure that often accompanies them.

Hysterical (or, as per later editions of the DSM, histrionic) character
is common in people without frequent or striking hysterical symptoms. As
with obsessive--compulsive individuals who lack obsessions and
compulsions but who operate on the same principles that produce them,
there are many of us who have never had hysterical outbreaks but whose
subjective experience is colored by the dynamics that create them.
Although this type of personality is seen more in women, hysterically
organized men are not uncommon. In fact, Freud (e.g., 1897) regarded
himself---with good reason---as somewhat hysterical. One of his earliest
publications (1886) was on hysteria in a man. Analytically oriented
therapists are accustomed to thinking of individuals with hysterical
personalities as in the neurotic range, since their defenses have been
considered more mature, but many people have hysterical psychologies
organized at the borderline and psychotic levels.

Elizabeth Zetzel (1968) noted some time ago (in an article that begins
with the nursery rhyme that observes "When she was good she was very,
very good, but when she was bad she was horrid") the great distance
between healthier and more deeply impaired individuals in this group.
Confusingly, post-1980 DSMs have reconceptualized histrionic personality
disorder toward the pathological end of the hysterical continuum,
indistinguishable from "Zetzel type 3 and 4" personalities and
Kernberg's (1975, 1984) "infantile personality." Kernberg and others
have used the term "hysterical" for higher-functioning patients and
"hysteroid" or "histrionic" or "pseudohysterical infantile" to refer to
those in the borderline and psychotic ranges.

In the language of more recent research on personality and personality
disorder, people with hysterical tendencies who are securely attached
may be seen as having a histrionic style (but not disorder) or
hysterical personality. Researchers studying psychopathology and
attachment (e.g., Ouimette, Klein, Anderson, Riso, & Lizardi, 1994) have
noted an anxious--resistant attachment style in histrionic people who
meet DSM criteria for histrionic personality disorder. Hysterically
oriented people with histories of significant early trauma, for whom the
infantile object of safety was also the source of fear, show a
disorganized attachment style characterized by subjective helplessness
and compulsive caregiving rather than hostility and aggression
(Lyons-Ruth, 2001).

The phenomenon of hysterical psychosis, which may overlap with the
extreme version of the disorganized, posttraumatic attachment style, has
been known since antiquity (Veith, 1965, 1977), noted across cultures
(Linton, 1956), and supported by earlier research (Hirsch & Hollender,
1969; Hollender & Hirsch, 1964; Langness, 1967; Richman & White, 1970).
Its absence from the DSM has arguably impoverished our approach to
assessment and contributed to the overdiagnosis of schizophrenia when a
trauma-related, hysteroid process should have been considered.

People with hysterical personalities have high anxiety, high intensity,
and high reactivity, especially interpersonally. They are warm,
energetic, and intuitive "people people," attracted to situations of
personal drama and risk. They may be so addicted to excitement that they
go from crisis to crisis. Because of their anxiety level and the
conflicts they suffer, their own emotionality may look superficial,
artificial, and exaggerated to others, and their feelings may shift
rapidly ("hysterical lability of affect"). The great actress Sarah
Bernhardt (Gottlieb, 2010) seems to have had many hysterical features,
as did the fictional Scarlett O'Hara. People with hysterical characters
may like high-visibility professions, such as acting, performing,
preaching, teaching, and politics.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT IN HYSTERIA**

Many have suggested that hysterically organized people are by
temperament intense, hypersensitive, and sociophilic. The kind of baby
who kicks and screams when frustrated but shrieks with glee when
entertained may well have the constitutional template for hysteria.
Freud (e.g., 1931) suggested that powerful appetites may be
characteristic of people who become hysterical, that they crave oral
supplies, love, attention, and erotic closeness. Blatt and Levy (2003)
have reviewed extensive empirical data attesting to their tilt in the
anaclitic direction. They seek stimulation but get overwhelmed by too
much of it, and they have trouble processing distressing experiences.
They may have the sensitivity of the schizoid person, to whom they often
have an affinity (McWilliams, 2006), but they move toward people rather
than away from them.

Others have speculated (e.g., D. W. Allen, 1977) that people with
hysterical tendencies are more dependent constitutionally on
right-hemisphere brain functioning (Galin, 1974; Wasserman & Stefanatos,
2000), in contrast to obsessively inclined individuals, who may be
left-brain dominant. Before fMRI studies, one basis for this speculation
was the careful work of D. Shapiro (1965) on the hysterical cognitive
style. Hysterically organized people differ strikingly from more
obsessional ones in the quality of their mental operations;
specifically, they are impressionistic, global, and imaginal. Some
highly intelligent people with hysterical personality organization are
remarkably creative; their integration of affective and sensory
apperception with more linear, logical approaches to understanding
produces a rich integration of intellectual and artistic sensibility.

Developmentally, Freud (1925b, 1932) and many later analysts (e.g.,
Halleck, 1967; Hollender, 1971; Marmor, 1953) suggested a dual fixation
in hysteria, at oral and oedipal issues. An oversimplified account of
this formulation follows: A sensitive and hungry little girl needs
particularly responsive maternal care in infancy. She becomes
disappointed with her mother, who fails to make her feel adequately
safe, sated, and prized. As she approaches the oedipal phase, she
achieves separation from the mother by devaluing her. She turns her
intense love toward Father, a most exciting object, especially because
her unmet oral needs combine with later genital concerns to magnify
oedipal dynamics. But how can she make a normal resolution of the
oedipal conflict by identifying with and competing with her mother? She
still needs her, and she has also devalued her.

This dilemma traps her at the oedipal level. As a result of her
fixation, she continues to see males as strong and exciting, and
females, herself included, as weak and insignificant. Because she
regards power as inherently a male attribute, she looks up to men, but
she also---unconsciously, for the most part---hates and envies them. She
tries to increase her sense of adequacy and self-esteem by attaching to
males, yet she also subtly punishes them for their assumed superiority.
She uses her sexuality, the one kind of power she feels her gender
affords, along with idealization and "feminine wiles"---the strategies
of the subjectively weak---in order to access male strength. Because she
uses sex defensively rather than expressively, and because she fears men
and their abuses of power, she does not fully enjoy sexual intimacy with
them and may suffer physical equivalents of fear and rejection, such as
sexual pain or anesthesia, lack of full responsiveness, or failure of
orgasm.

Freud's stress on penis envy as a universal female problem arose from
his work with hysterically structured women. When he discovered that his
patients symbolized male power in their dreams, fantasies, and symptoms
with phallic images, he speculated that during their early years these
women had learned to equate powerlessness---their own and that of their
mothers---with penislessness. In a patriarchal and increasingly complex
urban culture where traditional feminine virtues carried little
prestige, such a conclusion was probably easy for many young girls to
draw. Freud (1932) stated:

::: calibre1
 
:::

The castration complex of girls is \... started by the sight of the
genitals of the other sex. They at once notice the difference *and, it
must be admitted, its significance too*. They feel seriously wronged,
often declare that they want to "have something like it too," and fall
victim to "envy for the penis," which will leave ineradicable traces on
their development and the formation of their character. (p. 125;
emphasis added)

This quotation suggests that despite his reputation in some intellectual
quarters, Freud appreciated the negative consequences of patriarchy. In
his life he encouraged women toward professional achievement and
intellectual equality. He also hoped that by interpreting their penis
envy he would foster his patients' realization that men are not *in
fact* superior---that a belief to that effect betrays an infantile
fantasy that can be examined and discarded. Blame for the fact that
ideas about penis envy were used by some mid-century American therapists
in the service of trying to keep women safely in an "appropriate"
domestic sphere cannot justly be laid at Freud's door. (See
Young-Bruehl, 1990, for a thoughtful commentary on Freud's complex views
about women.)

In the affective realm, hysterical individuals are notable for their
high level of anxiety and their vulnerability to both shame and guilt.
Often conceptualized as having "shallow affect," they actually struggle
with intense affect that terrifies them, against which they erect
distinctive defenses. I say more about this in the context of the
histrionic person's sense of self.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES IN HYSTERIA**

People with hysterical personalities use repression, sexualization, and
regression. They act out in counterphobic ways, usually related to
preoccupations with the fantasied power and danger of the opposite sex.
They also use dissociative defenses, about which I say more in the next
chapter.

Freud regarded repression as the cardinal mental process in hysteria.
Amnesia was a phenomenon of such fascination for him that it led to a
whole theory about the structure of the mind and about how we can
"forget" things that at some inaccessible level we also "know." Freud's
first constructions of repression as an active force rather than an
accidental lapse derived from his work with people who under hypnosis
recalled and relived childhood traumas, often incestuous ones, and then
lost their hysterical symptoms. In his earliest therapeutic attempts,
first with hypnosis and then with nonhypnotic suggestion, he put all his
energies into undoing repression, inviting his patients to relax and
exhorting them to let their minds be open to recollection. He observed
that when traumatic memories returned with their original emotional
power, a process he labeled "abreaction," hysterical disabilities would
disappear.

Repressed memory and its associated affects became central objects of
early psychoanalytic study, and lifting repression came to be seen as a
key therapeutic task. Before long, however, Freud became convinced that
some of the "memories" recovered by hysterical patients were actually
fantasies, and his interest shifted from amnesia for trauma to the
repression of wishes, fears, infantile theories, and painful affects. He
saw Victorian myths about the asexual nature of females as particularly
inimical to psychological health, and he felt that women raised to
repress their erotic strivings were at risk of hysteria because so
compelling a biological force could only be deflected, not quelled. He
began to see some maladies as *conversions* of impulse into bodily
symptoms. A woman who, for instance, had been reared to regard sexual
self-stimulation as depraved might lose feeling and movement in the hand
with which she would be tempted to masturbate. This phenomenon, known as
"glove paralysis" or "glove anesthesia" because only the hand was
affected (which cannot be of neurological origin because nerve damage
that paralyzes the hand would also paralyze the arm), was not uncommon
in Freud's time, and it begged for an explanation.

It was symptoms like glove paralysis that inspired Freud to conceive of
hysterical ailments as achieving a *primary gain* in resolving a
conflict between a wish (e.g., to masturbate) and a prohibition (against
masturbating), and also *secondary gains* in the form of concern from
others. The secondary gains compensated the afflicted person for the
loss of sexual satisfaction by the resulting nonerotic attention to the
person's body and its disability. With the development of the structural
theory, this dynamic was seen as a conflict between the id and the
superego. Freud felt that such a solution is highly unstable, since
sexual energy is blocked up rather than expressed or sublimated, and he
was inclined to interpret any outbreaks of sexualized interest as "the
return of the repressed." Repression can be a useful defense, but it is
a brittle and unreliable one when directed against normal impulses that
will continue to exert a pressure for discharge. Freud's original
formulation about the high degree of anxiety for which hysterical people
are noted was that they were converting dammed-up sexual energy into
diffuse nervousness (see [Chapter 2](#part0011.html){.calibre9}).

I am dwelling on this formulation about hysterical symptoms because a
comparable process can be inferred at a characterological level. People
who repress erotic strivings and conflicts that seem dangerous or
unacceptable tend to feel both sexually frustrated and vaguely anxious.
Their normal wishes for closeness and love may become amplified, as if
energized by unsatisfied sexual longing. They may be highly seductive
(the return of the repressed) but unaware of the implied sexual
invitation in their behavior. In fact, they are often shocked when their
actions are construed as initiating a sexual connection. Moreover, if
they proceed with such an encounter (as they sometimes do, both to
placate the frightening sexualizing object and to assuage their guilt
over the effects of their behavior), they generally do not enjoy it
erotically.

In addition to these interacting processes of repression and
sexualization, people with hysterical personalities may use regression.
When insecure, fearful of rejection, or faced with a challenge that
stimulates unconscious fear, they may become helpless and childlike in
an attempt to fend off trouble by disarming potential rejecters and
abusers. Like anyone in a state of high anxiety (cf. the "Stockholm
syndrome" or the "Patty Hearst phenomenon," terms for situations in
which captive people become trusting toward their abductors or
persecutors), people with hysterical tendencies may be quite
suggestible. In the high-functioning range they can be charming when
operating regressively; in the borderline and psychotic ranges
histrionic clients may become physically ill, clingily dependent, whiny
and demanding, or addicted to crisis. The regressive aspect of
hysterical dynamics was once so common in some female subcultures that
playing dumb, giggling girlishly, and gushing over big, strong men were
seen as normal. The 19th-century equivalent was the swoon.

Acting out in hysterical people is often counterphobic: They approach
what they unconsciously fear. Behaving seductively when they dread sex
is only one example; they may also exhibit themselves when they are
unconsciously ashamed of their bodies, make themselves the center of
attention when they are feeling inferior to others, throw themselves
into acts of bravery and heroism when they are unconsciously frightened
of aggression, and provoke authorities when they are intimidated by
their power. The depiction of histrionic personality disorder in DSM-IV
(American Psychiatric Association, 1994) emphasizes the acting-out
aspects of hysterical character to the exclusion of other equally
important features. While counterphobic enactments are clearly the most
striking of the purely behavioral phenomena associated with
hysteria---and they are certainly the ones that get people's
attention---the *meaning* of these behaviors is also important to the
diagnosis. The most pressing internal characteristic of the hysterical
style is anxiety.

Because hysterically structured people have a surfeit of unconscious
anxiety, guilt, and shame, and because they may be temperamentally
intense and subject to overstimulation, they are easily overwhelmed.
Experiences that are manageable for others may be traumatic to
hysterical people. Consequently, they may use dissociative mechanisms to
reduce the amount of affectively charged information that they must deal
with all at once. Examples include the phenomenon that 19th-century
French psychiatrists labeled la belle indifférence, a strange
minimization of the gravity of a situation or symptom; fausse
reconnaissance, the conviction of remembering something that did not
happen; pseudologia fantastica, the tendency to tell patent untruths
while seeming, at least during the telling, to believe them; fugue
states; body memories of traumatic events not recalled cognitively;
dissociated behaviors such as binge eating or hysterical rages, and so
forth. There is considerable overlap between hysterical and dissociative
personality structures; many contemporary writers view histrionic
psychology as a version of dissociative psychology.

One of my patients, a highly successful professional woman in her 60s
who had devoted a large portion of her career to educating people about
safe sex, found herself during a conference going to bed with a man to
whom she was not particularly attracted ("He wanted it, and somehow that
felt like the final word"). It did not occur to her to ask him to use a
condom. She dissociated both her capacity to say no and her awareness of
the negative consequences of unprotected sex. The sources of her
dissociation included a seductive, narcissistic father and unremitting
childhood messages to the effect that the needs of the other person
always come first.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN HYSTERICAL PSYCHOLOGY**

In the backgrounds of heterosexual people of a hysterical bent, one
often finds events and attitudes that assigned differential power and
value to the different sexes. Common hysterogenic situations include
families in which a little girl is painfully aware that one or both
parents greatly favor her brother(s), or where she senses she was
supposed to have been a boy. (Sometimes she is accurate; sometimes she
erroneously deduces this theory from data such as her being the third of
three daughters.) Or a young girl may notice that her father and the
male members of the family have much more power than her mother,
herself, and her sisters.

When positive attention is given to this child, it involves superficial,
external attributes, such as her appearance, or nonthreatening,
infantile ones such as her innocence and niceness. When negative
attention is given to her brothers, their putative inadequacies are
equated with femininity ("You throw like a girl!" or "You're not acting
like someone who wears the pants in the family"). As she gets older and
matures physically, she notices that her father pulls away from her and
seems uncomfortable with her developing sexuality. She feels deeply
rejected on the basis of her gender, yet she senses that femininity has
a strange power over men (Celani, 1976; Chodoff, 1978, 1982).

It has often been observed (e.g., Easser & Lesser, 1965; Herman, 1981;
Slipp, 1977) that the fathers of histrionic women were both frightening
and seductive. Men may easily underestimate how intimidating they are to
their young female children; male bodies, faces, and voices are harsher
than those of either little girls or mothers, and they take some getting
used to. A father who is angry seems particularly formidable, perhaps
especially to a sensitive female child. If a man engages in tantrums,
harsh criticism, erratic behavior, or sexual violation, he may be
terrifying. A doting father who also intimidates his little girl creates
a kind of approach--avoidance conflict; he is an exciting but feared
object. If he seems to dominate his wife, as in a patriarchal family,
the effect is magnified. His daughter will learn that people of her own
gender are less valued, especially once the days of delectable girlhood
are gone, and that people of her father's gender must be approached with
calculation. Mueller and Aniskiewitz (1986) emphasize the combination of
maternal inadequacy and paternal narcissism in the etiology of
hysterical personality:

::: calibre1
 
:::

Whether the mother is resigned to a weak, ineffectual role or is
threatened by the child and reacts competitively, the basic issue
remains one of not having achieved a mature mutuality. . . . Similarly,
whether the father's adequacy conflicts are expressed through a brittle,
pseudomasculine exterior or directly in warm, sexual, or collusive ways
with the daughter, he . . . reveals his own immaturity. . . . Despite
variations in the manifest traits of the fathers, the common latent
personality trends reflect a phallic--oedipal orientation. The fathers
are self-centered and possessive, and view relationships as extensions
of themselves. (pp. 15--17)

Thus, a frequent source of hysterical personality structure is the sense
that one's sexual identity is problematic. Some little boys reared in
matriarchies where their masculinity is denigrated (e.g., with scornful
contrasts to hypothetical "real" men) develop in a hysterical direction,
despite the advantages the larger culture has traditionally conferred on
males. There is an identifiable subgroup of gay men who meet DSM-IV
criteria for histrionic personality, about whom such family dynamics
have been reported (e.g., Friedman, 1988). The greater frequency of
hysteria in females seems to me to be explicable by two facts: (1) men
have more power than women in the larger culture, and no child fails to
notice this; and (2) men do less of the primary care for infants, and
their relative absence makes them more exciting, idealizable, and
"other" than women.

The outcome of an upbringing that magnifies simplistic gender
stereotypes (men are powerful but narcissistic and dangerous; women are
soft and warm but weak and helpless) is for a woman thus reared to seek
security and self-esteem from attaching herself to males she sees as
particularly powerful. She may use her sexuality to do this and then
find she has no satisfactory sexual response to physical involvement
with such a person. She may also, because his power scares her, seek to
evoke the more tender side of a male partner and then unconsciously
devalue him for being less of a man (i.e., soft, feminine, weak). Some
hysterically organized people, male as well as female, thus go through
repetitive cycles of gender-specific overvaluation and devaluation,
where power is sexualized but sexual satisfaction is curiously absent or
ephemeral.

**THE HYSTERICAL SELF**

The hysterical sense of self is that of a small, fearful, defective
child coping as well as can be expected in a world dominated by powerful
and alien others. Although people with hysterical personalities may come
across as controlling and manipulative, their subjective state of mind
is quite the opposite. Manipulations carried out by individuals with
hysterical structure are, in marked contrast to the maneuvering of
psychopathic people, secondary to their quest for safety and acceptance.
Their orchestration of others involves efforts to achieve an island of
security in a frightening world, to stabilize self-esteem, to master
frightening possibilities by initiating them, to express unconscious
hostility, or some combination of these motives (Bollas, 1999). They do
not seek pleasure from "getting over on" others.

For example, one of my patients, a graduate student in theater arts, a
young woman who had grown up with a loving but capriciously explosive
father, used to become infatuated with one after another man in
authority and would knock herself out to be the favorite student of
each. She would approach all her male teachers and coaches with subtle
flattery and an attitude of awestruck discipleship, a demeanor she
rationalized as going with the territory of being an acting student at
the mercy of arbitrary men. Her seductiveness was hard for some of her
mentors to ignore. When she began getting signals that they were
attracted to her, she reacted with excitement (at feeling powerful and
valued), exhilaration (at feeling attractive and desired), fear (of
their translating their attraction into sexual demands), and guilt (for
exerting her will over them and winning their forbidden erotic
interest). Her manipulativeness was limited to men, and men in authority
at that, and although powerfully driven, it was full of conflict.

Self-esteem in histrionic people is often dependent on their
repetitively achieving the sense that they have as much status and power
as the people they fear (those of the other gender or, in the case of
hysterically structured gay individuals, those of their own gender who
are seen as powerful). Attachment to an idealized object---especially
being seen with one---may create a kind of "derived" self-esteem
(Ferenczi, 1913): "This powerful person is part of me." The psychology
of groupies who idealize artists or politicians has this feel. Sexual
acting out may be fueled by the unconscious fantasy that to be
penetrated by a powerful man is somehow to capture his strength.

Another way hysterically structured people attain self-esteem is through
rescue operations. Via reversal, they may care for their internal
frightened child by helping children at risk. Or they may handle their
fear of authorities counterphobically and set out to change or heal
present-day substitutes for a frightening--exciting childhood object.
The phenomenon of sweet, warm, loving females falling in love with
predatory, destructive males in the hope of "saving" them is bewildering
but familiar to many parents, teachers, and friends of hysterical young
women.

In the dream imagery of hysterical men and women one often finds symbols
that represent possession of a secret uterus or penis, respectively.
Hysterically organized women tend to see any power they have in their
natural aggressiveness as representing their "masculine" side rather
than as integrated with their gender identity. The inability to feel
power in womanhood gives them an insoluble and self-perpetuating
problem. As one of my clients put it, "When I feel strong, I feel like a
man, not a strong woman." This kind of thinking---that maleness equates
with activity and femaleness with passivity, and that an assertive woman
is thus exercising her "masculine" side, or a tender man his
"femininity"---was rife throughout the late 19th century and assumed in
numerous psychoanalytic theories (e.g., Jung's \[1954\] archetypes of
the animus and anima). Contemporary psychoanalytic gender theory (e.g.,
Dyess & Dean, 2000) challenges this essentialistic, reductive thinking,
but in the unconscious, such images may retain great psychic force.

The perception that one's erotic objects, as a class, have the power can
lead to depressive reactions to aging in people with hysterical
personality structure. Because heterosexual women with hysterical
dynamics feel that the only potency in femaleness is sexual
attractiveness, they may be overinvested in how they look and subject to
a greater-than-average dread of aging. Gay men who struggle with
unconscious hysterical beliefs that they are insignificant and weak when
not desired by the powerful may suffer similarly. The tragicomic quality
of the older hysterical woman was captured in the character of Blanche
duBois in *A Streetcar Named Desire.* The pain of the aging gay man is
striking in the character of Gustav von Ashenbach in Thomas Mann's
*Death in Venice.* Any hysterically inclined client needs to be
encouraged to develop other areas besides attractiveness in which
self-esteem may be sought and realized.

The tendency toward vanity and seductiveness in histrionic people,
although constituting a narcissistic defense in that these attitudes
function to achieve and maintain self-esteem, differs from behaviorally
similar processes in individuals whose basic personality is
narcissistic. Hysterically structured people are not internally empty
and indifferent; they charm people not because they crave any attention
that fills a void but because they fear intrusion, exploitation, and
rejection. When these anxieties are not aroused, they are genuinely warm
and caring. In healthier hysterical people, the loving aspects of the
personality are conspicuously in conflict with the defensive and
sometimes destructive ones. The aspiring actress I described previously
was painfully and guiltily aware of her complex effect on the men she
worked so hard to beguile, and despite being able to dissociate the
feeling most of the time, she felt guilt toward their wives.

The attention-seeking behavior of histrionic people has the unconscious
meaning of attaining reassurance that they are acceptable---in
particular that their gendered body is appreciated, in contrast to their
childhood experiences. Hysterically organized individuals tend to feel
unconsciously castrated; by showing off their bodies they may be
converting a passive sense of physical inferiority into an active
feeling of power in physicality. Their exhibitionism is thus
counterdepressive.

Similar considerations illuminate the "shallow affect" associated with
hysteria. It is true that when histrionic people express feelings, there
is often a dramatized, inauthentic, exaggerated quality to what they
say. This does not mean that they do not "really" have the emotions to
which they are giving voice. Their superficiality and apparent
playacting derive from their having extreme anxiety over what will
happen if they have the temerity to express themselves to someone they
see as powerful. Having been infantilized and devalued, they do not
anticipate respectful attention to their feelings. They magnify them to
get past their anxiety and convince themselves and others of their right
to self-expression; simultaneously, by conveying that they are not
really serious, they preserve their option to retract or minimize what
they are saying if it should turn out that this is another unsafe place
to express oneself. Announcements such as "I was SOOOO furious!",
accompanied by theatrically rolling eyes, invite others to see the
emotion as not really there or as trivial. It is there, but it is
drenched in conflict.

Bromberg (1996, p. 223) makes the quip, attributing an earlier version
of it to R. D. Laing (1962, p. 34), that a hysteric "is someone who goes
through life pretending to be who he really is." Behind the wit here,
there is a deeply empathic sensibility, in which the dilemma of the
hysterical person is framed as the "tragic inability to convince others
of the authenticity of his or her own subjective experience" (p. 224).
In a therapeutic atmosphere of scrupulous respect, the histrionic person
will eventually feel sufficiently heard to become able to describe anger
and other feelings in a credible, direct way, and to augment a reactive,
impressionistic style with a proactive, analytic one.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH HYSTERICAL PATIENTS**

Transference was originally discovered with clients whose complaints
were in the hysterical realm, and it is no accident that it became so
visible there. Freud's whole conception of hysteria revolved around the
observation that what is not consciously remembered remains active in
the unconscious realm, finding expression in symptoms, enactments, and
reexperiences of early scenarios. The present is misunderstood as
containing the perceived dangers and insults of the past, partly because
the hysterical person is too anxious to let contradictory information
in.

In addition to these factors, histrionic people are strongly object
related and emotionally expressive. They are more likely than other
individuals to talk about their reactions to people in general and to
the therapist in particular. Given the dynamics described above, the
reader can probably see how the combination of a heterosexual female
hysterical patient and a male therapist would immediately evoke the
client's central conflicts. Freud (1925a) was initially quite
exasperated to find that while he was trying to put himself across to
his histrionic patients as a benevolent physician, they insisted on
seeing him as a provocative male presence, with whom they would suffer,
struggle, and sometimes fall in love.

Because hysterical personality is a psychology in which gender-related
issues may dominate the patient's way of seeing the world, the nature of
the initial transferences may differ as a function of the sex of both
client and therapist. With male practitioners, heterosexual female
clients with hysterical dynamics may be excited, intimidated, and
defensively seductive. With female therapists, they are often subtly
hostile and competitive. With both, they may seem somewhat childlike.
The transferences of male hysterical patients will vary depending on
whether their internal cosmology assigns greater power to maternal or
paternal figures. Most hysterical clients are cooperative and
appreciative of the therapist's interest, but borderline and
psychotic-level hysteroid people are difficult to treat because they act
out so destructively and feel so menaced by the treatment relationship
(Lazare, 1971).

Even high-functioning hysterical clients, however, can have
transferences of such intensity that they feel almost psychotic. Hot
transferences are unnerving to both therapist and client. They can be
addressed effectively by tactful investigation and by scrupulous
observance of professional boundaries. Therapists who are secure in
their role will find such reactions, as Freud did, not an obstacle to
treatment but rather the means through which it heals, as clients learn
to tolerate their complexly determined desire in a safe environment.
When histrionic patients are too afraid to admit to such passionate
responses in the presence of the therapist, they may act out with
objects who are transparent substitutes. A supervisee of mine named
James began seeing a hysterical young woman whose father had alternated
between traumatic intrusiveness and rejection; she had sequential
affairs with men named Jim, Jamie, and Jay within the first several
months of her treatment.

Occasionally the transference of a person with hysterical dynamics
becomes painfully intense before he or she has sufficient trust in the
therapist to bear that intensity. Especially in the early months,
histrionic clients may flee treatment, sometimes with rationalizations
and sometimes with awareness that it is the strength of their
attraction, or fear, or hatred---and the anxiety that it evokes---that
is driving them away. Even though the frightening reactions may coexist
with warm feelings, they can be too upsetting to tolerate. I have worked
with several women who became so upset by the hostility and devaluation
they found themselves feeling in my presence that they could not keep
coming to me. Similarly, several of my male colleagues have been fired
by histrionic clients who became too obsessed with winning their
therapist's love to benefit from therapy. In these cases, especially if
the transference is somewhat ego alien, a change of therapists to
someone who seems less like the original overstimulating or devalued
object may work out well.

Countertransference with hysterical clients may include both defensive
distancing and infantilization. The therapeutic dyad in which these
potentials are most problematic is that of the male therapist,
especially if his personality is at all narcissistic, and the female
client. It can be hard to attend respectfully to what feels like
pseudoaffect in histrionic clients; the self-dramatizing quality of
these anxious patients invites ridicule. Most hysterically organized
people are highly sensitive to interpersonal cues, however, and an
attitude of patronizing amusement will be very injurious to them, even
if they manage to keep the therapist's disrespect out of their
awareness.

Before it was politically incorrect to talk openly and ego-syntonically
about one's misogyny, it was common to hear (male) psychiatric residents
condoling with each other man-to-man about their exasperating histrionic
patients. "I've got this wacko hysteric---she bursts into tears every
time I frown. And today she comes in with a skirt that barely reaches
her thighs!" Female professionals within range of such conversations
would exchange pained expressions and give silent thanks---or
prayers---that they were not in treatment with someone who could talk
like this about a person he hoped to help. One still hears this kind of
conversation about borderline patients, and given that the DSM depiction
of BPD emphasizes hysteroid features, the power of this devaluing
countertransference remains impressive. It is arguable, in fact, that
even though "hysteria" has disappeared as a disease entity, we have seen
the return of the repressed in the contemporary concept of BPD (Bollas,
1999).

Related to this more condescending and hostile reaction is the
temptation to treat the histrionic woman like a little girl. As a major
weapon in the hysterical arsenal, regression is to be expected. Still,
it is surprising how many clinicians accept the hysterical invitation to
act out omnipotence. The appeal of playing "Big Daddy" to a helpless,
grateful young thing is evidently quite strong. I have known otherwise
disciplined practitioners who, when treating a hysterically organized
woman, could not contain their impulse to give her reassurance,
consolation, advice, or praise, despite the fact that the subtext in all
these messages is that she is too weak to figure things out on her own,
or to develop the capacity to give herself her own reassurance or
comfort. Because regression in most histrionic people is
defensive---that is, it protects them from fear and guilt that accompany
adult responsibility---it should not be confused with genuine
helplessness. Being afraid and being incompetent are not the same thing.
The problem with being too indulgent and commiserative with a hysterical
person, even if that stance lacks any hostile condescension, is that the
client's diminished self-concept will be reinforced. An attitude of
parental solicitude is as much of an insult as one of scorn for the
patient's "manipulativeness."

Finally, I should mention countertransference temptations to respond to
seductiveness in hysterical clients. As has been repeatedly demonstrated
in studies of the sexual abuse of clients (see Celenza, 2007; Gabbard &
Lester, 2002; Gutheil & Brodsky, 2008; Pope, Tabachnick, &
Keith-Spiegel, 1987), this is a greater danger to male than to female
therapists. Women treating hysterical patients, even highly seductive
males, are protected by internalized social conventions that make the
dyad of dependent male--authoritative female harder to erotize. Cultural
acceptance of the phenomenon of the older or more powerful man's
attraction to the younger or more needy woman, in contrast, which has
psychodynamic roots in male fears of female engulfment that are assuaged
by this paradigm, leaves men much more vulnerable to sexual temptation
in their therapeutic role.

The implications of theory and the lessons of practice emphatically
confirm that sexual acting out with patients has disastrous effects
(Celenza, 2007; Gabbard & Lester, 2002; Gutheil & Brodsky, 2008; Pope,
1987; Smith, 1984). What hysterical clients need, as opposed to what
they may feel they need when their core conflicts are activated in
treatment, is the experience of having and giving voice to powerful
desires that are not exploited by the object of those desires. Trying
and failing to seduce someone is profoundly transformative to histrionic
people, because---often for the first time in their lives---they learn
that someone they depend on will put their welfare above the opportunity
to use them, and that the direct exertion of their autonomy is more
effective than defensive, sexualized distortions of it.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF HYSTERICAL PERSONALITY**

Standard psychoanalytic treatment was invented for people with
hysterical personality structure, and it is still the treatment of
choice with healthier clients in this group. By standard treatment, I
mean that the therapist is relatively quiet and nondirective, addresses
process more than content, deals with defenses rather than what is being
defended against, and limits interpretation mostly to addressing
resistances as they appear in the transference. As David Allen (1977)
notes:

Hysterical patients make contact immediately, and it is a reparative
contact they seek. . . . For the beginning therapist, such patients give
the clearest and most accessible evidence of transference. . . . The
crux of the treatment of the hysterical personality is the transference.
If we give wrong interpretations, we can correct them in the light of
later information. If we miss opportunities to interpret, they will
occur again and again. But if we mishandle the transference, the
treatment is in trouble. Mishandling of the transference or failing to
establish a therapeutic alliance is almost the only vital mistake, and
it is exceedingly difficult to repair. (p. 291)

One must first develop rapport and spell out the responsibilities of
both parties to the therapy contract---a swift and easy process with
higher-functioning hysterical clients because of their basic
relatedness. Then, by a nonintrusive but warm demeanor, along with a
judicious avoidance of self-disclosure, the therapist allows the
transference to flourish. Once the patient's issues surface in the
treatment relationship, the therapist can tactfully address feelings,
fantasies, frustrations, wishes, and fears as they appear directly in
the consulting room. It is critical that the therapist allow the
hysterical client to come to his or her own understandings. A rush to
interpret will only intimidate someone with hysterical sensibilities,
reminding the patient once again of the superior power and insight of
others. Comments with any trace of the attitude "I know you better than
you know yourself" may, in the imagery that often dominates the internal
representational world of the hysterical person, feel castrating or
penetrating to the client. Raising gentle questions, remarking casually
when the patient seems stuck, and continually bringing him or her back
to what is being felt, and how that is understood, comprise the main
features of effective technique.

With neurotic-level hysterical people, the therapist may have the
experience of sitting back and watching the patient make him- or herself
well. It is important to rein in one's narcissistic needs to be valued
for making a contribution; the best contribution one can make to a
histrionic person is confidence in the client's capacity to figure
things out and make responsible adult decisions. One should attend not
only to the elicitation of feelings but to the integration of thinking
and feeling. D. W. Allen (1977) observes:

::: calibre1
 
:::

An essential part of craftsmanship in therapy is to communicate within
the cognitive style of the patient with full respect for the patient's
feelings and values. The hysterical thinking style is not inferior as
far as it goes, but the hysterical style needs the complementary
advantages of detailed, linear "left-hemisphere thinking" as well. In a
sense, the hysteric does need to learn how to think and what to connect
in thinking, just as the obsessive compulsive needs to learn how to feel
and what to connect in feeling. (p. 324)

 

More disturbed hysterical clients require much more active and educative
work. In the first interview, besides tolerating and naming their
crippling anxiety, one should predict any temptations that may imperil
the treatment. For example: "I know that right now you are determined to
work these problems out in therapy. But we can see that in your life so
far when your anxiety has gotten too high, you have escaped into an
exciting love affair \[or gotten sick, or gone into a rage and
left---whatever is the pattern\]. That is likely to happen here, too. Do
you think you can stick with our work over the long haul?"

Lower-functioning hysterical clients should be told to expect powerful
and negative reactions to the therapist and urged to come in and talk
about them. In general, approaches that apply to borderline patients
across the typological spectrum are useful with more disturbed
hysterical people, with special attention to their transference
reactions.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

The main conditions with which hysterical personality organization can
be confused, on the basis of its surface characteristics, are
psychopathy and narcissism. In addition, some imprecision exists, as it
did in Freud's day, between the diagnoses of hysterical and dissociative
psychology. Finally, also as in the time of Freud and earlier,
individuals with undiagnosed physiological conditions may be
misunderstood as having a hysterical personality disorder.

**Hysterical versus Psychopathic Personality**

Many writers, over many decades (e.g., Chodoff, 1982; Cloninger & Guze,
1970; Kraepelin, 1915; Lilienfield, Van Valkenburg, Larntz & Akiskal,
1986; Meloy, 1988; Rosanoff, 1938; Vaillant, 1975), have noted
connections between psychopathy and hysteria. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that there is an affinity between the two psychologies;
specifically, some histrionic women, especially in the borderline range,
are attracted to psychopathic men. Meloy (1988) mentions the familiar
phenomenon of the convicted murderer who gets inundated with letters
from female sympathizers looking to come to his defense and/or to become
his lover.

Qualities seen as hysterical in women are often construed as
psychopathic in men. A study by Richard Warner (1978), in which a
fictional case vignette was given to mental health professionals, found
that identical descriptions of sensational, flirtatious, excitable
behavior attributed to either a man or a woman yielded assessments of
antisocial or hysterical personality, respectively, depending on the
gender of the patient portrayed. Warner concluded that hysteria and
psychopathy are essentially the same. And yet every experienced
clinician has seen at least a few women who were unquestionably
psychopathic rather than hysterical characterologically, even if they
had some hysterical symptoms, and a few men who were clearly histrionic
and not antisocial. If these categories were just gendered versions of
the same psychology, that would not be so. (Also, Warner's vignettes
featured behaviors that make differential diagnosis difficult.) A more
reasonable view of his findings is that because of the greater frequency
of psychopathy in men and of hysteria in women, most of his
diagnosticians engaged in the research task with an explanatory "set"
that was not sufficiently counteracted to change their expectancies.

Confusion of hysteria with psychopathy is likelier toward the more
disturbed end of the hysterical continuum. In the borderline and
psychotic ranges, many people have aspects of both psychologies. But a
determination of which dynamic predominates is valuable to the formation
of an alliance and to the ultimate success of therapy. Hysterical
individuals are intensely anaclitic, conflicted, and frightened, and a
therapeutic relationship with them depends on the clinician's
appreciation of their fear. Psychopathic people equate fear with
weakness, resonate to self-definition themes over anaclitic onces, and
disdain therapists who mirror their trepidation. Hysterical and
antisocial people both behave dramatically, but the defensive
theatricality of the histrionic person is absent in psychopathy.
Demonstrating one's power as a therapist will engage a psychopathic
person positively yet will intimidate or infantilize a hysterical
client.

**Hysterical versus Narcissistic Personality**

As I have noted, hysterical people use narcissistic defenses. Both
hysterical and narcissistic individuals have basic self-esteem defects,
deep shame, and compensatory needs for attention and reassurance; both
idealize and devalue. But the sources of these similarities differ.
First, for the hysterical person, self-esteem problems are usually
related to gender identification or to particular conflicts, while with
narcissistic people they are diffuse. Second, people who are
hysterically organized are basically warm and caring; their exploitive
qualities arise only when their core dilemmas and fears are activated.
Third, hysterical people idealize and devalue in specific, often
gender-related ways; their idealization frequently has its origins in
counterphobia ("This wonderful man would not hurt me"), and their
devaluation has a reactive, aggressive quality. In contrast,
narcissistic people habitually rank all others in terms of better and
worse, without the press of powerful, object-directed affects. Kernberg
(1982) has commented on how a hysterical and a narcissistic woman may
both have unsatisfactory intimate relationships, but the former tends to
pick bad objects whom she has counterphobically idealized, while the
latter picks adequate objects whom she then devalues.

Implications of this differential for treatment are substantial, though
too complex to cover except with the overall observation that basically
hysterical people do well with traditional analytic treatment, whereas
narcissistic ones need therapeutic efforts adapted to the primacy of
their efforts to maintain self-cohesion and a positively valued
self-concept.

**Hysterical versus Dissociative Conditions**

Hysterical and dissociative psychologies are closely related and are
viewed by many contemporary scholars as variations on the same traumatic
theme. Because it is more common for a dissociative person to be
presumed to be hysterical than vice versa, I discuss the distinctions
between these two conditions, and the metapsychological problems of
classification related to dissociative dynamics, in the next chapter.

**Hysterical versus Physiological Conditions**

Although it is much less common now than in the heyday of American pop
Freudianism to attribute any baffling physical symptom to unconscious
conflict, a final word should be said about not overlooking the
possibility of physical origins of mysterious ailments. Symptoms of some
systemic illnesses---multiple sclerosis, for example---are frequently
assumed to be of hysterical origin, as are many "female complaints" that
frustrate physicians. In England in the 1990s there was an outbreak of
what was widely diagnosed as "gardener's hysteria" in members of a group
of horticulturists who had visited the United States; eventually it was
discovered that they had gathered examples of American fall foliage on
the trip, including a lot of brilliantly red poison ivy. More
consequentially, George Gershwin probably would have lived well beyond
38 if his therapist had not interpreted the symptoms of his brain tumor
as psychogenic rather than organic.

Because histrionic people regress when they are anxious, and have
off-putting, self-dramatizing ways of expressing their complaints, a
physical illness in a person with hysterical tendencies is in jeopardy
of not being thoroughly investigated. It is more than simply medically
prudent to pursue the possibility of an organic problem in a histrionic
person; it also sends a therapeutic message to a scared human being
whose basic dignity has not always been respected.

**SUMMARY**

I have described hysterical personality in the context of evolving
psychoanalytic conceptualizations that include aspects of drive (intense
and affectionate basic temperament, with oral and oedipal struggles
aggravated by gender-related disappointments), ego (impressionistic
cognitive style; defenses of repression, sexualization, regression,
acting out, dissociation), object relations (inadequate parenting that
includes narcissistic and seductive messages, replicated in later
relationships dominated by the repetition compulsion), and self
(self-image as small, defective, and endangered, and self-esteem
burdened by conflicts over sexualized expressions of power).

I described transference and countertransference experiences as
including strong, competitive, and erotized reactions, depending on the
sexual orientation and gender of client and therapist, as well as
regressive trends that invite contempt or infantilization rather than
respect. I addressed the value of working through erotic transferences
and stressed the destructiveness of therapist sexualization. I
recommended a treatment style characterized by the careful maintenance
of professional boundaries, a warm and empathic attitude, and an economy
of interpretation guided by traditional psychoanalytic technique. I
contrasted hysterical character with psychopathic, narcissistic, and
dissociative personality, and offered a final caveat about investigating
possible physiological causes of presumptively hysterical symptoms.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

For a sympathetic understanding of hysterical personality, I am partial
to Mardi Horowitz's (1991) edited volume and also to the work of Mueller
and Aniskiewitz (1986), whose tone lacks the condescension so common in
male therapists' writing on hysteria. D. Shapiro's (1965) essay on the
hysterical cognitive style is thorough and still timely.

For readers interested in hysterical neurosis as the emblematic mental
illness of the late 19th century (perhaps comparable to depression in
our current era), Scull's (2009) mordant "biography" of hysteria is
fascinating. Veith's (1965) history from ancient to modern times is
illuminating and entertaining. For those who enjoy thoughtful and
passionate feminist scholarship I recommend Juliet Mitchell's (2001)
plea that we resume attending to hysteria (contra to those who have
regarded it as a constructed and bygone cultural phenomenon) and *Storms
in Her Head* by Muriel Dimen and Adrienne Harris (2001). Bromberg's
chapter on "Hysteria, Dissociation, and Cure" in *Standing in the
Spaces* (1996) is a gracefully written, incisive commentary on Freudian
and post-Freudian formulations, that foregrounds the relational context
of healing for people with hysterical issues.

[]{#part0025.html}

**15**

Dissociative Psychologies

[W]{.dropcap}hen I first wrote this chapter in 1993, it was new to
include attention to dissociative psychologies in a psychodynamically
oriented book on personality. Since then, there has been an explosion of
psychoanalytic attention to dissociative phenomena, especially among
therapists identified with the relational movement (e.g., Boulanger,
2007; Bromberg, 1998, 2010; Davies & Frawley, 1994; Grand, 2000; Howell,
2005; D. B. Stern, 1997, 2009) and researchers in attachment (Liotti,
2004; Lyons-Ruth, Bronfman & Parsons, 1999) and cognitive and affective
neuroscience (Panksepp, 1998; Schore, 2002; Teicher, Glod, Surrey, &
Swett, 1993). Students of trauma and child development have generated
new paradigms for understanding what was once called multiple
personality and what recent editions of the DSM have labeled
"dissociative identity disorder"---that is, dissociative reactions that
are automatic, chronic, and repeated throughout the lifespan, the
pattern that has struck me and some other writers as describable in
terms of dissociative personality structure (cf. I. Brenner, 2001, 2004;
Classen, Pain, Field, & Woods, 2006).

To update this chapter in the face of a flood of new data, I have
collaborated closely with Richard Chefetz, who straddles the worlds of
psychoanalysis and trauma studies, has extensive experience treating
dissociative clients, and writes with particular poignancy about the
topic, integrating attachment theory, affective and cognitive
neuroscience, and relational psychoanalytic perspectives on multiple
self-states with core work in traumatology (e.g., Chefetz, 2000a, 2000b,
2009, 2010a, 2010b). He is further along than I am in the paradigm shift
that is in process; he rejects the concept of dissociative personality
structure or personality disorder (Chefetz, 2004) and views my way of
organizing diagnostic data as dependent on a flawed ego psychology model
that has too often gotten in the way of therapists' appreciating the
dissociative process.

It may be true that organizing chronic and severe dissociative
conditions under the rubric of traditional personality categories is not
the best paradigm or metaphor for dissociative phenomena. I continue to
feel, however, that dissociative identity disorder and other complex
dissociative conditions should be represented in this book, given the
crucial diagnostic importance of distinguishing the dissociative process
from other patterns that may infuse character. In this chapter, I try to
provide some fundamental knowledge to help readers with dissociative
clients, while holding open the possibilities for different
constructions of how to organize that information.

Until approximately the 1980s, multiple personality disorder and related
psychologies based on severe dissociation were considered rare enough to
preclude their incorporation into schemata of personality types and
disorders. It has become clear, however, that many people engage
dissociative processes quite actively as a first-line adaptation to deal
with destabilizing situations such as emotional intensity. For many of
them, their dissociative experience is ego syntonic and assumed to be
normal. If dissociative identity disorder were not "a pathology of
hiddenness" (Gutheil, in Kluft, 1985), in which the patient is often
unaware of having dissociated self-states (alter personalities), and in
which trust is so problematic that even those parts of the self that
know about the dissociation are reluctant to divulge their secret, we
might have known long ago how to begin identifying and helping
dissociative clients.

In fact, some people did know long ago. A regrettable side effect of
Freud's ultimate privileging of maturational issues over traumatic ones,
and of repression over dissociation, is that it distracted us from some
fine scholarship on dissociation that was available at the end of the
19th century. Pierre Janet (1890), for example, explained many
hysterical symptoms by reference to dissociative processes, explicitly
disputing Freud's favoring of repression as a primary explanatory
principle (see van der Hart, Nijenhuis, & Steele, 2006, which builds
upon Janet's work). In the United States, William James and Alfred Binet
were both interested in dissociation. Morton Prince (1906) published his
detailed case of a dissociative woman around the time that *The
Interpretation of Dreams* (Freud, 1900) was attracting notice
(unfortunately, the eventual impact of the latter virtually eclipsed
that of the former---see Putnam, 1989; C. A. Ross, 1989b). In
mid-20th-century theorizing, Sullivan's (1953) concept of "not-me"
states as a normal variant of experience came closest to capturing the
subjective experience of dissociation.

Therapists experienced with dissociative clients view multiplicity not
as a bizarre aberration but as an understandable adaptation to a
particular kind of history---specifically, as a chronic posttraumatic
stress syndrome of childhood origin (D. Spiegel, 1984). Because of the
extensively documented differences among the self-states of someone with
dissociative identity disorder, the condition has been widely
sensationalized. These differences (which may include subjective age,
sexual identity and preference, systemic illnesses, allergies, eyeglass
prescriptions, electroencephalogram \[EEG\] readings, handwriting,
handedness, addictions, and language facility) are so impressive that
lay people may consider multiple personality disorder the most exotic
mental illness they have ever heard of. So do many therapists with
little experience treating dissociation.

No other documented disorder has inspired comparable arguments about
*whether it exists at all* independent of iatrogenesis. Dissociative
phenomena can certainly strain credulity, but I find it no harder to
accept that the mind has a method of segregating intolerable experience
than I do to take seriously the fact that some people believe they are
obese when they are in fact starving to death. George Atwood once
remarked to me that the controversy over whether dissociative identity
disorder "exists" eerily parallels the quandary of the dissociative
patient ("Do I remember this, or am I making it up?" "Should I take my
experience seriously, or dismiss it as attention seeking?").

We now know (Solms & Turnbull, 2002) that glucocorticoids secreted
during traumatic experience can shut down the hippocampus, making it
impossible for episodic memory (the memory of *being there*) to be laid
down in the first place. Semantic memory (third-person facts about the
event), somatic--procedural memory (body experiences of it), and
emotional learning (the amygdala's storing of affect connected to
triggers) remain operative, but the sense of "I was there and it
happened to me" may never have been established in the brain and hence
is not recoverable. Thus, because trauma damages memory, one frequently
knows *that* a client has been traumatized, but not the details of *how*
(J. H. Slavin, 2007). Along with many other therapists who have treated
dissociative patients, I have found myself construing the controversy
about "whether dissociative identity disorder exists" as a pervasive
social countertransference to a condition that can be unbearable to
imagine.

Considered in context, dissociation that results in "alter
personalities" (Putnam, 1989) or experiences of "isolated subjectivity"
(Chefetz, 2004) and the "elsewhere thought known" (Kluft, 2000) is not
so incomprehensible. Researchers in cognitive psychology (e.g., Hilgard,
1986; LeDoux, 1996, 2002) have described simultaneous, coexisting trains
of thought in both patient populations and "normals." Investigations
into dissociative states and hypnosis (people who dissociate are
actually entering spontaneous hypnotic trances) have revealed some
remarkable capacities of the human organism and have raised absorbing
questions about consciousness, brain functioning, integrative and
disintegrative mental processes, and latent potential. Still, clinicians
know that each of their dissociative patients is in most respects an
ordinary human being---a single person with the subjective experience of
different selves---one whose suffering is only too real.

The first carefully documented case of multiple personality since M.
Prince's (1906) "Miss Beauchamps" was Eve (of *The Three Faces of* \...
), the pseudonym of Christine Costner Sizemore (Sizemore, 1989; Sizemore
& Pittillo, 1977; Thigpen & Cleckley, 1957). Sizemore, a woman of
impressive energy and achievement, is a good exemplar of a
high-functioning dissociative person. It is notable that the first
sufferer of characterological dissociation to "come out" to a therapist
in this era was someone with considerable basic trust, ego strength, and
object constancy. More disturbed individuals who are diagnosable with
dissociative identity disorder, even when they suspect their
multiplicity, are much too afraid of mistreatment to let a naive
clinician in on their troubled inner life---especially early in therapy.
A dissociative woman I treated for several years said that the
deinstitutionalization of mental patients in the 1970s, which made it
less likely that she would be locked up for life in some snake pit,
contributed to her mustering the courage to admit to her hallucinatory
experiences and "lost time."

Josef Breuer's famous patient "Anna O" (Bertha Pappenheim), a person who
influenced psychoanalytic history in incalculable ways, is another
example of a high-functioning multiple personality. Breuer and Freud
(1883--1885) regarded her dissociated states as only one part of her
hysterical illness, but most contemporary diagnosticians would consider
her primarily dissociative. Consider the following description:

::: calibre1
 
:::

Two entirely distinct states of consciousness were present which
alternated very frequently and without warning and which became more and
more differentiated in the course of her illness. In one of these states
she recognized her surroundings; she was melancholy and anxious, but
relatively normal. In the other state she hallucinated and was
"naughty"---that is to say, she was abusive, used to throw the cushions
at people\... . \[I\]f something had been moved in the room or someone
had entered or left it (during her other state of consciousness) she
would complain of having "lost" some time and would remark upon the gap
in her train of conscious thoughts\... . At moments when her mind was
quite clear she would complain \... of having two selves, a real one and
an evil one which forced her to behave badly. (p. 24)

 

This remarkable woman went on, after an abortive treatment with Breuer,
to be a devoted and highly effective social worker (Karpe, 1961).

In contrast to Christine Sizemore and Bertha Pappenheim, who were able
to function well through large parts of their lives, are the ruthlessly
self-destructive and "polyfragmented" patients who dissociate so
automatically and chaotically that they experience themselves as having
hundreds of "personalities," most of which consist of limited attributes
that address some current issue. Truddi Chase (1987), whose many
self-states the popular media touted during the resurgence of interest
in dissociation, may be in this category, though it is arguable that if
her therapist had been less invested in publicizing her dissociated
condition, she might not look so splintered. Many dissociative people in
the psychotic range may be in jails rather than mental hospitals; alter
personalities who rape and kill, often in delusional states of mind, are
possible outcomes of the traumatic abuse and neglect that create
multiplicity (Lewis, Yaeger, Swica, Pincus, & Lewis, 1997).

Since the rediscovery of dissociation in the last three decades, there
has been considerable mutual ambivalence between the psychoanalytic
community and those who led the movement to gain and disseminate
knowledge of dissociation. On the one hand, analysts appreciate the
power of organized unconscious forces; consequently, the idea of
traumatically created, out-of-consciousness alter personalities does not
require from them a huge leap of imagination. And they tend to work with
patients over months and years, during which the covert parts of a
dissociative person may build up the courage to expose experiences that
are unacknowledged in the self-state in which the client usually comes
to therapy. Thus, analytic therapists are more likely than other
professionals to have worked with people who have revealed their
multiplicity, and many of them doubtless addressed such revelations
respectfully, with a willingness to learn from the client about a
condition that was not emphasized in their psychoanalytic training.

On the other hand, until recent developments in analytic theory,
psychodynamic clinicians tended to accept the explanatory preferences of
Freud, who eventually put less emphasis on trauma and molestation than
on fantasy and its interaction with developmental challenges. Also, and
curiously, Freud had little to say about multiple personality, a
condition that was recognized in his day by several of the psychiatrists
he revered (although he once made the off-hand comment, "Perhaps the
secret of the cases of what is described as 'multiple personality' is
that the different identifications seize hold of consciousness in turn"
\[1923, pp. 30--31\]). His blind spots contributed to a tendency in some
Freudians to regard reports of incest and molestation as fantasy.
Intriguingly, Freud's original "seduction theory" ran aground on a
problem that later resurfaced in the form of the "false memory
controversy" about reports of childhood sexual abuse: Trauma distorts
perception, impairs memory, and creates a basis for later confusions of
fact and fantasy (Dorahy, 2001). This is true for traumatized patients
as well as for therapists with traumatic histories---people who have
suffered trauma may be especially attracted to the profession of helping
others or to the study of trauma---and so the possibilities for
misunderstanding and confusion are vast.

In addition to habits of thought that derive from Freud, people trained
in the psychodynamic tradition have sometimes misapplied developmental
concepts to the switches in consciousness that signal the emergence of
dissociated self-states. For example, they have been more inclined than
other mental health professionals to interpret them not as alterations
in consciousness but as nonamnesic regressive episodes or as evidence of
defensive splitting. As a result, they have often failed to ask
questions that would discriminate between the splitting off of what has
once been integrated and the dissociation of what has always been held
separately (D. B. Stern, 1997).

Some therapists who have distinguished themselves by their commitment to
learning and teaching about trauma and dissociation have thus found it
hard to forgive Freud and Freudians for minimizing both the prevalence
and the destructiveness of the sexual abuse of children. Some also
lament the influence of thinkers like Kernberg, on the grounds that they
have conflated trauma-related dissociation with developmentally
normative splitting and have thereby misdiagnosed many people with
dissociative personalities as borderline or schizophrenic---a mistake
that can cost such a patient years of misguided treatment. Specialists
in dissociation (e.g., C. A. Ross, 1989a) rightly complain that legions
of desperate people have been misunderstood and retraumatized for years
by unnecessary medical procedures (e.g., major tranquilizers,
electroshock). Critics of exponents of dissociation counter that when
one is looking for them, one can find a multiple under every rock (cf.
Brenneis, 1996; D. R. Ross, 1992). Fads in psychopathology are not
unknown, especially in conditions in which suggestibility may play a
large role.

I review all of this because it remains true that, even though
dissociative identity disorder and other dissociative conditions have
attained respectability by inclusion in the DSM, a certain polemicism
infuses the work of both explicators and critics of dissociative
concepts. This is to be expected in any field when there has been a
paradigm shift (Kuhn, 1970; R. J. Loewenstein, 1988; Loewenstein & Ross,
1992). I urge readers, whatever your biases, to try to comprehend the
phenomenon of dissociation with an "experience-near" sensibility; that
is, from the standpoint of empathy with the internal experience of the
person who feels and behaves like a composite of many different selves.
My own understanding of dissociation is still developing, and I suspect
that much of what I say here will eventually be revised. It is less
important to decide which experts to believe than to try to comprehend
what patients experience.

**DRIVE, AFFECT, AND TEMPERAMENT\
IN DISSOCIATIVE CONDITIONS**

People who use dissociation as their primary defense mechanism are
essentially virtuosos in self-hypnosis. Movement into an altered state
of consciousness when one is distressed is not possible for everybody;
you have to have the talent. Just as people differ in their basic levels
of hypnotizability (Spiegel & Spiegel, 1978), they differ in their
capacities for autohypnosis. To learn to dissociate automatically, one
has to have the constitutional potential to go into trance; otherwise,
trauma may be handled in other ways (e.g., repression, acting out,
substance use).

Some have suggested that people who develop dissociative identity
disorder are innately more resourceful and interpersonally sensitive
than the norm. A child with a complex, rich inner life (imaginary
friends, fantasy identities, internal dramas, and a penchant for
imaginative play) may be more able to retreat to a secret inner world
when terrorized or emotionally traumatized than a less gifted youngster.
Clinical lore suggests that people who struggle with dissociation are as
a group brighter and more creative than average. Such observations may
be artifactual; those who come for help may not be typical of the whole
dissociative spectrum. It was once thought that Eve and Sybil
(Schreiber, 1973) were paradigmatic multiples, but their more hysteroid
presentations are now seen as characteristic of only a small percentage
of those who dissociate (Kluft, 1991).

To my knowledge, no drive constructs have been put forward to account
for dissociative phenomena, probably because by the time the mental
health community attended seriously to dissociation, the hegemony of
psychoanalytic drive theory was over. With respect to affect, however,
the picture is clear: Dissociative people have been overwhelmed with it
and have gotten virtually no help processing it. Their affect is
consequently in a state of chronic dysregulation (Chefetz, 2000a).
Primordial terror, horror, and shame are foremost among the emotions
that provoke dissociation in any traumatic situation; rage, excitement,
and guilt may also be involved. The more numerous and conflicting the
emotional states activated, the harder it is to assimilate an experience
without dissociation.

Bodily states that may instigate trance include intolerable pain and
confusing sexual arousal. While it is possible to develop a dissociative
identity in the absence of early sexual trauma and abuse by caregivers,
empirical studies have established this relationship in the vast
majority of cases in hospital settings severe enough to be diagnosed as
dissociative identity disorder (Braun & Sacks, 1985; Putnam, 1989). More
and more, neglect is emerging as equally pathogenic (Brunner, Parzer,
Schuld, & Resch, 2000; Teicher et al., 2004); the child who is sexually
used by a parent and otherwise ignored (by both the exploitive parent
and other caregivers) suffers unbearably and must resort to dissociative
solutions. Bullying and peer aggression (Teicher, Samson, Sheu, Polcari,
& McGreenery, 2010), emotional abuse, and---probably most pathogenic of
all---witnessing of domestic violence (Wolf, Gales, Shane, & Shane,
2000) are found in the histories of people with severe enough
dissociation to meet DSM criteria for dissociative identity disorder.

**DEFENSIVE AND ADAPTIVE PROCESSES\
IN DISSOCIATIVE CONDITIONS**

Dissociative defenses that become relied on as a first-order strategy
are like any others in that they begin as the best possible adaptation
of an immature organism to a particular situation, then become automatic
and hence maladaptive in later circumstances. Some adults with
dissociative personalities have merely continued to use simple and
sophisticated "below-the-radar" dissociative processes to regulate
affect ever since the time of their original traumas; others, once the
abusive practices ceased, have achieved for significant periods either a
tenuous cooperation of alter personalities or the consistent domination
of their subjective world by one self-state.

One common clinical presentation is the person whose observable
dissociation stopped when he or she left the family in which it
originated, only to surface again when a son or daughter reached the age
at which the parent was first abused. (This identificatory connection is
usually completely out of consciousness.) Another frequent trigger for
dissociation in an adult whose autohypnotic tendencies have been dormant
is an experience that unconsciously recalls childhood trauma. One woman
in my practice suffered a household fall that injured her in the same
places where she had been mutilated during childhood ritual abuse, and
for the first time in years she suddenly became someone else. In taking
a careful history, one often finds many minor instances of dissociation
throughout the patient's adult life, but what usually brings the person
to treatment is some dramatic and disabling dissociative reaction
(losing significant amounts of time, being told of things one cannot
remember, suffering interruption of the daily routines of living that
have allowed the person to avoid feeling through doing). It is phenomena
like these that prompted Kluft (1987) to talk about "windows of
diagnosability" in dissociative conditions (see R. J. Loewenstein,
1991).

Dissociation is an oddly invisible defense. When one self-state or
system of alters is running things smoothly, no one outside the client
can see the dissociative process. Many clinicians believe they have
never treated someone with dissociative identity disorder---perhaps
because they expect such a client to announce his or her multiplicity or
to generate a dramatically alien alter personality. Sometimes this
happens, but more commonly, indications of dissociation are subtle.
Frequently, only one alter personality goes to therapy in a particular
session. Even when a fairly identifiable alter emerges in treatment
(e.g., a frightened child), an unenlightened therapist will tend to read
the change in the patient in nondissociative terms (e.g., as a passing
regressive phenomenon).

My first experience with a severely dissociative client---knowingly,
that is---was at one remove. In the early 1970s, a close friend and
colleague at Rutgers was conferring with me about treating a student who
had exposed her multiplicity in the second year of her therapy with him.
I found his account riveting. *Sybil* had just been published, and I
remember thinking that this woman must be one of only a dozen or so
extant multiples. Then he mentioned that she was in a course that I
taught and, with her permission, told me her name. I was stunned. I
would never have guessed that this young woman was dissociative; from
the outside, the shifts that indicated "switching" looked like minor
changes of mood. Since I knew from my friend how painfully she struggled
with amnesia, it was an unforgettable lesson in how opaque the condition
is to observers, even credulous ones. I began to wonder how many other
hidden dissociative people there might be.

Accurate appraisal of the demographics of dissociation is hampered by
its invisibility. I have sometimes consulted with spouses of people with
dissociative psychologies, who, despite full awareness of their
partner's diagnosis, have made comments like, "But yesterday, she said
the opposite!" Cerebral knowledge that one was talking to a different
alter yesterday pales against the data provided by one's senses: I was
speaking to the same physical person on both days. If intimate partners
of those with admitted, diagnosed dissociative identity disorder miss
signs of dissociation, it is not hard to see how professionals can be
even blinder, especially if they have been advised to view the topic
skeptically. People who dissociate learn to "cover" for their lapses.
They develop techniques of evasion and fabrication in childhood, as they
find themselves repeatedly accused of "lying" about things they do not
remember. Because they have suffered grievously at the hands of people
who were supposed to protect them, they do not trust authorities, and
they do not come to treatment with the expectation that full disclosure
is in their interest.

The estimation of how many of us rely heavily on a dissociative
adaptation to living also depends on how the term is defined. In
addition to "classic" multiple personality, there is the condition
currently labeled dissociative disorder not otherwise specified (DDNOS),
in which alter personalities exist but do not take executive control of
the body or who do so but with no demonstrable amnesia. There are also
other dissociative phenomena such as depersonalization---after
depression and anxiety the third most commonly reported psychiatric
symptom (Cattell & Cattell, 1974; Steinberg, 1991)---that can be
frequent and longstanding enough to be considered characterological.

In 1988, Bennett Braun suggested a conceptualization that has come to be
known by the acronym BASK (behavior, affect, sensation, knowledge). With
it, he elevated the concept of dissociation to the status of a
superordinate category rather than, as Freud had conceived it, a more
peripheral defense. Braun's model subsumes many processes that often
occur together but have not always been seen as related. One can
dissociate behavior, as in a paralysis or a trance-driven
self-mutilation; or affect, as in acting with la belle indifférence or
remembering trauma without feeling; or sensation, as in conversion
anesthesias and body memories of abuse; or knowledge, as in fugue states
and amnesia. The BASK model views repression as a subsidiary of
dissociation (dissociation of knowledge) and puts a number of phenomena
that were previously regarded as hysterical into the dissociative
domain. It also links to trauma many issues that have tended to be
understood in terms of intrapsychic conflict. Some contemporary
psychoanalysts (Bromberg, 1998; D. B. Stern, 1997) have similarly
relocated defensive processes under the umbrella of dissociation.
Therapists working with diagnosed dissociative patients have found such
formulations useful; those working with others may find that it
sensitizes them to the dissociative processes that occur in all of us.

**RELATIONAL PATTERNS IN DISSOCIATIVE CONDITIONS**

The outstanding feature of the childhood relationships of someone who
becomes regularly dissociative is abuse, including but not limited to
sexual abuse. The caregivers of people with dissociative identity
disorder are frequently themselves dissociative, either directly, as a
result of their own traumatic histories, or indirectly, via altered
self-states created by alcohol and other drugs. Because the parents
often have amnesia for what they do---whether it is psychogenic amnesia
or substance abuse-related blackouts---they both traumatize their
children and fail to help them understand what has happened to them.

Severely dissociative clients show "Type D" attachment, the
disorganized--disoriented type associated with infantile experience in
which the object of safety is also the object of fear (Blizard, 2001;
Fonagy, 2001; Liotti, 1999; Lyons-Ruth et al., 1999; Main & Hesse, 1990;
Solomon & George, 1999). Disorganized attachment may increase
susceptibility to traumatic experiences even when its source lies not in
overt abuse but in a mother's emotional unavailability (Pasquini,
Liotti, Mazzotti, Fassone, & Picardi, 2002). Avoidant attachment may
also predict dissociation (Ogawa, Sroufe, Weinfield, Carlson, & Egeland,
1997). Traumatic experience early in life has devastating effects on
psychic structure (Schore, 2002), distorting the development of the
limbic system (Teicher et al., 1993), causing abnormalities in the
corpus callosum (Teicher et al., 2004), and interfering with the
development of the cerebellar vermis (Anderson, Teicher, Polcari, &
Renshaw, 2002). Chronic hyperarousal floods the brain with
glucocorticoids that damage the hippocampus (Solms & Turnbull, 2002).
Severe trauma can override any constitutional, environmental, genetic,
or psychological resilience factor (de Bellis, 2001).

Herman (1992) and Liotti (1999, 2004) have elaborated on the internal
presence in traumatized people of perpetrator, victim, and rescuer
images---the "drama triangle" originally noted by Karpman in 1968.
Others have noted witness and bystander roles as well (Davies & Frawley,
1994; R. Prince, 2007). Therapists can expect to find themselves cast in
such roles, and to face dramatic eruptions of traumatic themes. Sudden,
intense experiences of danger, affective deluge, and emotional pressure
to enact one of these positions tend to repeat in treatment the
overwhelming and formative life experiences that created this
psychology.

Many have wondered whether dissociative identity disorder is more common
now than it was generations ago, or whether the current increase in
diagnosing it derives entirely from our increased ability to identify
it. It is not impossible that severe child abuse has been on the rise
over the past decades and that a greater portion of humanity has
resulting dissociative problems. Sociological factors that might
contribute to more child abuse include the nature of modern warfare (in
which whole civilizations rather than small groups of warriors are
traumatized, and more people may reenact their horror with their
children); destabilization of families; increases in addiction made
possible by modern capacities for distribution (an intoxicated parent
will do things that he or she would not even conceive of doing sober);
increased violent imagery in the media (such that trance states are more
often stimulated in a susceptible person); and the mobility, anonymity,
and privacy of contemporary life (I have no idea how my next-door
neighbors treat their kids, and I have no personal influence on their
behavior).

On the other hand, children have been traumatized since antiquity. When
one treats a patient for dissociative problems, one frequently finds
that that person's parent was also abused, as was the parent's parent,
and so on. Coontz's (1992) indictment of nostalgia in sociological
theorizing should give pause to anyone inclined to postulate easier
times for children in prior generations. It seems likely, though, that
more people in our era are talking about their childhood abuse and
seeking help for its dissociative legacy. In the United States, this
conversation was fueled by both the feminist movement and the reports of
soldiers traumatized in Vietnam. Dissociation is not just a Western
phenomenon, however; recent studies in Turkey (Sar, Akyuz, & Dogan,
2006; Sar, Dogan, Yargic, & Tutkun, 1999) found roughly the same
proportion of dissociative patients there as Latz, Kramer, and Hughes
(1995) found in a North Carolina hospital.

Kluft (1984) has offered a four-factor theory of the etiology of
multiple personality disorder and severe dissociation. First, the
individual is talented hypnotically. Second, he or she is severely
traumatized. Third, the patient's dissociative responses are shaped by
particular childhood influences; that is, dissociation is adaptive and
to some extent rewarded by the family. Fourth, there is no comfort
during and after traumatic episodes. I have already discussed aspects of
Kluft's first three prerequisites; the last is equally critical, and it
never fails to move therapists. No one seems ever to have held the
dissociative child, or wiped away a tear, or explained an upsetting
experience. Typically, emotional responses to trauma elicited more abuse
("Now I'll *really* give you something to cry about!"). There is often a
kind of systemic family collusion to deny feeling, to forget pain, to
act as if the horrors of the preceding night were all imaginary.

One fascinating aspect of dissociative identity disorder is how lovable
many dissociative people are---at least many who seek treatment. Despite
all the devastations to their basic emotional security and all the
corruptions of parental care that one would expect to have destroyed the
capacity to attach, clinicians almost universally report that
dissociative patients evoke in them deep feelings of concern and
tenderness. Although they often get involved with abusive people (via
the repetition compulsion, as in masochism), they also attract some
generous, understanding friends. In the histories of dissociative
individuals, there is often one person after another---a childhood
friend who stayed in touch for years, a nurse who felt this patient was
different from the "other" schizophrenics on the ward, a beloved
teacher, an indulgent cop---who saw something special in the
dissociative person and tried to act as a force for good.

Readers may recall that I have sequenced these typological chapters
according to the degree of object-relatedness I have attributed to the
overall psychology under consideration. Even more than the hysterical
person, the dissociative patient may be object seeking, hungry for
relationship, and appreciative of care. I have not seen any explanation
for this widely noted phenomenon in the literature on dissociation, but
perhaps the unresolved nature of the dissociative person's attachment
style leads him or her to keep trying to connect. Whatever the reasons,
many people with multiple personality disorder tend to attach powerfully
and with hope. With others, one feels the conflicted pull of "please
help me but don't come near me," a communication that has often been
considered paradigmatic of borderline psychology (Masterson, 1976),
especially when it is accompanied, as it often is in dissociation, by
high levels of suicidal and parasuicidal behavior.

**THE DISSOCIATIVE SELF**

The most striking feature of the self of a chronically traumatized
person is, of course, that it is fractured into numerous split-off
partial selves, each of which performs certain functions. Often, an
infancy characterized by neglect and maltreatment prevented the self
from integrating in the first place. The discrete self-states typically
include one that traumatologists originally dubbed the "host
personality" (the one most often in evidence, usually the seeker of
treatment, who may present as anxious, dysthymic, and overwhelmed),
infant and child components, internal persecutors, victims, protectors
and helpers, and special-purpose alters (see Putnam, 1989). The host may
know all, some, or none of the alters, and each alter may likewise know
all, some, or none.

It can be hard for inexperienced or skeptical people to appreciate how
discrete and "real" the dissociated selves can seem, both to the
dissociative individual and to knowledgeable others. One evening I
picked up my phone when my answering machine was beginning to record and
found myself talking to a petulant child, an alter personality of a
patient. She was calling to tell me about an early trauma whose
existence I had suspected and to ask why the treatment-seeking part of
the self needed to know about it. The next day when I told my client
about the message, she asked to hear it. After listening together to my
conversation with this dissociated aspect of herself, she was amused to
note that she had not been feeling at all identified with the childish
voice recounting her own history but was instead feeling sympathy with
me, the voice of parental reason (she was a mother), trying to persuade
a peevish little girl that I knew what was good for her.

Running through all the identities of a dissociative person, like the
themes in a complex musical composition, are core beliefs engendered by
childhood abuse. Colin Ross, discussing the "cognitive map" of multiple
personality disorder, summarizes them as follows:

1\. Different parts of the self are separate selves.

2\. The victim is responsible for the abuse.

3\. It is wrong to show anger (or frustration, defiance, a critical
attitude \... ).

4\. The past is present.

5\. The primary personality can't handle the memories.

6\. I love my parents but *she* hates them.

7\. The primary personality must be punished.

8\. I can't trust myself or others. (1989b, p. 126)

Ross then dissects each of these convictions, exposing its component
beliefs and inevitable extrapolations. For example:

::: calibre1
 
:::

2\. *The victim is responsible for the abuse*.

2a. I must have been bad otherwise it wouldn't have happened.

2b. If I had been perfect, it wouldn't have happened.

2c. I deserve to be punished for being angry.

2d. If I were perfect, I would not get angry.

2e. I never feel angry---*she* is the angry one.

2f. She deserves to be punished for allowing the abuse to happen.

2g. She deserves to be punished for showing anger. (p. 127)

Recent literature by traumatologists contains extensive information on
how to access alter personalities and how to reduce amnesic barriers so
that they may eventually become integrated into one person with all the
memories, feelings, and assets that were previously sequestered and
inaccessible. The therapist must keep in mind is that "everyone" is the
patient. Even the most unsavory persecutory personality is a valuable,
potentially adaptive part of the person. When alters are not in
evidence, one should assume they are listening and address their
concerns by "talking through" the available personality (Putnam, 1989).

People who have not worked closely with dissociative patients can be
unsettled by the idea of joining the patient in reifying alter
personalities, but to do anything else seems to be ineffective (Kluft,
2006). Refusal to acknowledge personified self-states could cause much
of the client's mental life to be kept out of the therapeutic
relationship. If my experience is normative, it would also be false to
one's natural empathic response to the patient's experience. Some
clinicians talk about "parts," whereas others refer to "different ways
of being you," a commonsense use of language that holds the experience
of being one while feeling like many (Chefetz, 2010a). Treatment may
seem a bit like family therapy---with one person who has constructed an
internal family system.

**TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE\
WITH DISSOCIATIVE PATIENTS**

The most impressive feature of transference in dissociative clients is
that there is so much of it. A person who has been severely mistreated
lives in constant readiness to see the abuser in anyone on whom he or
she comes to depend. Especially when child self-states are in
ascendance, the present can feel so much like the past that
hallucinatory convictions (e.g., the therapist is about to rape me, to
torture me, to desert me) are not uncommon. These transferences, which
may strike the therapist as psychotic but are better understood as
traumatic transferences (Kluft, 1994; R. J. Loewenstein, 1993), do not
indicate psychotic or schizophrenic disorders, though professionals
untrained in dissociation have frequently made that inference. Rather,
they are posttraumatic perceptions, sensations, and affects that were
severed from awareness at the time of the original abuse and that remain
unintegrated into the client's personal narrative. They can perhaps be
best conceptualized as conditioned emotional responses to a class of
stimuli associated with abuse.

A common sequence with people with undiagnosed dissociation is for the
therapist to feel a vague, benign positive transference from the person
in the self-state that seeks therapy, who is treated as the whole
patient for several weeks, months, or years. Then there is a sudden
crisis driven by the patient's emerging recollection of trauma and its
activation of alter personalities, somatic memories, and/or reenactments
of abuse. Such developments can be deeply disturbing and can invite
counterphobic responses from the naive clinician, who may assume a
schizophrenic break. The histories of dissociative patients are littered
with referrals for unwarranted pharmacological treatment (including
major tranquilizers, which may aggravate dissociation), invasive medical
procedures, electroshock, and infantilizing "management" approaches. But
for a therapist who can see what has really happened, this crisis can
signal the beginning of a reparative collaboration.

Because transference inundates dissociative patients, the therapist
needs to be somewhat more "real" than some analytic therapists
customarily behave. Many clinicians find that they do this
naturally---albeit with guilt if their training emphasized an invariant,
"orthodox" technique. It is true that relatively healthy nondissociative
people can be so grounded in reality that for their underlying
projections to become evident, the therapist must be relatively
reserved. In the classical psychoanalytic paradigm, transferences become
analyzable because the client discovers a tendency to make attributions
in the absence of evidence and then discovers that the sources of such
assumptions are historical. In contrast, people struggling with
dissociation, even those who are high functioning, tend to assume that
current reality is only a distraction from a more ominous *real*
reality: exploitation, abandonment, torment.

To explore a dissociative person's transference, the therapist must
first establish that he or she is someone different from the expected
abuser---someone respectful, devoted, modest, and scrupulously
professional. The dissociative person's world is so infused with
unexamined transferences that the active contradiction of them,
especially early in treatment or in reorienting during or after a
flashback ("I'm Nancy McWilliams, and we're here in my office in
Flemington"), may be critical to eventually understanding the intense
reactions that confuse past and present.

The most disturbing experiences for both therapists and clients
addressing dissociation include erotic (erotized) (Blum, 1973; Wrye &
Welles, 1994) and traumatic transferences (Chefetz, 1997). The patient
may exert intense pressure to be treated as "special," including as a
lover, which can interact with the therapist's narcissistic needs to be
seen as generous, benevolent, and altruistic. The temptation to act out
the role of rescuer or idealized object of desire, while not
acknowledging to oneself coexisting feelings of hatred and resentment,
can produce enactments that infantilize and harm the client and
exacerbate dissociative responses. The suffering of traumatized
individuals is so profound and undeserved, their responsiveness to
simple consideration so touching, that one yearns to put them on one's
lap (especially the child alters) or take them home. But however
intensely they evoke this reaction, they are also petrified by any
violation of normal boundaries; it smacks of incestuous exploitation.

Pathfinders in the rediscovery of multiplicity in the second half of the
20th century, who lacked the benefit of prior work by trauma therapists
who could have helped them manage their countertransferences, had a
tendency toward excessive nurturance: Cornelia Wilbur was very motherly
toward Sybil, and David Caul seems to have been overinvolved with Billy
Milligan (Keyes, 1982). Like their intrepid predecessors, many
clinicians seeing their first dissociative client tend to overextend
themselves. Traumatized patients are notoriously hard to contain; at the
end of each session they may linger and chat, evidently seeking a few
extra shreds of moral support in facing the horrors that therapy has
unearthed. Even experienced practitioners report that sessions with such
clients tend to creep past the scheduled end of sessions. Dissociative
patients use time boundaries to gauge when the assumed re-abuse, the
abuse that is seen as an inevitable part of relating, will likely occur.
Being warmer and more emotionally expressive than one usually is with
clients, while at the same time being fastidiously observant of limits,
gets easier with practice. And when one inevitably blunders, some alter
will usually be happy to provide corrective instruction.

One rather amusing countertransference to dissociative people is
dissociation. Like other psychologies, dissociation is catching. Not
only is it easy to get into trance states while working with an
autohypnotist, one also gets oddly forgetful. When I began to work with
my first known multiple, I enrolled twice in the International Society
for the Study of Multiple Personality and Dissociation (now the
International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation), having
forgotten that I had already joined.

**THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIAGNOSIS\
OF A DISSOCIATIVE CONDITION**

New therapists can be intimidated by the prospect of working with
someone with severe or chronic dissociation, and many training programs
consider such clients too daunting for a beginner. This is unfortunate.
Dissociation is common, and severe dissociation and its challenges are
faced by any therapist sooner or later, whether or not it is seen for
what it is. Putnam (1989) says that there is nothing fancy, no special
wizardry, required to help a dissociative client. In the first edition
of this book, I echoed this assessment, but as my experience with this
population has increased, I want to qualify his assertion. The emotional
demands of working with patients with dissociative identity disorder and
other complex posttraumatic conditions are great. Because inductions
into traumatic enactments are a risk with this group, one needs both a
deep level of self-knowledge, preferably from one's own therapy, and a
lot of support from dissociation-savvy supervisors and colleagues.

In distilling the essence of effective therapy with this population, I
could not do better than Kluft (1991), who has derived the following
principles:

1.     MPD \[multiple personality disorder\] is a condition that was
created by broken boundaries. Therefore, a successful treatment will
have a secure treatment frame and firm, consistent boundaries.

2.     MPD is a condition of subjective dyscontrol and passively endured
assaults and changes. Therefore, there must be a focus on mastery and
the patient's active participation\... .

3.     MPD is a condition of involuntariness. Its sufferers did not
elect to be traumatized and find their symptoms are often beyond their
control. Therefore, the therapy must be based on a strong therapeutic
alliance, and efforts to establish this must be undertaken throughout
the process.

4.     MPD is a condition of buried traumata and sequestered affect.
Therefore, what has been hidden away must be uncovered, and what feeling
has been buried must be abreacted.

5.     MPD is a condition of perceived separateness and conflict among
the alters. Therefore, the therapy must emphasize their collaboration,
cooperation, empathy, and identification\... .

6.     MPD is a condition of hypnotic alternate realities. Therefore,
the therapist's communications must be clear and straight\... .

7.     MPD is a condition related to the inconsistency of important
others. Therefore, the therapist must be evenhanded to all the alters,
avoiding "playing favorites" or dramatically altering his or her
behavior toward the different personalities. The therapist's consistency
across all of the alters is one of the most powerful assaults on the
patient's dissociative defenses.

8.     MPD is a condition of shattered security, self-esteem, and future
orientation. Therefore, the therapy must make efforts to restore morale
and inculcate realistic hope.

9.     MPD is a condition stemming from overwhelming experiences.
Therefore, the pacing of the therapy is essential. Most treatment
failures occur when the pace of the therapy outstrips the patient's
capacity to tolerate the material\... . \[I\]f one cannot get into the
difficult material one planned to address in the first third of the
session, to work on it in the second, and process it and restabilize the
patient in the third \[one should not approach\] the material, lest the
patient leave the session in an overwhelmed state\....

10.      MPD is a condition that results from the irresponsibility of
others. Therefore, the therapist must be very responsible, and hold the
patient to a high standard of responsibility once the therapist is
confident that the patient, across alters, actually grasps what
reasonable responsibility entails.

11.      MPD is a condition that often results because people who could
have protected a child did nothing. The therapist can anticipate that
technical neutrality will be interpreted as uncaring and rejecting and
is best served by taking a warmer stance that allows for a latitude of
affective expression.

12.      MPD is a condition in which the patient has developed many
cognitive errors. The therapy must address and correct them on an
ongoing basis. (pp. 177--178)

It also helps to know a little hypnosis. Since dissociative people by
definition go into trance states spontaneously, it is not possible to
work with them without hypnosis---either they are doing it alone, or you
and they are doing it cooperatively. A therapist who can help the
patient learn how to get the hypnotic process under control and use it
autonomously and therapeutically rather than traumatically and
defensively is providing a critical service. Trance-inducing techniques
are extremely easy to use with this population of hypnotic prodigies,
and they are especially effective in building a sense of safety,
containing surplus anxiety, and handling emergencies. Help in this area
can be found from the American Society for Clinical Hypnosis at
*www.asch.net* and the International Society of Hypnosis at
*www.ish-web.org*.

I say this as someone who came to hypnosis kicking and screaming. My
colleague Jeffrey Rutstein calls this the
"If-it-wasn't-good-enough-for-Freud-it-isn't-good-enough-for-me!"
reaction. My resistance to learning hypnotic techniques came from my
misgivings about any intervention I regarded as authoritarian; I did not
want to tell clients they were getting sleepy if that was actually my
directive rather than their natural experience. This prejudice remitted
when I learned to hypnotize in an egalitarian, collaborative way (having
the patient direct me as to induction images and other particulars), and
when I saw how much calmer it made my dissociative clients in managing
the emotional maelstrom created by going in and out of traumatic
memories. For therapists who have no background in it, a weekend
workshop in hypnosis is enough to provide adequate skill for work with
most dissociative clients. The training also helps one to appreciate the
full range of dissociative phenomena. Similarly, eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) has shown promise as an
adjunctive treatment (Chemtob, Tolin, van der Kolk, & Pitman, 2004),
although it can be disorganizing to people with complex dissociation.

Because of the power of the traumatic transferences, one must tolerate
being used by the patient in ways that feel "distorting." This requires
swallowing one's defensiveness and engaging in what Sandler (1976)
called "role responsiveness" and Lichtenberg (2001) has called "wearing
the attributions" of the client. Chefetz (personal communication,
October 11, 2010) offers an example of this kind of response: "So,
you're feeling like you're at risk of being hurt by me? Tell me about
what you imagine might happen. What comes to mind as you consider this?
Does that match any scenes from the past? Are there other ways of being
you in the background, close by, who are really engaged in a lot of this
thinking and feeling? Why do you think they are so present?"

Chu's (1998) description of the stages of treatment for complex
dissociation is pertinent here. Chu divides therapy into three phases:
(1) the early work (which may last a long time), focusing on self-care,
symptom control, acknowledgment of early trauma, support for normal
functioning, expression of feelings, and constant negotiation of the
therapeutic alliance; (2) the middle part of treatment, involving
abreation and reconstruction at a pace tolerable to the patient; and (3)
late-stage work, consisting of consolidation of gains and increasing
skills needed to live one's life. Chefetz (personal communication,
October 11, 2010) summarizes phase-oriented treatment of the
dissociative disorders as stabilization, working through trauma,
integration, and termination. The stabilization period, which may be
long and should not be rushed, may require teaching techniques for
self-soothing, self-care, grounding, and affect tolerance.

In practice, as is true of any therapy, the treatment phases often occur
out of order. Some trauma work might intrude into the stabilization
period; some may recur during integration and termination as old issues
are reworked or come to light for the first time. In a 10-year follow-up
study of patients diagnosed with dissociative identity disorder, Coons
and Bowman (2001) found that following the general treatment guidelines
of the International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation
(*www.isst-d.org/education/treatmentguidelines-index.htm*) brought
improvements in both dissociative and nondissociative symptoms.

Working with dissociative clients requires some flexibility. Deviations
from standard care may occur in the form of apparently innocent boundary
crossings or in the therapist's occasional deliberate decision to "throw
away the book" (cf. Hoffman, 1998). In either case, it is critical to
negotiate the boundary in an open, thoughtful manner that attends to
potential meanings (Gabbard & Lester, 2002). I have occasionally
attended a client's wedding, accepted a gift, or walked around the block
with a person whose anxiety was too high to stay in one place, and
sometimes such boundary crossings have been taken in as healing. When
one has traversed the normal boundaries of treatment, intentionally or
not, it is especially important to process mutually what has happened
and what it means to the client. Because dissociative people are even
more concerned than others about boundary infractions, attention to
their responses to departures from standard operating procedure is
particularly vital.

Especially with dissociative patients, it is wise to remember the old
psychoanalytic chestnut, "The slower you go, the faster you get there."
When multiplicity was rediscovered in the 1980s, some clinics and
researchers experimented with ways to cut down on treatment time with
exposure and planned abreaction, but they found that these techniques
tended to retraumatize complexly dissociative clients. We have no
business, especially in the name of mental health, hurting someone who
has already had more than an ordinary share of injury. For readers who
want more education in this area, I recommend the psychotherapy program
for the dissociative disorders and chronic complex trauma in children,
adolescents, and adults that Richard Chefetz and Elizabeth Bowman
started in 2001. Information is available at *www.isst-d.org*.

**DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

Because so much of the misunderstanding and mistreatment of dissociative
patients derives from diagnostic errors, this section is more thorough
than in other chapters. The typical profile for someone with chronic and
complex dissociation includes having been in the mental health system
for years, with different serious diagnoses (e.g., bipolar,
schizophrenic, schizoaffective, and major depression), none of which has
been effectively treated with medication. Often the patient is also
diagnosed with BPD. There may be periods when the person is off all
medication and somehow functions well. Dissociative clients leave in
their wake numerous failed medication regimens and multiple therapists,
and yet no one has asked them about being abused or hurt or has
questioned them about depersonalization, derealization, and amnesia. In
1988, Coons, Bowman, and Milstein found that an average of 7 years
elapses between a dissociative client's initial search for treatment and
an accurate diagnosis. This lag may be shrinking, but it is still true
that one factor that should alert a diagnostician to a possible
dissociative identity problem is the presence of several prior, serious,
and/or mutually exclusive diagnostic labels in a person's treatment
history.

Unless a client has a known history of trauma, most beginning therapists
are not encouraged to look for dissociation. In my training in the 1970s
I was never taught to "rule out" dissociative possibilities. I was told,
for example, that a client who reports hearing voices is presumptively
psychotic, organically or functionally, probably some variety of
schizophrenic. I was not told to ask whether the voices seemed to be
inside or outside the person's head. This quick-and-dirty way of
discriminating posttraumatic hallucinatory states from psychotic
decompensation was not even known in the 1970s, and despite research
that has since then established its value (Kluft, 1991; C. A. Ross,
1989a), it is still taught only rarely. It is my impression that even
now, most graduate programs teach students, at best, only how to
recognize classic PTSD.

I cannot stress enough that most people with dissociative psychologies
do not come to therapy announcing that their problem is dissociation. It
must be inferred. Data suggesting the possibility of a dissociative
process include a known history of trauma; a family background of severe
alcoholism or drug abuse; a personal background of unexplained serious
accidents; amnesia for the elementary school years; a pattern of
self-destructive behavior for which the client can offer no rationale;
complaints of lost time, blank spells, or time distortion; headaches
(common during switching); referral to the self in the third person or
the first-person plural; eye-rolling and trance-like behaviors; voices
or noises in the head; and prior treatment failures.

Individuals born with anomalous genitals (for whatever reason:
chromosomal, hormonal, prenatal injury) who have had early surgeries and
invasive medical treatments intended to make them look unambiguously
like one gender are at serious risk of dissociation. This is a
particular risk if, as pediatric protocols dictated until just a few
years ago (Lee et al., 2006), the affected child was lied to about his
or her condition and the reason for the painful, traumatically exposing
medical interventions. As 1 in every 2,000 births involves anomalous
genital presentation ("intersex" condition, "disorder of sexual
development," or "atypical genitals"), there is a substantial group of
people who have been deeply traumatized for this reason---over 100,000
in the United States alone have been subjected to the older medical
protocol (Blackless et al., 2000).

Depersonalization and derealization are regularly features of the
dissociative disorders, but patients are unlikely to volunteer this
information and must be asked about them in a manner that does not make
them feel that their basic sanity is being impugned. One may have to ask
questions in several different ways; for example, "Do you ever have an
experience of somehow, in a not really understandable way, not quite
being in your body? Do you ever find yourself feeling unreal in ways you
can't describe? Do you have other experiences that are hard to describe
in the words I've used?") Because people often think they are crazy if
they suffer depersonalization or derealization, a wise clinician is
alert to the sad reality that shame is often at the core of dissociative
dynamics.

Dissociative problems range from mild depersonalization to
polyfragmented multiple personality disorder. Many of us have occasional
dissociative symptoms, and neither they nor the dissociative strategies
that may pervade personality can be addressed by a therapist who is not
open to seeing them. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV
Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D; Steinberg, 1993) is the current gold
standard for diagnosis, but it can take 2 to 3 hours to complete. Other
inventories by C. A. Ross (1989b: Dissociative Disorder Interview
Schedule), Briere (1992; Trauma Symptom Inventory:
*www.johnbriere.com/tsi.htm*), and Dell (2006: Multidimentional
Inventory of Dissociation) may be helpful.

**Dissociative Conditions versus the Psychoses**

Because dissociative patients in crisis or under stress show most of
Schneider's (1959) "first-rank" symptoms (Hoenig, 1983; Kluft, 1987,
2000), they are easily construed as schizophrenic. If an interviewer
regards dissociative switching as lability of mood, the client may be
seen as schizoaffective or bipolar at the psychotic level.
Hallucinations and delusions in dissociative people tend to be flashback
phenomena rather than dominantly projective operations. Their
relationships with therapists often have an intensity from the
beginning, whereas schizophrenic clients have a flat, deadened quality
and do not tend to draw the therapist into an intense attachment.
Schizophrenic withdrawal from reality and relatedness tends to start in
the teens and progress insidiously toward further isolation in
adulthood. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder, in contrast,
live compartmentalized lives, functioning well in some areas and poorly
in others.

Bipolar and schizoaffective people have shifts of mood but no disorders
of memory. In a manic state the person with bipolar illness is much more
grandiose than the agitated dissociative person. Whereas rapid cycling
in bipolar disorders is defined as four times yearly, a dissociative
patient may switch consciousness many times in 1 day or even in 1 hour.

Complicating the diagnostic challenge is the fact that dissociative
symptoms can coexist with schizophrenia and with the affective
psychoses. To assess whether dissociation is a major part of a psychotic
picture when voices are reported, one can ask to speak with "the part of
you that is saying these things." If dissociation predominates, an alter
may answer back. The first time one does this it feels ludicrous, but
after that it seems a rather prosaic question. Beginners should remember
that the worst that can happen is for the patient to stare blankly and
ascribe the request to some weird professional rite of intake.

**Dissociative versus Borderline Conditions**

From the psychoanalytic developmental perspective I have represented
here, the diagnoses of borderline and dissociative conditions are not
mutually exclusive. Dissociation can pervade personality at any level of
severity. Referring to DSM-III-R definitions of multiple personality
disorder and borderline personality disorder, Kluft (1991) reported that
"of treatment-adherent patients who appear to have both MPD and BPD,
one-third rapidly ceased to show BPD features once they settled into
treatment, one-third lost their apparent BPD as their MPD resolved, and
one-third retained BPD features even after integration" (p. 175).
Presumably, once patients in this last group had stopped dissociating,
their borderline status could be addressed in further treatment.

Even though some dissociative clients are legitimately regarded as in
the borderline range, where separation--individuation issues prevail, it
is common for high-functioning dissociative people to be misconstrued as
borderline when their dissociation becomes problematic. Dissociation
resembles splitting, and switches of self-state can be easily mistaken
for non-amnesic outbreaks of hostility, dependency, shame, and other
attitudes. Thus, one must be sensitive to the presence or absence of
amnesia. Because traumatized people do not trust in the benevolence of
authorities, they may offer critical information only if it is expressly
and respectfully welcomed, and so phrasing matters. Saying "Last Monday
you were furious at me and thought I was worthless, but today you're
saying I'm wonderful" may evoke defensiveness in either a dissociative
or a generically borderline person. But saying "I'm noticing that today
you are clear that I am really on your side. Do you recall how you felt
about me in last Monday's session?" may permit the dissociative client
to admit to having forgotten the Monday session. The person with
borderline dynamics is more likely to rationalize moving back and forth
from love to hatred, idealization to devaluation.

**Dissociative versus Hysterical Psychology**

As I have mentioned, there is considerable overlap between hysterical
and dissociative psychologies; many of us have both, and many
contemporary traumatologists regard the terms as synonymous.
Neurotic-level hysterical personality (Kernberg, 1984), however, as
opposed to the more serious histrionic personality disorder of the DSM
or the severe conversion symptoms, does not in my experience necessarily
result from trauma and may have more to do with temperamental
sensitivity than with maltreatment. In contrast, no one with diagnosable
dissociative identity disorder, even those with long periods of good
functioning, has escaped severe trauma. Anyone with pronounced
hysterical symptoms should be questioned about dissociation.

The therapeutic ramifications of this differential revolve around the
importance with hysterical people of interpreting their recurrent
impulses, fantasies, and unconscious strivings, as opposed to an
emphasis with dissociative clients on reconstructing a traumatic past.
If one does the former with a basically dissociative client, one will
reinforce denial, increase guilt, and fail to deal with the pain that a
terrible history has created. If one does the latter with a histrionic
client, one may prevent the flowering of the sense of agency that comes
from acknowledging internal dynamics and redirecting one's energies in
directions that are genuinely satisfying.

**Dissociative versus Psychopathic Conditions**

As I noted in [Chapter 7](#part0017.html){.calibre9}, many antisocial
people have dissociative defenses or frank dissociative identity
disorder (Lewis et al., 1997). Discriminating between a psychopathic
person with a dissociative streak and a dissociative person with a
psychopathic alter is maddeningly difficult---mostly because by the time
this question is asked, so many legal consequences hinge on the answer.
A person accused of a serious crime may have a huge stake in convincing
a judge or jury of multiplicity; less commonly, a persecutory alter may
be punishing another part of the self by getting it assessed as
antisocial. It is prudent to assume psychopathy when someone has
powerful reasons to malinger (see Thomas, 2001, on differentiating
malingering from dissociation).

If we do become adept at reliably differentiating essentially
dissociative from essentially psychopathic people, even when there is
significant advantage to a person in presenting as one or the other, the
consequences for the criminal justice system could be substantial.
Because most dissociative people have a better prognosis than
psychopathic individuals, there would be significant crime-preventive
value in giving intensive therapy to perpetrators discovered to have
dissociative identity disorder. Clinicians can resolve dissociation more
expeditiously than they can modify antisocial patterns; under conditions
of limited resources, people working in jails or with the probation
system could concentrate on those clients most receptive to their help.

**SUMMARY**

In this chapter I have discussed the history of the concept of
dissociation and the psychology of people with dissociative identities.
In accounting for individual development of dissociation as a core
process, I mentioned constitutional talent for self-hypnosis, often
coexisting with high intelligence, creativity, and sociophilia. These
factors may predispose a person to respond to trauma with a dissociative
defense invisible to outsiders. I mentioned Braun's (1988) BASK model of
dissociation as an alternative to Freudian concepts of defense. I
described object relations of dissociative people in terms of
disorganized or avoidant attachment caused by childhood relational
trauma. I depicted the self of someone with a dissociative identity as
not only fragmented but also as permeated by paralyzing fears, shame,
and self-blaming cognitions. Still, I noted how well many dissociative
people function, in their highly compartmentalized way.

I emphasized the power of transference and countertransference reactions
with dissociative patients, especially as they provoke rescue fantasies
and overinvolvement in the therapist. Treatment implications of this
diagnosis included a stress on nurturing a sense of basic safety;
teaching techniques in self-soothing, self-care, grounding, and
stabilization of emotional lability; fostering cooperation in the
therapeutic relationship; and only after stabilization promoting recall
and emotional comprehension of dissociated experiences. Overall, I
recommended maintaining consistency toward all personalities, being
"real" and warm while adhering strictly to professional boundaries,
analyzing pathogenic beliefs, using adjunctive techniques such as
hypnosis and EMDR, and respecting the client's need to take time to
tolerate the therapeutic process. I differentiated dissociative dynamics
from schizophrenic and bipolar psychoses, generically borderline
conditions, and hysterical and psychopathic personality organizations.

**SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING**

Herman's classic *Trauma and Recovery* (1992) and Terr's (1992) study of
traumatized children are foundational for understanding the phenomena
involved in dissociation. Putnam's (1989) text remains the starting
point for anyone dealing with dissociative adults, and his 1997 book
extends his work into the treatment of children and adolescents. R. J.
Loewenstein's (1991) overview on diagnosis of chronic, complex
dissociation is especially valuable. Kluft and Fine (1993) have
published a good edited book on treating dissociation. For readers
integrating psychoanalytic ideas with research and clinical experience
with dissociation, I recommend Kluft's (2000) article, Ira Brenner's
(2001, 2004, and 2009) contributions, and Elizabeth Howell's (2005)
relational tour de force. Also within the relational tradition, both
Philip Bromberg (1998, 2010) and Donnell Stern (1997, 2009) write
eloquently about addressing dissociation in the clinical process. As I
write this, Richard Chefetz is planning to publish a book on working
with dissociative patients that I expect to be particularly valuable to
therapists.

[]{#part0026.html}

**Appendix**

Suggested Diagnostic\
Interview Format

**DEMOGRAPHIC DATA**

Name, age, gender, ethnic and racial background, religious orientation,
relationship status, parental status, level of education attained,
employment status, previous experience with psychotherapy, source of
referral, informants other than client.

**CURRENT PROBLEMS AND THEIR ONSET**

Chief complaints and the client's ideas about their origins; history of
these problems; how they have been addressed so far, including
medications; why therapy is being sought *now*.

**PERSONAL HISTORY**

Where born, reared, number of children in family and client's place
among them; major moves. Parents and siblings: Get objective data
(whether alive, cause and time of death if not; age, health, occupation)
and subjective data (personality, nature of relationship with patient).
Psychological problems in family (diagnosed psychopathology and other
conditions; e.g., substance use disorder, violence, boundary
violations).

**Infancy and Toddlerhood**

Whether patient was wanted; family conditions after birth; anything
unusual in developmental milestones; any early problems (eating, bowel
control, talking, locomoting, bedwetting, night terrors, sleepwalking,
nailbiting, etc.); earliest memories; family stories or jokes about the
client; the story of the client's name.

**Latency**

Separation problems, social problems, academic problems, behavioral
problems, cruelty to animals; illnesses, losses, moves, or family
stresses at this time; sexual, physical, or emotional abuse or
witnessing of domestic violence.

**Adolescence**

Age of puberty, any physical problems with sexual maturation, family
preparation for sexuality, first sexual experiences, sexual preference
(masturbation fantasies if this is uncertain); school experience,
academically and socially; patterns of self-destructiveness (eating
disorders, drug use, questionable sexual judgment, excessive
risk-taking, suicidal tendencies, antisocial patterns; social
withdrawal); illnesses, losses, moves or family stresses at this time.

**Adulthood**

Work history; relationship history; adequacy of current intimate
relationship; relationship to children; hobbies, talents, pleasures,
areas of pride and satisfaction, aspirations (where does the person hope
to be in 5 years, 10 years, etc.).

**CURRENT PRESENTATION (MENTAL STATUS)**

General appearance, affective state, mood, quality of speech, soundness
of reality testing, estimated intelligence, adequacy of memory; assess
reliability of information. Pursue further investigation into any of
these areas that suggest problems; for example, if mood is depressed,
assess suicide. If it feels difficult to get a linear history, assess
for depersonalization, derealization, and other dissociative reactions.

Dreams: Are they remembered? Any recurrent? Example of a recent dream.

Substance use, prescribed or otherwise, including alcohol.

**CONCLUDING TOPICS**

Ask the patient if he or she can think of any important information that
your questions have not touched on. Ask whether the patient is
comfortable with you and whether he or she has anything to ask.

**INFERENCES**

Major recurring themes; attachment pattern; areas of developmental
arrest and internal conflict; favored defenses; inferred unconscious
fantasies, wishes, fears, beliefs; central identifications,
counteridentifications, unmourned losses; self-cohesion and self-esteem.

[]{#part0027.html}

**References**

::: xsmall
Abraham, K. (1911). Notes on the psycho-analytic investigation and
treatment of manic--depressive insanity and allied conditions. In
*Selected papers on psycho-analysis* (pp. 137--156). London: Hogarth
Press.

Abraham, K. (1924). A short study of the development of the libido,
viewed in light of mental disorders. In *Selected papers on
psycho-analysis* (pp. 418--501). London: Hogarth Press.

Abraham, K. (1935). The history of a swindler. *Psychoanalytic
Quarterly, 4*, 570--587.

Abrahamsen, D. (1985). *Confessions of Son of Sam*. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Adams, H. E., Wright, L. W., & Lohr, B. A. (1996). Is homophobia
associated with homosexual arousal? *Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
105*, 440--445.

Adler, A. (1927). *Understanding human nature*. Garden City, NY: Garden
City Publishing.

Adler, G. (1972). Hospital management of borderline patients and its
relationship to psychotherapy. In P. Hartocollis (Ed.), *Borderline
personality disorders: The concept, the syndrome, the patient* (pp.
307--323). New York: International Universities Press.

Adler, G. (1985). *Borderline psychopathology and its treatment*. New
York: Jason Aronson.

Adler, G., & Buie, D. (1979). The psychotherapeutic approach to
aloneness in the borderline patient. In J. LeBoit & A. Capponi (Eds.),
*Advances in psychotherapy of the borderline patient* (pp. 433--448).
New York: Jason Aronson.

Adorno, T. W., Frenkl-Brunswick, E., Levinson, D. J., & Sanford, R. N.
(1950). *The authoritarian personality*. New York: Harper.

Aichhorn, A. (1936). *Wayward youth*. London: Putnam.

Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (Eds.).
(1978). *Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the Strange
Situation*. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Akhtar, S. (1992). *Broken structures: Severe personality disorders and
their treatment*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Akhtar, S. (2000). The shy narcissist. In J. Sandler, R. Michaels, & P.
Fonagy (Eds.), *Changing ideas in a changing world: The revolution in
psychoanalysis. Essays in honor of Arnold Cooper* (pp. 111--119).
London: Karnac.

Akiskal, H. S. (1984). Characterologic manifestations of affective
disorders: Toward a new conceptualization. *Integrative Psychiatry, 2*,
83--88.

Alanen, Y. O., Gonzalez de Chavez, M., Silver, A. S., & Martindale, B.
(2009). *Psychotherapeutic approaches to schizophrenic psychoses: Past,
present, future*. New York: Routledge.

Allen, D. W. (1977). Basic treatment issues. In M. J. Horowitz (Ed.),
*Hysterical personality* (pp. 283--328). New York: Jason Aronson.

Allen, J. G. (1980). Adaptive functions of affect and their implications
for therapy. *Psychoanalytic Review, 67*, 217--230.

American Psychiatric Association. (1968). *Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders* (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (1980). *Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders* (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). *Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders* (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.

Anderson, C. M., Teicher, M. H., Polcari, A., & Renshaw, P. F. (2002).
Abnormal T2 relaxation time in the cerebellar vermis of adults sexually
abused in childhood: Potential role of the vermis in stress-enhanced
risk for drug abuse. *Psychoneuroendocrinology, 27*, 231--244.

Anderson. F. S., & Gold, J. (2003). Trauma, dissociation, and conflict:
The space where psychoanalysis, cognitive science, and neuroscience
overlap. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 20*, 536--541.

Anstadt, T., Merten, J., Ullrich, B., & Krause, R. (1997). Affective
dyadic behavior, core conflictual relationship themes and success of
treatment. *Psychotherapy Research, 7*, 397--417.

Arieti, S. (1955). *Interpretation of schizophrenia*. New York:
Brunner/Mazel.

Arieti, S. (1961). Introductory notes on the psychoanalytic therapy of
schizophrenics. In A. Burton (Ed.), *Psychotherapy of the psychoses*
(pp. 68--89). New York: Basic Boooks.

Arieti, S. (1974). *Interpretation of schizophrenia* (2nd ed.). New
York: Basic Books.

Arlow, J. A., & Brenner, C. (1964). *Psychoanalytic concepts and the
structural theory*. New York: International Universities Press.

Aron, L. (1996). *A meeting of minds: Mutuality in psychoanalysis*.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Aronson, M. L. (1964). A study of the Freudian theory of paranoia by
means of the Rorschach test. In C. F. Reed, I. E. Alexander, & S. S.
Tomkins (Eds.), *Psychopathology: A source book* (pp. 370--387). New
York: Wiley.

Asch, S. S. (1985). The masochistic personality. In R. Michels & J.
Cavenar (Eds.), *Psychiatry 1* (pp. 1--9). Philadelphia: Lippincott.

Atwood, G. E., Orange, D. M., & Stolorow, R. D. (2002). Shattered worlds
/ psychotic states: A post-Cartesian view of the experience of personal
annihilation. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 19*, 281--306.

Atwood, G. E., & Stolorow, R. D. (1993). *Faces in a cloud:
Intersubjectivity in personality theory*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Babiak, P., & Hare, R. D. (2007). *Snakes in suits: When psychopaths go
to work*. New York: Harper Paperback.

Bach, S. (1985). *Narcissistic states and the therapeutic process*. New
York: Jason Aronson.

Bach, S. (1999). *The language of perversion and the language of love*.
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Bak, R. C. (1946). Masochism in paranoia. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly,
15*, 285--301.

Balint, M. (1945). Friendly expanses---Horrid empty spaces.
*International Journal of Psycho-Analysis*, *36*, 225--241.

Balint, M. (1960). Primary narcissism and primary love. *Psychoanalytic
Quarterly, 29*, 6--43.

Balint, M. (1968). *The basic fault: Therapeutic aspects of regression*.
London: Tavistock.

Banai, E., Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2005). "Selfobject" needs in
Kohut's self psychology: Links with attachment, self-cohesion, affect
regulation, and adjustment. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 22*, 224--260.

Basch, M. (1994). Chapter 1: The selfobject concept: Clinical
implications. *Progress in Self Psychology, 10*, 1--7.

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2004). *Mentalization-based treatment for
borderline personality disorders*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Bateson, G., Jackson, D. D., Haley, J., & Weakland, J. (1956). Toward a
theory of schizophrenia. *Behavioral Science, I*, 251--264.

Baumeister, R. F. (1989). *Masochism and the self*. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Beck, J. S. (1995). *Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond*. New York:
Guilford Press.

Beck, J. S., Greenberg, L. S., & McWilliams, N. (Guest Experts);
American Psychological Association. (Producer). (in press-a). *Three
approaches to psychotherapy with a female client: The next generation*
\[DVD\]. Available from *www.apa.org/videos*.

Beck, J. S., Greenberg, L. S., & McWilliams, N. (Guest Experts);
American Psychological Association. (Producer). (in press-b). *Three
approaches to psychotherapy with a male client: The next generation*
\[DVD\]. Available from *www.apa.org/videos*.

Beebe, B., Jaffe, J., Markese, S., Buck, K., Chen, H., Cohen, P., et al.
(2010). The origins of 12-month attachment: A microanalysis of 4-month
mother--infant interaction. *Attachment and Human Development, 12*, 1,
3--141.

Beebe, B., & Lachmann, F. M. (1994). Representation and internalization
in infancy: Three principles of salience. *Psychoanalytic Psychology,
11*, 127--165.

Bellak, L., Hurvich, M., & Gediman, H. K. (1973). *Ego functions in
schizophrenics, neurotics, and normals: A systematic study of
conceptual, diagnostic, and therapeutic aspects*. New York: Wiley.

Bellak, L., & Small, L. (1978). *Emergency psychotherapy and brief
psychotherapy*. New York: Grune & Stratton.

Benjamin, J. (1988). *The bonds of love: Psychoanalysis, feminism, and
the problem of domination*. New York: Pantheon.

Benveniste, D. (2005). Recognizing defenses in the drawings and play of
children in therapy. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 22*, 395--410.

Beres, D. (1958). Vicissitudes of superego formation and superego
precursors in childhood. *Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 13*,
324--335.

Bergler, E. (1949). *The basic neurosis*. New York: Grune & Stratton.

Bergman, P., & Escalona, S. K. (1949). Unusual sensitivities in very
young children. *Psychoanalytic Study of the Child*, *3/4*, 333--352.

Bergmann, M. S. (1985). Reflections on the psychological and social
functions of remembering the Holocaust. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 5*,
9--20.

Bergmann, M. S. (1987). *The anatomy of loving: The story of man's quest
to know what love is*. New York: Columbia University Press.

Berliner, B. (1958). The role of object relations in moral masochism.
*Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 27*, 38--56.

Bernstein, I. (1983). Masochistic psychology and feminine development.
*Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 31*, 467--486.

Bettelheim, B. (1960). *The informed heart: Autonomy in a mass age*.
Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

Bettelheim, B. (1983). *Freud and man's soul*. New York: Knopf.

Bibring, E. (1953). The mechanism of depression. In P. Greenacre (Ed.),
*Affective disorders* (pp. 13--48). New York: International Universities
Press.

Bion, W. R. (1959). *Experiences in groups*. New York: Basic Books.

Bion, W. R. (1962). *Learning from experience*. London: Karnac.

Bion, W. R. (1967). *Second thoughts*. London: Karnac.

Biondi, R., & Hecox, W. (1992). *The Dracula killer: The true story of
California's vampire killer*. New York: Pocket Books.

Bird, H. R. (2001). Psychoanalytic perspectives on theories regarding
the development of antisocial behavior. *Journal of the American Academy
of Psychoanalysis, 29*, 57--71.

Blackless, M., Caruvastra, A., Derryck, A., Fausto-Sterling, A.,
Lauzanne, K., & Lee, E. (2000). How sexually dimorphic are we?: Review
and synthesis. *American Journal of Human Biology, 12*, 151--166.

Blagys, M. D., & Hilsenroth, M. J. (2000). Distinctive activities of
short-term psychodynamic--interpersonal psychotherapy: A review of the
comparative psychotherapy process literature. *Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 7*, 167--188.

Blanck, G., & Blanck, R. (1974). *Ego psychology: Theory and practice*.
New York: Columbia University Press.

Blanck, G., & Blanck, R. (1979). *Ego psychology II: Psychoanalytic
developmental psychology*. New York: Columbia University Press.

Blanck, G., & Blanck, R. (1986). *Beyond ego psychology: Developmental
object relations theory*. New York: Columbia University Press.

Blatt, S. J. (1974). Levels of object representation in anaclitic and
introjective depression. *Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 29*,
107--157.

Blatt, S. J. (2004). *Experiences of depression: Theoretical, clinical
and research perspectives*. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

Blatt, S. J. (2008). *Polarities of experience: Relatedness and
self-definition in personality development, psychopathology, and the
therapeutic process*. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

Blatt, S. J., & Bers, S. (1993). The sense of self in depression: A
psychoanalytic perspective. In Z. V. Segal & S. J. Blatt (Eds.), *The
self in emotional distress: Cognitive and psychodynamic perspectives*
(pp. 171--210). New York: Guilford Press.

Blatt, S. J., & Levy, K. N. (2003). Attachment theory, psychoanalysis,
personality development, and psychopathology. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry,
23*, 102--150.

Blatt, S. J., & Zuroff, D. C. (2005). Empirical evaluation of the
assumptions in identifying evidence based treatments in mental health.
*Clinical Psychology Review, 66*, 423--428.

Bleuler, E. (1911). *Dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias*
(J. Zinkin, Trans.). New York: International Universities Press.

Bleuler, M. (1977). *The schizophrenic disorders* (S. M. Clemens,
Trans.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Blizard, R. A. (2001). Masochistic and sadistic ego states: Dissociative
solutions to the dilemma of attachment to an abusive caregiver. *Journal
of Trauma and Dissociation, 2*, 37--58.

Blum, H. P. (1973). The concept of the erotized transference. *Journal
of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 21*, 61--76.

Bollas, C. (1987). Loving hate. In *The shadow of the object* (pp.
117--134). New York: Columbia University Press.

Bollas, C. (1999). *Hysteria*. New York: Routledge.

Bornstein, B. (1949). The analysis of a phobic child: Some problems of
theory and technique in child analysis. *Psychoanalytic Study of the
Child, 3/4*, 181--226.

Bornstein, R. F., & Gold, S. H. (2008). Comorbidity of personality
disorders and somatization disorder: A meta-analytic review. *Journal of
Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 30*, 154--161.

Boulanger, G. (2007). *Wounded by reality: Understanding and treating
adult onset trauma.* Mahwah, NJ: Analytic Press.

Bowen, M. (1993). *Family therapy in clinical practice*. Northvale, NJ:
Jason Aronson.

Bowlby, J. (1969). *Attachment and loss: Vol. I. Attachment*. New York:
Basic Books.

Bowlby, J. (1973). *Attachment and loss: Vol. II. Separation: Anxiety
and anger*. New York: Basic Books.

Braun, B. G. (1988). The BASK (behavior, affect, sensation, knowledge)
model of dissociation. *Dissociation, 1*, 4--23.

Braun, B. G., & Sacks, R. G. (1985). The development of multiple
personality disorder: Predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating
factors. In R. P. Kluft (Ed.), *Childhood antecedents of multiple
personality* (pp. 37--64). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Brazelton, T. B. (1982). Joint regulation of neonate--parent behavior.
In E. Tronick (Ed.), *Social interchange in infancy*. Baltimore:
University Park Press.

Brenman, M. (1952). On teasing and being teased and the problems of
"moral masochism." *Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 7*, 264--285.

Brenneis, C. B. (1996). Multiple personality: Fantasy proneness, demand
characteristics, and indirect communication. *Psychoanalytic Psychology,
13*, 367--387.

Brenner, C. (1959). The masochistic character. *Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association, 7*, 197--226.

Brenner, C. (1982). The calamities of childhood. In *The mind in
conflict* (pp. 93--106). New York: International Universities Press.

Brenner, I. (2001). *Dissociation of trauma: Theory, phenomenology, and
technique*. New York: International Universities Press.

Brenner, I. (2004). *Psychic trauma: Dynamics, symptoms, and treatment*.
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Brenner, I. (2009). *Injured men: Trauma, healing, and the masculine
self*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Breuer, J., & Freud, S. (1893--1895). Studies in hysteria. *Standard
Edition, 2*, 21--47.

Briere, J. (1992). *Child abuse trauma: Theory and treatment of the
lasting effects*. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Bristol, R. C., & Pasternack, S. (Eds.). (2001). Obsessive--compulsive
disorder (OCD): Manifestations, theory, and treatment. *Psychoanalytic
Inquiry, 2*(2).

Bromberg, P. M. (1991). On knowing one's patient inside out: The
aesthetics of unconscious communication. *Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 1*,
399--422.

Bromberg, P. M. (1996). Hysteria, dissociation, and cure: Emmy von N
revisited. In *Standing in the spaces: Essays on clinical process,
trauma, and dissociation* (pp. 223--237). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Bromberg, P. M. (1998). *Standing in the spaces: Essays on clinical
process, trauma and dissociation*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Bromberg, P. M. (2001). Treating patients with symptoms---and symptoms
with patience: Reflections on shame, dissociation, and eating disorders.
*Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 11*, 891--912.

Bromberg, P. M. (2003). Something wicked this way comes. Trauma,
dissociation, and conflict: The space where psychoanalysis, cognitive
science, and neuroscience overlap. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 20*,
558--574.

Bromberg, P. M. (2010). *Awakening the dreamer: Clinical journeys*. New
York: Routledge.

Brown, R. (1965). *Social psychology*. New York: Free Press.

Brunner, R., Parzer, P., Schuld, V., & Resch, F. (2000). Dissociative
symptomatology and traumatogenic factors in adolescent psychiatric
patients. *Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 188*, 7--17.

Bucci, W. (2002). The challenge of diversity in modern psychoanalysis.
*Psychoanalytic Psychology, 19*, 216--226.

Buckley, P. (Ed.). (1988). *Essential papers on psychosis*. New York:
New York University Press.

Buechler, S. (2008). *Making a difference in patients' lives: Emotional
experience in the therapeutic setting*. New York: Routledge.

Buirski, P., & Haglund, P. (2001). *Making sense together: The
intersubjective approach to psychotherapy*. Northvale, NJ: Jason
Aronson.

Bursten, B. (1973a). *The manipulator: A psychoanalytic view*. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Bursten, B. (1973b). Some narcissistic personality types. *International
Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 54*, 287--300.

Cain, D. J. (2010). *Person-centered psychotherapies*. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.

Cameron, N. (1959). Paranoid conditions and paranoia. In S. Arieti
(Ed.), *American handbook of psychiatry* (Vol. 1, pp. 508--539). New
York: Basic Books.

Capote, T. (1965). *In cold blood*. New York: Random House.

Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T. E., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I.
W., et al. (2002). Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in
maltreated children. *Science, 297*, 851--854.

Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (2010). *Handbook of attachment:*
*Theory, research, and clinical applications* (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Cath, S. H. (1986). Fathering from infancy to old age: A selective
overview of recent psychoanalytic contributions. *Psychoanalytic Review,
74*, 469--479.

Cattell, J. P., & Cattell, J. S. (1974). Depersonalization:
Psychological and social perspectives. In S. Arieti (Ed.), *American
handbook of psychiatry* (pp. 767--799). New York: Basic Books.

Cela, J. A. (1995). A classical case of a severe obsessive compulsive
defense. *Modern Psychoanalysis, 20*, 271--277.

Celani, D. (1976). An interpersonal approach to hysteria. *American
Journal of Psychiatry, 133*, 1414--1418.

Celenza, A. (2006). The threat of male-to-female erotic transference.
*Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 54*, 1207--1231.

Celenza, A. (2007). *Sexual boundary violations: Therapeutic,
supervisory, and academic contexts*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Charles, M. (2004). *Learning from experience: A guidebook for
clinicians*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Chase, T. (1987). *When Rabbit howls*. New York: Jove.

Chasseguet-Smirgel, J. (1985). *The ego ideal: A psychoanalytic essay on
the malady of the idea*. New York: Norton.

Chefetz, R. A. (1997). Special case transferences and
countertransferences in the treatment of dissociative disorders.
*Dissociation, 10*, 255--265.

Chefetz, R. A. (2000a). Affect dysregulation as a way of life. *Journal
of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis, 28*, 289--303.

Chefetz, R. A. (2000b). The psychoanalytic psychotherapy of dissociative
identity disorder in the context of trauma therapy. *Psychoanalytic
Inquiry, 20*, 259--286.

Chefetz, R. A. (2004). Re-associating psychoanalysis and dissociation.
*Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 40*, 123--133.

Chefetz, R. A. (2009). Waking the dead therapist. *Psychoanalytic
Dialogues, 19*, 393--404.

Chefetz, R. A. (2010a). Life as performance art: Right and left brain
function, implicit knowing, and "felt coherence." In J. Petrucelli
(Ed.), *Knowing, not knowing, and sort-of-knowing: Psychoanalysis and
the experience of uncertainty* (pp. 258--278). New York: Karnac.

Chefetz, R. A. (2010b). "T" in interpellation stands for terror.
Commentary on paper by Orna Guralnik and Daphne Simeon. *Psychoanalytic
Dialogues, 20*, 417--437.

Chemtob, C. M., Tolin, D. F., van der Kolk, B., & Pitman, R. K. (2004).
Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing. In E. B. Foa, T. M.
Keane, & M. J. Friedman (Eds.), *Effective treatments for PTSD: Practice
guidelines from the International Society for Trauma Stress Studies*
(pp. 139--154, 333--335). New York: Guilford Press.

Chessick, R. D. (2001). OCD, OCPD: Acronyms do not make a disease.
*Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 21*, 183--207.

Chodoff, P. (1978). Psychotherapy of the hysterical personality
disorder. *Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis, 6*,
496--510.

Chodoff, P. (1982). The hysterical personality disorder: A
psychotherapeutic approach. In A. Roy (Ed.), *Hysteria* (pp. 277--285).
New York: Wiley.

Chodorow, N. J. (1978). *The reproduction of mothering: Psychoanalysis
and the sociology of gender*. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Chodorow, N. J. (1989). *Feminism and psychoanalytic theory*. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Chodorow, N. J. (1999). *The power of feelings: Personal meaning in
psychoanalysis, gender, and culture*. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.

Chodorow, N. J. (2010). Beyond the dyad: Individual psychology, social
world. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 58*,
207--230.

Chu, J. A. (1998). Riding the therapeutic roller coaster: Stage-oriented
treatment for survivors of childhood abuse. In *Rebuilding shattered
lives: The responsible treatment of complex post-traumatic and
dissociative disorders* (pp. 75--91). New York: Wiley.

Clarkin, J. F., & Levy, K. N. (2003). A psychodynamic treatment for
severe personality disorders: Issues in treatment development.
*Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 23*, 248--267.

Clarkin, J. F., Levy, K. N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kernberg, O. F.
(2007). Evaluating three treatments for borderline personality disorder:
A multiwave study. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 164*, 1--8.

Clarkin, J. F., Yeomans, F. E., & Kernberg, O. F. (2006). *Psychotherapy
for borderline personality: Focusing on object relations*. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Classen, C., Pain, C., Field, N., & Woods, P. (2006). Posttraumatic
personality disorder: A reformulation of complex posttraumatic stress
disorder and borderline personality disorder. *Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 29*, 87--112.

Cleckley, H. (1941). *The mask of sanity: An attempt to clarify some
issues about the so-called psychopathic personality*. St. Louis, MO:
Mosby.

Cloninger, C. R., & Guze, S. B. (1970). Psychiatric illness and female
criminality. The role of sociopathy and hysteria in the antisocial
woman. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 127*, 303--311.

Coccaro, E. F. (1996). Neurotransmitter correlates of impulsive
aggression in humans. *Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 794*,
82--89.

Cohen, M. B., Baker, G., Cohen, R. A., Fromm-Reichmann, F., & Weigert,
E. (1954). An intensive study of twelve cases of manic-depressive
psychosis. *Psychiatry, 17*, 103--137.

Colby, K. (1951). *A primer for psychotherapists*. New York: Ronald
Press.

Coleman, M., & Nelson, B. (1957). Paradigmatic psychotherapy in
borderline treatment. *Psychoanalysis*, 5, 28--44.

Coons, P. M., & Bowman, E. S. (2001). Ten-year follow-up study of
patients with dissociative identity disorder. *Journal of Trauma and
Dissociation, 2*, 73--90.

Coons, P. M., Bowman, E. S., & Milstein, V. (1988). Multiple personality
disorder: A clinical investigation of 50 cases. *Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 176*, 519--527.

Coontz, S. (1992). *The way we never were: American families and the
nostalgia gap*. New York: Basic Books.

Cooper, A. M. (1984). Narcissism in normal development. In M. R. Zales
(Ed.), *Character pathology: Theory and treatment* (pp. 39--56). New
York: Brunner/Mazel.

Cooper, A. M. (1988). The narcissistic--masochistic character. In R. A.
Glick & D. I. Meyers (Eds.), *Masochism: Current psychoanalytic
perspectives* (pp. 189--204). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Corbett, K. (2001). More life: Centrality and marginality in human
development. *Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 11*, 313--335.

Cosgrove, L. (2010, November--December). Diagnosing conflict-of-interest
disorder. *Academe*, pp. 43--46.

Cramer, P. (1991). *The development of defense mechanisms: Theory,
research and assessment*. New York: Springer-Verlag.

Cramer, P. (2006). *Protecting the self: Defense mechanisms in action*.
New York: Guilford Press.

Cramer, P. (2008). Seven pillars of defense mechanism theory. *Social
and Personality Psychology Compass, 2*, 1--19.

Cushman, P. (1995). *Constructing the self, constructing America: A
cultural history of psychotherapy*. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Damasio, A. R. (1994). *Descartes' error: Emotion, reason, and the human
brain*. New York: Putnam.

Davanloo, H. (1980). *Short-term dynamic psychotherapy*. New York: Jason
Aronson.

Davies, J. M., & Frawley, M. G. (1994). *Treating the adult survivor of
childhood sexual abuse: A psychoanalytic perspective*. New York: Basic
Books.

de Bellis, M. (2001). Developmental traumatology: The psychobiological
development of maltreated children and its implications for research,
treatment, and policy. *Development and Psychopathology, 13*, 539--564.

Dell, P. F. (2006). The multidimensional inventory of dissociation
(MID): A comprehensive measure of pathological dissociation. *Journal of
Trauma and Dissociation, 7*, 77--103.

de Monchy, R. (1950). Masochism as a pathological and as a normal
phenomenon in the human mind. *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis,
31*, 95--97.

Deri, S. (1968). Interpretation and language. In E. Hammer (Ed.), *The
use of interpretation in treatment*. New York: Grune & Stratton.

Deutsch, H. (1942). Some forms of emotional disturbance and their
relationship to schizophrenia. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 11*, 301--321.

Deutsch, H. (1944). *The psychology of women: A psychoanalytic
interpretation: Vol. 1. Girlhood*. New York: Grune & Stratton.

de Tocqueville, A. (2002). *Democracy in America* (H. C. Mansfield & D.
Winthrop, Trans.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

De Waelhens, A., & Ver Eecke, W. (2000). *Phenomenology and Lacan on
schizophrenia, after the decade of the brain*. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven
University Press.

Diamond, D. (2004). Attachment disorganization: The reunion of
attachment theory and psychoanalysis. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 21*,
276--299.

Diamond, M. J. (2007). *My father before me: How fathers and sons
influence each other throughout their lives*. New York: Norton.

Dimen, M., & Harris, A. (2001). *Storms in her head: Freud and the
construction of hysteria*. New York: Other Press.

Dinnerstein, D. (1976). *The mermaid and the minotaur*. New York: Harper
& Row.

Doidge, N. (2001). Diagnosing *The English Patient*: Schizoid fantasies
of being skinless and being buried alive. *Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association, 49*, 279--309.

Dorahy, M. J. (2001). Dissociative identity disorder and memory
dysfunction: The current state of experimental research and its future
directions. *Clinical Psychology Review, 21*, 771--795.

Dorpat, T. (1982). An object-relations perspective on masochism. In P.
L. Giovacchini & L. B. Boyer (Eds.), *Technical factors in the treatment
of severely disturbed patients* (pp. 490--513). New York: Jason Aronson.

Dougherty, N. J., & West, J. J. (2007). *The matrix and meaning of
character: An archetypal and developmental approach*. New York:
Routledge.

Dyess, C., & Dean, T. (2000). Gender: The impossibility of meaning.
*Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 10*, 735--756.

Eagle, M. N. (2011). *From classical to contemporary psychoanalysis: A
critique and integration*. New York: Routledge.

Easser, B. R., & Lesser, S. (1965). The hysterical personality: A
reevaluation. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 34*, 390--405.

Eells, T. D. (Ed.). (2007). *Handbook of psychotherapy case formulation*
(2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.

Ehrenberg, D. B. (1992). *The intimate edge: Extending the reach of
psychoanalytic interaction*. New York: Norton.

Eigen, M. (1973). Abstinence and the schizoid ego. *International
Journal of Psychoanalysis, 54*, 493--498.

Eigen, M. (1986). *The psychotic core*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Eigen, M. (2004). A little psyche-music. *Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 14*,
119--130.

Einstein, A. (1931). The world as I see it. In S. Bergmann (Trans.),
*Ideas and opinions* (3rd ed., pp. 3--79). New York: Three Rivers Press.

Eissler, K. R. (1953). The effects of the structure of the ego on
psychoanalytic technique. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic
Association, 1*, 104--143.

Ekstein, R., & Wallerstein, R. S. (1958). *The teaching and learning of
psychotherapy* (Rev. ed., 1971). Madison, CT: International Universities
Press.

Erikson, E. H. (1950). *Childhood and society*. New York: Norton.

Erikson, E. H. (1968). *Identity: Youth and crisis*. New York: Norton.

Escalona, S. K. (1968). *The roots of individuality: Normal patterns of
development in infancy*. Chicago: Aldine.

Evans, S., Tsao, J. C. I., Lu, Q., Kim, S. C., Turk, N., Myers, C. D.,
et al. (2009). Sex differences in the relationship between maternal
negative life events and children's laboratory pain. *Journal of
Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 30*, 279--288.

Fairbairn, W. R. D. (1940). Schizoid factors in the personality. In
*Psychoanalytic studies of the personality* (pp. 3--27). London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1952.

Fairbairn, W. R. D. (1941). A revised psychopathology of the psychoses
and psychoneuroses. *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 22*,
250--279.

Fairbairn, W. R. D. (1943). The repression and return of bad objects
(with special reference to the "war neuroses"). In *Psychoanalytic
studies of the personality* (pp. 29--58). New York: Routledge, 1994.

Fairbairn, W. R. D. (1954). *An object-relations theory of the
personality*. New York: Basic Books.

Fairfield, S. (2001). Analyzing multiplicity: A postmodern perspective
on some current psychoanalytic theories of subjectivity. *Psychoanalytic
Dialogues, 11*, 221--251.

Federn, P. (1952). *Ego psychology and the psychoses*. New York: Basic
Books.

Fenichel, O. (1928). On "isolation." In *The collected papers of Otto
Fenichel, first series* (pp. 147--152). New York: Norton.

Fenichel, O. (1941). *Problems of psychoanalytic technique*. Albany, NY:
Psychoanalytic Quarterly.

Fenichel, O. (1945). *The psychoanalytic theory of neurosis*. New York:
Norton.

Ferenczi, S. (1913). Stages in the development of a sense of reality. In
*First contributions to psycho-analysis* (pp. 213--239). New York:
Brunner/Mazel, 1980.

Ferenczi, S. (1925). Psychoanalysis of sexual habits. In *Further
contributions to the theory and technique of psycho-analysis* (pp.
259--297). New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1980.

Fernando, J. (1998). The etiology of narcissistic personality disorder.
*Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 53*, 141--158.

Fink, B. (1999). *A clinical introduction to Lacanian psychoanalysis:
Theory and technique*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Fink, B. (2007). *Fundamentals of psychoanalytic technique: A Lacanian
approach for practitioners*. New York: Norton.

Fiscalini, J. (1993). Interpersonal relations and the problem of
narcissism. In J. Fiscalini & A. L. Grey (Eds.), *Narcissism and the
interpersonal self* (pp. 53--87). New York: Columbia University Press.

Fischer, K. W., & Bidell, T. R. (1998). Dynamic development of
psychological structures in action and thought. In W. Damon & R. M.
Lerner (Eds.), *Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models
of human development* (5th ed., pp. 467--561). New York: Wiley.

Fisher, S. (1970). *Body experience in fantasy and behavior*. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Fisher, S., & Greenberg, R. P. (1985). *The scientific credibility of
Freud's theories and therapy*. New York: Columbia University Press.

Fisher, S., & Greenberg, R. P. (1996). *Freud scientifically
reappraised: Testing the theories and therapy*. New York: Wiley.

Fogelman, E. (1988). Intergenerational group therapy: Child survivors of
the Holocaust and offspring of survivors. *Psychoanalytic Review, 75*,
619--640.

Fogelman, E., & Savran, B. (1979). Therapeutic groups for children of
Holocaust survivors. *International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 29*,
211--235.

Fonagy, P. (2000). Attachment and borderline personality disorder.
*Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 48*, 1129--1146.

Fonagy, P. (2001). *Attachment theory and psychoanalysis*. New York:
Other Press.

Fonagy, P. (2003). Genetics, developmental psychology, and
psychoanalytic theory: The case for ending our (not so) splendid
isolation. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 23*, 218--247.

Fonagy, P., Gergely, G., Jurist, E. L., & Target, M. (2002). *Affect
regulation, mentalization, and the development of the self*. New York:
Other Press.

Fonagy, P., & Target, M. (1996). Playing with reality: I. Theory of mind
and normal development of psychic reality in the child. *International
Journal of Psychoanalysis, 77*, 217--233.

Fonagy, P., Target, M., Gergeley, G., Allen, J. G., & Bateman, A. W.
(2003). The developmental roots of borderline personality disorder in
early attachment relationships: A theory and some evidence.
*Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 23*, 412--459.

Fosha, D. (2000). *The transforming power of affect: A model of
accelerated change*. New York: Basic Books.

Fosha, D. (2005). Emotion, true self, core state: Toward a clinical
theory of the affective change process. *Psychoanalytic Review, 92*,
519--551.

Fraiberg, S. (1959). *The magic years: Understanding and handling the
problems of early childhood*. New York: Scribner's.

Frances, A., & Cooper, A. M. (1981). Descriptive and dynamic psychiatry:
A perspective on DSM-1II. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 138*,
1198--1202.

Frank, J. D., Margolin, J., Nash, H. T., Stone, A. R., Varon, E., &
Ascher, E. (1952). Two behavior patterns in therapeutic groups and their
apparent motivation. *Human Relations*, *5*, 289--317.

Freud, A. (1936). *The ego and the mechanisms of defense*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Freud, S. (1886). Observation of a severe case of hemianaesthesia in a
hysterical male. *Standard Edition, 1*, 23--31.

Freud, S. (1895). Project for a scientific psychology. *Standard
Edition, 1*, 281--397.

Freud, S. (1897). Letter to Wilhelm Fliess. *Standard Edition, 1*, 259.

Freud, S. (1900). The interpretation of dreams. *Standard Edition, 4*.

Freud, S. (1901). The psychopathology of everyday life. *Standard
Edition, 6*.

Freud, S. (1905). Three essays on the theory of sexuality. *Standard
Edition, 7*, 135--243.

Freud, S. (1908). Character and anal eroticism. *Standard Edition, 9*,
169--175.

Freud, S. (1909). Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis. *Standard
Edition, 10*, 151--320.

Freud, S. (1911). Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographic account of
a case of paranoia (dementia paranoides). *Standard Edition, 13*,
1--162.

Freud, S. (1912). The dynamics of transference. *Standard Edition, 12*,
97--108.

Freud, S. (1913). The disposition to obsessional neurosis. *Standard
Edition, 12*, 311--326.

Freud, S. (1914a). On narcissism: An introduction. *Standard Edition,
14*, 67--102.

Freud, S. (1914b). Remembering, repeating and working through (Further
recommendations on the technique of psycho-analysis II). *Standard
Edition, 12*, 147--156.

Freud, S. (1915a). Instincts and their vicissitudes. *Standard Edition,
14*, 111--140.

Freud, S. (1915b). Repression. *Standard Edition, 14*, 147.

Freud, S. (1916). Some character types met with in psychoanalytic work.
*Standard Edition, 14*, 311--333.

Freud, S. (1917a). Mourning and melancholia. *Standard Edition, 14*,
243--258.

Freud, S. (1917b). On transformations of instinct as exemplified in anal
erotism. *Standard Edition, 17*, 125--133.

Freud, S. (1918). From the history of an infantile neurosis. *Standard
Edition, 17*, 7--122.

Freud, S. (1919). A child is being beaten: A contribution to the study
of the origin of sexual perversions. *Standard Edition, 17*, 179--204.

Freud, S. (1920). Beyond the pleasure principle. *Standard Edition, 18*,
7--64.

Freud, S. (1923). The ego and the id. *Standard Edition, 19*, 13--59.

Freud, S. (1924). The economic problem in masochism. *Standard Edition,
19*, 159--170.

Freud, S. (1925a). Autobiographical study. *Standard Edition, 20*,
32--76.

Freud, S. (1925b). Some psychical consequences of the anatomical
distinction between the sexes. *Standard Edition, 19*, 248--258.

Freud, S. (1931). Libidinal types. *Standard Edition, 21*, 215--222.

Freud, S. (1932). Femininity. *Standard Edition, 22*, 112--135.

Freud, S. (1937). Analysis terminable and interminable. *Standard
Edition, 22*, 216--253.

Freud, S. (1938). An outline of psycho-analysis. *Standard Edition, 23*,
144--207.

Friedenberg, E. Z. (1959). *The vanishing adolescent*. Boston: Beacon.

Friedman, R. C. (1988). *Male homosexuality: A contemporary
psychoanalytic perspective*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Friedman, R. C. (1991). The depressed masochistic patient: Diagnostic
and management considerations---A contemporary psychoanalytic
perspective. *Journal of the American Academy of Dynamic Psychiatry,
19*, 9--30.

Friedman, R. C. (2006). Psychodynamic psychiatry: Past, present, and
future. *Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis, 34*,
471--487.

Fromm, E. (1947). *Man for himself: An inquiry into the psychology of
ethics*. New York: Rinehart.

Fromm-Reichmann, F. (1950). *Principles of intensive psychotherapy*.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Frosch, J. (1964). The psychotic character: Clinical psychiatric
considerations. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 38*, 91--96.

Furman, E. (1982). Mothers have to be there to be left. *Psychoanalytic
Study of the Child, 37*, 15--28.

Gabbard, G. O. (1986). The treatment of the "special" patient in a
psychoanalytic hospital. *International Review of Psycho-Analysis, 13*,
333--347.

Gabbard, G. O. (1989). Two subtypes of narcissistic personality
disorder. *Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 53*, 527--539.

Gabbard, G. O. (1991). Technical approaches to transference hate in the
analysis of borderline patients. *International Journal of
Psychoanalysis, 72*, 625--636.

Gabbard, G. O. (2001). Psychoanalytically informed approaches in the
treatment of obsessive--compulsive disorder. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry,
21*, 208--221.

Gabbard, G. O. (2005). *Psychodynamic psychiatry in clinical practice*.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.

Gabbard, G. O., & Lester, E. P. (2002). *Boundaries and boundary
violations in psychoanalysis*. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association.

Gabriel, J., & Beratis, S. (1997). Early trauma in the development of
masochism and depression. *International Forum of Psychoanalysis, 6*,
231--236.

Gacano, C. B., & Meloy, J. R. (1991). A Rorschach investigation of
attachment and anxiety in antisocial personality disorder. *Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 179*, 546--552.

Gacano, C. B., Meloy, J. R., & Berg, J. L. (1992). Object relations,
defensive operations, and affective states in narcissistic, borderline,
and antisocial personality disorders. *Journal of Personality
Assessment, 59*, 32--49.

Gaddis, T., & Long, J. (1970). *Killer: A journal of murder*. New York:
Macmillan.

Galenson, E. (1988). The precursors of masochism: Protomasochism. In R.
A. Glick & D. I. Meyers (Eds.), *Masochism: Current psychoanalytic
perspectives* (pp. 189--204). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Galin, D. (1974). Implications for psychiatry of left and right cerebral
specialization. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 31*, 572--583.

Garcia-Campayo, J., Alda, M., Sobradiel, N., Olivan, B., & Pascual, A.
(2007). Personality disorders in somatization disorder patients: A
controlled study in Spain. *Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 62*,
675--680.

Gardiner, M. (1971). *The wolf-man: By the wolf-man*. New York: Basic
Books.

Gardner, M. R. (1991). The art of psychoanalysis: On oscillation and
other matters. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 39*,
851--870.

Gay, P. (1968). *Weimar culture*. New York: Harper & Row.

Gaylin, W. (Ed.). (1983). *Psychodynamic understanding of depression:
The meaning of despair*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Geekie, J., & Read, J. (2009). *Making sense of madness: Contesting the
meaning of schizophrenia*. New York: Routledge.

Ghent, E. (1990). Masochism, submission, surrender---Masochism as a
perversion of surrender. *Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 26*, 108--136.

Gill, M. M. (1983). The interpersonal paradigm and the degree of the
therapist's involvement. *Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 19*, 200--237.

Gill, M. M., Newman, R., & Redlich, F. C. (1954). *The initial interview
in psychiatric practice*. New York: International Universities Press.

Gilleland, J., Suveg, C., Jacob, M. L., & Thomassin, K. (2009).
Understanding the medically unexplained: Emotional and family influences
on children's somatic. *Child: Care, Health, and Development, 35*,
383--390.

Gilligan, C. (1982). *In a different voice: Psychological theory and
women's development.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Giovacchini, P. L. (1979). *The treatment of primitive mental states*.
New York: Jason Aronson.

Giovacchini, P. L., & Boyer, L. B. (Eds.). (1982). *Technical factors in
the treatment of the severely disturbed patient*. New York: Jason
Aronson.

Glick, R. A., & Meyers, D. I. (1988). *Masochism: Current psychoanalytic
perspectives*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Glover, E. (1955). *The technique of psycho-analysis*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Goldberg, A. (1990a). Disorders of continuity. *Psychoanalytic
Psychology, 7*, 13--28.

Goldberg, A. (1990b). *The prisonhouse of psychoanalysis*. New York:
Analytic Press.

Goldstein, K. (1959). Functional disturbances in brain damage. In S.
Arieti (Ed.), *American handbook of psychiatry* (Vol. 1, pp. 770--794).
New York: Basic Books.

Gordon, R. (1987). Masochism: The shadow side of the archetypal need to
venerate and worship. *Journal of Analytic Psychology, 32*, 427--453.

Gottdiener, W. H. (2002). Psychoanalysis and schizophrenia: Three
responses to Martin Willock. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic
Association, 50*, 314--316.

Gottdiener, W. H. (2006). Individual psychodynamic psychotherapy for
schizophrenia: Empirical evidence for the practicing clinician.
*Psychoanalytic Psychology, 23*, 583--589.

Gottdiener, W., & Haslam, N. (2002). The benefits of individual
psychotherapy for people diagnosed with schizophrenia: A meta-analytic
review. *Ethical Human Sciences and Services, 4*, 163--187.

Gottesman, I. (1991). *Schizophrenia genesis: The origins of madness*.
New York: Freeman.

Gottlieb, R. (2010). *Sarah: The life of Sarah Bernhardt*. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.

Grand, S. (2000). *The reproduction of evil: A clinical and cultural
perspective*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Green, H. (1964). *I never promised you a rose garden*. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.

Greenacre, P. (1958). The impostor. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 27*,
359--382.

Greenberg, J. R., & Mitchell, S. A. (1983). *Object relations in
psychoanalytic theory*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Greenson, R. R. (1967). *The technique and practice of psychoanalysis*.
New York: International Universities Press.

Greenspan, S. I. (1981). *Clinical infant reports: Number I:
Psychopathology and adaptation in infancy and early childhood:
Principles of clinical diagnosis and preventive intervention*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Greenspan, S. I. (1997). *Developmentally based psychotherapy*. New
York: International Universities Press.

Greenwald, H. (1958). *The call girl: A sociological and psychoanalytic
study*. New York: Ballantine Books.

Greenwald, H. (1974). Treatment of the psychopath. In H. Greenwald
(Ed.), *Active psychotherapy* (pp. 363--377). New York: Jason Aronson.

Grinker, R. R., Werble, B., & Drye, R. C. (1968). *The borderline
syndrome: A behavioral study of ego functions*. New York: Basic Books.

Grossman, W. (1986). Notes on masochism: A discussion of the history and
development of a psychoanalytic concept. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 55*,
379--413.

Grossmann, K., & Grossmann, K. E. (1991). Newborn behavior, early
parenting quality and later toddler--parent relationships in a group of
German infants. In J. K. Nugent, B. M. Lester, & T. B. Brazelton (Eds.),
*The cultural context of infancy* (Vol. 2, pp. 3--38). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.

Groth, A. N. (1979). *Men who rape: The psychology of the offender*. New
York: Basic Books.

Grotstein, J. (1982). Newer perspectives in object relations theory.
*Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 18*, 43--91.

Grotstein, J. S. (1993). *Splitting and projective identification*.
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Grotstein, J. S. (2000). *Who is the dreamer who dreams the dream?: A
study of psychic presences*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Gunderson, J. G. (1984). *Borderline personality disorder*. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Gunderson, J. G., & Lyons-Ruth, K. (2008). BPD's interpersonal
hypersensitivity phenotype: A gene--environment developmental model.
*Journal of Personality Disorders, 22*, 22--41.

Gunderson, J. G., & Singer, M. T. (1975). Defining borderline patients:
An overview. *American Journal of Psychiatry*, 133, 1--10.

Guntrip, H. (1952). The schizoid personality and the external world. In
*Schizoid phenomena, object relations and the self* (pp. 17--48). New
York: International Universities Press, 1969.

Guntrip, H. (1961). The schizoid problem, regression, and the struggle
to preserve an ego. In *Schizoid phenomena, object relations and the
self* (pp. 49--86). New York: International Universities Press, 1969.

Guntrip, H. (1969). *Schizoid phenomena, object relations and the self*.
New York: International Universities Press.

Guntrip, H. (1971). *Psychoanalytic theory, therapy, and the self: A
basic guide to the human personality in Freud, Erikson, Klein, Sullivan,
Fairbairn, Hartmann, Jacobson, and Winnicott*. New York: Basic Books.

Gutheil, T. G., & Brodsky, A. (2008). *Preventing boundary violations in
clinical practice*. New York: Guilford Press.

Hagarty, G. E., Kornblith, S. J., Deborah, G., DiBarry, A. L., Cooley,
S., Flesher, S., et al. (1995). Personal therapy: A disorder-relevant
psychotherapy for schizophrenia. *Schizophrenia Bulletin, 21*, 379--393.

Hall, J. S. (1998). *Deepening the treatment*. Northvale, NJ: Jason
Aronson.

Halleck, S. L. (1967). Hysterical personality traits---psychological,
social, and iatrogenic determinants. *Archives of General Psychiatry,
16*, 750--759.

Hammer, E. (1968). *The use of interpretation in treatment*. New York:
Grune & Stratton.

Hammer, E. (1990). *Reaching the affect: Style in the psychodynamic
therapies*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Hanley, M. A. F. (Ed.). (1995). *Essential papers on masochism*. New
York: New York University Press.

Hare, R. D. (1999). *Without conscience: The disturbing world of the
psychopaths among us*. New York: Guilford Press.

Hare, R. D., Harpur, T. J., Hakstian, A. R., Forth, A. E., Hart, S. D.,
& Newman, J. P. (1990). The Revised Psychopathy Checklist: Reliability
and factor structure. *Journal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology,
2*, 338--341.

Harris, A. (2008). *Gender as soft assembly*. New York: Routledge.

Harris, A., & Gold, B. H. (2001). The fog rolled in: Induced
dissociative states in clinical process. *Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 11*,
357--384.

Harris, D. (1982). *Dreams die hard: Three men's journey through the
sixties*. New York: St. Martin's/Marek.

Hartmann, H. (1958). *Ego psychology and the problem of adaptation*. New
York: International Universities Press.

Hartocollis, P. (Ed.). (1977). *Borderline personality disorders: The
concept, the syndrome, the patient*. New York: International
Universities Press.

Hedges, L. E. (1992). *Listening perspectives in psychotherapy*. New
York: Jason Aronson.

Heisenberg, W. (1927). The uncertainty principle. *Zeitschrift fur
Physik, 43*, 172--196.

Henderson, D. K. (1939). *Psychopathic states*. New York: Norton.

Hendin, H. (1975). *The age of sensation: A psychoanalytic exploration*.
New York: Norton.

Herman, J. L. (1981). *Father--daughter incest*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Herman, J. L. (1992). *Trauma and recovery: The aftermath of
violence---From domestic abuse to political terror*. New York: Basic
Books.

Herzig, A., & Licht, J. (2006). Overview of empirical support for the
DSM symptom- based approach to diagnostic classification. In PDM Task
Force (2006), *Psychodynamic diagnostic manual* (pp. 663--690). Silver
Spring, MD: Alliance of Psychoanalytic Organizations.

Hesse, E., & Main, M. (1999). Second generation effects of unresolved
trauma in nonmaltreating parents: Dissociated, frightening, and
threatening parental behavior. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 19*, 481--540.

Hilgard, E. R. (1986). *Divided consciousness: Multiple controls in
human thought and action*. New York: Wiley.

Hirsch, S. J., & Hollender, M. H. (1969). Hysterical psychoses:
Clarification of the concept. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 125*,
909.

Hite, A. L. (1996). The diagnostic alliance. In D. L. Nathanson (Ed.),
*Knowing feeling: Affect, script, and psychotherapy* (pp. 37--54). New
York: Norton.

Hoch, P. H., & Polatin, P. (1949). Pseudoneurotic forms of
schizophrenia. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly*, *23*, 248--276.

Hoenig, J. (1983). The concept of schizophrenia:
Kraepelin-Bleuler-Schneider. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 142*,
547--556.

Hoffman, I. Z. (1998). *Ritual and spontaneity in the psychoanalytic
process: A dialectical constructivist view*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic
Press.

Hollender, M. H. (1971). Hysterical personality. *Comments on
Contemporary Psychiatry, 1*, 17--24.

Hollender, M., & Hirsch, S. (1964). Hysterical psychosis. *American
Journal of Psychiatry, 120*, 1066--1074.

Horner, A. J. (1979). *Object relations and the developing ego in
therapy*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Horner, A. J. (1990). *The primacy of structure: Psychotherapy of
underlying character pathology*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Horner, A. J. (1991). *Psychoanalytic object relations therapy*.
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Horney, K. (1939). *New ways in psycho-analysis*. New York: Norton.

Horowitz, A. V., & Wakefield, J. C. (2007). *The loss of sadness: How
psychiatry transformed normal sorrow into depressive disorder*. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Horowitz, M. (Ed.). (1991). *Hysterical personality style and the
histrionic personality disorder* (2nd rev. ed.). Northvale, NJ: Jason
Aronson.

Howell, E. (1996). Dissociation in masochism and psychopathic sadism.
*Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 32*, 427--453.

Howell, E. (2005). *The dissociative mind*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic
Press.

Hughes, J. M. (1989). *Reshaping the psychoanalytic domain: The work of
Melanie Klein, W. R. D. Fairbairn, and D. W. Winnicott*. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Hurvich, M. (2003). The place of annihilation anxieties in
psychoanalytic theory. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic
Association, 57*, 579--616.

Hyde, J. (2009). *Fragile narcissists or the guilty good. What drives
the personality of the psychotherapist?* Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.

Intrator, J., Hare, R. D., Stritzke, P., Brichtswein, K., Dorman, D.,
Harpur, T., et al. (1997). A brain imaging (single photon emission
computerized topography \[SPECT\]) study of semantic and affective
processing in psychopaths). *Biological Psychiatry, 42*, 96--103.

Isaacs, K. (1990). Affect and the fundamental nature of neurosis.
*Psychoanalytic Psychology, 7*, 259--284.

Jacobs, T. J. (1991). *The use of the self: Countertransference and
communication in the analytic situation*. Madison, CT: International
Universities Press.

Jacobson, E. (1964). *The self and the object world*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Jacobson, E. (1967). *Psychotic conflict and reality*. London: Hogarth
Press.

Jacobson, E. (1971). *Depression: Comparative studies of normal,
neurotic, and psychotic conditions*. New York: International
Universities Press.

Janet, P. (1890). *The major symptoms of hysteria*. New York: Macmillan.

Jaspers, K. (1963). *General psychopathology* (J. Hoenig & M. W.
Hamilton, Trans.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jellesma, F. C., Rieffe, C., Terwogt, M. M., & Westenburg, P. M. (2009).
Somatic complaints in children: Does reinforcement take place by
positive parental reactions? *Kind en Adolescent, 30*, 24--35.

Johnson, A. (1949). Sanctions for superego lacunae of adolescents. In K.
R. Eissler (Ed.), *Searchlights on delinquency* (pp. 225--245). New
York: International Universities Press.

Jones, E. (1913). The God complex: The belief that one is God, and the
resulting character traits. In *Essays in applied psycho-analysis* (Vol.
2, pp. 244--265). London: Hogarth Press, 1951.

Josephs, L. (1992). *Character structure and the organization of the
self*. New York: Columbia University Press.

Josephs, L., & Josephs, L. (1986). Pursuing the kernel of truth in the
psychotherapy of schizophrenia. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 3*,
105--119.

Jung, C. G. (1945). The relations between the ego and the unconscious.
In H. Read, M. Fordham, & G. Adler (Eds.), *The collected works of C. G.
Jung* (Bollinger Series 20, Vol. 7, pp. 120--239). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1953.

Jung, C. G. (1954). Concerning the archetypes, with special reference to
the anima concept. In H. Read, M. Fordham, G. Adler, & W. McGuire
(Eds.), *The collected works of C. G. Jung* (Bollinger Series 20, Vol.
9, pp. 54--72). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1959.

Kagan, J. (1994). *Galen's prophecy: Temperament in human nature*. New
York: Basic Books.

Kahn, H. (1962). *Thinking about the unthinkable*. New York: Horizon.

Kahn, M. (2002). *Basic Freud: Psychoanalytic thought for the 21st
century*. New York: Basic Books.

Kandel, E. R. (1999). Biology and the future of psychoanalysis: A new
intellectual framework for psychiatry revisited. *American Journal of
Psychiatry, 156*, 505--524.

Karon, B. P. (1989). On the formation of delusions. *Psychoanalytic
Psychology*, *6*, 169--185.

Karon, B. P. (1992). The fear of understanding schizophrenia.
*Psychoanalytic Psychology, 9*, 191--211.

Karon, B. P. (2003). The tragedy of schizophrenia without psychotherapy.
*Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis and Dynamic
Psychiatry, 31*, 89--118.

Karon, B. P., & VandenBos, G. R. (1981). *Psychotherapy of
schizophrenia: The treatment of choice*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Karpe, R. (1961). The rescue complex in Anna O's final identity.
*Psychoanalytic Quarterly*, *30*, 1--27.

Karpman, S. (1968). Fairy tales and script drama analysis.
*Transactional Analysis Bulletin, 7*, 39--43.

Kasanin, J. S. (Ed.). (1944). *Language and thought in schizophrenia*.
New York: Norton.

Kasanin, J. S., & Rosen, Z. A. (1933). Clinical variables in schizoid
personalities. *Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry*, *30*, 538--553.

Katan, M. (1953). Mania and the pleasure principle: Primary and
secondary symptoms. In P. Greenacre (Ed.), *Affective disorders* (pp.
140--209). New York: International Universities Press.

Kernberg, O. F. (1970). Factors in the psychoanalytic treatment of
narcissistic personalities. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic
Association, 18*, 51--85.

Kernberg, O. F. (1975). *Borderline conditions and pathological
narcissism*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Kernberg, O. F. (1976). *Object relations theory and clinical
psychoanalysis*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Kernberg, O. F. (1981). Some issues in the theory of hospital treatment.
*NordiskTidsskriftforLoegeforen, 14*, 837--842.

Kernberg, O. F. (1982). Self, ego, affects, and drives. *Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association, 30*, 893--917.

Kernberg, O. F. (1984). *Severe personality disorders: Psychotherapeutic
strategies*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Kernberg, O. F. (1986). Institutional problems of psychoanalytic
education. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 34*,
799--834.

Kernberg, O. F. (1988). Clinical dimensions of masochism. *Journal of
the American Psychoanalytic Association, 36*, 1005--1029.

Kernberg, O. F. (1992). Psychopathic, paranoid, and depressive
tendencies. *International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 73*, 13--28.

Kernberg, O. F. (2004). *Aggressivity, narcissism and
self-destructiveness in the psychotherapeutic relationship: New
developments in the psychology and psychotherapy of severe personality
disorders*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Kernberg, O. F. (2005). Unconscious conflict in light of contemporary
psychoanalytic findings. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 74*, 65--81.

Kernberg, O. F. (2006). The coming changes in psychoanalytic education.
Part 1. *International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 87*, 1649--1673.

Kernberg, O. F., Yeomans, F. E., Clarkin, J. F., & Levy, K. N. (2008).
Transference focused psychotherapy: Overview and update. *International
Journal of Psychoanalysis, 89*, 601--620.

Keyes, D. (1982). *The minds of Billy Milligan*. New York: Bantam.

Khan, M. M. R. (1963). The concept of cumulative trauma. *Psychoanalytic
Study of the Child, 18*, 286--306.

Khan, M. M. R. (1974). *The privacy of the self*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Kieffer, C. C. (2007). Emergence and the analytic third: Working at the
edge of chaos. *Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 17*, 683--703.

Klein, M. (1932). *The psycho-analysis of children*. London: Hogarth
Press.

Klein, M. (1935). A contribution to the psychogenesis of
manic-depressive states. In *Love, guilt and reparation and other works
1921--1945* (pp. 262--289). New York: Free Press.

Klein, M. (1937). Love, guilt and reparation. In *Love, guilt and
reparation and other works 1921--1945* (pp. 306--343). New York: Free
Press.

Klein, M. (1940). Mourning and its relation to manic-depressive states.
In *Love, guilt and reparation and other works 1921--1945* (pp.
311--338). New York: Free Press.

Klein, M. (1945). The oedipus complex in light of early anxieties. In
*Love, guilt and reparation and other works 1921--1945* (pp. 370--419).
New York: Free Press.

Klein, M. (1946). Notes on some schizoid mechanisms. *International
Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 27*, 99--110.

Klein, M. (1957). Envy and gratitude. In *Envy and gratitude and other
works 1946--1963* (pp. 176--235). New York: Free Press.

Kluft, R. P. (1984). Treatment of multiple personality disorder: A study
of 33 cases. *Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 7*, 9--29.

Kluft, R. P. (Ed.). (1985). *Childhood antecedents of multiple
personality*. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Kluft, R. P. (1991). Multiple personality disorder. In A. Tasman & S. M.
Goldfinger (Eds.), *American Psychiatric Press review of psychiatry*
(Vol. 10, pp. 161--188). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Kluft, R. P. (1987). First-rank symptoms as a diagnostic clue to
multiple personality disorder. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 144*,
293--298.

Kluft, R. P. (1994). Countertransference in the treatment of multiple
personality disorder. In J. P. Wilson & J. D. Lindy (Eds.),
*Countertransference in the treatment of PTSD* (pp. 122--150). New York:
Guilford Press.

Kluft, R. P. (2000). The psychoanalytic psychotherapy of dissociative
identity disorder in the context of trauma therapy. *Psychoanalytic
Inquiry, 20*, 259--286.

Kluft, R. P. (2006). Dealing with alters: A pragmatic clinical
perspective. *Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 29*, 281--304.

Kluft, R. P., & Fine, C. G. (Eds.). (1993). *Clinical perspectives on
multiple personality disorder*. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press.

Knight, R. (1953). Borderline states in psychoanalytic psychiatry and
psychology. *Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 17*, 1--12.

Kohut, H. (1968). The psychoanalytic treatment of narcissistic
personality disorders. *Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 23*, 86--113.

Kohut, H. (1971). *The analysis of the self: A systematic approach to
the psychoanalytic treatment of narcissistic personality disorders*. New
York: International Universities Press.

Kohut, H. (1977). *The restoration of the self*. New York: International
Universities Press.

Kohut, H. (1984). *How does analysis cure?* (A. Goldberg, Ed., with P.
Stepansky). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kohut, H., & Wolf, E. S. (1978). The disorders of the self and their
treatment---An outline. *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis*,
*59*, 413--425.

Kraepelin, E. (1913). *Lectures on clinical psychiatry*. London:
Bailliere, Tindall, & Cox.

Kraepelin, E. (1915). *Psychiatrie: Ein lehrbuch* (8th ed.). Leipzig:
Barth.

Kraepelin, E. (1919). *Dementia praecox and paraphrenia* (R. M. Barclay,
Trans.). Huntington, NY: Krieger, 1971.

Krafft-Ebing, R. (1900). *Psychopathia sexualis* (E. J. Rebman, Trans.).
New York: Physicians and Surgeons Book Company, 1935.

Kretschmer, E. (1925). *Physique and character* (J. H. Sprott, Trans.).
New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

Kris, E. (1956). The recovery of childhood memories in psychoanalysis.
*Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 11*, 54--88.

Krystal, H. (1988). *Integration and self-healing: Affect, trauma,
alexithymia*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Krystal, H. (1997). Desomatization and the consequences of infantile
psychic trauma. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 17*, 126--150.

Kuhn, T. S. (1970). *The structure of scientific revolutions* (2nd rev.
ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Laing, R. D. (1962). *The self and others*. Chicago: Quadrangle.

Laing, R. D. (1965). *The divided self: An existential study in sanity
and madness*. Baltimore: Penguin.

Langness, L. L. (1967). Hysterical psychosis---The cross-cultural
evidence. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 124*, 143--151.

Langs, R. J. (1973). *The technique of psychoanalytic psychotherapy: The
initial contact, theoretical framework, understanding the patient's
communications, the therapist's interventions* (Vol. 1). New York: Jason
Aronson.

LaPlanche, J., & Pontalis, J. B. (1973). *The language of
psychoanalysis*. New York: Norton.

Lasch, C. (1978). *The culture of narcissism: American life in an age of
diminishing expectations*. New York: Norton.

Lasch, C. (1984). *The minimal self: Psychic survival in troubled
times*. New York: Norton.

Latz, T. T., Kramer, S. I., & Hughes, D. R. (1995). Multiple personality
disorder among female inpatients in a state hospital. *American Journal
of Psychiatry, 152*, 1343--1348.

Laughlin, H. P. (1956). *The neuroses in clinical practice*.
Philadelphia: Saunders.

Laughlin, H. P. (1967). *The neuroses*. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Laughlin, H. P. (1970). *The ego and its defenses*. New York: Jason
Aronson.

Lax, R. F. (1977). The role of internalization in the development of
certain aspects of female masochism: Ego psychological considerations.
*International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 58*, 289--300.

Lax, R. F. (Ed.). (1989). *Essential papers on character neurosis and
treatment*. New York: New York University Press.

Layton, L. (2004). Relational no more: Defensive autonomy in
middle-class women. *Annual of Psychoanalysis, 32*, 29--42.

Lazare, A. (1971). The hysterical character in psychoanalytic theory:
Evolution and confusion. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 25*, 131--137.

LeDoux, J. (1996). *The emotional brain: The mysterious underpinnings of
emotional life*. New York: Simon & Schuster.

LeDoux, J. (2002). *Synaptic self: How our brains become who we are*.
New York: Viking.

Lee, P. A., Houk, C. P., Ahmed, S. F., Hughes, I. A., in collaboration
with the participants in the International Consensus Conference on
Intersex organized by the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society and
the European society for Paediatric Endocrinology (2006). Consensus
statement on management of intersex disorders: International consensus
conference on intersex. *Pediatrics, 118*, 488--5000.

Leichsenring, F., & Rabung, S. (2008). Effectiveness of long-term
psychodynamic psychotherapy: A meta-analysis. *Journal of the American
Medical Association, 300*, 1551--1565.

Levenson, E. A. (1972). *The fallacy of understanding: An inquiry into
the changing structure of psychoanalysis*. New York: Basic Books.

Levin, J. D. (1987). *Treatment of alcoholism and other addictions: A
self-psychology approach*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Levy, K. N., Wasserman, R. H., Scott, L. N., Zach, S. E., White, C. N.,
Cain, N. M., et al. (2006). The development of a measure to assess
putative mechanisms of change in the treatment of borderline personality
disorder. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 54*,
1325--1330.

Lewis, D. O., Yaeger, C. A., Swica, Y., Pincus, J. H., & Lewis, M.
(1997). Objective documentation of child abuse and dissociation in 12
murderers with dissociative identity disorder. *American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154*, 1703--1710.

Lewis, H. B. (1971). *Shame and guilt in neurosis*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Lewis, M., & Haviland-Jones, J. M. (2010). *Handbook of emotions* (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.

Lichtenberg, J. (1989). *Psychoanalysis and motivation*. Hillsdale, NJ:
Analytic Press.

Lichtenberg, J. D. (2001). Motivational systems and model scenes with
special references to bodily experience. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 21*,
430--447.

Lichtenberg, J. D. (2004). Experience and inference: How far will
science carry us? *Journal of Analytic Psychology, 49*, 133--142.

Lidz, T. (1973). *The origin and treatment of schizophrenic disorders*.
New York: Basic Books.

Lidz, T., & Fleck, S. (1965). Family studies and a theory of
schizophrenia. In T. Lidz, S. Fleck, & A. R. Cornelison (Eds.),
*Schizophrenia and the family*. New York: International Universities
Press.

Lieb, P. T. (2001). Integrating behavior modification and pharmacology
with the psychoanalytic treatment of obsessive--compulsive disorder: A
case study. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 21*, 222--241.

Lifton, R. J. (1968). *Death in life: Survivors of Hiroshima*. New York:
Random House.

Lilienfeld, S. O., Van Valkenburg, C., Larntz, K., & Akiskal, H. S.
(1986). The relationship of histrionic personality disorder to
antisocial personality disorder and somatization disorders. *American
Journal of Psychiatry, 142*, 718--722.

Lindner, R. (1955). The jet-propelled couch. In *The fifty-minute hour:
A collection of true psychoanalytic tales* (pp. 221--293). New York:
Jason Aronson, 1982.

Linehan, M. M. (1993). *Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline
personality disorder*. New York: Guilford Press.

Linton, R. (1956). *Culture and mental disorders*. Springfield, IL:
Thomas.

Lion, J. R. (1978). Outpatient treatment of psychopaths. In W. Reid
(Ed.), *The psychopath: A comprehensive study of antisocial disorders
and behaviors* (pp. 286--300). New York: Brunner/Mazel.

Lion, J. R. (Ed.). (1986). *Personality disorders: Diagnosis and
management* (2nd ed.). Malabar, FL: Krieger.

Liotti, G. (1999). Understanding dissociative process: The contribution
of attachment theory. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 19*, 757--783.

Liotti, G. (2004). Trauma, dissociation, and disorganized attachment:
Three strands of a single braid. *Psychotherapy: Theory, Research,
Practice, Training, 41*, 472--486.

Little, M. I. (1981). *Transference neurosis and transference psychosis:
Toward basic unity*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Little, M. I. (1990). *Psychotic anxieties and containment: A personal
record of an analysis with Winnicott*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Loewenstein, R. J. (1988). The spectrum of phenomenology in multiple
personality disorder: Implications for diagnosis and treatment. In B. G.
Braun (Ed.), *Proceedings of the Fifth National Conference on Multiple
Personality Disorder/Dissociative States* (p. 7). Chicago: Rush
University.

Loewenstein, R. J. (1991). An office mental status examination for
complex chronic dissociative symptoms and multiple personality disorder.
*Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 14*, 567--604.

Loewenstein, R. J. (1993). Post-traumatic and dissociative aspects of
transference and countertransference in the treatment of multiple
personality disorder. In R. P. Kluft & C. Fine (Eds.), *Clinical
perspectives on multiple personality disorder* (pp. 51--85). Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Loewenstein, R. J., & Ross, D. R. (1992). Multiple personality and
psychoanalysis: An introduction. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 12*, 3--48.

Loewenstein, R. M. (1951). The problem of interpretation.
*Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 20*, 1--14.

Loewenstein, R. M. (1955). A contribution to the psychoanalytic theory
of masochism. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 5*,
197--234.

Lothane, Z. (1992). *In defense of Schreber: Soul murder and
psychiatry*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Louth, S. M., Williamson, S., Alpert, M., Pouget, E. R., & Hare, R. D.
(1998). Acoustic distinctions in the speech of male psychopaths.
*Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 27*, 375--384.

Lovinger, R. J. (1984). *Working with religious issues in therapy*. New
York: Jason Aronson.

Luepnitz, D. A. (2002). *Schopenhauer's porcupines: Intimacy and its
dilemmas. Five stories of psychotherapy*. New York: Basic Books.

Lykken, D. (1995). *The antisocial personalities*. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Lynd, H. M. (1958). *On shame and the search for identity*. New York:
Harcourt, Brace & World.

Lyons-Ruth, K. (1991). Rapprochement or approchement: Mahler's theory
reconsidered from the vantage point of recent research on early
attachment relationships. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 8*, 1--23.

Lyons-Ruth, K. (2001). The two-person construction of defenses:
Disorganized attachment strategies, unintegrated mental states and
hostile/helpless relational processes. *Psychologist-Psychoanalyst, 21*,
40--45.

Lyons-Ruth, K., Bronfman, E., & Parsons, E. (1999). Maternal frightened,
frightening, or atypical behavior and disorganized attachment patterns.
In J. I. Voncra & D. Barnett (Eds.), *Atypical attachment in infancy and
early childhood among children at risk* (pp. 67--96). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

MacKinnon, R. A., & Michels, R. (1971). *The psychiatric interview in
clinical practice*. Philadelphia: Saunders.

MacKinnon, R. A., Michels, R., & Buckley, P. J. (2006). *The psychiatric
interview in clinical practice* (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association.

Maheu, R., & Hack, R. (1992). *Next to Hughes*. New York: HarperCollins.

Mahler, M. S. (1968). *On human symbiosis and the vicissitudes of
individuation*. New York: International Universities Press.

Mahler, M. S. (1971). A study of the separation--individuation process
and its possible application to borderline phenomena in the
psychoanalytic situation. *Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 26*,
403--424.

Mahler, M. S. (1972a). On the first three subphases of the
separation--individuation process. *International Journal of
Psycho-Analysis, 53*, 333--338.

Mahler, M. S. (1972b). Rapprochement subphase of the
separation--individuation process. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly*, *41*,
487--506.

Mahler, M. S., Pine, F., & Bergman, A. (1975). *The psychological birth
of the human infant*. New York: Basic Books.

Main, M. (1995). Attachment: Overview, with implications for clinical
work. In S. Goldberg, R. Muir, & J. Kerr (Eds.), *Attachment theory:
Social, developmental and clinical perspectives* (pp. 407--474).
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Main, M., & Hesse, E. (1990). Parents' unresolved traumatic experiences
are related to infant disorganized attachment status: Is frightened
and/or frightening parental behavior the linking mechanism? In M. T.
Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings (Eds.), *Attachment in the
preschool years: Theory, research, and intervention* (pp. 161--182).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1986). Discovery of a new,
insecure--disorganized/disoriented attachment pattern. In T. B.
Brazelton & M. Yogman (Eds.), *Affective development in infancy* (pp.
95--124). Norwood: Ablex.

Main, M., & Weston, D. R. (1982). Avoidance of the attachment figure in
infancy. In M. Parkes & J. Stevenson-Hinde (Eds.), *The place of
attachment in human behavior* (pp. 31--59). New York: Basic Books.

Main, T. F. (1957). The ailment. *British Journal of Medical Psychology,
30*, 129--145.

Malan, D. H. (1963). *A study of brief psychotherapy*. New York: Plenum.

Mandelbaum, A. (1977). The family treatment of the borderline patient.
In P. Hartocollis (Ed.), *Borderline personality disorders: The concept,
the syndrome, the patient* (pp. 423--438). New York: International
Universities Press.

Mann, J. (1973). *Time-limited psychotherapy*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Marmor, J. (1953). Orality in the hysterical personality. *Journal of
the American Psychiatric Association, 1*, 656--671.

Maroda, K. J. (1991). *The power of countertransference*. Northvale, NJ:
Jason Aronson.

Maroda, K. J. (1999). *Seduction, surrender, and transformation:
Emotional engagement in the analytic process*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic
Press.

Maroda, K. J. (2010). *Psychodynamic techniques: Working with emotion in
the therapeutic relationship*. New York: Guilford Press.

Martens, W. H. J. (2002). Criminality and moral dysfunction: Neurology,
biochemical, and genetic dimensions. *International Journal of Offender
Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 46*, 170--182.

Masterson, J. F. (1972). *Treatment of the borderline adolescent: A
developmental approach*. New York: Wiley-Interscience.

Masterson, J. F. (1976). *Psychotherapy of the borderline adult: A
developmental approach*. New York: Brunner/Mazel.

Masterson, J. F. (1993). *The emerging self: A developmental, self and
object relations approach to the treatment of closet narcissistic
disorder of the self*. New York: Brunner/Mazel.

Masterson, J. F., & Klein, R. (Eds.). (1995). *Disorders of the self:
New therapeutic horizons*. New York: Routledge.

Mattila, A. K., Kronholm, E., Jula, A., Salminen, J. K., Koivisto, A.
M., Mielonen, R. L., et al. (2008). Alexithymia and somatization in the
general population. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 70*, 716--722.

Mayes, L. (2001). Review of S. Greenspan (1997), *Developmentally based
psychotherapy*. New York: International Universities Press. *Journal of
the American Psychoanalytic Association, 49*, 1060--1064.

Mayes, R., & Horwitz, A. V. (2005). DSM-III and the revolution in the
classification of mental illness. *Journal of the History of the
Behavioral Sciences, 41*, 249--267.

McClelland, D. C. (1961). *The achieving society*. Princeton, NJ: Van
Nostrand.

McDougall, J. (1980). *Plea for a measure of abnormality*. New York:
International Universities Press.

McDougall, J. (1989). *Theaters of the body: A psychoanalytic approach
to psychosomatic illness*. New York: Norton.

McGoldrick, M. (2005). Irish families. In M. McGoldrick, J. Giordano, &
N. Garcia-Preto (Eds.), *Ethnicity and family therapy* (3rd ed., pp.
595--615). New York: Guilford Press.

McWilliams, N. (1979). Treatment of the young borderline patient:
Fostering individuation against the odds. *Psychoanalytic Review, 66*,
339--357.

McWilliams, N. (1984). The psychology of the altruist. *Psychoanalytic
Psychology, 1*, 193--213.

McWilliams, N. (1999). *Psychoanalytic case formulation*. New York:
Guilford Press.

McWilliams, N. (2004). *Psychoanalytic psychotherapy: A practitioner's
guide*. New York: Guilford Press.

McWilliams, N. (2005a). Mother and fathering processes in the
psychoanalytic art. In E. L. K. Toronto, G. Ainslie, M. Donovan, M.
Kelly, C. C. Kieffer, & N. McWilliams (Eds.), *Psychoanalytic
reflections on a gender-free case: Into the void* (pp. 154--169). New
York: Routledge.

McWilliams, N. (2005b). Preserving our humanity as therapists.
*Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice and Training, 42,* 139--151;
response to Norcross, 156--159.

McWilliams, N. (2006a). Some thoughts about schizoid dynamics.
*Psychoanalytic Review, 93*, 1--24.

McWilliams, N. (2006b). The woman who hurt too much to talk. *Fort Da*,
*12*, 9--25.

McWilliams, N. (Guest Expert); American Psychological Association
(Producer). (2007). *Psychoanalytic therapy* \[DVD\]. Available from
*www.apa.org/videos*.

McWilliams, N. (2010). Paranoia and political leadership.
*Psychoanalytic Review, 97*, 239--261.

McWilliams, N., & Lependorf, S. (1990). Narcissistic pathology of
everyday life: The denial of remorse and gratitude. *Journal of
Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 26*, 430--451.

McWilliams, N., & Stein, J. (1987). Women's groups led by women: The
management of devaluing transferences. *International Journal of Group
Psychotherapy, 37*, 139--153.

Meares, R. (2001). A specific developmental deficit in
obsessive--compulsive disorder: The example of the Wolf Man.
*Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 21*, 289--319.

Meares, R. (2002). I*ntimacy and alienation: Memory, trauma and personal
being*. London: Routledge.

Meissner, W. W. (1978). *The paranoid process*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Meissner, W. W. (1979). Narcissistic personalities and borderline
conditions: A differential diagnosis. *Annual Review of Psychoanalysis,
7*, 171--202.

Meissner, W. W. (1984). *The borderline spectrum: Differential diagnosis
and developmental issues*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Meissner, W. W. (1988). *Treatment of patients in the borderline
spectrum*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Meissner, W. W. (2006). Psychoanalysis and the mind--body relation:
Psychosomatic perspectives. *Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 70*,
295--315.

Meloy, J. R. (1988). *The psychopathic mind: Origins, dynamics, and
treatment*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Meloy, J. R. (1997). The psychology of wickedness: Psychopathy and
sadism. *Psychiatric Annals, 27*, 630--633.

Meloy, J. R. (Ed.). (2001). *The mark of Cain: Psychoanalytic insight
and the psychopath*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Menaker, E. (1942). The masochistic factor in the psychoanalytic
situation. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 11*, 171--186.

Menaker, E. (1953). Masochism*---*A defense reaction of the ego.
*Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 22*, 205--220.

Menninger, K. (1963). *The vital balance: The life process in mental
health and illness* (with M. Mayman & P. Pruyser). New York: Viking.

Messer, S. B., & Warren, C. S. (1995). *Models of brief psychodynamic
therapy: A comparative approach*. New York: Guilford Press.

Michaud, S., & Aynesworth, H. (1983). *The only living witness*. New
York: New American Library.

Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2007). *Attachment in adulthood:
Structure, dynamics, and change*. New York: Guilford Press.

Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience. *Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 67*, 371--378.

Miller, A. (1975). *Prisoners of childhood: The drama of the gifted
child and the search for the true self*. New York: Basic Books.

Miller, J. B. (1984). The development of women's sense of self. In J. V.
Jordan, A. G. Kaplan, J. B. Miller, I. P. Stiver, & J. L. Surrey (Eds.),
*Women's growth in connection: Writings for the Stone Center* (pp.
11--26). New York: Guilford Press.

Millon, T. (1995). *Disorders of personality: DSM-IV and beyond*. New
York: Wiley.

Mischler, E., & Waxier, N. (Eds.). (1968). *Family processes and
schizophrenia*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Mitchell, J. (2001). *Mad men and Medusas: Reclaiming hysteria*. New
York: Basic Books.

Mitchell, S. A. (1988). *Relational concepts in psychoanalysis: An
integration*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Mitchell, S. A. (1997). *Influence and autonomy in psychoanalysis*.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Mitchell, S. A., & Aron, L. (Eds.). (1999). *Relational psychoanalysis:
The emergence of a tradition*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Mitchell, S. A., & Black, M. J. (1995). *Freud and beyond: A history of
modern psychoanalytic thought*. New York: Basic Books.

Modell, A. H. (1975). A narcissistic defense against affects and the
illusion of self-sufficiency. *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis,
56*, 275--282.

Modell, A. H. (1976). The "holding environment" and the therapeutic
action of psychoanalysis. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic
Association, 24*, 285--308.

Modell, A. H. (1996). *The private self*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Morrison, A. P. (1983). Shame, the ideal self, and narcissism.
*Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 19*, 295--318.

Morrison, A. P. (Ed.). (1986). *Essential papers on narcissism*. New
York: New York University Press.

Morrison, A. P. (1989). *Shame: The underside of narcissism*. Hillsdale,
NJ: Analytic Press.

Mowrer, O. H. (1950). *Learning theory and personality dynamics*. New
York: Ronald.

Mueller, W. J., & Aniskiewitz, A. S. (1986). *Psychotherapeutic
intervention in hysterical disorders*. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Mullahy, P. (1970). *Psychoanalysis and interpersonal psychiatry: The
contributions of Harry Stack Sullivan*. New York: Science House.

Murray, H. A., & members of the Harvard Psychological Clinic. (1938).
*Explorations in personality*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Myerson, P. G. (1991). *Childhood dialogues and the lifting of
repression: Character structure and psychoanalytic technique*. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Nagera, H. (1976). *Obsessional neuroses: Developmental pathology*. New
York: Jason Aronson.

Nannarello, J. J. (1953). Schizoid. *Journal of Nervous and Mental
Diseases, 118*, 242.

Nemiah, J. C. (1973). *Foundations of psychopathology*. New York: Jason
Aronson.

Newirth, J. (2003). *Between emotion and cognition: The generative
unconscious*. New York: Other Press.

Nickell, A. D., Waudby, C. J., & Trull, T. J. (2002). Attachment,
parental bonding, and borderline personality disorder features in young
adults. *Journal of Personality Disorders, 16*, 148--159.

Niederland, W. (1959). Schreber: Father and son. *Psychoanalytic
Quarterly, 28*, 151--169.

Niehoff, D. (2003). A vicious circle: The neurobiological foundations of
violent behavior. *Modern Psychoanalysis, 28*, 235--245.

Noblin, C. D., Timmons, E. O., & Kael, H. C. (1966). Differential
effects of positive and negative verbal reinforcement on psychoanalytic
character types. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4*,
224--228.

Norcross, J. C. (2002). *Psychotherapy relationships that work:
Therapist contributions and responsiveness to patients*. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Novick, J., & Novick, K. K.(1991). Some comments on masochism and the
delusion of omnipotence from a developmental perspective. *Journal of
the American Psychoanalytic Association, 39*, 307--331.

Nunberg, H. (1955). *Principles of psycho-analysis*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Nydes, J. (1963). The paranoid--masochistic character. *Psychoanalytic
Review, 50*, 215--251.

Ogawa, J. R., Sroufe, L. A., Weinfield, N. S., Carlson, E. A., &
Egeland, B. (1997). Development and the fragmented self: Longitudinal
study of dissociative symptomatology in a nonclinical sample.
*Development and Psychopathology, 9*, 855--879.

Ogden, T. H. (1982). *Projective identification: Psychotherapeutic
technique*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Ogden, T. H. (1989). *The primitive edge of experience*. Northvale, NJ:
Jason Aronson.

Ogden, T. H. (1996). The perverse subject of analysis. *Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association, 44*, 1121--1146.

Olds, D. D. (2006). Identification: Psychoanalytic and biological
perspectives. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 54*,
17--46.

Ouimette, P. C., Klein, D. N., Anderson, R., Riso, L. P., & Lizardi, H.
(1994). Relationships of sociotropy/autonomy and
dependency/self-criticism to DSM-III-R personality disorders. *Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 103*, 743--749.

Panken, S. (1973). *The joy of suffering: Psychoanalytic theory and
therapy of masochism*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Panksepp, J. (1998). *Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human
and animal emotions*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Panksepp, J. (1999). Emotions as viewed by psychoanalysis and
neuroscience: An exercise in consilience. *Neuro-Psychoanalysis, 1*,
15--38.

Panksepp, J. (2001). The long-term psychobiological consequences of
infant emotions: Prescriptions for the 21st century.
*Neuro-Psychoanalysis, 3*, 149--178.

Paris, J. (2008). *Treatment of borderline personality disorder: A guide
to evidence-based practice*. New York: Guilford Press.

Patrick, C. J. (1994). Emotion and psychopathology: Startling new
insights. *Psychophysiology, 31*, 319--330.

Pasquini, P., Liotti, G., Mazzotti, E., Fassone, G., & Picardi, A.
(2002). Risk factors in the early family life of patients suffering from
dissociative disorders. *Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 105*, 110--116.

PDM Task Force (2006). *Psychodynamic diagnostic manual*. Silver Spring,
MD: Alliance of Psychoanalytic Organizations.

Pearlman, E. (2005). Terror of desire: The etiology of eating disorders
from an attachment theory perspective. *Psychoanalytic Review, 92*,
223--235.

Peebles-Kleiger, M. J. (2002). *Beginnings: The art and science of
planning psychotherapy*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Peralta, V., Cuesta, M. J., & de Leon, J. (1991). Premorbid personality
and positive and negative symptoms in schizophrenia. *Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 84*, 336--339.

Persons, J. B. (2008). *The case formulation approach to
cognitive-behavior therapy*. New York: Guilford Press.

Pharis, M. E. (2004, July). *The virtuous narcissist: Extending
Gabbard's two subtypes of narcissism*. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Psychological Association, Honolulu, HI.

Piaget, J. (1937). *The construction of reality in the child*. New York:
Basic Books.

Pine, F. (1985). *Developmental theory and clinical process*. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.

Pine, F. (1990). *Drive, ego, object, and self: A synthesis for clinical
work*. New York: Basic Books.

Pinsker, H. (1997). *A primer of supportive psychotherapy*. Hillsdale,
NJ: Analytic Press.

Pope, K. S. (1987). Preventing therapist--patient sexual intimacy:
Therapy for a therapist at risk. *Professional Psychology: Research and
Practice, 18*, 624--628.

Pope, K. S., Tabachnick, B. G., & Keith-Spiegel, P. (1987). Ethics of
practice: The beliefs and behaviors of psychologists as therapists.
*American Psychologist, 42*, 993--1006.

Prichard, J. C. (1835). *Treatise on insanity*. London: Sherwood,
Gilbert & Piper.

Prince, M. (1906). *The dissociation of a personality: A biographical
study in abnormal personality*. New York: Longman, Green.

Prince, R. (2007). Present and past in sonata form. *Contemporary
Psychoanalysis, 43*, 484--492.

Putnam, F. W. (1989). *Diagnosis and treatment of multiple personality
disorder*. New York: Guilford Press.

Putnam, F. W. (1997). *Dissociation in children and adolescents: A
developmental perspective*. New York: Guilford Press.

Racker, H. (1968). *Transference and countertransference*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Rado, S. (1928). The problem of melancholia. *International Journal of
Psycho-Analysis, 9*, 420--438.

Rafaeli, E., Bernstein, D. P., & Young, J. (2010). *Schema therapy:
Distinctive features*. New York: Routledge.

Rank, O. (1929). *The trauma of birth*. Harper & Row, 1973.

Rao, D., Young, M., & Raguram, R. (2007). Culture, somatization, and
psychological distress: Symptom presentation in South Indian patients
from a public psychiatric hospital. *Psychopathology, 40*, 349--355.

Rasmussen, A. (1988). Chronically and severely battered women: A
psychodiagnostic investigation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Graduate School of Applied and Professional Psychology, Rutgers
University. *Dissertation Abstracts International, 50*, 2634B.

Read, J., Mosher, L. R., & Bentall, R. P. (2004). *Models of madness:
Psychological, social and biological approaches to schizophrenia*.
London: Routledge.

Read, J., Perry, B., Moskowitz, A., & Connolly, J. (2001). The
contribution of early traumatic events to schizophrenia in some
patients: A traumagenic neurodevelopmental model. *Psychiatry, 64*,
319--345.

A Recovering Patient. (1986). "Can we talk?": The schizophrenic patient
in psychotherapy. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 143*, 68--70.

Redl, R., & Wineman, D. (1951). *Children who hate*. New York: Free
Press.

Reich, A. (1960). Pathological forms of self-esteem regulation.
*Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 15*, 215--231.

Reich, W. (1933). *Character analysis*. New York: Farrar, Straus, &
Giroux, 1972.

Reichbart, R. (2010, June). *Paranoia: The therapist mistaken for a
monster*. Paper presented at the Center for Psychoanalysis and
Psychotherapy of New Jersey, Madison, NJ.

Reik, T. (1941). *Masochism in modern man*. New York: Farrar, Straus.

Reik, T. (1948). *Listening with the third ear*. New York: Grove.

Reinhard, M. J., Wolf, G., & Cozolino, L. (2010). Using the MMPI to
assess reported cognitive disturbances and somatization as a core
feature of complex PTSD. *Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 11*,
57--72.

Ressler, R. K., & Schactman, T. (1992). *Whoever fights monsters: My
twenty years of hunting serial killers for the FBI*. New York: St.
Martin's.

Rhodes, J. (1980). *The Hitler movement: A modern millenarian
revolution*. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.

Rice, E. (2004). Reflections on the obsessive--compulsive disorders: A
psychodynamic and therapeutic perspective. *Psychoanalytic Review, 91*,
29--44.

Rice, J., Reich, T., Andreason, N. C., Endicott, J., Van Eerdewegh, M.,
Fishman, R., et al. (1987). The familial transmission of bipolar
illness. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 44*, 441--447.

Richfield, J. (1954). An analysis of the concept of insight.
*Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 23*, 390--408.

Richman, J., & White, H. (1970). A family view of hysterical psychosis.
*American Journal of Psychiatry, 127*, 280--285.

Rinsley, D. B. (1982). *Borderline and other self disorders: A
developmental and object-relations perspective*. New York: Jason
Aronson.

Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror neuron system.
*Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27*, 169--192.

Robbins, A. (1980). *Expressive therapy*. New York: Human Sciences
Press.

Robbins, A. (1988). The interface of the real and transference
relationships in the treatment of schizoid phenomena. *Psychoanalytic
Review, 75*, 393--417.

Robbins, A. (1989). *The psychoaesthetic experience: An approach to
depth-oriented treatment*. New York: Human Sciences Press.

Robbins, M. (1993). *Experiences of schizophrenia: An integration of the
personal, scientific, and therapeutic*. New York: Guilford Press.

Robins, L. N., Tipp, J., & Przybeck, T. (1991). Antisocial personality.
In L. N. Robins & D. A. Regier (Eds.), *Psychiatric disorders in
America: The epidemiological catchment area study* (pp. 258--290). New
York: Free Press.

Rockland, L. H. (1992). *Supportive therapy: A psychodynamic approach*.
New York: Basic Books.

Rogers, C. R. (1951). *Client-centered therapy: Its current practice,
implications, and theory*. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Rogers, C. R. (1961). *On becoming a person*. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Roland, A. (1981). Induced emotional reactions and attitudes in the
psychoanalyst as transference and in actuality. *Psychoanalytic Review,
68*, 45--74.

Roland, A. (2003). Psychoanalysis across civilizations. *Journal of the
American Academy of Psychoanalysis and Dynamic Psychiatry, 31*,
275--295.

Rosanoff, A. J. (1938). *Manual of psychiatry and mental hygiene*. New
York: Wiley.

Rosenfeld, H. (1947). Analysis of a schizophrenic state with
depersonalization. *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 28*,
130--139.

Rosenfeld, H. (1987). Afterthought: Changing theories and changing
techniques in psychoanalysis. In *Impasse and interpretation* (pp.
265--279). London: Tavistock.

Rosenwald, G. C. (1972). Effectiveness of defenses against anal impulse
arousal. *Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 39*, 292--298.

Ross, C. A. (1989a). The dissociative disorders interview schedule: A
structured interview. *Dissociation, 7*, 169--189.

Ross, C. A. (1989b). *Multiple personality disorder: Diagnosis, clinical
features, and treatment*. New York: Wiley.

Ross, C. A. (2000). *The trauma model: A solution to the problem of
comorbidity in psychiatry*. Richardson, TX: Manitou Communications.

Ross, D. R. (1992). Discussion: An agnostic viewpoint on multiple
personality disorder. *Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 12*, 124--138.

Rosse, I. C. (1890). Clinical evidences of borderland insanity. *Journal
of Nervous and Mental Diseases, 17*, 669--683.

Rowe, C. E., & Maclsaac, D. S. (1989). *Empathic attunement: The
"technique" of psychoanalytic self psychology*. Northvale, NJ: Jason
Aronson.

Safran, J. D. (2006). The relational unconscious: The enchanted
interior, and the return of the repressed. *Contemporary Psychoanalysis,
42*, 393--412.

Safran, J. D. (in press). *Psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic therapies*.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Safran, J. D., & Muran, J. C. (2000). *Negotiating the therapeutic
alliance: A relational treatment guide*. New York: Guilford Press.

Saks, E. R. (2008). *The center cannot hold: My journey through
madness*. New York: Hyperion Press.

Salzman, L. (1960). Masochism and psychopathy as adaptive behavior.
*Journal of Individual Psychology, 16*, 182--188.

Salzman, L. (1962). *Developments in psychoanalysis*. New York: Grune &
Stratton.

Salzman, L. (1980). *Treatment of the obsessive personality*. New York:
Jason Aronson.

Samelius, L., Wijma, B., Wingren, G., & Wijma, K. (2009). Posttraumatic
stress and somatization in abused women. *Traumatology, 15*, 103--112.

Sandler, J. (1976). Countertransference and role-responsiveness.
*International Review of Psychoanalysis, 3*, 43--47.

Sandler, J. (1987). *Projection, identification, and projective
identification*. Madison, CT: International Universities Press.

Sands, S. H. (2003). The subjugation of the body in eating disorders.
*Psychoanalytic Psychology, 20*, 103--116.

Sar, V., Akyuz, G., & Dogan, O. (2006). Prevalence of dissociative
disorders among women in the general population. *Psychiatry Research,
149*, 169--176.

Sar, V., Dogan, O., Yargic, L. I., & Tutkun, H. (1999). Frequency of
dissociative disorders in the general population of Turkey.
*Comprehensive Psychiatry, 40*, 151--159.

Sass, L. A. (1992). *Madness and modernism: Insanity in the light of
modem art, literature, and thought*. New York: Basic Books.

Sasso, G. (2008). *The development of consciousness: An integrative
model of child development, neuroscience and psychoanalysis* (J. Cottam,
Trans.). London: Karnac.

Schafer, R. (1968). *Aspects of internalization*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Schafer, R. (1983). *The analytic attitude*. New York: Basic Books.

Schafer, R. (1984). The pursuit of failure and the idealization of
unhappiness. *American Psychologist, 39*, 398--405.

Scharff, J. S. (1992). *Projective and introjective identification and
the use of the therapist's self*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Schmideberg, M. (1947). The treatment of psychopaths and borderline
patients. *American Journal of Psychotherapy, 1*, 45--70.

Schneider, K. (1950). Psychoanalytic therapy with the borderline adult:
Some principles concerning technique. In J. Masterson (Ed.), *New
perspectives on psychotherapy of the borderline adult* (pp. 41--65). New
York: Brunner/Mazel.

Schneider, K. (1959). *Clinical psychopathology* (5th ed.). New York:
Grune & Stratton.

Schore, A. (2002). Advances in neuropsychoanalysis, attachment theory,
and trauma research: Implications for self psychology. *Psychoanalytic
Inquiry, 22*, 433--484.

Schore, A. N. (2003a). *Affect dysregulation and disorders of the self*.
New York: Norton.

Schore, A. N. (2003b). *Affect regulation and the repair of the self*.
New York: Norton.

Schreiber, F. R. (1973). *Sybil*. Chicago: Regency.

Scull, A. (2009). *Hysteria: The biography*. London: Oxford University
Press.

Searles, H. F. (1959). The effort to drive the other person crazy*---*An
element in the aetiology and psychotherapy of schizophrenia. *British
Journal of Medical Psychology, 32*, 1--18.

Searles, H. F. (1961). The sources of anxiety in paranoid schizophrenia.
In *Collected papers on schizophrenia and related subjects* (pp.
465--486). New York: International Universities Press, 1965.

Searles, H. F. (1965). *Collected papers on schizophrenia and related
subjects*. New York: International Universities Press.

Searles, H. F. (1986). *My work with borderline patients*. New York:
Jason Aronson.

Segal, H. (1950). Some aspects of the analysis of a schizophrenic.
*International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 31*, 268--278.

Segal, H. (1997). Some implications of Melanie Klein's work: Emergence
from narcissism. In J. Steiner (Ed.), *Psychoanalysis, literature and
war* (pp. 75--85). London: Routledge.

Seinfeld, J. (1991). *The empty core: An object relations approach to
psychotherapy of the schizoid personality*. Northvale, NJ: Jason
Aronson.

Seligman, S. (2005). Dynamic systems theories as a metaframework for
psychoanalysis. *Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 15*, 285--319.

Selzer, M. A., Sullivan, T. B., Carsky, M., & Terkelsen, K. G. (1989).
*Working with the person with schizophrenia: The treatment alliance*.
New York: Guilford Press.

Shapiro, D. (1965). *Neurotic styles.* New York: Basic Books.

Shapiro, D. (1984). *Autonomy and rigid character*. New York: Basic
Books.

Shapiro, D. (1989). *Psychotherapy of neurotic character*. New York:
Basic Books.

Shapiro, D. (2001). OCD or obsessive--compulsive character?
*Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 21*, 242--252.

Shapiro, D. (2002). *Dynamics of character: Self-regulation in
psychopathology*. New York: Basic Books.

Shapiro, J. L., Diamond, M. J., & Greenberg, M. (1995). *Becoming a
father: Contemporary social, developmental, and clinical perspectives*.
New York: Springer.

Shedler, J. (2010). The efficacy of psychodynamic therapy. *American
Psychologist, 65*, 98--109.

Shedler, J., & Westen, D. (2010). The Shedler-Westen Assessment
Procedure: Making diagnosis clinically meaningful. In J. F. Clarkin, P.
Fonagy, & G. O. Gabbard (Eds.), *Psychodynamic psychotherapy for
personality disorders* (pp. 125--161). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association.

Shengold, L. (1988). *Halo in the sky: Observations on anality and
defense*. New York: Guilford Press.

Sherwood, V. R., & Cohen, C. P. (1994). *Psychotherapy of the quiet
borderline patient: The as-if personality revisited*. Northvale, NJ:
Jason Aronson.

Shostrum, E. L. (Producer). (1965). *Three approaches to psychotherapy:
I, II, and III*. Orange, CA: Psychological Films.

Siever, L. J., & Weinstein, L. N. (2009). The neurobiology of
personality disorders: Implications for psychoanalysis. *Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association, 57*, 361--398.

Sifneos, P. (1973). The prevalence of "alexithymia" characteristics in
psychosomatic patients. *Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 22*,
255--262.

Sifneos, P. (1992). *Short-term anxiety-provoking psychotherapy*. New
York: Basic Books.

Silberschatz, G. (Ed.). (2005). *Transformative relationships: The
control--mastery theory of psychotherapy*. New York: Routledge.

Silver, A.-L. S. (Ed.). (1989). *Psychoanalysis and psychosis*. Madison,
CT: International Universities Press.

Silver, A.-L. S. (2003). The psychotherapy of schizophrenia: Its place
in the modern world. *Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis
and Dynamic Psychiatry, 31*, 325--341.

Silver, A.-L. S., & Cantor, M. B. (1990). *Psychoanalysis and severe
emotional illness*. New York: Guilford Press.

Silverman, K. (1986). *Benjamin Franklin: Autobiography and other
writings*. New York: Penguin.

Silverman, L. H. (1984). Beyond insight: An additional necessary step in
redressing intrapsychic conflict. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 1*,
215--234.

Silverman, L. H., Lachmann, F. M., & Milich, R. (1982). *The search for
oneness*. New York: International Universities Press.

Singer, J. A. (2005). *Personality and psychotherapy: Treating the whole
person*. New York: Guilford Press.

Singer, M. T., & Wynne, L. C. (1965a). Thought disorder and family
relations of schizophrenics: III. Methodology using projective
techniques. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 12*, 187--200.

Singer, M. T., & Wynne, L. C. (1965b). Thought disorder and family
relations of schizophrenics: IV. Results and implications. *Archives of
General Psychiatry, 12*, 201--212.

Sizemore, C. C. (1989). *A mind of my own*. New York: Morrow.

Sizemore, C. C., & Pittillo, E. S. (1977). *I'm Eve*. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.

Slater, P. E. (1970). *The pursuit of loneliness: American culture at
the breaking point*. Boston: Beacon.

Slavin, J. H. (2007). Personal agency and the possession of memory. In
D. Mandels & H. Soreq (Eds.), *Memory: An interdisciplinary approach*
(pp. 299--317). Bern, Switzerland: Lang. Revised version of chapter
published in R. Gardner (Ed.). (1997). *Memories of sexual betrayal:
Truth, fantasy, repression, and dissociation*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Slavin, M. O., & Kriegman, D. (1990). Evolutionary biological
perspectives on the classical--relational dialectic. *Psychoanalytic
Psychology, 7*, 5--32.

Slipp, S. (1977). Interpersonal factors in hysteria: Freud's seduction
theory and the case of Dora. *Journal of the American Academy of Dynamic
Psychiatry, 5*, 359--376.

Smith, S. (1984). The sexually abused patient and the abusing therapist:
A study in sadomasochistic relationships. *Psychoanalytic Psychology,
1*, 89--98.

So, J. K. (2008). Somatization as cultural idiom of distress: Rethinking
mind and body in a multicultural society. *Counseling Psychology
Quarterly, 21*, 167--174.

Solms, M., & Bucci, W. (2000). Biological and integrative studies on
affect. *International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 81*, 141--144.

Solms, M., & Nersessian, E. (1999). Freud's theory of affect: Questions
for neuroscience. *Neuro-Psychoanalysis, 1*, 5--14.

Solms, M., & Turnbull, O. (2002). *The brain and the inner world: An
introduction to the neuroscience of subjective experience*. New York:
Other Press.

Solomon, J., & George, C. (Eds.). (1999). *Attachment disorganization*.
New York: Guilford Press.

Sorel, E. (1991, September). First encounters: Joan Crawford and Bette
Davis. *Atlantic*, p. 75.

Spangler, G., & Grossmann, K. E. (1993). Biobehavioral organization in
securely and insecurely attached infants. *Child Development, 64*,
1439--1450.

Spence, D. P. (1987). *The Freudian metaphor: Toward paradigm change in
psychoanalysis*. New York: Norton.

Spezzano, C. (1993). *Affect in psychoanalysis: A clinical synthesis*.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Spiegel, D. (1984). Multiple personality as a post-traumatic stress
disorder. *Psychiatric Clinics of North America*, 7, 101--110.

Spiegel, H., & Spiegel, D. (1978). *Trance and treatment: Clinical uses
of hypnosis*. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Spitz, R. A. (1953). Aggression: Its role in the establishment of object
relations. In R. M. Loewenstein (Ed.), *Drives, affects, behavior* (pp.
126--138). New York: International Universities Press.

Spitz, R. A. (1965). *The first year of life*. New York: International
Universities Press.

Spitzer, C., & Barnow, S. (2005). Somatization as a unique dimension in
personality disorders. *Personlichkeitsstorungen Theorie und Therapie,
9*, 106--115.

Spotnitz, H. (1969). *Modern psychoanalysis of the schizophrenic
patient*. New York: Grune & Stratton.

Spotnitz, H. (1976). *Psychotherapy of preoedipal conditions*. New York:
Jason Aronson.

Spotnitz, H. (1985). *Modern psychoanalysis of the schizophrenic
patient: Theory of the technique* (2nd ed.). New York: Human Sciences
Press.

Sroufe, L. A., & Waters, E. (1977). Heart rate as a convergent measure
in clinical and developmental research. *Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 23*,
3--28.

Stanton, A. H., & Schwartz, M. S. (1954). *The mental hospital: A study
of institutional participation in psychiatric illness and treatment*.
New York: Basic Books.

Stein, A. (1938). Psychoanalytic investigation of the therapy in the
borderline group of neuroses. *Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 7*, 467--489.

Steinberg, M. (1991). The spectrum of depersonalization: Assessment and
treatment. In A. Tasman & S. M. Goldfinger (Eds.), *American Psychiatric
Press review of psychiatry* (Vol. 10, pp. 223--247). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press.

Steinberg, M. (1993). *Structured clinical interview for DSM-IV
dissociative disorders*. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Steiner, J. (1993). *Psychic retreats: Pathological organizations in
psychotic, neurotic and borderline patients*. London: Routledge.

Steiner, J. (2006). Seeing and being seen: Narcissistic pride and
narcissistic humiliation. *International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 87*,
935--951.

Sterba, R. F. (1934). The fate of the ego in analytic therapy.
*International Journal of Psycho-Analysis*, 15, 117--126.

Sterba, R. F. (1982). *Reminiscences of a Viennese psychoanalyst*.
Detroit: Wayne State University Press.

Stern, B. L., Caligor, E., Roose, S. P., & Clarkin, J. F. (2004). The
Structured Interview for Personality Organization (STIPO): Reliability
and validity. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 52*,
1223--1224.

Stern, D. B. (1997). *Unformulated experience: From dissociation to
imagination in psychoanalysis*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Stern, D. B. (2009). *Partners in thought: Working with unformulated
experience, dissociation, and enactment*. New York: Routledge.

Stern, D. N. (2000). *The interpersonal world of the infant: A view from
psychoanalysis and developmental psychology*. New York: Basic Books.

Stern, F. (1961). *The politics of cultural despair*. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Stoller, R. J. (1968). *Sex and gender*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Stoller, R. J. (1975). *Perversion*. New York: Pantheon.

Stoller, R. J. (1980). *Sexual excitement*. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Stoller, R. J. (1985). *Observing the erotic imagination*. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.

Stolorow, R. D. (1975). The narcissistic function of masochism (and
sadism). *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis*, 56, 441--448.

Stolorow, R. D. (1976). Psychoanalytic reflections on client-centered
therapy in the light of modern conceptions of narcissism.
*Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice*, 13, 26--29.

Stolorow, R. D., & Atwood, G. E. (1979). *Faces in a cloud: Subjectivity
in personality theory*. New York: Jason Aronson.

Stolorow, R. D., & Atwood, G. E. (1992). *Contexts of being: The
intersubjective foundations of psychological life*. Hillsdale, NJ:
Analytic Press.

Stolorow, R. D., Brandchaft, B., & Atwood, G. E. (1987). *Psychoanalytic
treatment: An intersubjective approach*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Stolorow, R. D., & Lachmann, F. M. (1978). The developmental prestages
of defenses: Diagnostic and therapeutic implications. *Psychoanalytic
Quarterly, 45*, 73--102.

Stone, L. (1954). The widening scope of indications for psycho-analysis.
*Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 2*, 567--594.

Stone, L. (1979). Remarks on certain unique conditions of human
aggression (the hand, speech, and the use of fire). *Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association, 27*, 27--33.

Stone, M. H. (1977). The borderline syndrome: Evolution of the term,
genetic aspects and prognosis. *American Journal of Psychotherapy, 31*,
345--365.

Stone, M. H. (1980). *The borderline syndromes: Constitution,
personality, and adaptation*. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Stone, M. H. (1981). Borderline syndromes: A consideration of subtypes
and an overview, direction for research. *Psychiatric Clinics of North
America, 4*, 3--13.

Stone, M. H. (Ed.). (1986). *Essential papers on borderline disorders:
One hundred years at the border*. New York: New York University Press.

Stone, M. H. (2000). Psychopathology: Biological and psychological
correlates. *Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis, 28*,
203--235.

Strachey, J. (1934). The nature of the therapeutic action of
psychoanalysis. *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 15*,
127--159.

Strupp, H. H. (1989). Psychotherapy: Can the practitioner learn from the
researcher? *American Psychologist, 44*, 717--724.

Sullivan, H. S. (1953). *The interpersonal theory of psychiatry*. New
York: Norton.

Sullivan, H. S. (1954). *The psychiatric interview*. New York: Norton.

Sullivan, H. S. (1962). *Schizophrenia as a human process*. New York:
Norton.

Sullivan, H. S. (1973). *Clinical studies in psychiatry*. New York:
Norton.

Surrey, J. L. (1985). The "self-in-relation": A theory of women's
development. In J. V. Jordan, A. G. Kaplan, J. B. Miller, I. P. Stiver,
& J. L. Surrey (Eds.), *Women's growth in connection: Writings from the
Stone Center* (pp. 51--66). New York: Guilford Press.

Symington, N. (1986). *The analytic experience*. New York: St. Martin's.

Symington, N. (1993). *Narcissism: A new theory*. London: Karnac.

Tansey, M. J., & Burke, W. F. (1989). *Understanding
countertransference: From projective identification to empathy*.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Teicher, M. H., Dumont, N. L., Ito, Y., Vaituzis, C., Giedd, J. N., &
Anderson, S. L. (2004). Childhood neglect is associated with reduced
corpus callosum area. *Biological Psychiatry, 56*, 80--85.

Teicher, M. H., Glod, C. A., Surrey, J., & Swett, C. (1993). Early
childhood abuse and limbic system ratings in adult psychiatric
outpatients. *Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 5*,
301--306.

Teicher, M. H., Samson, J. A., Sheu, Y-S., Polcari, A., & McGreenery, C.
E. (2010, July 15). Hurtful words: Association of exposure to peer
verbal abuse with elevated psychiatric symptom scores and corpus
callosum abnormalities. *AJP in Advance*, pp. 1--8.

Terr, L. (1992). *Too scared to cry: Psychic trauma in childhood*. New
York: Basic Books.

Thigpen, C. H., & Cleckley, H. (1957). *The three faces of Eve*. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Thomas, A. (2001). Factitious and malingered dissociative identity
disorder: Clinical features observed in 18 cases. *Journal of Trauma and
Dissociation, 2*, 59--77.

Thomas, A., Chess, S., & Birch, H. G. (1968). *Temperament and behavior
disorders in children*. New York: New York University Press.

Thompson, C. M. (1959). The interpersonal approach to the clinical
problems of masochism. In M. Green (Ed.), *Clara M. Thompson:
Interpersonal psychoanalysis* (pp. 183--187). New York: Basic Books.

Tibon, S., & Rothschild, L. (2009). Dissociative states in eating
disorders: An empirical Rorschach study. *Psychoanalytic Psychology,
26*, 69--82.

Tomkins, S. S. (1962). *Affect, imagery, consciousness: Vol. I. The
positive affects*. New York: Springer.

Tomkins, S. S. (1963). *Affect, imagery, consciousness: Vol. 2. The
negative affects*. New York: Springer.

Tomkins, S. S. (1964). The psychology of commitment, part 1: The
constructive role of violence and suffering for the individual and for
his society. In S. S. Tomkins & C. Izard (Eds.), *Affect, cognition, and
personality: Empirical studies* (pp. 148--171). New York: Springer.

Tomkins, S. S. (1991). *Affect, imagery, consciousness: Vol. 3. The
negative affects: Anger and fear*. New York: Springer.

Tomkins, S. S. (1992). *Affect, imagery, consciousness: Vol. 4.
Cognition: Duplication and transformation of information*. New York:
Springer.

Tomkins, S. S. (1995). Script theory. In E. V. Demos (Ed.), *Exploring
affect: The selected writings of Silvan Tomkins* (pp. 312--388). New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Trevarthen, C., & Aitken, K. J. (1994). Brain development, infant
communication, and empathy disorders: Intrinsic factors in child mental
health. *Developmental Psychology 6*, 597--633.

Tribich, D., & Messer, S. (1974). Psychoanalytic type and status of
authority as determiners of suggestibility. *Journal of Counseling and
Clinical Psychology, 42*, 842--848.

Tronick, E. Z. (2003). "Of course all relationships are unique": How
co-creative processes generate unique mother--infant and
patient--therapist relationships and change other relationships.
*Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 23*, 473--491.

Tsao, J. C. I., Allen, L. B., Evans, S., Lu, Q., Myeres, C. D., &
Zeltzer, L. K. (2009). Anxiety sensitivity and catastrophizing:
Associations with pain and somatization in non-clinical children.
*Journal of Health Psychology, 14*, 1085--1094.

Tyson, P., & Tyson, R. L. (1990). *Psychoanalytic theories of
development: An integration*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Vaillant, G. (1975). Sociopathy as a human process. *Archives of General
Psychiatry, 32*, 178--183.

Vaillant, G. E. (Ed.). (1992). *Ego mechanisms of defense: A guide for
clinicians and researchers*. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association.

Vaillant, G. E. (1992). The historical origins and future potential of
Sigmund Freud's concept of the mechanisms of defense. *International
Journal of Psychoanalysis, 19*, 35--50.

Vaillant, G. E., Bond, M., & Vaillant, C. O. (1986). An empirically
validated hierarchy of defense mechanisms. *Archives of General
Psychiatry, 43*, 786--794.

Vaillant, G. E., & Vaillant, C. O. (1992). A cross validation of two
methods of investigating defenses. In G. E. Vaillant (Ed.), *Ego
mechanisms of defense: A guide for clinicians and researchers* (pp.
159--170). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.

van Asselt, A. D. I., Dirksen, C. D., Arntz, A., Giesen-Bloos, J. H.,
van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., et al. (2008). Out-patient therapy for
borderline personality disorder: Cost-effectiveness of schema-focused
therapy v. transference-focused psychotherapy. *British Journal of
Psychiatry, 192*, 450--457.

Vandenberg, S. G., Singer, S. M., & Pauls, D. L. (1986). Hereditary
factors in antisocial personality disorder. In *The heredity of behavior
disorders in adults and children* (pp. 173--184). New York: Plenum
Press.

van der Hart, O., Nijenhuis, E. R. S., & Steele, K. (2006). *The haunted
self: Structural dissociation and the treatment of chronic
traumatization*. New York: Norton.

Veith, I. (1965). *Hysteria: The history of a disease*. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Veith, I. (1977). Four thousand years of hysteria. In M. Horowitz (Ed.),
*Hysterical personality* (pp. 7--93). New York: Jason Aronson.

Volkan, V. D. (1995). *The infantile psychotic self and its fate:
Understanding and treating schizophrenics and other difficult patients*.
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Wachtel, P. L. (2008). *Relational theory and the practice of
psychotherapy*. New York: Guilford Press.

Wachtel, P. L. (2010). Beyond "ESTs": Problematic assumptions in the
pursuit of evidence-based practice. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 27*,
251--272.

Waelder, R. (1960). *Basic theory of psychoanalysis*. New York:
International Universities Press.

Waldinger, R. J., Shulz, M. S., Barsky, A. J., & Ahern, D. K. (2006).
Mapping the road from childhood trauma to adult somatization: The role
of attachment. *Psychosomatic Medicine, 68*, 129--135.

Wallerstein, J. S., & Blakeslee, S. (1989). *Second chances: Men, women,
and children a decade after divorce*. New York: Ticknor & Fields.

Wallerstein, J. S., & Lewis, J. M. (2004). The unexpected legacy of
divorce: A 25-year landmark study. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 21*,
353--370.

Wallerstein, R. S. (1986). *Forty-two lives in treatment: A study of
psychoanalysis and psychotherapy*. New York: Guilford Press.

Wallerstein, R. S. (2002). The growth and transformation of American ego
psychology. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 50*,
135--168.

Wallin, D. J. (2007). *Attachment in psychotherapy*. New York: Guilford
Press.

Wampold, B. E. (2001). *The great psychotherapy debate: Methods, models,
and findings*. New York: Routledge.

Wampold, B. E. (2010). *The basis of psychotherapy: An introduction to
theory and practice*. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

Warner, R. (1978). The diagnosis of antisocial and hysterical
personality disorders: An example of sex bias. *Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 166*, 839--845.

Wasserman, J., & Stefanatos, G. S. (2000). The right hemisphere and
psychopathology. *Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis,
29*, 371--395.

Weinberger, D. R. (2004). Genetics, neuroanatomy, and neurobiology. In
C. B. Nemeroff (Ed.), New findings in schizophrenia: An update on causes
and treatment. *Clinical Psychiatry News, 32*(Suppl.).

Weiss, J. (1993). *How psychotherapy works: Process and technique*. New
York: Guilford Press.

Weiss, J., Sampson, H., & the Mount Zion Psychotherapy Research Group.
(1986). New York: Guilford Press.

Welch, B. (2008). *State of confusion: Political manipulation and the
assault on the American mind*. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Wender, P. H., Kety, S. S., Rosenthal, D., Schulsinger, F., Ortmann, J.,
& Lunde, I. (1986). Psychiatric disorders in the biological and adoptive
families of adopted individuals with affective disorders. *Archives of
General Psychiatry, 43*, 923--929.

Westen, D. (1990). Towards a revised theory of borderline object
relations: Contributions of empirical research. *International Journal
of Psychoanalysis, 71*, 661--693.

Westen, D. (1993). Commentary. The self in borderline personality
disorder: A psychodynamic perspective. In Z. V. Segal & S. J. Blatt
(Eds.), *The self in emotional distress: Cognitive and psychodynamic
perspectives* (pp. 326--360). New York: Guilford Press.

Westen, D. (1999). The scientific status of unconscious processes: Is
Freud really dead? *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association,
67*, 217--230.

Westen, D., & Shedler, J. (1999a). Revising and assessing Axis II: Part
I: Developing a clinically and empirically valid assessment method.
*American Journal of Psychiatry, 156*, 258--272.

Westen, D., & Shedler, J. (1999b). Revising and assessing Axis II: Part
II: Toward an empirically based and clinically useful classification of
personality disorders. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 156*, 273--285.

Wheelis, A. (1956). The vocational hazards of psychoanalysis.
*International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 37*, 171--184.

Whitaker, R. (2002). *Mad in America: Bad science, bad medicine, and the
enduring mistreatment of the mentally ill*. Cambridge, MA: Perseus.

Will, O. A. (1961). Paranoid development and the concept of the self:
Psychotherapeutic intervention. *Psychiatry, 24*(Suppl.), 74--86.

Wills, G. (1970). *Nixon agonistes: The crisis of the self-made man*.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Winnicott, D. W. (1949). Hate in the countertransference. In *Collected
papers* (pp. 194--203). New York: Basic Books, 1958.

Winnicott, D. W. (1952). Anxiety associated with insecurity. In *Through
pediatrics to psycho-analysis* (pp. 97--100). New York: Basic Books,
1958.

Winnicott, D. W. (1960a). Ego distortion in terms of the true and false
self. In *The maturational processes and the facilitating environment*
(pp. 140--152). New York: International Universities Press, 1965.

Winnicott, D. W. (1960b). The theory of the parent--infant relationship.
*International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 41*, 585--595.

Winnicott, D. W. (1965). *The maturational processes and the
facilitating environment*. New York: International Universities Press.

Winnicott, D. W. (1967). Mirror-role of mother and family in child
development. In *Playing and reality* (pp. 111--118). New York: Basic
Books.

Wolf, E. K., & Alpert, J. L. (1991). Psychoanalysis and child sexual
abuse: A review of the post-Freudian literature. *Psychoanalytic
Psychology, 8*, 305--327.

Wolf, E. S. (1988). *Treating the self: Elements of clinical self
psychology*. New York: Guilford Press.

Wolf, N. S., Gales, M., Shane, E., & Shane, M. (2000). Mirror neurons,
procedural learning, and the positive new experience: A developmental
systems self psychological approach. *Journal of the American
Association of Dynamic Psychiatry, 28*, 409--430.

Wolfenstein, M. (1951). The emergence of fun morality. *Journal of
Social Issues, 7*, 15--24.

Wrye, H. K., & Welles, J. K. (1994). *The narration of desire: Erotic
transferences and countertransferences*. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.

Wurmser, L. (2007). *Torment me but don't abandon me: Psychoanalysis of
the severe neuroses in a new key*. Lanham, MD: Jason Aronson.

Yalom, I. D., & Leszcz, M. (2005). *Theory and practice of group
psychotherapy* (5th ed.). New York: Basic Books.

Yarok, S. R. (1993). Understanding chronic bulimia: A four psychologies
approach. *American Journal of Psychoanalysis, 53*, 3--17.

Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). *Schema therapy:
A practitioner's guide*. New York: Guilford Press.

Young-Bruehl, E. (1990). *Freud on women: A reader*. New York: Norton.

Yu, C. K-C. (2006). Commentary on "Freudian dream theory, dream
bizarreness, and the disguise-censor controversy."
*Neuro-Psychoanalysis, 8*, 53--59.

Zeddies, T. J. (2000). Within, outside, and in between: The relational
unconscious. *Psychoanalytic Psychology, 17*, 467--487.

Zetzel, E. (1968). The so-called good hysteric. *International Journal
of Psycho-Analysis, 49*, 256--260.

Zink, T., Klesges, L., Stevens, S., & Decker, P. (2009). The development
of a Sexual Abuse Severity Score: Characteristics of childhood sexual
abuse associated with trauma symptomatology, somatization, and alcohol
abuse. *Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 24*, 537--546.

Zuelzer, M., & Mass, J. W. (1994). An integrated conception of the
psychology and biology of superego development. *Journal of the American
Academy of Psychoanalysis, 22*, 195--209.

Zuroff, D. C., & Blatt, S. J. (2006). The therapeutic relationship in
the brief treatment of depression: Contributions to clinical improvement
and enhanced adaptive capacities. *Journal of Counseling and Clinical
Psychology, 74*, 130--140.
:::

[]{#part0028.html}

**Author Index**

[The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition
from which it was created. To locate a specific passage, please use the
search feature of your e-book reader.]{.small}

 

 

**A**

Abraham, K., 162, 238, 240, 248

Abrahamsen, D., 165

Adams, H. E., 224

Adler, A., 176, 186

Adler, G., 40, 54, 84, 99, 117

Adorno, T. W., 116

Ahern, D. K., 118

Aichhorn, A., 120, 162

Ainsworth, M. D. S., 54, 202

Aitken, K. J., 35

Akhtar, S., 68, 162, 175, 178, 197, 257, 263, 265

Akiskal, H. S., 258, 263, 328

Akyuz, G., 343

Alanen, Y. O., 75, 98

Alda, M., 118

Allen, D. W., 313, 326, 327

Allen, J. G., 54, 152

Alpert, J. L., 54

Alpert, M., 159

Anderson, C. M., 342

Anderson, R., 312

Anderson. F. S., 124

Aniskiewitz, A. S., 319, 331

Anstadt, T., 86, 152

Arendt, H., 291

Arieti, S., 59, 75, 98, 231

Arlow, J. A., 27

Aron, L., 39, 42, 115

Aronson, M. L., 224

Asch, S. S., 268

Atwood, G. E., 22, 37, 42, 61, 84, 188, 334

Aynesworth, H., 165

 

**B**

Babiak, P., 108, 158, 175

Bach, S., 37, 188, 195, 273, 288

Bak, R. C., 276

Baker, G., 263

Balint, A., 31

Balint, M., 31, 84, 125, 177, 204

Banai, E., 177

Barnow, S., 118

Barsky, A. J., 118

Basch, M., 37, 182, 188

Bateman, A., 12, 69, 71, 84, 99

Bateman, A. W., 54

Bateson, G., 62, 79, 203

Baumeister, R. F., 269

Beck, J. S., 213, 251, 265

Beebe, B., 35, 190, 244

Bellak, L., 29, 73

Benjamin, J., 39, 182, 224

Bentall, R. P., 12

Benveniste, D., 292

Beratis, S., 268, 286

Beres, D., 299

Berg, J. L., 157, 162

Bergler, E., 280

Bergman, A., 25

Bergman, P., 198

Bergmann, M. S., 109, 184

Berkowitz, D., 165

Berliner, B., 268, 274

Bernheim, H., 311

Bernstein, D. P., 71

Bernstein, I., 274

Bers, S., 237

Bettelheim, B., 29, 41, 112

Bibring, E., 240

Bidell, T. R., 27, 43

Bierce, A., 257

Binet, A., 333

Bion, W. R., 60, 86, 125, 177

Biondi, R., 158

Birch, H. G., 159

Bird, H. R., 162

Black, M. J., 42

Blackless, M., 353

Blagys, M. D., 33, 152

Blakeslee, S., 243

Blanck, G., 5, 42, 68, 84

Blanck, R., 5, 42, 68, 84

Blatt, S. J., 10, 33, 38, 84, 112, 193, 204, 237, 240, 248, 251, 264,
270, 298, 313

Blehar, M. C., 54

Bleuler, E., 196, 197, 204

Bleuler, M., 196, 204

Blizard, R. A., 342

Blum, H. P., 347

Bollas, C., 166, 320, 325

Bond, M., 29

Bornstein, B., 80

Bornstein, R. F., 118

Boulanger, G., 124, 332

Bowen, M., 139

Bowlby, J., 177

Bowman, E. S., 351, 352

Boyer, L. B., 84

Brandchaft, B., 84, 188

Braun, B. G., 339, 341, 356

Brazelton, T. B., 198

Brenman, M., 276

Brenneis, C. B., 337

Brenner, C., 27, 108, 268

Brenner, I., 124, 332, 357

Breuer, J., 128, 335, 336

Briere, J., 84, 353

Bristol, R. C., 310

Brodsky, A., 325

Bromberg, P. M., 39, 40, 120, 123, 124, 299, 322, 331, 332, 341, 357

Bronfman, E., 332

Brown, R., 116

Bruce, L., 257

Brunner, R., 339

Brunswick, R. M., 139

Buber, M., 291

Bucci, W., 27, 152

Buckley, P., 19, 59, 68

Buckley, P. J., 292

Buechler, S., 146

Buie, D., 84

Buirski, P., 188

Bundy, T., 165

Burke, W. F., 93

Bursten, B., 108, 158, 175, 178, 193

 

**C**

Caligor, E., 55

Cameron, N., 215

Cantor, M. B., 59

Capote, T., 165

Carlson, E. A., 342

Carsky, M., 75

Caspi, A., 159

Cassidy, J., 244

Cath, S. H., 164

Cattell, J. P., 341

Cattell, J. S., 341

Caul, D., 347

Cela, J. A., 292

Celani, D., 318

Celenza, A., 122, 325

Chapman, M., 291

Charcot, J. M., 311

Charles, M., 86, 98

Chase, T., 336

Chasseguet-Smirgel, J., 263

Chefetz, R. A., 203, 332, 333, 334, 338, 346, 347, 350, 351, 352, 357

Chemtob, C. M., 350

Cheney, D., 215

Chess, S., 159

Chessick, R. D., 290

Chodoff, P., 318, 328

Chodorow, N. J., 95, 152, 202, 247

Chu, J. A., 350

Clarkin, J. F., 12, 55, 65, 66, 69, 71, 99

Classen, C., 332

Cleckley, H., 159, 160, 335

Cloninger, C. R., 328

Coccaro, E. F., 159

Cohen, B., 114

Cohen, C. P., 53

Cohen, M. B., 263

Cohen, R. A., 263

Colby, K., 87

Coleman, M., 81

Connolly, J., 61

Coons, P. M., 351, 352

Coontz, S., 343

Cooper, A. M., 179, 236, 277, 288

Corbett, K., 44

Cosgrove, L., 11

Cozolino, L., 118

Craighero, L., 35

Cramer, P., 102, 125, 126, 144, 150

Cuesta, M. J., 196

Cushman, P., 177, 195

 

**D**

Damasio, A. R., 152, 159

Davanloo, H., 73

Davies, J. M., 39, 40, 123, 332, 342

de Bellis, M., 342

de Leon, J., 196

de Monchy, R., 268

de Tocqueville, A., 177

De Waelhens, A., 59

Dean, T., 321

Decker, P., 118

Dell, P. F., 353

Deri, S., 208

Deutsch, H., 52, 268

Diamond, D., 163

Diamond, M. J., 164

Dimen, M., 331

Dinnerstein, D., 202

Dogan, O., 343

Doidge, N., 198, 202

Dorahy, M. J., 337

Dorpat, T., 275

Dougherty, N. J., 42

Drye, R. C., 52

duBois, B., 321

Dyess, C., 321

 

**E**

Eagle, M. N., 42

Easser, B. R., 318

Eells, T. D., 20

Egeland, B., 342

Ehrenberg, D. B., 36

Eigen, M., 59, 68, 75, 115, 201

Einstein, A., 197

Eissler, K. R., 46

Ekstein, R., 36

Ellis, A., 213

Erikson, E. H., 24, 25, 26, 37, 44, 53, 57, 177

Escalona, S. K., 198

Evans, S., 118

 

**F**

Fairbairn, W. R. D., 31, 42, 113, 138, 177, 199, 201, 202, 203, 241

Fairfield, S., 44

Fassone, G., 342

Federn, P., 75, 81

Fenichel, O., 68, 81, 87, 120, 147, 150, 238, 257, 265, 292, 293

Ferenczi, S., 31, 107, 108, 292, 320

Fernando, J., 184

Field, N., 332

Fine, C. G., 357

Fink, B., 40

Fiscalini, J., 184

Fischer, K. W., 27, 43

Fisher, S., 292

Fleck, S., 203

Fogelman, E., 184

Fonagy, P., 12, 26, 44, 45, 54, 61, 64, 68, 69, 71, 84, 99, 107, 155,
159, 342

Fosha, D., 35, 73, 146, 152

Fosshage, J., 37

Foster, J., 168

Fraiberg, S., 105

Frances, A., 236

Frank, J. D., 16, 280

Franklin, B., 133

Frawley, M. G., 40, 123, 332, 342

Frenkl-Brunswick, E., 116

Freud, A., 30, 31, 112, 126, 138, 150, 241

Freud, S., 13, 21, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 41, 42, 43,
44, 46, 53, 56, 58, 72, 100, 101, 107, 113, 119, 121, 122, 127, 128,
129, 139, 141, 144, 145, 146, 147, 152, 176, 177, 178, 186, 214, 220,
236, 238, 239, 240, 248, 267, 268, 272, 280, 290, 291, 292, 297, 298,
299, 302, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 323, 327, 333, 335, 336,
337, 341

Friedenberg, E. Z., 58

Friedman, R. C., 75, 270, 319

Fromm, E., 32, 177

Fromm-Reichmann, F., 32, 42, 60, 75, 98, 231, 250, 263

Frosch, J., 52

Furman, E., 242, 243

 

**G**

Gabbard, G. O., 9, 19, 67, 84, 178, 290, 325, 351

Gabriel, J., 268, 286

Gacano, C. B., 157, 162

Gaddis, T., 171

Galenson, E., 271

Gales, M., 339

Galin, D., 313

Garcia-Campayo, J., 118

Gardiner, M., 46, 139

Gardner, M. R., 189

Gay, P., 224

Gaylin, W., 265

Gediman, H. K., 29

Geekie, J., 98

George, C., 342

Gergeley, G., 54

Gergely, G., 26, 45

Gershwin, G., 330

Ghent, E., 268, 288

Gill, M. M., 19, 93

Gilleland, J., 118

Gilligan, C., 247

Giovacchini, P. L., 84, 201--202, 203

Glick, R. A., 288

Glod, C. A., 332

Glover, E., 306

Gold, B. H., 293

Gold, J., 124

Gold, S. H., 118

Goldberg, A., 22, 37, 38, 185

Goldman, W., 239

Goldstein, K., 309

Gonzalez de Chavez, M., 75

Gordon, R., 268

Gore, A., 132

Gottdiener, W. H., 82

Gottesman, I., 197

Gottlieb, R., 313

Graham, M., 197

Grand, S., 124, 332

Green, H., 98

Greenacre, P., 162

Greenberg, J. R., 39, 98

Greenberg, L. S., 213, 265

Greenberg, M., 164

Greenberg, R. P., 292

Greenson, R. R., 49, 80, 98, 190, 227, 237

Greenspan, S. I., 5, 68

Greenwald, H., 162, 170, 193

Grinker, R. R., 52, 83

Grossman, W., 268

Grossmann, K., 202

Grossmann, K. E., 202

Groth, A. N., 193

Grotstein, J., 163

Grotstein, J. S., 115, 125

Gunderson, J. G., 52, 53, 54, 67, 69, 117

Guntrip, H., 42, 199, 201, 213

Gutheil, T. G., 325, 333

Guze, S. B., 328

 

**H**

Hack, R., 216

Hagarty, G. E., 82

Haglund, P., 188

Haley, J., 62

Hall, J. S., 7

Halleck, S. L., 314

Hammer, E., 87, 208, 209, 227, 228, 231, 253, 283, 306

Hanley, M. A. F., 288

Hare, R. D., 108, 157, 158, 159, 175

Harris, A., 39, 40, 293, 331

Harris, D., 216

Hartmann, H., 28

Hartocollis, P., 99

Haslam, N., 82

Haviland-Jones, J. M., 244

Hearst, P., 317

Hecox, W., 158

Hedges, L. E., 98

Heisenberg, W., 39

Henderson, D. K., 158

Hendin, H., 145, 177

Herman, J. L., 54, 69, 318, 342, 357

Herzig, A., 9

Hesse, E., 164, 342

Hilgard, E. R., 334

Hilsenroth, M. J., 33, 152

Hirsch, S., 312

Hirsch, S. J., 312

Hitchcock, A., 50

Hite, A. L., 8

Hitler, A., 134

Hoch, P. H., 52

Hoenig, J., 354

Hoffman, I. Z., 39, 40, 351

Hollender, M., 312

Hollender, M. H., 312, 314

Hopkins, A., 168

Horner, A. J., 5, 46, 80, 98, 202

Horney, K., 22, 32, 177

Horowitz, A. V., 3, 239

Horowitz, M., 331

Howell, E., 123, 203, 286, 332, 357

Hughes, D. R., 343

Hughes, H., 216

Hughes, J. M., 42

Hurvich, M., 29, 55, 217

Hyde, J., 18, 237

 

**I**

Intrator, J., 159

Isaacs, K., 152

 

**J**

Jackson, D. D., 62

Jacob, M. L., 118

Jacobs, T. J., 93

Jacobson, E., 75, 177, 240

James, W., 333

Jamison, K. R., 265

Janet, P., 290, 311, 333

Jaspers, K., 197

Jellesma, F. C., 118

Johnson, A., 160

Jones, E., 178

Joplin, J., 179

Josephs, L., 22, 42, 68, 229, 306

Jung, C. G., 21, 40, 178, 321

Jurist, E. L., 26, 45

 

**K**

Kael, H. C., 292

Kagan, J., 153, 159, 198

Kahn, H., 131

Kahn, M., 42, 203

Kandel, E. R., 35

Karon, B. P., 63, 75, 76, 78, 98, 167, 201, 207, 218, 220, 231

Karpe, R., 336

Karpman, S., 342

Kasanin, J. S., 61, 199

Katan, M., 258

Keith-Spiegel, P., 325

Kernberg, O. F., 5, 12, 20, 22, 34, 37, 52, 53, 54, 55, 65, 67, 69, 71,
84, 99, 102, 113, 114, 117, 119, 152, 154, 157, 159, 160, 163, 168, 172,
173, 180, 185, 186, 188, 189, 193, 195, 235, 236, 256, 260, 261, 263,
268, 270, 277, 298, 312, 329, 337, 355

Keyes, D., 347

Khan, M., 203

Kieffer, C. C., 190

King, M. L., Jr., 296

Klein, D. N., 312

Klein, M., 25, 26, 31, 34, 42, 59, 75, 113, 125, 165, 171, 172, 180,
201, 240, 248

Klein, R., 201, 213

Klesges, L., 118

Klosko, J. S., 12

Kluft, R. P., 333, 334, 338, 340, 343, 345, 346, 348, 352, 354, 357

Knight, R., 52

Kohut, H., 5, 37, 42, 177, 178, 180, 186, 188, 189, 190, 192, 195, 277,
299

Kraepelin, E., 46, 197, 207, 328

Krafft-Ebing, R., 267, 271

Kramer, D., 27

Kramer, S. I., 343

Krause, R., 86, 152

Kretschmer, E., 197, 199

Kriegman, D., 40

Kris, E., 50, 306

Krystal, H., 118

Kuhn, T. S., 36, 337

 

**L**

Lacan, J., 40

Lachmann, F. M., 35, 45, 177, 190

Laing, R. D., 62, 68, 200, 203, 207, 322

Langness, L. L., 312

Langs, R. J., 85

LaPlanche, J., 267

Larntz, K., 328

Lasch, C., 177

Latz, T. T., 343

Laughlin, H. P., 102, 126, 150, 236, 241, 256, 265, 268

Lax, R. F., 68, 274

Layton, L., 177

Lazare, A., 323

LeDoux, J., 334

Lee, P. A., 353

Lennon, J., 291

Lenzenweger, M. F., 12

Lependorf, S., 185

Lesser, S., 318

Lester, E. P., 325, 351

Leszcz, M., 306

Levenson, E. A., 42

Levin, J. D., 306

Levinson, D. J., 116

Levy, K. N., 12, 65, 66, 84, 313

Lewis, D. O., 336, 356

Lewis, H. B., 177

Lewis, J. M., 243

Lewis, M., 244, 336

Licht, J., 9

Lichtenberg, J., 152

Lichtenberg, J. D., 24, 350

Lidz, T., 62, 75, 79, 98, 203

Lieb, P. T., 308

Lifton, R. J., 131

Lilienfeld, S. O., 328

Lindner, R., 81, 232

Linehan, M. M., 12, 71, 99

Linton, R., 312

Lion, J. R., 167, 197

Liotti, G., 332, 342

Little, M. I., 13, 75

Lizardi, H., 312

Loewenstein, R. J., 337, 340, 346, 357

Loewenstein, R. M., 80, 272

Lohr, B. A., 224

Long, J., 171

Lothane, Z., 221

Louth, S. M., 159

Lovinger, R. J., 19

Lowenstein, A., 216

Luepnitz, D. A., 42, 201

Lykken, D., 159

Lynd, H. M., 177

Lyons-Ruth, K., 44, 54, 312, 332, 342

 

**M**

MacKinnon, R. A., 19, 220, 223, 231, 292, 293

Maclsaac, D. S., 188

Maheu, R., 216

Mahler, M. S., 25, 26, 44, 54, 66, 130, 242

Main, M., 92, 163, 164, 202, 342

Main, T. F., 52, 67, 117

Malan, D. H., 73

Mandelbaum, A., 54

Mann, J., 73

Mann, T., 321

Marmor, J., 314

Maroda, K. J., 36, 95, 98, 146, 152

Martens, W. H. J., 159

Martindale, B., 75

Marx, G., 253

Mass, J. W., 290

Masterson, J. F., 15, 37, 52, 54, 66, 67, 84, 91, 92, 99, 178, 201, 213,
344

Mattila, A. K., 118

May, R., 37

Mayes, L., 26

Mazzotti, E., 342

McClelland, D. C., 297

McDougall, J., 118, 149

McGoldrick, M., 239

McGreenery, C. E., 339

McWilliams, N., 1, 8, 20, 54, 98, 112, 137, 143, 164, 185, 206, 213,
246, 250, 265, 284, 288, 301, 313, 347

Meares, R., 68, 297

Meissner, W. W., 54, 84, 117, 178, 214, 216, 229, 234

Meloy, J. R., 157, 162, 163, 166, 167, 174, 175, 193, 328

Menaker, E., 268, 275, 281

Menninger, K., 48

Merten, J., 86

Messer, S., 292

Messer, S. B., 73

Meyers, D. I., 288

Michaud, S., 165

Michels, R., 19, 292

Mikulincer, M., 177

Milgram, S., 112

Milich, R., 45

Miller, A., 37, 178, 179, 195, 244

Miller, J. B., 247

Milligan, B., 347

Millon, T., 268

Milstein, V., 352

Mischler, E., 62, 79

Mitchell, J., 331

Mitchell, S. A., 39, 42, 113

Modell, A. H., 160, 177, 201, 213

Morrison, A. P., 37, 177, 178, 195

Mosher, L. R., 12

Moskowitz, A., 61

Mowrer, O. H., 129

Mueller, W. J., 319, 331

Mullahy, P., 202

Muran, J. C., 50

Murray, H. A., 21, 40

Myerson, P. G., 56, 128

 

**N**

Nagera, H., 290

Nannarello, J. J., 196, 199

Nelson, B., 81

Nemiah, J. C., 140

Nersessian, E., 152

Newirth, J., 116

Newman, R., 19

Nickell, A. D., 54

Niederland, W., 221

Niehoff, D., 159

Nightingale, F., 295

Nijenhuis, E. R. S., 333

Nixon, R. M., 269

Noblin, C. D., 292

Norcross, J. C., 33, 146

Novick, J., 288

Novick, K. K., 288

Nunberg, H., 48

Nydes, J., 222, 227, 276, 282, 283

 

**O**

Ogawa, J. R., 342

Ogden, T. H., 25, 26, 59, 113, 122, 125

O'Hara, S., 313

Olds, D. D., 35

Olivan, B., 118

Orange, D. M., 37, 61

Ornstein, A., 37

Ornstein, P., 37

Ouimette, P. C., 312

 

**P**

Pain, C., 332

Panken, S., 267

Panksepp, J., 55, 122, 152, 217, 238, 332

Panzram, C., 171

Pappenheim, B., 335, 336

Paris, J., 69, 84

Parsons, E., 332

Parzer, P., 339

Pascual, A., 118

Pasquini, P., 342

Pasternack, S., 310

Patrick, C. J., 162

Pauls, D. L., 159

Pearlman, E., 299

Peebles-Kleiger, M. J., 20

Peralta, V., 196

Perls, F., 213

Perry, B., 61

Persons, J. B., 12

Pharis, M. E., 179

Piaget, J., 107

Picardi, A., 342

Pincus, J. H., 336

Pine, F., 22, 25, 42, 84, 92, 98, 152

Pinsker, H., 75, 98

Pitman, R. K., 350

Pittillo, E. S., 335

Polatin, P., 52

Polcari, A., 339, 342

Pontalis, J. B., 267

Pope, K. S., 325

Pouget, E. R., 159

Prichard, J. C., 45

Prince, M., 333, 335

Prince, R., 342

Przybeck, T., 161

Putnam, F. W., 333, 334, 339, 344, 345, 348, 357

 

**R**

Racker, H., 34, 35, 166, 250

Rado, S., 240, 248

Rafaeli, E., 71

Raguram, R., 119

Rank, O., 40, 176

Rao, D., 119

Rasmussen, A., 275, 276

Read, J., 12, 61, 98

Redl, R., 162

Redlich, F. C., 19

Reich, A., 177

Reich, W., 24, 29, 36, 47, 178, 268, 291

Reichbart, R., 232

Reik, T., 72, 129, 135, 268, 273, 288

Reinhard, M. J., 118

Renik, O., 39

Renshaw, P. F., 342

Resch, F., 339

Ressler, R. K., 158, 160

Rhodes, J., 224

Rice, E., 291

Rice, J., 238

Richfield, J., 306

Richman, J., 312

Rieffe, C., 118

Riley, K., 284

Rinsley, D. B., 54

Riso, L. P., 312

Rizzolatti, G., 35

Robbins, A., 190, 201, 202, 209, 210

Robbins, M., 59

Robins, L. N., 161

Rockland, L. H., 75, 98

Rogers, C. R., 37, 190, 213

Roland, A., 27, 93

Roose, S. P., 55

Rosanoff, A. J., 328

Rosen, Z. A., 199

Rosenfeld, H., 75, 179

Rosenwald, G. C., 292

Ross, C. A., 84, 333, 337, 345, 352, 353

Ross, D. R., 337

Rosse, I. C., 52

Rothschild, L., 299

Rowe, C. E., 188

Rutstein, J., 350

 

**S**

Sacks, R. G., 339

Safran, J. D., 42, 50, 98, 116, 146

Saks, E. R., 69, 82

Salzman, L., 220, 269, 274, 290, 310

Samelius, L., 118

Sampson, H., 40, 272

Samson, J. A., 339

Sandler, J., 93, 125, 350

Sands, S. H., 299

Sanford, R. N., 116

Sar, V., 343

Sass, L. A., 203, 204, 205, 207

Sasso, G., 35

Savran, B., 184

Schactman, T., 158, 160

Schafer, R., 98, 144, 268, 277

Scharff, J. S., 111, 125

Schmideberg, M., 34

Schneider, K., 197, 248, 354

Schopenhauer, A., 201

Schore, A., 54, 177, 332, 342

Schore, A. N., 35, 93

Schreber, D. P., 220, 221

Schreiber, F. R., 124, 338

Schuld, V., 339

Schwartz, M. S., 117

Scull, A., 331

Searles, H. F., 32, 34, 59, 75, 84, 98, 203, 219, 224, 231

Segal, H., 75, 180

Seinfeld, J., 199, 201, 213

Seligman, S., 40

Sellers, P., 214

Selzer, M. A., 75, 98

Shane, E., 37, 339

Shane, M., 339

Shapiro, D., 29, 50, 152, 214, 222, 229, 234, 290, 291, 302, 310, 313,
331

Shapiro, J. L., 164

Shaver, P. R., 177, 244

Shedler, J., 20, 33, 179

Shengold, L., 292, 310

Sherwood, V. R., 53

Sheu, Y-S., 339

Shostrum, E. L., 213

Shulz, M. S., 118

Siever, L. J., 54

Sifneos, P., 73, 118

Silberschatz, D., 21, 142, 272

Silberschatz, G., 42

Silver, A. S., 75

Silver, A.-L. S., 59, 63, 75, 82, 83

Silverman, K., 133

Silverman, L. H., 45, 230

Singer, J. A., 20

Singer, M. T., 52, 62, 79, 203

Singer, S. M., 159

Sizemore, C. C., 335, 336

Slater, P. E., 41, 177

Slavin, J. H., 334

Slavin, M. O., 40

Slipp, S., 318

Small, L., 73

Smith, S., 325

So, J. K., 119

Sobradiel, N., 118

Solms, M., 127, 152, 334, 342

Solomon, J., 163, 342

Sorel, E., 134

Spangler, G., 202

Spence, D. P., 36

Spezzano, C., 152

Spiegel, D., 334, 338

Spiegel, H., 338

Spitz, R. A., 177, 274

Spitzer, C., 118

Spotnitz, H., 40, 59, 81, 232

Sroufe, L. A., 202, 342

Stanton, A. H., 117

Steele, K., 333

Stefanatos, G. S., 313

Stein, A., 52

Stein, J., 284

Steinberg, M., 341, 353

Steiner, J., 12, 68, 180

Sterba, R. F., 28, 32, 57

Stern, B. L., 55, 168

Stern, D. B., 40, 79, 120, 332, 337, 341, 357

Stern, D. N., 24, 39, 44, 244

Stern, F., 224

Stevens, S., 118

Stewart, J., 295

Stoller, R. J., 122

Stolorow, R. D., 22, 37, 42, 61, 84, 177, 188, 190, 277, 288

Stone, L., 33, 271

Stone, M. H., 5, 52, 54, 68, 84, 158, 171

Strachey, J., 306

Strupp, H. H., 33, 146

Styron, W., 265

Sullivan, A., 265

Sullivan, H. S., 19, 25, 26, 32, 60, 75, 88, 140, 177, 202, 204, 224,
229, 232, 333

Sullivan, T. B., 75

Surrey, J., 332

Surrey, J. L., 247

Susalis, N., 160

Sutton, W., 169

Suveg, C., 118

Sweeney, D., 216

Swett, C., 332

Swica, Y., 336

Symington, N., 42, 183

 

**T**

Tabachnick, B. G., 325

Tansey, M. J., 93

Target, M., 26, 45, 54, 61

Teicher, M. H., 332, 339, 342

Terkelsen, K. G., 75

Terr, L., 357

Terwogt, M. M., 118

Thigpen, C. H., 335

Thomas, A., 159, 356

Thomassin, K., 118

Thompson, C. M., 32, 275

Tibon, S., 299

Tillich, P., 296

Timmons, E. O., 292

Tipp, J., 161

Tolin, D. F., 350

Tomkins, S. S., 21, 40, 137, 152, 217, 220

Trevarthen, C., 35

Tribich, D., 292

Tronick, E. Z., 35

Trull, T. J., 54

Tsao, J. C. I., 118

Turnbull, O., 127, 334, 342

Tutkun, H., 343

Twain, M., 257

Tyson, P., 68

Tyson, R. L., 68

 

**U**

Ullrich, B., 86

 

**V**

Vaillant, C. O., 29, 126

Vaillant, G. E., 29, 102, 125, 126, 150, 328

van Asselt, A. D. I., 84

van der Hart, O., 333

van der Kolk, B., 350

Van Valkenburg, C., 328

Vandenberg, S. G., 159

VandenBos, G. R., 75, 78, 98, 167, 201, 207

Veith, I., 312, 331

Ver Eecke, W., 59

Volkan, V. D., 45, 59

von Ashenbach, G., 321

von Sacher-Masoch, L., 267

 

**W**

Wachtel, P. L., 7, 42, 95

Waelder, R., 38, 101

Wakefield, J. C., 3, 239

Waldinger, R. J., 118

Walkup, J., 110

Wall, S., 54

Wallerstein, J. S., 243

Wallerstein, R. S., 36, 75

Wallin, D. J., 69, 202

Wampold, B. E., 33, 146

Warner, R., 328

Warren, C. S., 73

Wasserman, J., 313

Waters, E., 54, 202

Waudby, C. J., 54

Waxier, N., 62, 79

Weakland, J., 62

Weigert, E., 263

Weinberger, D. R., 196

Weinfield, N. S., 342

Weinstein, L. N., 54

Weishaar, M. E., 12

Weiss, J., 40, 90, 120, 153, 272

Welch, B., 224

Welles, J. K., 347

Wender, P. H., 238

Werble, B., 52

West, J. J., 42

Westen, D., 20, 43, 54, 152, 179

Westenburg, P. M., 118

Weston, D. R., 202

Wheelis, A., 205

Whitaker, R., 63

White, H., 312

Wijma, B., 118

Wijma, K., 118

Wilbur, C., 347

Will, O. A., 32, 220

Williams, R., 257

Williamson, S., 159

Wills, G., 269

Wilson, W., 291

Wineman, D., 162

Wingren, G., 118

Winnicott, D. W., 34, 39, 42, 177, 183, 190, 200, 202

Wittgenstein, L., 197

Wolf, E., 37

Wolf, E. K., 54

Wolf, E. S., 42, 98, 178, 188, 192, 285

Wolf, G., 118

Wolf, N. S., 339

Wolfenstein, M., 184

Woods, P., 332

Wright, L. W., 224

Wrye, H. K., 347

Wurmser, L., 275, 288

Wynne, L. C., 62, 79, 203

 

**Y**

Yaeger, C. A., 336

Yalom, I. D., 306

Yargic, L. I., 343

Yarok, S. R., 299

Yeomans, F. E., 65, 69, 71

Young, J., 71

Young, J. E., 12, 84

Young, M., 119

Young-Bruehl, E., 315

Yu, C. K-C., 159

 

**Z**

Zeddies, T. J., 115

Zetzel, E., 312

Zink, T., 118

Zuelzer, M., 290

Zuroff, D. C., 33, 251

[]{#part0029.html}

**Subject Index**

[The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition
from which it was created. To locate a specific passage, please use the
search feature of your e-book reader.]{.small}

 

Page numbers followed by *f* indicate figure, *t* indicate table

 

 

**A**

Abandonment

depressive personalities and, 243--244

masochistic personalities and, 274--276

relational patterns in, 274--277

schizoid personality style and, 204--205

Abandonment depression, 91--92. *See also* Depression

Abuse

dissociative conditions and, 341--344

manic personalities and, 258--259

masochistic personalities and, 276

paranoid personalities and, 222

psychopathic personalities and, 159, 162--164

Acceptance, depressive personalities and, 252--253

Acting out

masochistic personalities and, 271--274

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 295

overview, 119--121

psychopathic personalities and, 160

*See also* Primitive defenses

Adaptive processes

in depressive personalities, 240--242

in dissociation, 339--341

in hysterical personalities, 315--318

in manic personalities, 258

in masochistic personalities, 271--274

in narcissistic personalities, 180--182

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 293--296

in paranoid personalities, 218--220

in psychopathic personalities, 160--162

in schizoid personality style, 200

Addiction

compared to psychopathic personalities, 174

differential diagnosis and, 174

manic personalities and, 261

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 305--306

Advice

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 305

psychotic-level patients and, 78

Affect

in depressive personalities, 238--239

in dissociative psychologies, 338--339

in hysterical personalities, 313--315

in manic personalities, 257--258

in masochistic personalities, 270--271

in narcissistic personalities, 179--180

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 291--293, 294--296, 302

overview, 152

in paranoid personalities, 216--218

in psychopathic personalities, 158--160

in schizoid personality style, 198--200

*See also* Emotions

Affect, isolation of, 131--132. *See also* Secondary defenses

Affect regulation

narcissism and, 177

psychopathic personalities and, 159--160

Agency

comparing psychoanalytic to descriptive psychiatric diagnosis and, 9

omnipotent control and, 107

Aggression

depressive personalities and, 239

masochistic personalities and, 271

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 299

paranoid personalities and, 216, 231, 233--234

psychopathic personalities and, 158, 159, 164--165, 165

reaction formation and, 141

schizoid personality style and, 199

sexualization and, 122

Aggression-inward model, 239

Aging, hysterical personalities and, 321

Alexithymia, somatization and, 118

Altruism, 143

Ambivalence, tolerating, 296

Amnesia, 341, 341--342. *See also* Memory

Anaclitically depressive personality

countertransference with, 248

self-experience and, 247--248

therapy and, 252

transference with, 248

Anal imagery, 291--292

Anal phase of development

drive theory and, 23--27

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 291--292, 297

Anger

borderline personality organization and, 85, 94--95

depressive personalities and, 239, 249

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 292--293, 293--296, 306--307

paranoid personalities and, 216--217

psychosis and, 76--77

Annihilation anxiety, 217

Antisocial personalities. *See* Psychopathic personalities

Anxiety

acting out and, 120

comparing psychoanalytic to descriptive psychiatric diagnosis and, 9--10

compartmentalization and, 135--136

defenses and, 103

displacement and, 139--140

ego psychology and, 30--31

hysterical personalities and, 313, 317--318

masochistic personalities and, 277, 280--281, 284

overview, 61

paranoid personalities and, 216--217, 221

sexualization and, 122

splitting and, 116

Anxious--resistant attachment, 312. *See also* Attachment

Approach-avoidance conflict, 319

Asperger syndrome, 197--198

Assessment, 18--19, 29--30

Attachment

dissociative psychologies and, 342

hysterical personalities and, 312, 319--320

manic personalities and, 259

masochistic personalities and, 275--276

narcissism and, 177

object relations tradition and, 31--32, 54--55

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 294

psychopathic personalities and, 160, 163--164

schizoid personality style and, 201, 202--203

somatization and, 118

Attentional functioning, 127

Attention-deficit disorders (ADD and ADHD), 264

Attention-seeking behavior, 322

Attractiveness, 321--322

Authoritarian control, 258

Autistic spectrum, 197--198

Autonomy

borderline personality organization and, 66--67

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 58

Avoidance

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 302

schizoid personality style and, 202--203

 

**B**

Behavior, 230

Behavioral defenses, 295--296. *See also* Defenses

Biaxial grid representation of diagnostic possibilities, 5--6

Bipolar disorder

compared to dissociative conditions, 354

denial and, 106

differential diagnosis and, 354

Kraepelinian diagnosis and, 46--47

Borderline conditions

borderline personality disorder, 52--53

object relations diagnosis and, 52--55

schizoid personality style and, 203

Borderline personality organization

characteristics of, 63--67

compared to dissociative psychologies, 354--355

defenses and, 103

differential diagnosis and, 354--355

empathy and, 15--16

hysterical personalities and, 324--325

manipulation and, 160--161

maturational and typological dimensions of character and, 95--97, 96*f*

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 55--67

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 294

paranoid personalities and, 218

reality testing and, 218--219

therapists' comfort with diagnosis and, 17--18

therapy and, 83--95

Boundaries

with borderline patients, 84--87

paranoid personalities and, 230--231

Bowel control, 292

Brain structures

dissociation and, 334

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 309

overview, 61--62

psychopathic personalities and, 159

repression and, 127--128

Brief treatments. *See* Short-term treatments

 

**C**

Caregiving

borderline personality organization and, 66--67

contemporary relational movement and, 39--40

depressive personalities and, 242--245

dissociation and, 341--344

drive theory and, 23

hysterical personalities and, 318--320

masochistic personalities and, 274--277

narcissism and, 183--184

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 56--57

object relations tradition and, 31--32

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 297, 298--299

paranoid personalities and, 220--223, 234

psychopathic personalities and, 164--165

somatization and, 117--119

*See also* Early experiences; Parenting

Categorical approach to diagnosis

comparing psychoanalytic to descriptive psychiatric diagnosis and, 9--11

Kraepelinian diagnosis and, 46--47

Character diagnosis

contemporary relational movement, 39--40

developmental processes and, 43--55

drive theory, 23--27

ego psychology and, 27--31

format for diagnostic interview, 359--361

further reading suggestions regarding, 41--42

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 55--67

object relations tradition, 31--36

overview, 21--22, 40--41

self psychology, 36--38

*See also* Character organization; Differential diagnosis; *individual
character types*; Therapeutic implications of diagnosis

Character organization

borderline personality organization and, 63--67

further reading suggestions regarding, 68--69

maturational and typological dimensions of, 95--97, 96*f*

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 59--63

overview, 67--68, 153--154

*See also* Character diagnosis; *individual character types*

Character pathology, 153--154

Classical Freudian drive theory. *See* Drive theory

Client-centered therapy, 190

Cognitive defenses, 294. *See also* Defenses

Cognitive-behavioral therapies (CBT)

with neurotic-level patients, 74

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 307--308

psychotic-level patients and, 82--83

treatment planning and, 12

*See also* Therapy

Communication between therapists and clients, 13--14, 14--16. *See also*
Therapeutic relationship

Compartmentalization, 135--136. *See also* Secondary defenses

Compulsions, 57--58

Compulsive personalities

adaptive processes in, 293--296

affect in, 291--293

compared to hypomanic personalities, 263

compared to schizoid personality style, 212

countertransference with, 302--304

defensive processes in, 293--296

depressive personalities and, 239

diagnosis of, 304--309

differential diagnosis and, 212, 263, 308--309

drive in, 291--293, 294--296

further reading suggestions regarding, 310

overview, 289--291, 310

reaction formation and, 141

relational patterns in, 296--299

schizoid personality style and, 211

self-experience and, 300--302

temperament and, 291--293

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 304--308

transference with, 302--304

*See also* Obsessive--compulsive personality

Confidentiality, 85

Confusion, compartmentalization and, 135--136

Conscience, 160, 169--170

Consistency, paranoid personalities and, 231

Consumer protection, as a reason to diagnose, 8, 13--14

Containment, narcissism and, 177

Contamination fears, obsessive and compulsive personalities and,
297--298

Contemporary relational movement, 39--40

Contempt, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Control, obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 292--293, 305

Control, omnipotent

overview, 107--108

in psychopathic personalities, 160

undoing and, 136--137

*See also* Primitive defenses

Control--mastery theory

masochistic personalities and, 285

reversal and, 142

schizoid personality style and, 207

Coping styles

ego psychology and, 29

sexualization and, 122

Counterdependent people, 16

Countermasochism, 279

Countertransference

borderline personality organization and, 67, 91--92, 93--95

depressive personalities and, 248--250

dissociation and, 346--348

hysterical personalities and, 323--326

manic personalities and, 259--260

masochistic personalities and, 278--281

narcissistic personality organization and, 186--188, 191--192

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 62

object relations tradition and, 34

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 302--304

paranoid personalities and, 225--226

projective identification and, 114--115

psychopathic personalities and, 166

schizoid personality style and, 206--208

self psychology and, 36--37

Creativity, schizoid personality style and, 200, 205

Crisis-intervention model, 15--16

Criticism

manic personalities and, 258--259

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 302, 304, 306--307

Cultural factors

hysterical personalities and, 312--313

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 297--298

Cumulative trauma, 203

Cyclothymic personalities. *See* Hypomanic personalities

 

**D**

Death, identification and, 145

Defenses

borderline personality organization and, 88--89

in depressive personalities, 240--242

in dissociative conditions, 339--341

ego psychology and, 29, 30

in hysterical personalities, 314--315, 315--318

in manic personalities, 258

in masochistic personalities, 271--274

in narcissistic personalities, 180--182

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 56--57

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 293--296

in paranoid personalities, 218--220

in psychopathic personalities, 158, 160--162

psychotic-level patients and, 79--80

in schizoid personality style, 199, 200

*See also* Primitive defenses; Secondary defenses; *specific defenses*

Defensive distancing, 324

Defensive enactment, 119--121. *See also* Primitive defenses

Degree of pathology, schizoid personality style and, 211--212

Delusions, 59--63

Denial

manic personalities and, 258

masochistic personalities and, 274, 280--281

overview, 103, 105--107

paranoid personalities and, 219--220, 224

in schizoid personality style, 200

*See also* Primitive defenses

Dependency

depressive personalities and, 241, 244--245

sexualization and, 122

Depersonalization, dissociative personalities and, 353

Depleted definitions of self, 185

Depression

borderline personality organization and, 91--92

comparing psychoanalytic to descriptive psychiatric diagnosis and, 9--10

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 301

self psychology and, 38

*See also* Depressive personality

Depressive personality

adaptive processes in, 240--242

affect in, 238--239

compared to masochistic personalities, 256, 285

compared to narcissistic personality, 193, 255--256

compared to paranoid personalities, 215

countertransference with, 248--250

defensive processes in, 240--242

diagnosis of, 250--256

differential diagnosis and, 193, 215, 254--256, 285

drive in, 238--239

further reading suggestions regarding, 265--266

masochistic personalities and, 279--280

overview, 235--237, 264--265

relational patterns in, 242--245

self-experience and, 245--248

temperament and, 238--239

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 250--254

transference with, 248--250

*See also* Depression

Depressive psychology, 112--113. *See also* Depressive personality

Derealization, dissociative conditions and, 353

Descriptive psychiatric diagnosis, compared to psychoanalytic diagnosis,
9--11

Devaluation

narcissism and, 195

overview, 108--110

in schizoid personality style, 200

*See also* Primitive defenses

Developmental levels of organization, 70--71

Developmental processes

character diagnosis and, 45--55

maturational and typological dimensions of character, 95--97, 96*f*

narcissism and, 177

overview, 43--45

primitive defenses and, 102--103

psychopathic personalities and, 159

regression and, 129--131

Developmental stages, 23--27. *See also* Psychosexual stages of
development

Diagnosis, character. *See* Character diagnosis

Diagnosis, differential. *See* Differential diagnosis

Diagnostic discrimination, 38

Diagnostic errors, 352--356. *See also* Differential diagnosis

Diagnostic hypothesis, 17

Diagnostic interview, suggested format for, 359--361

Diagnostic labels, 7--8

Differential diagnosis

borderline personality organization and, 65

depressive personalities and, 254--256

dissociative psychologies and, 352--356

format for diagnostic interview, 359--361

hysterical personalities and, 327--330

manic personalities and, 262--264

masochistic personalities and, 285--287

narcissistic personality organization and, 192--194

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 308--309

overview, 153

paranoid personalities and, 232--233

psychopathic personalities and, 172--174

schizoid personality style and, 211--212

*See also* Character diagnosis

Disavowal of what is projected, 218

Disclosure, psychopathic personalities and, 169

Disease model, 10

Disorganized--disoriented attachment

dissociative psychologies and, 342

psychopathic personalities and, 163--164

*See also* Attachment

Displacement, 139--140, 293--296. *See also* Secondary defenses

Dissociation

overview, 123--125

in psychopathic personalities, 160, 161--162

schizoid personality style and, 203

*See also* Primitive defenses

Dissociative defenses, 315, 317--318

Dissociative psychologies

adaptive processes in, 339--341

affect in, 338--339

compared to borderline personality organization, 354--355

compared to hysterical personalities, 355--356

compared to masochistic personalities, 286--287

compared to narcissistic personality, 329

compared to paranoid personalities, 233

compared to psychopathic personalities, 173, 356

compared to psychosis, 354

countertransference with, 346--348

defensive processes in, 339--341

diagnosis of, 342--343, 348--356

differential diagnosis and, 173, 233, 286--287, 329, 352--356

drive in, 338--339

further reading suggestions regarding, 357

hysterical personalities and, 327

overview, 332--338, 356--357

relational patterns in, 341--344

schizoid personality style and, 203

self-experience and, 344--346

temperament and, 338--339

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 348--352

transference with, 346--348

Drive

in depressive personalities, 238--239

in dissociation, 338--339

in hysterical personalities, 313--315

in manic personalities, 257--258

in masochistic personalities, 270--271

in narcissistic personalities, 179--180

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 291--293, 294--296

overview, 152

in paranoid personalities, 216--218

in psychopathic personalities, 158--160

in schizoid personality style, 198--200

Drive satisfaction, 31--32

Drive theory

depressive personalities and, 238--239

overview, 23--27

sexualization and, 122

sublimation and, 147

DSM

borderline conditions and, 52--53

comparing psychoanalytic to descriptive psychiatric diagnosis and, 9--11

depressive personalities and, 236

hysterical personalities and, 312--313, 324--325

manic personalities and, 256

masochistic personalities and, 269

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 289--290

paranoid personalities and, 215

psychopathic personalities and, 168

schizoid personality style and, 197, 211

somatization and, 118

terminology and, 3

Duration of therapy, 72--73

 

**E**

Early experiences

depressive personalities and, 242

dissociation and, 341--344, 349

format for diagnostic interview and, 359--360

hysterical personalities and, 314--315, 318--320

manic personalities and, 258--259

masochistic personalities and, 272, 274--277

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 298--299

paranoid personalities and, 220--223, 234

psychopathic personalities and, 159, 162--164

*See also* Caregiving; Trauma

Education, psychotic-level patients and, 79--81, 82--83

Ego

overview, 152

in paranoid personalities, 218

schizoid personality style and, 211

splitting and, 116--117

"Ego alien" personality style, 29, 48, 49

Ego psychology

character organization and, 27--31

diagnosis and, 47--51

overview, 28/--29

psychosis and, 75

"Ego syntonic" personality style, 29

Emotional intensity, with borderline patients, 84--87

Emotions

hysterical personalities and, 313, 322

in narcissistic personalities, 185

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 294, 307

psychopathic personalities and, 159--160, 161--162

*See also* Affect

Empathic parenting, 56--57. *See also* Parenting

Empathy by the therapist

borderline personality organization and, 91--92

depressive personalities and, 237

dissociative conditions and, 337--338

object relations tradition and, 33

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 308--309

as a reason to diagnose, 8, 11--12, 14--16

treatment planning and, 11--12

Emptiness

depressive personalities and, 255

in narcissistic personalities, 185

Enactment, defensive, 119--121. *See also* Primitive defenses

Engagement with treatment, as a reason to diagnose, 8, 16

Envy

in narcissistic personalities, 180, 185, 195

paranoid personalities and, 217--218, 234

primitive envy, 165

Episodic memory

dissociation and, 334

repression and, 127--128

*See also* Memory

Escape needs, 260--261

Exhibitionism, 258

Exposure therapies, 307--308

Extreme defenses, 103

 

**F**

False memory controversy, 337. *See also* Memory

Falseness, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Fathers. *See* Parenting

Fear

displacement and, 140

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 297--298

paranoid personalities and, 216--217, 234

psychosis and, 74

Feeling states

borderline personality organization and, 87--88

hysterical personalities and, 322

*See also* Emotions

Fees

borderline personality organization and, 85

depressive personalities and, 251--252

discussing with clients, 77

masochistic personalities and, 282

psychopathic personalities and, 168--169

Fight--flight--freeze response

manic personalities and, 258

somatization and, 117--119

Fixation--regression hypothesis, 201--202

Forgetting, repression and, 127. *See also* Memory

Frequency of therapy sessions, 72--73

Freudian analysis. *See* Psychoanalytic treatment

Freudian drive theory. *See* Drive theory

 

**G**

Gender differences

hysterical personalities and, 314--315, 318--320, 321, 323, 328

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 294

schizoid personality style and, 202--203

self-experience and, 247--248

sexualization and, 122

Gender stereotypes, 318--320

Genetic factors

depressive personalities and, 238

masochistic personalities and, 271

psychopathic personalities and, 159

Glove paralysis, 316

Glucocorticoids, 334

Grandiosity

masochistic personalities and, 277

narcissism and, 178--179, 180--181, 185

overview, 107--108

paranoid personalities and, 223

in psychopathic personalities, 160

*See also* Omnipotent control; Primitive defenses

Gratitude, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Grief, manic personalities and, 261--262

Group therapy, obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 306

Guilt

compartmentalization and, 135--136

depressive personalities and, 244

hysterical personalities and, 317--318, 322

masochistic personalities and, 282, 283

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 295

paranoid personalities and, 224, 234

undoing and, 137

 

**H**

Hallucinations, 59--63

Heterosexism, 140

Higher-order defensive processes. *See* Defenses; Secondary defenses

Hippocampus

dissociation and, 334

repression and, 127--128

History of patients

dissociative psychologies and, 352--353

format for diagnostic interview, 359--360

Histrionic personalities. *See* Hysterical personalities

Holding environment, 177

Homicidal threats and behavior, 59--63

Honesty

dissociative psychologies and, 340--341

psychopathic personalities and, 169

psychosis and, 75--78

Hospitalization, 211

Hostility

depressive personalities and, 249

paranoid personalities and, 216--217, 231

reaction formation and, 141

Humor

overview, 148

paranoid personalities and, 227--228, 234

*See also* Secondary defenses

Hypnosis, 335, 349, 350

Hypochondriacal people, 130--131

Hypomanic personalities

compared to compulsive personalities, 263

compared to hysterical personalities, 262

compared to narcissistic personality, 262--266

compared to schizoid personality style, 263--264

denial and, 106, 106--107

diagnosis of, 260--266

differential diagnosis and, 262--266

engagement with treatment and, 16

further reading suggestions regarding, 265--266

overview, 256--257, 264--265

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 260--262

*See also* Manic personalities

Hysterical personalities

adaptive processes in, 315--318

affect in, 313--315

compared to borderline personality organization, 355--356

compared to hypomanic personalities, 262

compared to narcissistic personality, 194, 329

compared to paranoid personalities, 215

compared to psychopathic personalities, 328--329

countertransference with, 323--326

defensive processes in, 315--318

diagnosis of, 326--330

differential diagnosis and, 194, 215, 262, 327--330, 355--356

drive in, 313--315

further reading suggestions regarding, 331

manipulation and, 160--161

overview, 311--313, 330--331

relational patterns in, 318--320

self-experience and, 320--322

temperament and, 313--315

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 326--327

transference with, 323--326

 

**I**

Id, 27--28

Idealization

depressive personalities and, 241--242

manic personalities and, 258

masochistic personalities and, 271--274

narcissism and, 195

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 299

overview, 103, 108--110

in schizoid personality style, 200

*See also* Primitive defenses

Ideals of reference, 59--63

Identification, 143--146. *See also* Secondary defenses

Identity

borderline personality organization and, 64--65

hysterical personalities and, 319

narcissism and, 177, 178--179

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 57, 58

Identity integration, 158

Ignoring, repression and, 127

Illogical thinking, 59--63

Immune system, 118--119

Impulses, biological, 147

Impulsivity, 258

Incompleteness, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Individual differences, 149, 159

Individuation, borderline personality organization and, 66--67, 91--92

Infancy

denial and, 105--107

omnipotent control and, 107--108

withdrawal and, 104--105

Infantilization, hysterical personalities and, 324

Inferiority, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Insecure attachment. *See also* Attachment

psychopathic personalities and, 163--164

somatization and, 118

Insight, 29

Instinctualization, 121--123. *See also* Primitive defenses

Integrated sense of identity, 57

Intellectualization

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 306

overview, 132--133

in schizoid personality style, 200

*See also* Secondary defenses

International Society for the Psychological Treatments of Schizophrenia,
71

Interpersonal psychoanalysis, 32

Interpersonal reactivity, 313

Interpretations

borderline personality organization and, 88--89, 92

depressive personalities and, 253

paranoid personalities and, 229--230

schizoid personality style and, 209

Interventions, 66

Introjection

depressive personalities and, 240--241, 245--248, 249, 250--251

masochistic personalities and, 271--274

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 298, 300, 308--309

overview, 111--116

in schizoid personality style, 200

*See also* Primitive defenses

Introversion, 197

Intuition, 111

Irritation

borderline personality organization and, 94--95

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 302

paranoid personalities and, 233--234

psychosis and, 76--77

Isolated subjectivity, 334--335

Isolation

compartmentalization and, 135--136

schizoid personality style and, 206

Isolation of affect

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 293--296, 302

overview, 131--132

*See also* Secondary defenses

 

**J**

Jealousy, 217--218. *See also* Envy

Joining, 81--82

 

**K**

Kraepelinian diagnosis, 46--47, 67--68

 

**L**

Labels

acting out and, 121

limits to the utility of diagnosis and, 19

overview, 7--8

prognosis implications and, 12--13

psychotic-level patients and, 80

Libido, 122

Loss

depressive personalities and, 238, 242, 243--244, 245--248

identification and, 145

manic personalities and, 258--259

 

**M**

Malignant grandiosity, 160. *See also* Grandiosity

Maltreatment

manic personalities and, 258--259

psychopathic personalities and, 159

Manic personalities

adaptive processes in, 258

affect in, 257--258

compared to attention-deficit disorders (ADD and ADHD), 264

countertransference with, 259--260

defensive processes in, 258

denial and, 106--107

diagnosis of, 260--264

differential diagnosis and, 262--264

drive in, 257--258

further reading suggestions regarding, 265--266

overview, 235, 256--257, 264--265

relational patterns in, 258--259

self-experience and, 259

temperament and, 257--258

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 260--262

transference with, 259--260

*See also* Hypomanic personalities

Manic-depressive illness, 235. *See also* Depressive personality; Manic
personalities

Manipulation

hysterical personalities and, 320

psychopathic personalities and, 160--161

Masochistic personalities

adaptive processes in, 271--274

affect in, 270--271

compared to depressive personalities, 256, 285

compared to dissociative conditions, 286--287

compared to paranoid personalities, 215

countertransference with, 278--281

defensive processes in, 271--274

diagnosis of, 281--287

differential diagnosis and, 215, 256, 285--287

drive in, 270--271

further reading suggestions regarding, 288

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 301--302

overview, 267--270, 287

relational patterns in, 274--277

self-experience and, 277--278

temperament and, 270--271

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 281--285

transference with, 278--281

Masturbation, 316

Maturational dimensions of character, 95--97, 96*f*. *See also*
Developmental processes

Mature defenses, 103

Medical model, 10

Medication

depressive personalities and, 249

manic personalities and, 261

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 307--308

schizoid personality style and, 211

Memory

dissociation and, 334, 337, 349

hysterical personalities and, 315--317

psychopathic personalities and, 161--162

repression and, 127--128

Mental status, format for diagnostic interview and, 360

Mentalization-based therapy (MBT), 84

Mirroring

narcissism and, 177

schizoid personality style and, 208

Misdiagnosis, 17

Moral masochism, 268. *See also* Masochistic personalities

Morality

depressive personalities and, 243--244

masochistic personalities and, 278

superego and, 29

*See also* Moralization

Moralization

masochistic personalities and, 271--274

overview, 134--135

psychopathic personalities and, 170

*See also* Morality; Secondary defenses

Mothers. *See* Parenting

Motivation, 238--239

Mourning, 243--244

Multiple personalities. *See* Dissociative psychologies

Multiplicity, 333--334. *See also* Dissociative psychologies

 

**N**

Narcissism

schizoid personality style and, 203

self psychology and, 36--37

Narcissistic defense, 193

Narcissistic personality organization

adaptive processes in, 180--182

affect in, 179--180

compared to depressive personalities, 193, 255--256

compared to dissociative psychologies, 329

compared to hypomanic personalities, 262--266

compared to hysterical personalities, 329

compared to neurotic symptoms, 51

compared to obsessive personalities, 308--309

compared to paranoid personalities, 217

compared to physiological conditions, 329--330

compared to psychopathic personalities, 173--174

countertransference and, 186--188

defensive processes in, 180--182

diagnosis of, 188--194

differential diagnosis and, 51, 173--174, 192--194, 217, 255--256,
262--266, 308--309, 329--330

drive in, 179--180

further reading suggestions regarding, 195

hysterical personalities and, 321--322

overview, 154, 176--179, 194--195

relational patterns in, 182--185

self-experiences in, 185--186

temperament and, 179--180

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 188--192

transference and, 186--188

Neglect, 159

Neurosis, 46--47. *See also* Obsessive--compulsive personality

Neurotic character, 47--51. *See also* Neurotic personality

Neurotic personality

compared to neurotic symptoms, 50--51

maturational and typological dimensions of character and, 95--97, 96*f*

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 55--67

object relations diagnosis and, 53--54

paranoid personalities and, 218

therapy and, 71--74

Neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum

maturational and typological dimensions of character and, 95--97, 96*f*

overview, 55--67

paranoid personalities and, 218

therapy and, 70--71, 97--98

*See also* Borderline personality organization; Neurotic personality;
Psychotic levels of character structure

Nonpsychodynamic therapies, 73--74. *See also* Cognitive-behavioral
therapies (CBT); Therapy

Normalization

psychotic-level patients and, 79--81

schizoid personality style and, 209

Numbing, psychic, 131--132. *See also* Secondary defenses

 

**O**

Object relations

depressive personalities and, 242

hysterical personalities and, 323

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 297, 304

overview, 152

schizoid personality style and, 201--202

Object relations diagnosis, 52--55

Object relations tradition, 31--36

Observing ego, 62

Obsessions, 58

Obsessive personalities

adaptive processes in, 293--296

affect in, 291--293

compared to narcissistic personality, 308--309

compared to organic conditions, 309

compared to paranoid personalities, 233

compared to schizoid personality style, 212, 309

countertransference with, 302--304

defensive processes in, 293--296

depressive personalities and, 239

diagnosis of, 304--309

differential diagnosis and, 212, 233, 308--309

drive in, 291--293, 294--296

further reading suggestions regarding, 310

moralization and, 135

overview, 289--291, 310

reaction formation and, 141

relational patterns in, 296--299

schizoid personality style and, 211

self-experience and, 300--302

temperament and, 291--293

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 304--308

transference with, 302--304

*See also* Obsessive--compulsive personality

Obsessive--compulsive personality

adaptive processes in, 293--296

affect in, 291--293

compared to narcissistic personality, 193--194

countertransference with, 302--304

defensive processes in, 293--296

diagnosis of, 304--309

differential diagnosis and, 193--194, 308--309

drive in, 291--293, 294--296

further reading suggestions regarding, 310

overview, 289--291, 310

relational patterns in, 296--299

self-experience and, 300--302

temperament and, 291--293

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 304--308

transference with, 302--304

*See also* Compulsive personalities; Obsessive personalities

Oedipal phase of development

drive theory and, 23--27

hysterical personalities and, 314

identification and, 144--145

object relations tradition and, 33

Omnipotent control

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 295--296

overview, 107--108

in psychopathic personalities, 160

undoing and, 136--137

*See also* Grandiosity; Primitive defenses

Oral fixations

depressive personalities and, 238

hysterical personalities and, 314

manic personalities and, 257--258

masochistic personalities and, 271

Oral phase of development, 23--27

Orbitofrontal cortex, 159

Organic psychopathology, 309

 

**P**

Pain, 275--276

Paranoid personalities

adaptive processes in, 218--220

affect in, 216--218

compared to psychopathic personalities, 172

countertransference with, 225--226

defensive processes in, 218--220

diagnosis of, 226--233

differential diagnosis and, 172, 232--233

drive in, 216--218

further reading suggestions regarding, 234

manic personalities and, 261

masochistic personalities and, 276--277

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 57

overview, 214--216, 233--234

projection and, 111--112

relational patterns in, 220--223

self-experience and, 223--225

temperament and, 216--218

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 226--232

transference with, 225--226

Paranoid--schizo state, 59--61

Parenting

depressive personalities and, 242--245

dissociative psychologies and, 341--344

hysterical personalities and, 318--320

masochistic personalities and, 274--277

narcissism and, 183--184

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 56--57

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 291--292, 297, 298--299

paranoid personalities and, 220--223

psychopathic personalities and, 164--165

schizoid personality style and, 202--203

*See also* Caregiving; Early experiences

"Passive-into-active transformation", 142

Passive--parasitic psychopaths, 158. *See also* Psychopathic
personalities

Penis envy, 314--315

Perfectionism, 181--182, 185

Personality

defenses and, 101, 149

maturational and typological dimensions of, 95--97, 96*f*

overview, 21--22, 154

*See also* Character diagnosis; Character organization; *individual
personality categories*; Temperament

Personality change, 155

Personality disorders

hypomanic personalities and, 257

manic personalities and, 235, 258

masochistic personalities and, 270

overview, 154

somatization and, 118

Phallic phase of development, 23--27

Phases of therapy, dissociative personalities and, 350--351

Phobia

displacement and, 140

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 58

Physiological conditions

compared to narcissistic personality, 329--330

differential diagnosis and, 329--330

Political correctness, 2--3

Posttraumatic stress reactions. *see also* Trauma

dissociation and, 334

hysterical personalities and, 312--313

repression and, 127--128

Power

hysterical personalities and, 314--315, 320--321

power struggles, 304, 306

psychopathic personalities and, 160

Prejudice in diagnosis, 7--8

Presenting problems, 8

Preverbal phase of development, 102--103

Pride, in narcissistic personalities, 185

"Primary process" thought, 27--28

Primitive defenses

acting out, 119--121

denial, 105--107

dissociation, 123--125

further reading suggestions regarding, 125

idealization and devaluation, 108--110

omnipotent control, 107--108

overview, 100--104, 125

projection, introjection, and projective identification, 111--116

sexualization, 121--123

somatization, 117--119

splitting of the ego, 116--117

withdrawal, 104--105

*See also* Defenses; *individual defenses*

Primitive envy, 165

Prognosis implications, 8, 12--13

Projection

displacement and, 140

dissociation and, 346--347

overview, 111--116

in paranoid personalities, 218

paranoid personalities and, 218--220, 224, 228--229

in schizoid personality style, 200

*See also* Primitive defenses

Projective identification

overview, 111--116

in psychopathic personalities, 160, 161--162

*See also* Primitive defenses

Protecting consumers of mental health services, 8, 13--14

Psychic numbing, 131--132. *See also* Secondary defenses

Psychoanalytic diagnosis, 9--11

Psychoanalytic treatment

ego psychology and, 28--31

with neurotic-level patients, 72--73

*See also* Therapy

*Psychodymanic Diagnostic Manual* (PDM), 151, 237

Psychopathic personalities

adaptive processes in, 160--162

affect in, 158--160

compared to dissociative psychologies, 356

compared to hysterical personalities, 327, 328--329

compared to narcissistic personality, 193

compared to paranoid personalities, 232--233

countertransference and, 166

defensive processes in, 160--162

diagnosis of, 167--174

differential diagnosis and, 172--174, 193, 232--233, 327, 328--329, 356

drive in, 158--160

further reading suggestions regarding, 174--175

overview, 157--158, 174

relational patterns in, 162--164

self-experience and, 164--165

temperament in, 158--160

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 167--172

transference and, 166

*See also* Psychopathy

Psychopathy

compared to neurotic symptoms, 51

omnipotent control and, 108

somatization and, 118

*See also* Psychopathic personalities

Psychopharmacology

depressive personalities and, 249

manic personalities and, 261

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 307--308

schizoid personality style and, 211

Psychosexual stages of development

drive theory and, 23--27

object relations tradition and, 33

*See also* Developmental stages

Psychosis

compared to dissociative conditions, 354

differential diagnosis and, 354

ego psychology diagnosis and, 47--51

hysterical personalities and, 312--313, 323--324

identity and, 64--65

manic personalities and, 258

versus neurosis, 46--47

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 59--63

object relations diagnosis and, 53--54

paranoid personalities and, 218

schizoid personality style and, 211

*See also* Psychotic levels of character structure; Schizophrenia

Psychotic levels of character structure

maturational and typological dimensions of character and, 95--97, 96*f*

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 55--67

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 294

therapy and, 74--83

*See also* Psychosis

Punishment, 276

 

**R**

Racism, 140

Rage, 292--293. *See also* Anger

Rape, 258

Rapprochment subphase, 130. *See also* Separation--individuation process

Rationalization, 103, 133--134. *See also* Secondary defenses

Reaction formation

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 293--296

overview, 140--141

paranoid personalities and, 219--220

*See also* Secondary defenses

Reactivity, 313

Reality principle, 28

Reality testing

paranoid personalities and, 218--219

psychopathic personalities and, 158

Reassurance, 66--67

Reflective functioning, 61

Reframing, psychotic-level patients and, 79

Regression

borderline personality organization and, 91--92

hysterical personalities and, 315, 325

overview, 129--131

*See also* Secondary defenses

Relational models

acting out and, 120

character organization and, 21

contemporary relational movement, 39--40

Relational patterns

in depressive personalities, 242--245

in dissociative psychologies, 341--344

in hysterical personalities, 318--320

in manic personalities, 258--259

in masochistic personalities, 274--277

narcissism and, 177, 182--185, 195

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 296--299

in paranoid personalities, 220--223

in psychopathic personalities, 162--164

in schizoid personality style, 201--203

Reliability, 9--10

Remorse

in narcissistic personalities, 185

undoing and, 137

Repetition compulsion, 272

Repression

in hysterical personalities, 315--317

overview, 103, 127--129

in schizoid personality style, 200

*See also* Primitive defenses; Secondary defenses

Rescue operations, 321

Resentment, 216--217

Resiliency, 9

Resistance

as a reason to diagnose, 8, 16

withdrawal and, 104--105

Respect, 75--78

Reversal, 142--143. *See also* Secondary defenses

Rituals, 290. *See also* Compulsive personalities

Running from treatment, as a reason to diagnose, 8, 16

 

**S**

Sadism

masochistic personalities and, 279

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 307

psychopathic personalities and, 165

Sadness, depressive personalities and, 239

Safety

psychosis and, 75--78

schizoid personality style and, 201

Scapegoating, 140

Schema-focused therapy (SFT), 84

Schizoaffective personalities, 354

Schizoid personality styles

adaptive processes in, 200

affect in, 198--200

compared to hypomanic personalities, 263--264

compared to obsessive personalities, 309

countertransference with, 206--208

defensive processes in, 200

diagnosis of, 208--212

differential diagnosis and, 211--212, 263--264, 309

drive in, 198--200

further reading suggestions regarding, 213

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 294

overview, 196--198, 212--213

relational patterns in, 201--203

self-experience in, 204--206

temperament and, 198--200

therapeutic implications in the diagnosis of, 208--210

transference with, 206--208

withdrawal and, 104--105

Schizophrenia

compared to dissociative conditions, 354

differential diagnosis and, 211--212, 354

dissociative personalities and, 343

hysterical personalities and, 312--313

Kraepelinian diagnosis and, 46--47

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 294

overview, 61--62, 207

paranoid personalities and, 218

therapy and, 74--83

*See also* Psychosis

"Script theory," 21

Secondary defenses

compartmentalization, 135--136

displacement, 139--140

further reading suggestions regarding, 150

humor, 148

identification, 143--146

intellectualization, 132--133

isolation of affect, 131--132

moralization, 134--135

overview, 126, 148--149

rationalization, 133--134

reaction formation, 140--141

regression, 129--131

repression, 127--129

reversal, 142--143

sublimation, 146--147

turning against the self, 138--139

undoing, 136--138

*See also* *individual defenses*

Security

dissociative psychologies and, 349

narcissism and, 177

paranoid personalities and, 231

Seduction theory, 336--337

Seductiveness, 321--322, 325--326. *See also* Sexualization

Self, turning against, 138--139. *See also* Secondary defenses

Self psychology

narcissistic personality organization and, 189

overview, 36--38

Self-acceptance, 177

Self-awareness, 213

Self-defeating patterns. *See* Masochistic personalities

Self-definition

depressive personalities and, 237

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 298

Self-disclosure, 75--78

Self-doubt, 283

Self-esteem

depressive personalities and, 241--242, 251--252, 253

dissociative psychologies and, 349

engagement with treatment and, 16

hysterical personalities and, 314, 319--320, 320--321

manic personalities and, 259

masochistic personalities and, 277

narcissism and, 176, 177, 178--179, 182, 192, 195

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 289--290, 301

omnipotent control and, 107

overview, 154

schizoid personality style and, 205

splitting and, 116

of the therapist, 17--18

Self-experiences

in depressive personalities, 245--248

in dissociative psychologies, 344--346

in hysterical personalities, 320--322

in manic personalities, 259

in masochistic personalities, 277--278

in narcissistic personalities, 185--186

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 300--302

overview, 152

in paranoid personalities, 223--225

in psychopathic personalities, 164--165

in schizoid personality style, 204--206

self psychology and, 38

Self-fragmentation, 261--262

Self-fulfilling prophecy, 115

Self-injury, 272

Self-in-relationship

depressive personalities and, 237

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 298

Selfobjects, narcissism and, 182--183

Self-representations

masochistic personalities and, 277

paranoid personalities and, 223--225

psychopathic personalities and, 165

Self-righteousness, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Self-sacrifice, masochistic personalities and, 282

Self-sufficiency, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Semantic memory. *See also* Memory

Semantic memory, dissociation and, 334

Separateness

borderline personality organization and, 91--92

schizoid personality style and, 201

Separation

borderline personality organization and, 66--67

depressive personalities and, 252--253

manic personalities and, 258--259

paranoid personalities and, 229

Separation anxiety, 273

Separation--individuation process

borderline personality organization and, 66--67

depressive personalities and, 242--243

overview, 242--243

regression and, 130

Sexism, displacement and, 140

Sexual abuse

borderline conditions and, 54--55

dissociation and, 341--344

Sexual behavior

acting out and, 121

paranoid personalities and, 224

*See also* Sexualization

Sexualization

displacement and, 139--140

dissociative psychologies and, 338--339

hysterical personalities and, 314, 315, 316--317, 319, 320--322,
325--326

masochistic personalities and, 267--268, 271

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 297

overview, 121--123

paranoid personalities and, 231

schizoid personality style and, 201

*See also* Primitive defenses

"Shallow affect," 322

Shame

compartmentalization and, 135--136

hysterical personalities and, 317--318

narcissistic personality organization and, 177, 185, 191, 195

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 293

paranoid personalities and, 217, 234

in psychopathic personalities, 160

Short-term treatments

depressive personalities and, 251--252

with neurotic-level patients, 73--74

*See also* Therapy

Situational factors, 153--154

Skills training, 82--83

Somatization, 117--119, 130--131

Splitting defense mechanism, 103, 116--117, 135. *See also* Primitive
defenses

Stage theories, 43--45

Stigmas, psychotic-level patients and, 80

Strengths, 9

Stress

paranoid personalities and, 218

repression and, 127--128

schizoid personality style and, 200

somatization and, 117--119

Structural models

ego psychology and, 27--31

hysterical personalities and, 316

Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders
(SCID-D), 353

Structured Interview for Personality Organization (STIPO), 55

Subconsciousness, 28--31. *See also* Unconsciousness

Sublimation, 146--147. *See also* Secondary defenses

Substance use disorders. *See also* Addiction

compared to psychopathic personalities, 174

differential diagnosis and, 174

Suicidal threats and behavior

borderline personality organization and, 85

empathy and, 15--16

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 59--63

therapists' comfort with diagnosis and, 17--18

Superego

depressive personalities and, 255

narcissism and, 178

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 292, 299

overview, 29--30

psychopathic personalities and, 160, 169

self psychology and, 37

Superiority, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Supervision from the patient, 89--91

Support, 82--83

Symptom neurosis, 47--51

 

**T**

Teasing, 276

Temperament

defenses and, 101

in depressive personalities, 238--239

in dissociative psychologies, 338--339

in hysterical personalities, 313--315

in manic personalities, 257--258

in masochistic personalities, 270--271

in narcissistic personalities, 179--180

in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 291--293

overview, 152--153

in paranoid personalities, 216--218

in psychopathic personalities, 158--160

in schizoid personality style, 198--200

*See also* Personality

Terminology

overview, 2--3

prejudice in diagnosis and, 7--8

Terror, psychosis and, 74

Therapeutic frame, borderline personality organization and, 85--86

Therapeutic implications of diagnosis

depressive personalities and, 250--254

dissociative psychologies and, 348--352

hypomanic personalities and, 260--262

hysterical personalities and, 326--327

masochistic personalities and, 281--285

narcissistic personality organization and, 188--192

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 304--308

paranoid personalities and, 226--232

psychopathic personalities and, 167--172

schizoid personality style and, 208--210

*See also* *individual character types*

Therapeutic relationship

with borderline patients, 84--87

diagnostic sessions and, 8, 16--18

ego psychology diagnosis and, 49--50

hysterical personalities and, 323--326

limits to the utility of diagnosis and, 18--19

masochistic personalities and, 284--285

narcissistic personality organization and, 190--191

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 57, 61--63

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 304--305

paranoid personalities and, 226

projective identification and, 114--115

psychosis and, 75--78

schizoid personality style and, 207--208

*See also* Countertransference; Transference

Therapeutic split, 57

"Therapeutic split in the ego," 28--29

Therapists' discomfort with diagnosis, 16--18

Therapy

with borderline patients, 83--95

depressive personalities and, 250--254

further reading suggestions regarding, 98--99

narcissistic personality organization and, 188--192

with neurotic-level patients, 71--74

overview, 70--71, 97--98

paranoid personalities and, 226--232

phases of in working with dissociative patients, 350--351

psychopathic personalities and, 167--172

with psychotic-level patients, 74--83

schizoid personality style and, 206--208, 208--210

*See also* Countertransference; Nonpsychodynamic therapies;
Psychoanalytic treatment; Short-term treatments; Transference

Thoughts, paranoid personalities and, 230

Toilet training, obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 291--292

Tolerance, 9

Tolerating ambivalence, 296

Training to be a therapist, 246--247

Trance-inducing services, 350. *See also* Hypnosis

Transference

borderline personality organization and, 67, 86--87

depressive personalities and, 248--250

displacement and, 140

dissociative psychologies and, 334, 341--344, 346--348, 352--353

hysterical personalities and, 323--326

manic personalities and, 259--260

masochistic personalities and, 278--281

narcissistic personality organization and, 186--188

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 62

object relations tradition and, 33--34

obsessive and compulsive personalities and, 302--304

paranoid personalities and, 220, 225--226, 231

psychopathic personalities and, 166

schizoid personality style and, 206--208

Transference neurosis, 56--57

Transference-focused psychotherapy (TFP), 66, 84

Trauma

borderline personality organization and, 85

displacement and, 140

dissociation and, 124--125, 336--337, 349

manic personalities and, 258--259

narcissism and, 177

overview, 61--62

repression and, 127--128

schizoid personality style and, 203

somatization and, 117--119

*See also* Early experiences

Treatment planning, as a reason to diagnose, 8, 11--12

Triangulation, 139

Triggers, 81--83

Trust

borderline personality organization and, 84--85

dissociative psychologies and, 340--341

hysterical personalities and, 324

neurotic--borderline--psychotic spectrum and, 58

paranoid personalities and, 215, 226

psychosis and, 75--78

Turning against the self. *see also* Secondary defenses

depressive personalities and, 241

masochistic personalities and, 271--274

overview, 138--139

Two-person model of the therapeutic process, 70--71

Typographical dimensions of character, 95--97, 96*f*

 

**U**

Ugliness, in narcissistic personalities, 185

Unconsciousness

acting out and, 120

defenses and, 101

ego psychology and, 28--31

hysterical personalities and, 317--318

object relations tradition and, 31--32

overview, 152

regression and, 130

repression and, 127, 128

*See also* Subconsciousness

Undoing, 136--138, 295--296. *See also* Secondary defenses

 

**V**

Validity, 9--10

Vanity

hysterical personalities and, 321--322

in narcissistic personalities, 185

Vindictiveness, paranoid personalities and, 216--217

 

**W**

Wishes, in obsessive and compulsive personalities, 294--296

Withdrawal, 103, 104--105, 201--203. *See also* Primitive defenses

Working alliance

ego psychology diagnosis and, 49--50

masochistic personalities and, 284--285

schizoid personality style and, 207--208

*See also* Therapeutic relationship

[]{#part0030.html}

# About Guilford Publications {#part0030.html_calibre_pb_0 .chaptitle}

Founded in 1973, Guilford Publications, Inc.
([www.guilford.com](http://www.guilford.com){.calibre9}), has built an
international reputation as a publisher of books, periodicals, software,
and audiovisual programs in mental health, education, and the social and
behavioral sciences. We are dedicated to bringing well-written, solidly
researched work to professionals, academics, and general readers.
Guilford's balance of continuity and innovation has enabled us to foster
lasting relationships with authors as well as customers, and to produce
and market numerous enduring titles. The firm is owned by its founding
partners, President Bob Matloff and Editor-in-Chief Seymour Weingarten.

[]{#part0031.html}

# Discover More Guilford Titles {#part0031.html_calibre_pb_0 .chaptitle}

+------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ![Page_234.jpg](images/00009.jpeg){.calibre23} | Sign up to receive e-Alerts of new titles in your field(s) of interest:                                                                     |
|                                                | [http://www.guilford.com/ealerts.](http://www.guilford.com/cgi-bin/cartscript.cgi?page=maillists/index.html&cart_id=435922.3607){.calibre9} |
+------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
