i

Shorter Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry

ii

iii

Shorter Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry SEVENTH EDITION Paul Harrison
Philip Cowen Tom Burns Mina Fazel

1

iv

1 Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP, United Kingdom Oxford
University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It
furthers the University's objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a
registered trade mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in
certain other countries Â© Oxford University Press 2018 The moral rights
of the authors have been asserted First Edition published in 1983 Second
Edition published in 1989 Third Edition published in 1996 Fourth Edition
published in 2001 Fifth Edition published in 2006 Sixth Edition
published in 2012 Seventh Edition published in 2018 Impression: 1 All
rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or
as expressly permitted by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the
appropriate reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning
reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights
Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above You must not
circulate this work in any other form and you must impose this same
condition on any acquirer Published in the United States of America by
Oxford University Press 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United
States of America British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Data
available Library of Congress Control Number: 2017932616 ISBN
978--0--19--874743--7 Printed in Great Britain by Bell & Bain Ltd.,
Glasgow Oxford University Press makes no representation, express or
implied, that the drug dosages in this book are correct. Readers must
therefore always check the product information and clinical procedures
with the most up-to-date published product information and data sheets
provided by the manufacturers and the most recent codes of conduct and
safety regulations. The authors and the publishers do not accept
responsibility or legal liability for any errors in the text or for the
misuse or misapplication of material in this work. Except where
otherwise stated, drug dosages and recommendations are for the
non-pregnant adult who is not breast-feeding Links to third party
websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for information only.
Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials contained in any
third party website referenced in this work.

v

Preface to the seventh edition In the 5 years since the sixth edition of
this book, psychiatry has seen important advances in understanding and
treatment of its disorders, as well as the publication of revised
diagnostic criteria in DSM-5. These developments have been incorporated
into this substantially rewritten edition, which includes a new chapter
on global mental health, and division of mood disorders into separate
chapters on depression and bipolar disorder. As in previous editions, we
have sought to provide information in a format, and at a level of
detail, to assist those training in psychiatry. We hope the book will
also continue to be useful to medical students and other health
professionals, including those working in primary care, community
health, and the many professions and groups contributing to
multidisciplinary mental health care. More detailed information can be
found in the companion reference textbook, the New Oxford

Textbook of Psychiatry, the third edition of which is nearing
completion. We welcome Mina Fazel. Mina is the first child psychiatrist,
and the first woman, to be an author of the Shorter Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry since its inception. We are delighted that both these
unfortunate omissions have been corrected, and this edition benefits
greatly from her contributions. We thank Sarah Atkinson, Linda Carter,
and Sue Woods-Gantz for secretarial assistance. We are very grateful to
Charlotte Allan, Chris Bass, Christopher Fairburn, and Kate Saunders for
their expert advice and helpful comments. PH PC TB MF Oxford, March 2017

vi

vi

Contents 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders 1 2
Classification 21 3 Assessment 35 4 Ethics and civil law 71 5 Aetiology
87 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry 119 7 Reactions to
stressful experiences 135 8 Anxiety and obsessive--compulsive disorders
161 9 Depression 193 10 Bipolar disorder 233 11 Schizophrenia 253 12
Paranoid symptoms and syndromes 299 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual
disorders 313 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric
disorders 345 15 Personality and personality disorder 391 16 Child
psychiatry 415 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) 485 18
Forensic psychiatry 513 19 Psychiatry of the elderly 539 20 The misuse
of alcohol and drugs 563 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm 609 22
Psychiatry and medicine 631 23 Global psychiatry 675 24 Psychological
treatments 681 25 Drugs and other physical treatments 709 26 Psychiatric
services 777 References 801 Index 859

vi

1

CHAPTER 1

Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders Introduction 1 General
issues 2

Descriptions of symptoms and signs 4

Introduction Psychiatrists require two distinct capacities. One is the
capacity to collect clinical data objectively and accurately, and to
organize and communicate the data in a systematic and balanced way. The
other is the capacity for intuitive understanding of each patient as an
individual. When the psychiatrist exercises the first capacity, he draws
on his skills and knowledge of clinical phenomena; when he exercises the
second capacity, he draws on his knowledge of human nature and his
experience with former patients to gain insights into the patient he is
now seeing. Both capacities can be developed by listening to patients,
and by learning from more experienced psychiatrists. A textbook can
provide the information and describe the procedures necessary to develop
the first capacity. The focus of the chapter on the first capacity does
not imply that intuitive understanding is unimportant, but simply that
it cannot be learned directly or solely from a textbook. Skill in
examining patients depends on a sound knowledge of how symptoms and
signs are defined. Without such knowledge, the psychiatrist is liable to
misclassify phenomena and thereby make inaccurate diagnoses. For this
reason, this chapter is concerned with the definition of the key
symptoms and signs of psychiatric disorders. Having elicited a patient's
symptoms and signs, the psychiatrist needs to decide how far these
phenomena fall into a pattern that has been observed in other

psychiatric patients. In other words, he decides whether the clinical
features conform to a recognized syndrome. He does this by combining
observations about the patient's present state with information about
the history of the condition. The value of identifying a syndrome is
that it helps to predict prognosis and to select an effective treatment.
It does this by directing the psychiatrist to the relevant body of
accumulated knowledge about the causes, treatment, and outcome in
similar patients. Diagnosis and classification are discussed in the next
chapter, and also in each of the chapters dealing with the various
psychiatric disorders. Chapter 3 discusses how to elicit and interpret
the symptoms described in this chapter, and how to integrate the
information to arrive at a syndromal diagnosis, since this in turn is
the basis for a rational approach to management and prognosis. As much
of the present chapter consists of definitions and descriptions of
symptoms and signs, it may be less easy to read than those that follow.
It is suggested that the reader might approach it in two stages. The
first reading would be applied to the introductory sections and to a
general understanding of the more frequently observed phenomena. The
second reading would focus on details of definition and the less common
symptoms and signs, and might be done best in conjunction with an
opportunity to interview a patient exhibiting these.

2

2

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders

General issues Before individual phenomena are described, some general
issues will be considered concerning the methods of studying symptoms
and signs, and the terms that are used to describe them.

Psychopathology The study of abnormal states of mind is known as
psychopathology. The term embraces two distinct approaches to the
subject---descriptive and experimental. This chapter is concerned almost
exclusively with the former; the latter is introduced here but is
discussed in later chapters.

Descriptive psychopathology Descriptive psychopathology is the objective
description of abnormal states of mind avoiding, as far as possible,
preconceived ideas or theories, and limited to the description of
conscious experiences and observable behaviour. It is sometimes also
called phenomenology or phenomenological psychopathology, although the
terms are not in fact synonymous, and phenomenology has additional
meanings (Berrios, 1992). Likewise, descriptive psychopathology is more
than just symptomatology (Stanghellini and Broome, 2014). The aim of
descriptive psychopathology is to elucidate the essential qualities of
morbid mental experiences and to understand each patient's experience of
illness. It therefore requires the ability to elicit, identify, and
interpret the symptoms of psychiatric disorders, and as such is a key
element of clinical practice; indeed, it has been described as 'the
fundamental professional skill of the psychiatrist'. The most important
exponent of descriptive psychopathology was the German psychiatrist and
philosopher, Karl Jaspers. His classic work, Allgemeine Psychopathologie
(General Psychopathology), first published in 1913, still provides the
most complete account of the subject, and the seventh edition is
available in an English translation (Jaspers, 1963). A briefer
introduction can be found in Jaspers (1968), and Oyebode (2014) has
provided a highly readable contemporary text on descriptive
psychopathology.

Experimental psychopathology This approach seeks to explain abnormal
mental phenomena, as well as to describe them. One of the first attempts
was psychodynamic psychopathology, originating in Freud's psychoanalytic
investigations (see p.Â 91). It explains the causes of abnormal mental
events in terms

of mental processes of which the patient is unaware (i.e. they are
'unconscious'). For example, Freud explained persecutory delusions as
being evidence, in the conscious mind, of activities in the unconscious
mind, including the mechanisms of repression and projection (see
p.Â 277). Subsequently, experimental psychopathology has focused on
empirically measurable and verifiable conscious psychological processes,
using experimental methods such as cognitive and behavioural psychology
and functional brain imaging. For example, there are cognitive theories
of the origin of delusions, panic attacks, and depression. Although
experimental psychopathology is concerned with the causes of symptoms,
it is usually conducted in the context of the syndromes in which the
symptoms occur. Thus its findings are discussed in the chapter covering
the disorder in question.

Terms and concepts used in descriptive psychopathology Symptoms and
signs In general medicine there is a clear definition of, and separation
between, a symptom and a sign. In psychiatry the situation is different.
There are few 'signs' in the medical sense (apart from the motor
abnormalities of catatonic schizophrenia or the physical manifestations
of anorexia nervosa), with most diagnostic information coming from the
history and observations of the patient's appearance and behaviour. Use
of the word 'sign' in psychiatry is therefore less clear, and two
different uses may be encountered. First, it may refer to a feature
noted by the observer rather than something spoken by the patient
(e.g.Â a patient who appears to be responding to a hallucination).
Secondly, it may refer to a group of symptoms that the observer
interprets in aggregation as a sign of a particular disorder. In
practice, the phrase 'symptoms and signs' is often used interchangeably
with 'symptoms' (as we have done in this chapter) to refer collectively
to the phenomena of psychiatric disorders, without a clear distinction
being drawn between the two words.

Subjective and objective In general medicine, the terms subjective and
objective are used as counterparts of symptoms and signs, respectively,
with 'objective' being defined as something observed directly by the
doctor (e.g.Â meningism, jaundice)---even

3

General issues though, strictly speaking, it is a subjective judgement
on his part as to what has been observed. In psychiatry, the terms have
broadly similar meanings as they do in medicine, although with a
blurring between them, just as there is for symptoms and signs.
'Objective' refers to features observed during an interview (i.e.Â the
patient's appearance and behaviour). The term is usually used when the
psychiatrist wants to compare this with the patient's description of
symptoms. For example, in evaluation of depression, complaints of low
mood and tearfulness are subjective features, whereas observations of
poor eye contact, psychomotor retardation, and crying are objective
ones. If both are present, the psychiatrist might record 'subjective and
objective evidence of depression', with the combination providing
stronger evidence than either alone. However, if the patient's behaviour
and manner in the interview appear entirely normal, he records 'not
objectively depressed', despite the subjective complaints. It is then
incumbent on the psychiatrist to explore the reasons for the discrepancy
and to decide what diagnostic conclusions he should draw. As a rule,
objective signs are accorded greater weight. Thus he may diagnose a
depressive disorder if there is sufficient evidence of this kind, even
if the patient denies the subjective experience of feeling depressed.
Conversely, the psychiatrist may question the significance of complaints
of low mood, however prominent, if there are none of the objective
features associated with the diagnosis.

Form and content When psychiatric symptoms are described, it is useful
to distinguish between form and content, a distinction that is best
explained by an example. If a patient says that, when he is alone, he
hears voices calling him a homosexual, the form of the experience is an
auditory hallucination (see below), whereas the content is the statement
that he is homosexual. Another patient might hear voices saying that she
is about to be killed. Again the form is an auditory hallucination, but
the content is different. A third patient might experience repeated
intrusive thoughts that he is homosexual, but he realizes that these are
untrue. Here the content is the same as that of the first example, but
the form is different. Form is often critical when making a diagnosis.
From the examples given above, the presence of a hallucination indicates
(by definition) a psychosis of one kind or another, whereas the third
example suggests obsessive-- compulsive disorder. Content is less
diagnostically useful, but can be very important in management; for
example, the content of a delusion may suggest that the patient could
attack a supposed persecutor. It is also the

content, not the form, that is of concern to the patient, whose priority
will be to discuss the persecution and its implications, and who may be
irritated by what seem to be irrelevant questions about the form of the
belief. The psychiatrist must be sensitive to this difference in
emphasis between the two parties.

Primary and secondary With regard to symptoms, the terms primary and
secondary are often used, but unfortunately with two different meanings.
The first meaning is temporal, simply referring to which occurred first.
The second meaning is causal, whereby primary means 'arising directly
from the pathological process', and secondary means 'arising as a
reaction to a primary symptom'. The two meanings often coincide, as
symptoms that arise directly from the pathological process usually
appear first. However, although subsequent symptoms are often a reaction
to the first symptoms, they are not always of this kind, for they too
may arise directly from the pathological process. The terms primary and
secondary are used more often in the temporal sense because this usage
does not involve an inference about causality. However, many patients
cannot say in what order their symptoms appeared. In such cases, when it
seems likely that one symptom is a reaction to another---for example,
that a delusion of being followed by persecutors is a reaction to
hearing accusing voices---it is described as secondary (using the word
in the causal sense). The terms primary and secondary are also used in
descriptions of syndromes.

Understanding and explanation Jaspers (1913) contrasted two forms of
understanding when applied to symptoms. The first, called Verstehen
('understanding'), is the attempt to appreciate the patient's subjective
experience: what does it feel like? This important skill requires
intuition and empathy. The second approach, called ErklÃ¤ren
('explanation'), accounts for events in terms of external factors; for
example, the patient's low mood can be 'explained' by his recent
redundancy. The latter approach requires knowledge of psychiatric
aetiology (Chapter 5).

The significance of individual symptoms Psychiatric disorders are
diagnosed when a defined group of symptoms (a syndrome) is present.
Almost any single symptom can be experienced by a healthy person; even
hallucinations, often regarded as a hallmark of severe mental disorder,
are experienced by some otherwise healthy people. An exception to this
is that a delusion, even if isolated, is generally considered to

3

4

4

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders be evidence of
psychiatric disorder if it is unequivocal and persistent (see Chapter
11). In general, however, the finding of a single symptom is not
evidence of psychiatric disorder, but an indication for a thorough and,
if necessary, repeated search for other symptoms and signs of
psychiatric disorder. The dangers of not adhering to this principle are
exemplified by the well-known study by Rosenhan (1973). Eight 'patients'
presented with the complaint that they heard the words 'empty, hollow,
thud' being said out loud. All eight individuals were admitted and
diagnosed with schizophrenia, despite denying all other symptoms and
behaving entirely normally. This study also illustrates the importance
of descriptive psychopathology, and of reliable diagnostic criteria (see
Chapter 2), as fundamental aspects of psychiatry.

The patient's experience Symptoms and signs are only part of the subject
matter of psychopathology. The latter is also concerned with the
patient's experience of illness, and the way in which psychiatric
disorder changes his view of himself, his hopes for the future, and his
view of the world (Stanghellini and Broome, 2014). This may be seen as
one example of the understanding (verstehen) mentioned above. A
depressive disorder may have a very different effect on a person who has
lived a satisfying and happy life and has fulfilled his major ambitions,
compared with a person who has had many previous misfortunes but has
lived on hopes of future success. To understand this aspect of the
patient's experience of psychiatric disorder, the psychiatrist has to
understand him in the way that a biographer understands his

subject. This way of understanding is sometimes called the life-story
approach. It is not something that can be readily assimilated from
textbooks; it is best learned by taking time to listen to patients. The
psychiatrist may be helped by reading biographies or works of literature
that provide insights into the ways in which experiences throughout life
shape the personality, and help to explain the diverse ways in which
different people respond to the same events.

Cultural variations in psychopathology The core symptoms of most serious
mental disorders are present in culturally diverse individuals. However,
there are cultural differences in how these symptoms present in clinical
settings and to the meanings that are attributed to them. For example,
depression can present with prominent somatic symptoms in many Asian
populations, such as those from India and China. The content of symptoms
can also differ between cultures. For example, for sub-Saharan African
populations, delusions not infrequently centre upon being cursed, a rare
delusional theme in Europeans. Cultural differences also affect the
person's subjective experience of illness, and therefore influence that
person's understanding of it (Fabrega, 2000). In some cultures, the
effects of psychiatric disorder are ascribed to witchcraft---a belief
that adds to the patient's distress. In many cultures, mental illness is
greatly stigmatized, and can, for example, hinder prospects of marriage.
In such a culture the effect of illness on the patient's view of himself
and his future will be very different from the effect on a patient
living in a society that is more tolerant of mental disorder.

Descriptions of symptoms and signs Disturbances of emotion and mood Much
of psychiatry is concerned with abnormal emotional states, particularly
disturbances of mood and other emotions, especially anxiety. Before
describing the main symptoms of this kind, it is worth clarifying two
areas of terminology that may cause confusion, in part because their
usage has changed over the years. First, the term 'mood' can either be
used as a broad term to encompass all emotions (e.g.Â 'anxious mood'), or
in a more restricted sense to mean the emotion that runs from depression
at one end to mania at the other.

The former usage is now uncommon. The latter usage is emphasized by the
fact that, in current diagnostic systems, 'mood disorders' are those in
which depression and mania are the defining characteristics, whereas
disorders defined by anxiety or other emotional disturbances are
categorized separately. In this section, features common to both 'mood'
and 'other emotions' are described first, before the specific features
of anxiety, depression, and mania are discussed separately. The second
point concerns the term 'affect'. This is now usually used
interchangeably with the term 'mood', in the more limited meaning of the
latter word (e.g. 'his affect was normal', 'he has an affective
disorder').

5

Descriptions of symptoms and signs However, in the past, these words had
different nuances of meaning; mood referred to a prevailing and
prolonged state, whereas affect was linked to a particular aspect or
object, and was more transitory. Emotions and mood may be abnormal in
three ways: â

Their nature may be altered

â

They may fluctuate more or less than usual

â

They may be inconsistent with the patient's thoughts or actions, or with
his current circumstances.

Changes in the nature of emotions and mood These can be towards anxiety,
depression, elation, or irritability and anger. Any of these changes may
be associated with events in the person's life, but they may arise
without an apparent reason. They are usually accompanied by other
symptoms and signs. For example, an increase in anxiety is accompanied
by autonomic overactivity and increased muscle tension, and depression
is accompanied by gloomy preoccupations and psychomotor slowness.

Anxiety Anxiety is a normal response to danger. Anxiety is abnormal when
its severity is out of proportion to the threat of danger, or when it
outlasts the threat. Anxious mood is closely coupled with somatic and
autonomic components, and with psychological ones. All can be thought of
as equivalent to the preparations for dealing with danger seen in other
mammals, ready for flight from, avoidance of, or fighting with a
predator. Mild-tomoderate anxiety enhances most kinds of performance,
but very high levels interfere with it. The anxiety response is
considered further in Chapter 8. Here its main components can be
summarized as follows. â

Psychological. The essential feelings of dread and apprehension are
accompanied by restlessness, narrowing of attention to focus on the
source of danger, worrying thoughts, increased alertness (with
insomnia), and irritability (that is, a readiness to become angry).

â

Somatic. Muscle tension and respiration increase. If these changes are
not followed by physical activity, they may be experienced as muscle
tension tremor, or the effects of hyperventilation (e.g.Â dizziness).

â

Autonomic. Heart rate and sweating increase, the mouth becomes dry, and
there may be an urge to urinate or defaecate.

â

Avoidance of danger. A phobia is a persistent, irrational fear of a
specific object or situation. Usually there is also a marked wish to
avoid the object, although this is not always the case---for example,
fear of illness (hypochondriasis). The fear is out of proportion to the
objective threat, and is recognized as such by the person experiencing
it. Phobias include fear of animate objects, natural phenomena, and
situations. Phobic people feel anxious not only in the presence of the
object or situation, but also when thinking about it (anticipatory
anxiety). Phobias are discussed further in relation to anxiety disorders
in Chapter 5.

Changes in the way that emotions and mood vary Emotions and mood vary in
relation to the person's circumstances and preoccupations. In abnormal
states, this variation with circumstances may continue, but the
variations may be greater or less than normal. Increased variation is
called lability of mood; extreme variation is sometimes called emotional
incontinence. Reduced variation is called blunting or flattening. These
terms have been used with subtly different meanings, but are now usually
used interchangeably. Blunting or flattening usually occurs in
depression and schizophrenia. Severe flattening is sometimes called
apathy (note the difference from the layman's meaning of the word).
Emotion can also vary in a way that is not in keeping with the person's
circumstances and thoughts, and this is described as incongruous or
inappropriate. For example, a patient may appear to be in high spirits
and laugh when talking about the death of his mother. Such incongruity
must be distinguished from the embarrassed laughter which indicates that
the person is ill at ease.

Clinical associations of emotional and mood disturbances Disturbances of
emotions and mood are seen in essentially all psychiatric disorders.
They are the central feature of the mood disorders and anxiety
disorders. They are also common in eating disorders, substance-induced
disorders, delirium, dementia, and schizophrenia.

Clinical associations Phobias are common among healthy children,
becoming less frequent in adolescence and adult life. Phobic symptoms
occur in all kinds of anxiety disorder, but are the major feature in the
phobic disorders.

Depression Depression is a normal response to loss or misfortune, when
it may be called grief or mourning. Depression is abnormal when it is
out of proportion to the misfortune, or is unduly prolonged. Depressed
mood is closely

5

6

6

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders coupled with other
changes, notably a lowering of selfesteem, pessimistic or negative
thinking, and a reduction in or loss of the experience of pleasure
(anhedonia). A depressed person has a characteristic expression and
appearance, with turned-down corners of the mouth, a furrowed brow, and
a hunched, dejected posture. The level of arousal is reduced in some
depressed patients (psychomotor retardation) but increased in others,
with a consequent feeling of restlessness or agitation. The
psychopathology of depression is discussed further in Chapter 9.

Clinical associations Depression can occur in any psychiatric disorder.
It is the defining feature of mood disorders, and commonly occurs in
schizophrenia, anxiety, obsessive--compulsive disorder, eating
disorders, and substance-induced disorders. It can also be a
manifestation of an organic disorder.

Elation Happy moods have been studied less than depressed mood. Elation
is an extreme degree of happy mood which, like depression, is coupled
with other changes, including increased feelings of self-confidence and
wellbeing, increased activity, and increased arousal. The latter is
usually experienced as pleasant, but sometimes as an unpleasant feeling
of restlessness. Elation occurs most often in mania and hypomania.

Irritability and anger Irritability is a state of increased readiness
for anger. Both irritability and anger may occur in many kinds of
disorder, so they are of little value in diagnosis. However, they are of
great importance in risk assessment and risk management, as they may
result in harm to others and self (see Chapter 3). Irritability may
occur in anxiety disorders, depression, mania, dementia, and drug
intoxication.

Disturbances of perception Specific kinds of perceptual disturbance are
symptoms of severe psychiatric disorders. It is therefore important to
be able to identify these symptoms and to distinguish them from the
other, much less significant, alterations in sensory experience which
occur. We shall therefore describe perceptual phenomena in some detail.

Perception and imagery Perception is the process of becoming aware of
what is presented through the sense organs. It is not a direct awareness
of data from the sense organs, because these

data are acted on by cognitive processes that reassemble them and
extract patterns. Perception can be attended to or ignored, but it
cannot be terminated by an effort of will. Imagery is the awareness of a
percept that has been generated within the mind. Imagery can be called
up and terminated by an effort of will. Images are experienced as
lacking the sense of reality that characterizes perception, so that a
healthy person can distinguish between images and percepts. A few people
experience eidetic imagery, which is visual imagery so intense and
detailed that it has a 'photographic' quality akin to a percept,
although in other ways it differs from a percept. Imagery is generally
terminated when perception starts. Occasionally, imagery persists
despite the presence of percept (provided this is weak and
unstructured). This sort of imagery is called pareidolia. Percepts may
alter in intensity and in quality. Anxious people may experience
sensations as more intense than usual; for example, they may be
unusually sensitive to noise. In mania, perceptions seem more vivid than
usual. Depressed patients may experience perceptions as dull and
lifeless.

Illusions Illusions are misperceptions of external stimuli. They occur
when the general level of sensory stimulation is reduced and when
attention is not focused on the relevant sensory modality. For example,
at dusk the outline of a bush may be perceived at first as that of a
man, although not when attention is focused on the outline. Illusions
are more likely to occur when the level of consciousness is reduced, as
in delirium, or when a person is anxious. Illusions have no diagnostic
significance, but need to be distinguished from hallucinations.

Hallucinations A hallucination is a percept that is experienced in the
absence of an external stimulus to the corresponding sense organ. It
differs from an illusion in being experienced as originating in the
outside world or from within the person's body (rather than as
imagined). Hallucinations cannot be terminated at will. Hallucinations
are generally indications of significant psychiatric disorder, and
specific types of hallucination are characteristic of different
disorders, as outlined below. However, as noted above, hallucinations do
occur in some otherwise healthy people. It is also common to experience
them when falling asleep (hypnagogic hallucinations) or on waking
(hypnopompic hallucinations). These two types of hallucination may be
either visual or auditory, the latter sometimes as the experience of

7

Descriptions of symptoms and signs hearing one's name called. Such
hallucinations are common in narcolepsy (see page 327). Some recently
bereaved people experience hallucinations of the dead person.
Hallucinations can occur after sensory deprivation, in people with
blindness or deafness of peripheral origin, occasionally in neurological
disorders that affect the visual pathways, in epilepsy (see page 379),
and in Charles Bonnet syndrome (see page 555).

Types of hallucination Hallucinations can be described in terms of their
complexity and their sensory modality (see Box 1.1). The term elementary
hallucination refers to experiences such as bangs, whistles, and flashes
of light, whereas the term complex hallucination refers to experiences
such as hearing voices or music, or seeing faces and scenes. Auditory
hallucinations may be experienced as noises, music, or voices. Voices
may be heard clearly or indistinctly; they may seem to speak words,
phrases, or sentences. They may seem to address the patient directly
(second-person hallucinations), or talk to one another, referring to the
patient as 'he' or 'she' (third-person hallucinations). Sometimes
patients say that the voices anticipate what they are about to think a
few moments later. Sometimes the voices seem to speak the patient's
thoughts as he is thinking them (Gedankenlautwerden),

Box 1.1 Description of hallucinations According to complexity Elementary
Complex According to sensory modality Auditory Visual Olfactory and
gustatory Somatic (tactile and deep) According to special features
Auditory Second-person Third-person Gedankenlautwerden Ãcho de la pensÃ©e
Visual Extracampine Autoscopic hallucinations Reflex hallucinations
Hypnagogic and hypnopompic

or to repeat them immediately after he has thought them (Ã©cho de la
pensÃ©e). Visual hallucinations may also be elementary or complex. The
content may appear normal or abnormal in size; hallucinations of dwarf
figures are sometimes called lilliputian. Occasionally, patients
describe the experience of visual hallucinations located outside the
field of vision, usually behind the head (extracampine hallucinations).
Olfactory hallucinations and gustatory hallucinations are frequently
experienced together. The smells and tastes are often unpleasant.
Tactile hallucinations, sometimes called haptic hallucinations, may be
experienced as sensations of being touched, pricked, or strangled.
Sometimes they are felt as movements just below the skin, which the
patient may attribute to insects, worms, or other small creatures
burrowing through the tissues. Hallucinations of deep sensation may be
experienced as feelings of the viscera being pulled upon or distended,
or of sexual stimulation or electric shocks. An autoscopic hallucination
is the experience of seeing one's own body projected into external
space, usually in front of oneself, for short periods. The experience is
reported occasionally by healthy people in situations of sensory
deprivation, when it is called an out-of-body experience, or after a
near-fatal accident or heart attack, when it has been called a
near-death experience. Rarely, the experience is accompanied by the
conviction that the person has a double (Doppelganger). Reflex
hallucination is a rare phenomenon, in which a stimulus in one sensory
modality results in a hallucination in another; for example, music may
provoke visual hallucinations.

Clinical associations of hallucinations Hallucinations occur in diverse
disorders, notably schizophrenia, severe mood disorder, organic
disorders, and dissociative states. Therefore the finding of
hallucinations does not itself help much in diagnosis. However, as with
delusions, there are certain kinds of hallucination which do have
important implications for diagnosis of schizophrenia and other
disorders. â

Auditory hallucination. Only clearly heard voices (not noises or music)
have diagnostic significance. Third-person hallucinations (introduced
above) are strongly associated with schizophrenia. Such voices may be
experienced as commenting on the patient's intentions (e.g.Â 'He wants to
make love to her') or actions (e.g.Â 'She is washing her face'), or may
make critical comments. Second-person auditory

7

8

8

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders hallucinations
(i.e.Â those that appear to address the patient) do not point to a
particular diagnosis, but their content and the patient's reaction to
them may do so. Thus voices with derogatory content (e.g.Â 'You are a
failure, you are wicked') suggest severe depressive disorder, especially
when the patient accepts them as justified. In schizophrenia, the
patient more often resents such comments. Voices which anticipate, echo,
or repeat the patient's thoughts also suggest schizophrenia. â

â

â

Visual hallucinations should always suggest the possibility of an
organic disorder, although they also occur in severe affective
disorders, schizophrenia, and dissociative disorder. The content of
visual hallucinations is of little significance in diagnosis. Autoscopic
hallucinations also raise suspicion of an organic disorder, such as
temporal lobe epilepsy. Hallucinations of taste and smell are
infrequent. They may occur in schizophrenia, severe depressive
disorders, and temporal lobe epilepsy, and in tumours affecting the
olfactory bulb or pathways. Tactile and somatic hallucinations are
suggestive of schizophrenia, especially if they are bizarre in content
or interpretation. The sensation of insects moving under the skin
(formication) occurs in people who abuse cocaine.

Pseudohallucinations This term refers to experiences that are similar to
hallucinations but which do not meet all of the requirements of the
definition, nor have the same implications. The word has two distinct
meanings, which correspond to two of the ways in which an experience can
fail to meet the criteria for a hallucination. In the first meaning,
pseudohallucination is a sensory experience that differs from a
hallucination in not seeming to the patient to represent external
reality, being located within the mind rather than in external space. In
this way pseudohallucinations resemble imagery although, unlike imagery,
they cannot be dismissed by an effort of will. In the second meaning,
the sensory experience appears to originate in the external world, but
it seems unreal. For a more detailed discussion, see Hare (1973) and
Taylor (1981). Both definitions of pseudohallucinations are difficult to
apply clinically, because patients can seldom describe their experiences
in adequate detail. In any event, it is usually sufficient to decide
whether a perceptual experience is a 'true' hallucination or not, since
it is only the former which carries diagnostic significance. If it is
not

a hallucination, the experience should be described, but need not be
labelled as one kind of pseudohallucination or the other.

Abnormalities in the meaning attached to percepts A delusional
perception is a delusion arising directly from a normal percept. This is
sometimes erroneously considered to be a perceptual disturbance, but it
is really a disorder of thought, and is therefore discussed in the next
section.

Disturbances of thoughts Disturbances of thoughts and thought processes
are among the most diagnostically significant symptoms in psychiatry. As
with disturbances of perception, therefore, this area of descriptive
psychopathology merits relatively detailed description. It covers two
kinds of phenomena: â

Disturbance of thoughts themselves---that is, a change in the nature of
individual thoughts. The category of delusion is particularly important.
Disturbances of thought are covered in this section.

â

Disturbance of the thinking process and the linking together of
different thoughts; this may affect the speed or the form of the
relationship between thoughts. It can occur even if individual thoughts
are unremarkable in nature. These phenomena are covered in the next
section.

Delusions A delusion is a belief that is firmly held on inadequate
grounds, that is not affected by rational argument or evidence to the
contrary, and that is not a conventional belief that the person might be
expected to hold given their educational, cultural, and religious
background. This definition is intended to separate delusions, which are
cardinal symptoms of severe psychiatric disorder (and specifically of
psychosis), from other kinds of abnormal thoughts and from strongly held
beliefs found among healthy people. There are several problems with the
definition, which is summarized in Box 1.2, but it suffices as a
starting point for more detailed discussion of delusions. Although not
part of the definition, another characteristic feature of delusions is
that they have a marked effect on the person's feeling and actions---in
the same way that strongly held normal beliefs do. Since the behavioural
response to the delusion may itself be out of keeping or even bizarre,
it is often this that

9

Descriptions of symptoms and signs

Box 1.2 Problems with the definition of delusions Delusions are firmly
held despite evidence to the contrary The hallmark of a delusion is that
it is held with such conviction that it cannot be altered by presenting
evidence to the contrary. For example, a patient who holds the delusion
that there are persecutors in the adjoining house will not be convinced
by evidence that the house is empty. Instead he may suggest that the
persecutors left the house shortly before it was searched. The problem
with this criterion for delusions is that some of the ideas of normal
people are equally impervious to contrary evidence. For example, the
beliefs of a convinced spiritualist are not undermined by the
counterarguments of a non-believer. Strongly held non-delusional beliefs
are called overvalued ideas (see page 14). A further problem with this
part of the definition of delusion relates to partial delusions.
Although delusions are usually held strongly from the start, sometimes
they are at first held with a degree of doubt. Also, during recovery it
is not uncommon for patients to pass through a stage of increasing doubt
about their delusions before finally rejecting them. The term 'partial
delusion' refers to both these situations of doubt. It should be used
during recovery only when it is known that the beliefs were preceded by
a full delusion, and applied to the development of a delusion only when
it is known in retrospect that a full delusion developed later. Partial
delusions are not, in isolation, helpful in diagnosis---akin to the
status of pseudohallucinations mentioned on page 8.

delusion that hallucinated voices are those of people who are spying on
the patient.

Delusions are not beliefs shared by others in the same culture This
criterion is important when the patient is a member of a culture or
subculture (including a religious faith), because healthy people in such
a group may hold beliefs that are not accepted outside it. Like
delusions, such cultural beliefs are generally impervious to contrary
evidence and reasoned argument---for example, beliefs in evil spirits.
Therefore, before deciding that an idea is delusional, it is important
to determine whether other members of the same culture share the belief.

Delusions as false beliefs

Delusions are not arrived at by the ordinary processes of observation
and logic. Some delusions appear suddenly without any previous thinking
about the subject (primary delusions). Other delusions appear to be
attempts to explain another abnormal experiences---for example, the

Some definitions of delusions indicate that they are false beliefs, but
this criterion was not included in the definition given above. This
omission is because, in exceptional circumstances, a delusional belief
can be true or can subsequently become true. A well-recognized example
relates to pathological jealousy (see page 306). It is not falsity that
determines whether the belief is delusional, but the nature of the
mental processes that led up to it. (The difficulty with this statement
is that we cannot define these mental processes precisely.) There is a
further practical problem concerning the use of falsity as a criterion
for delusion. It is that if the criterion is used, it may be assumed
that, because a belief is highly improbable, it is false. This is
certainly not a sound assumption, because improbable stories--- for
example, of persecution by neighbours---sometimes turn out to be true
and arrived at through sound observations and logical thought. Therefore
ideas should be investigated thoroughly before they are accepted as
delusions. These issues are discussed further in Spitzer (1990) and
Butler and Braff (1991). See Garety and Freeman (2013) for a cognitive
account of delusions.

first brings the person to psychiatric attention, and leads to the
delusion being elicited. For example, a man with the delusion that he
was being irradiated by sonic waves covered his windows with silver foil
and barricaded his door. Occasionally, however, a delusion has

little influence on feelings and actions. For example, a patient may
believe that he is a member of the royal family while living contentedly
in a group home. This separation is called double orientation, and
usually occurs in chronic schizophrenia.

Delusions are held on inadequate grounds

9

10

10

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders

Types of delusions Several types of delusions are recognized, and they
are categorized either by the characteristics or by the theme of the
delusion (see Box 1.3). Many of the terms are simply useful descriptors,
but a few of them carry particular diagnostic implications; for example,
specific types of delusions are first rank symptoms of schizophrenia
(see page 255). Most categories of delusions can be diagnosed reliably
(Bell et al., 2006). For further descriptions, see also Oyebode (2014).

Primary and secondary delusions A primary or autochthonous delusion is
one that appears suddenly and with full conviction but without any
mental events leading up to it. For example, a schizophrenic patient may
be suddenly and completely convinced, for no reason and with no prior
thoughts of this kind, that

Box 1.3 Descriptions of delusions According to fixity Complete Partial
According to onset Primary Secondary Other delusional experiences
Delusional mood Delusional perception Delusional memory According to
theme Persecutory (paranoid) Delusions of reference Grandiose
(expansive) Bizarre Delusions of guilt Nihilistic Hypochondriacal
Religious Jealous Sexual or amorous Delusions of control Delusions
concerning possession of thought: Thought insertion Thought withdrawal
Thought broadcasting According to other features Shared delusions Mood
congruency

he is changing sex. Not all primary delusional experiences start with an
idea. Sometimes the first experience is a delusional mood (see below) or
a delusional perception (see below). Because patients do not find it
easy to remember the exact sequence of such unusual and distressing
mental events, it is often difficult to be certain which experience came
first. Primary delusions are given considerable weight in the diagnosis
of schizophrenia, and they should be recorded only when it is certain
that they are present. Secondary delusions are delusions apparently
derived from a preceding morbid experience. The latter may be of several
kinds, including hallucinations (e.g.Â someone who hears voices may
believe that he is being followed), low mood (e.g.Â a profoundly
depressed woman may believe people think that she is worthless), or an
existing delusion (e.g.Â a person who is convinced he is being 'framed'
may come to believe that he will be imprisoned). Some secondary
delusions seem to have an integrative function, making the original
experiences more comprehensible to the patient, as in the first example
above. Others seem to do the opposite, increasing the sense of
persecution or failure, as in the third example. Secondary delusions may
accumulate until there is a complicated and stable delusional system.
When this happens the delusions are said to be systematized.

Delusional mood When a patient first experiences a delusion, he responds
emotionally. For example, a person who believes that a group of people
intends to kill him is likely to feel afraid. Occasionally, the change
of mood precedes the delusion. This preceding mood is often a feeling of
foreboding that some, as yet, unidentified sinister event is about to
take place. When the delusion follows, it appears to explain this
feeling. In German this antecedent mood is called Wahnstimmung. This
term is usually translated as delusional mood, although it is really the
mood from which a delusion arises.

Delusional perception Sometimes the first abnormal experience is the
attaching of a new significance to a familiar percept without any reason
to do so. For example, the position of a letter that has been left on
the patient's desk may be interpreted as a signal that he is to die.
This experience is called delusional perception. Note, however, that the
perception is normal, and it is the delusional interpretation that is
abnormal.

Delusional misidentification This is the delusional misidentification of
oneself or of specific other people. Several eponymous forms are

1

Descriptions of symptoms and signs described, and have been considered
to be both symptoms and syndromes. In line with the latter view,
'delusional misidentification disorder' is described in Chapter 12.

Delusional memory In delusional memory, a delusional interpretation is
attached to past events. Fish (1962) distinguishes two forms of
delusional memory. In the commoner form, the past event was genuine, and
the term 'delusional' refers to the significance which has now become
attached to it. For example, a patient who believes that there is a
current plot to poison her may remember (correctly) that she vomited
after a meal, eaten long before her psychosis began, and now concludes
(incorrectly) that she had been intentionally poisoned. Alternatively, a
sudden (autochthonous) delusion arises, which is wrongly dated to a past
event. This latter form might be viewed as a true delusional memory
(i.e.Â the memory itself is the delusion), whereas in the first kind
described, the memory is normal but a delusional interpretation is
placed upon it.

Shared delusions As a rule, other people recognize delusions as false
and argue with the patient in an attempt to correct them. Occasionally,
a person who lives with a deluded patient comes to share his delusional
beliefs. This condition is known as shared delusions or folie Ã  deux
(see page 310). Although the second person's delusional conviction is as
strong as the partner's while the couple remain together, it often
recedes quickly when they are separated.

Delusional themes For the purposes of clinical work, it is useful to
group delusions according to their main themes, since the themes have
some diagnostic significance. However, it is first worth considering the
word 'paranoid', which is used widely but not always clearly in this
context (see Box 1.4).

Persecutory delusions These are most commonly concerned with persons or
organizations that are thought to be trying to inflict harm on the
patient, damage his reputation, or make him insane. Such delusions are
common but of little help in diagnosis, because they can occur in
delusional disorders, organic states, schizophrenia, and severe
affective disorders. However, the patient's attitude to the delusion may
point to the diagnosis. In a severe depressive disorder, a patient with
persecutory delusions characteristically accepts the supposed activities
of the persecutors as justified by his own wickedness. In schizophrenia,
however, he resents these activities as unwarranted.

Delusions of reference These are concerned with the idea that objects,
events, or people that are unconnected with the patient have a personal
significance for him. For example, the patient may believe that an
article in a newspaper or a remark on television is directed
specifically to him, either as a message to him or to inform others
about him. Delusions of reference may also relate to actions or gestures
made by other people which are thought to convey a message about the
patient. For example, a person who touches his hair may be thought by
the patient to be signalling that he, the patient, is turning into a
woman. Although most delusions of reference have persecutory
associations, some relate to grandiose or reassuring themes.

Delusions of control (passivity phenomena) A patient who has a delusion
of control believes that his actions, impulses, or thoughts are
controlled by an outside agency. These are also called passivity
phenomena. Delusions of control are strongly suggestive of
schizophrenia, and have forensic implications, so particular care should
be taken when eliciting and recording them. The symptom may be confused
with voluntary obedience to commands from hallucinatory voices, with
religious beliefs that God controls human actions, or with a
metaphorical view of one's free will. By contrast, a patient with a
delusion of control firmly believes that his movements or actions are
brought about by an outside agency (other than the divine), and are not
willed by himself. Moreover, other symptoms of schizophrenia are usually
present as well.

Delusions concerning the possession of thought Healthy people take it
for granted that their thoughts are their own. They also know that
thoughts are private experiences that become known to other people only
if they are spoken aloud, or revealed in writing or through facial
expression, gesture, or action. Patients with delusions concerning the
possession of thoughts lose these normal convictions in one or more of
three ways, all of which are strongly associated with schizophrenia: â

Thought insertion is the delusion that certain thoughts are not the
patient's own but are implanted by an outside agency. Often there is an
associated explanatory delusion---for example, that persecutors have
used radio waves to insert the thoughts. This experience must not be
confused with that of the obsessional patient, who may be distressed by
thoughts that he feels are alien to his nature but who never doubts that
these thoughts are his own. The patient with a delusion of thought
insertion believes that the thoughts are not his own, but that they have
been inserted into his mind.

11

12

12

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders

Box 1.4 The term 'paranoid'

â

â

The term 'paranoid' is often used as if it were equivalent to
'persecutory'. Strictly interpreted, however, the word 'paranoid' has a
wider meaning (Lewis, 1970). It was used in ancient Greek writings to
mean the equivalent of 'out of his mind'. For example, Hippocrates used
it to describe patients with febrile delirium. Many later writers
applied the term to grandiose, erotic, jealous, and religious delusions,
as well as to persecutory delusions. Although for historical reasons it
is preferable to retain the broader meaning of the term, the narrower
usage is

now more common, as sanctioned in the diagnostic category of paranoid
personality disorder (see page 398). Because the term 'paranoid' has two
possible meanings, the term 'persecutory' is preferable when the narrow
sense of paranoid is required. The issue also affects the use of the
word to describe syndromes in which such symptoms predominate; the older
term 'paranoid psychoses' (or 'paranoid states') is now replaced by
'delusional disorders', in part to avoid the ambiguities (see also
Chapter 12).

Thought withdrawal is the delusion that thoughts have been taken out of
the mind. The delusion usually accompanies thought blocking, in which
the patient experiences a sudden break in the flow of thoughts and
believes that the 'missing' thoughts have been taken away by some
outside agency. Often there are associated explanatory delusions
comparable to those that accompany delusions of thought insertion (see
above).

upon the patient, or that his sinfulness will lead to retribution on his
family.

Thought broadcasting is the delusion that unspoken thoughts are known to
other people through radio, telepathy, or in some other way. In
addition, some patients believe that their thoughts can be heard out
loud by other people, a belief that also accompanies the experience of
hearing one's own thoughts spoken (Gedankenlautwerden), described above
in the section on 'Types of hallucination'.

Grandiose delusions These are beliefs of exaggerated self-importance.
The patient may consider himself to be wealthy, endowed with unusual
abilities, or a special person. Such expansive ideas occur particularly
in mania, and in schizophrenia.

Bizarre delusions Delusions with highly improbable content (e.g.Â of
control by aliens who communicate via birds) are said to be bizarre.
They are often given particular weight in the diagnosis of
schizophrenia, but the category has problems of reliability and
definition (Bell et al., 2006; Cermolacce et al., 2010), and it is not
included in current diagnostic criteria.

Delusions of guilt These beliefs are found most often in depressive
illness, and for this reason are sometimes called depressive delusions.
Typical themes are that a minor infringement of the law in the past will
be discovered and bring shame

Nihilistic delusions These are beliefs that some person or thing has
ceased, or is about to cease, to exist. Examples include a patient's
delusion that he has no money, that his career is ruined, or that the
world is about to end. Nihilistic delusions are seen in severe
depression. Occasionally, nihilistic delusions concern failures of
bodily function (often that the bowels are blocked), and are often
referred to as Cotard's syndrome (see page 196).

Hypochondriacal delusions These are beliefs concerned with illness. The
patient believes, wrongly and in the face of all medical evidence to the
contrary, that he is suffering from a disease. Such delusions are more
common in the elderly, reflecting the increasing concern with health
among people in this age group. Other hypochondriacal delusions are
concerned with cancer or venereal disease, or with the appearance of
parts of the body, especially the nose. They must be distinguished from
the health worries of hypochondriasis (see page 650), which are not
delusional.

Mood-congruent and mood-incongruent delusions If a delusion 'makes
sense' in terms of the person's mood, it is said to be mood-congruent.
Hypochondriacal and nihilistic delusions in psychotic depression, and
grandiose delusions in mania, both fall into this category. In contrast,
a delusion that is out of keeping with the prevailing mood is
mood-incongruent, and is suggestive of schizophrenia. The concept of
congruency can also be applied to hallucinations.

Delusions of jealousy These are more common among men than women. Not
all jealous ideas are delusions; less intense jealous

13

Descriptions of symptoms and signs preoccupations and obsessions are
common. Jealous delusions are important because they may lead to
aggressive behaviour towards the person(s) who is thought to be
unfaithful. A patient with delusional jealousy is not satisfied if he
fails to find evidence supporting his beliefs; his search will continue.
These important and potentially dangerous problems are discussed further
in Chapter 12.

persistence. Obsessional symptoms are also a trait in anankastic
personality disorder (see page 403). Obsessions can take various forms
(see Box 1.5). â

Obsessional thoughts are repeated and intrusive words or phrases that
are upsetting to the patient---for example, repeated obscenities or
blasphemous phrases coming into the awareness of a religious person.

â

Obsessional ruminations are repeated worrying themes of a more complex
kind---for example, about the ending of the world.

â

Obsessional doubts are repeated themes expressing uncertainty about
previous actions---for example, whether or not the person turned off an
electrical appliance that might cause a fire. Whatever the nature of the
doubt, the person realizes that the degree of uncertainty and consequent
distress is unreasonable.

â

Obsessional impulses are repeated urges to carry out actions, usually
ones that are aggressive, dangerous, or socially embarrassing---for
example, the urge to pick up a knife and stab another person, to jump in
front of a train, or to shout obscenities in church. Whatever the urge,
the person has no wish to carry it out, resists it strongly, and does
not act on it.

â

Obsessional phobias. This term denotes an obsessional symptom associated
with avoidance as well as anxiety---for example, the obsessional impulse
to injure another person with a knife may lead to consequent avoidance
of knives. Sometimes obsessional fears of illness are called illness
phobias.

â

Obsessional slowness. Many obsessional patients perform actions slowly
because their compulsive rituals or repeated doubts take time and
distract them from their main purpose. Occasionally, however, the
slowness does not seem to be secondary to these other problems, but
appears to be a primary feature of unknown origin.

Sexual or amorous delusions These are rare, and are more frequent in
women than in men. Sexual delusions are occasionally secondary to
somatic hallucinations felt in the genitalia. A person with amorous
delusions believes that she is loved by a man who is usually
inaccessible to her, and often of higher social status. In many cases
she has never spoken to the person. Erotic delusions are the most
prominent feature of De ClÃ©rambault's syndrome (see page 308).

Obsessional and compulsive symptoms Obsessions Obsessions are recurrent
persistent thoughts, impulses, or images that enter the mind despite
efforts to exclude them. One characteristic feature is the subjective
sense of a struggle---the patient resists the obsession, which
nevertheless intrudes into awareness. Another characteristic feature is
the conviction that to think something is to make it more likely to
happen. Obsessions are recognized by the person as his own and not
implanted from elsewhere (in contrast to delusions of thought
insertion). Another important distinction from delusions is that
obsessions are regarded as untrue or senseless. They are generally about
matters that the patient finds distressing or otherwise unpleasant. They
are often, but not always, accompanied by compulsions (see page 14). The
presence of resistance is important because, together with the lack of
persistent or complete conviction about the truth of the idea, it
distinguishes obsessions from delusions. However, in practice this
distinction can, in isolation, be more difficult, since the resistance
tends to diminish when obsessions have been longstanding. Furthermore,
when obsessions are very intense, patients may become less certain that
they are false. However, a careful history, not only of the symptom but
also of other relevant features (e.g.Â compulsions, other evidence of
psychosis) should avoid diagnostic difficulties. It is also necessary to
distinguish clinically significant obsessions from similar thoughts that
occur in healthy people, especially when they are tired or under stress.
This requires evidence of dysfunction and

Box 1.5 Obsessional and compulsive symptoms Obsessions Thoughts
Ruminations Doubts Impulses Obsessional phobias Compulsions (rituals)
Obsessional slowness

13

14

14

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders Although the
content (or themes) of obsessions are various, most of them can be
grouped into one or other of six categories: â

dirt and contamination

â

aggression

â

orderliness

â

illness

â

sex

â

religion.

Thoughts about dirt and contamination are usually associated with the
idea of harm to others or self through the spread of disease. Aggressive
thoughts may be about striking another person or shouting angry or
obscene remarks in public. Thoughts about orderliness may be about the
way objects are to be arranged or work is to be organized. Thoughts
about illness are usually of a fearful kind---for example, a dread of
cancer. Obsessional ideas about sex usually concern practices that the
individual would find shameful. Obsessions about religion often take the
form of doubts about the fundamentals of belief (e.g.Â 'does God exist?')
or repeated doubts about whether sins have been adequately confessed
('scruples').

Compulsions Compulsions are repetitive and seemingly purposeful
behaviours that are performed in a stereotyped way (hence the
alternative name, 'compulsive rituals') in response to an obsession.
They are accompanied by a subjective sense that the behaviour must be
carried out and by an urge to resist it. The compulsion usually makes
sense given the content of the obsession. For example, a compulsion to
wash the hands repeatedly is usually driven by obsessional thoughts that
the hands are contaminated. Sometimes obsessional ideas concern the
consequences of failing to carry out the compulsion in the 'correct'
way---for example, that another person will suffer an accident.
Compulsions may cause problems for several reasons. â

They may cause direct harm (e.g.Â dermatitis from excessive washing).

â

They may interfere with normal life because of the time they require.

â

Although the compulsive act transiently reduces the anxiety associated
with the obsession, in fact the compulsions help to maintain the
condition. Strategies to reduce them are central to behavioural
treatments of obsessive--compulsive disorder.

There are many kinds of compulsive acts, but four types are particularly
common.

â

Checking rituals are often concerned with safety---for example, checking
over and over again that the fire has been turned off, or that the doors
have been locked.

â

Cleaning rituals often take the form of repeated hand washing, but may
involve household cleaning.

â

Counting rituals usually involve counting in some special way---for
example, in threes---and are frequently associated with doubting
thoughts such that the count must be repeated to make sure that it was
carried out adequately in the first place. The counting is often silent,
so an onlooker may be unaware of the ritual.

â

In dressing rituals the person lays out clothes, or puts them on, in a
particular way or order. The ritual is often accompanied by doubting
thoughts that lead to seemingly endless repetition.

Overvalued ideas Overvalued ideas were first described by Wernicke in
1900, and were reviewed by McKenna (1984). An overvalued idea is a
comprehensible and understandable idea which is pursued beyond the
bounds of reason. It may preoccupy and dominate a person's life for many
years, and affect their actions. It therefore shares some
characteristics of delusions. However, it is essential to distinguish
the two types of belief, as their diagnostic implications are very
different. Overvalued ideas differ from delusions in two main ways. â

The content of, and basis for, the overvalued idea is usually
understandable when the person's background is known, whereas delusions
and the person's explanation of them tend to be bizarre. For example, a
person whose mother and sister suffered from cancer one after the other
may understandably become convinced that cancer is contagious.

â

The theme also tends to be culturally common and acceptable, as in the
overvalued ideas about body shape that characterize anorexia nervosa.

With an overvalued idea, there is a small degree of insight and
willingness to at least entertain alternative views, even though this is
not persistent and the patient always returns to and retains the belief.
Overvalued ideas must also be distinguished from obsessions. This is
usually easier than the distinction from delusions, since there is no
sense of intrusiveness or senselessness of the thought, nor is there
resistance to it. Overvalued ideas differ from normal religious beliefs
in that the latter are shared by a wider group, arise from religious
instruction, and are subject to periodic doubts. Despite these
differences, it can on occasion be difficult to recognize an overvalued
idea and distinguish

15

Descriptions of symptoms and signs it unequivocally from a delusion,
obsession, or normal belief. However, this should rarely lead to
practical problems, because diagnosis depends on more than the presence
or absence of a single symptom. The beliefs concerning body shape and
weight that are held in anorexia nervosa are perhaps the clearest
example of overvalued ideas. According to McKenna (1984), the term also
applies to abnormal beliefs in many other conditions, including
dysmorphophobia, hypochondriasis, paranoid personality disorder, and
morbid jealousy. However, it is important to emphasize that overvalued
ideas are defined by their form, not their content, and they have no
inviolable relationship with, or implication for, any particular
diagnostic category. Thus some cases of morbid jealousy are clearly
delusional, whereas in hypochondriasis or dysmorphophobia the belief
often has the character of an obsession or a worry, not of an overvalued
idea.

Disturbances of thinking processes Disturbances of the stream of thought
In disturbances of the stream of thought, the amount and speed of
thinking are changed. In pressure of thought, ideas arise in unusual
variety and abundance and pass through the mind rapidly. In poverty of
thought, the patient has few thoughts, and these lack variety and
richness and seem to move slowly through the mind. Pressure of thought
occurs in mania; poverty of thought occurs in depressive disorders.
Either may be experienced in schizophrenia. Given that the phenomena are
recognized through the person's use of language, they are also known as
pressure of speech or poverty of speech.

Thought block Sometimes the stream of thought is interrupted suddenly.
The patient feels that his mind has gone blank, and an observer notices
a sudden interruption in the patient's speech. In a minor degree this
experience is common, particularly when a person is tired, anxious, or
distracted. In thought blocking, the interruptions are sudden, striking,
and repeated, and are experienced by the patient as an abrupt and
complete emptying of his mind. Thought blocking is an important symptom,
as it strongly suggests schizophrenia. The diagnostic association with
schizophrenia is stronger when the patient interprets the experience in
an unusual way---for example, when he says that another person has
removed his thoughts.

Disorders of the form of thought Disorder of the form of thought (also
known as formal thought disorder) is usually recognized from speech and
writing, but is sometimes evident from the patient's behaviour---for
example, he may be unable to file papers under appropriate category
headings. Disorders of the form of thought can be divided into several
kinds, as described below. Each kind has associations with a particular
mental disorder, but none of the associations is strong enough to be
diagnostic.

Perseveration Perseveration is the persistent and inappropriate
repetition of the same thoughts. The disorder is detected by examining
the person's words or actions. Thus, in response to a series of simple
questions, the person may give the correct answer to the first question,
but continue to give the same answer inappropriately to subsequent
questions. Perseveration occurs in, but is not limited to, dementia and
frontal lobe injury.

Flight of ideas In flight of ideas, thoughts and speech move quickly
from one topic to another so that one train of thought is not carried to
completion before another takes its place. The normal logical sequence
of ideas is generally preserved, although ideas may be linked by
distracting cues in the surroundings and by distractions arising from
the words that have been spoken. These verbal distractions are of three
kinds, namely clang associations (a second word with a sound similar to
the first), puns (a second meaning of the first word), and rhymes. In
practice, it is difficult to distinguish between flight of ideas and
loosening of associations (see below), especially when the patient
speaks rapidly. When this happens it is often helpful to record a sample
of speech. Flight of ideas is characteristic of mania.

Loosening of associations This denotes a loss of the normal structure of
thinking. To the interviewer the patient's discourse seems muddled,
illogical, or tangential to the matter in hand. It does not become
clearer when the patient is questioned further; indeed, the interviewer
has the experience that the more he tries to clarify the patient's
thinking (or the longer he allows the patient to speak without
interruption), the less he understands it. Several specific features of
this muddled thinking have been described, but they are difficult to
identify with certainty, and the most striking clinical impression is
often a general lack of clarity, best described by recording an example
of the speech and the impression made on the interviewer. This lack

15

16

16

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders of clarity differs
from that of people who are anxious or of low intelligence. Anxious
people give a more coherent account when they have been put at ease, and
people with low intelligence usually express their ideas more clearly
when the interviewer simplifies the questions and allows more time for
the reply. Three characteristic kinds of loosening of associations have
been described, all of which are seen most often in schizophrenia. â

In talking past the point (Vorbeireden) the patient seems always about
to get to the endpoint of the topic in question, but then skirts round
it and never in fact reaches it.

â

Knight's move or derailment refers to a transition from one topic to
another, either between sentences or in mid-sentence, with no logical
relationship between the two topics and no evidence of the associations
described above under flight of ideas.

â

Verbigeration is said to be present when speech is reduced to the
senseless repetition of sounds, words, or phrases. This abnormality can
occur with severe expressive aphasia and occasionally in schizophrenia.
When this abnormality is extreme, the disorder is called word salad.

Other disorders of thinking Overinclusion refers to a widening of the
boundaries of concepts, such that things are grouped together which are
not normally regarded as closely connected. Neologisms are words or
phrases invented by the patient, often to describe a morbid experience.
Neologisms must be distinguished from incorrect pronunciation, the wrong
use of words by people with limited education, dialect words, obscure
technical terms, and the 'private words' that some families invent for
their own use. Before deciding that a word is a neologism, the
interviewer should ask the patient what he means by it. Neologisms occur
most often in chronic schizophrenia.

Depersonalization and derealization Depersonalization is a change of
self-awareness such that the person feels unreal, detached from his own
experience, and unable to feel emotion (Sierra and David, 2011).
Derealization is a similar change in relation to the environment, such
that objects appear unreal and people appear as lifeless two-dimensional
'cardboard' figures. Despite the complaint of inability to feel emotion,
both depersonalization and derealization are described

as highly unpleasant experiences. These central features are often
accompanied by other morbid experiences, including changes in the
experience of time, changes in the body image (e.g.Â a feeling that a
limb has altered in size or shape), and occasionally a feeling of being
outside one's own body and observing one's own actions, often from
above. Because patients find it difficult to describe the feelings of
depersonalization and derealization, they often resort to metaphor, and
this can lead to confusion between depersonalization and delusional
ideas. For example, a patient may say that he feels 'as if part of my
brain had stopped working', or 'as if the people I meet are lifeless
creatures'. Sometimes careful questioning is required to make the
distinction; the 'as if' quality is a useful discriminator.
Depersonalization and derealization are experienced quite commonly by
healthy people---especially when they are tired---as transient phenomena
of abrupt onset (Sedman, 1970). The symptoms have been reported after
sleep deprivation and sensory deprivation, and as an effect of
hallucinogenic drugs. They occur in anxiety disorders, post-traumatic
stress disorder, depressive disorders, schizophrenia, and temporal lobe
epilepsy. There is also a rarely used diagnostic category of
depersonalization--derealization syndrome.

Motor symptoms and signs Abnormalities of social behaviour, facial
expression, and posture occur frequently in mental disorders of all
kinds; motor symptoms and signs can also be side effects of medication.
They are considered in Chapter 3, where the examination of the patient
is described. Motor slowing and agitation, which are important features
of depressive disorder, are discussed in Chapter 9. With the exception
of tics, the specific symptoms listed here are mainly observed in
schizophrenia, particularly catatonic schizophrenia (see page 256). â

Tics are irregular repeated movements involving a group of muscles---for
example, sideways movement of the head or the raising of one shoulder.

â

Mannerisms are repeated movements that appear to have some functional
significance---for example, saluting.

â

Stereotypies are repeated movements that are regular (unlike tics) and
without obvious significance (unlike mannerisms)---for example, rocking
to and fro.

â

Catatonia is a state of increased muscle tone that affects extension and
flexion and is abolished by voluntary movement.

17

Descriptions of symptoms and signs â

Catalepsy (waxy flexibility, flexibilitas cerea) is a term used to
describe the tonus in catatonia. It is detected when a patient's limbs
can be placed in a position in which they then remain for long periods
while at the same time muscle tone is uniformly increased. Patients with
this abnormality sometimes maintain the head a little way above the
pillow in a position that a healthy person could not maintain without
extreme discomfort (psychological pillow). Catalepsy should not be
confused with cataplexy (see page 327).

â

Posturing is the adoption of unusual bodily postures continuously for a
long time. The posture may appear to have a symbolic meaning
(e.g.Â standing with both arms outstretched as if being crucified), or
may have no apparent significance (for example, standing on one leg).

â

Grimacing has the same meaning as in everyday speech. The term
Schnauzkrampf (snout cramp or spasm) denotes pouting of the lips to
bring them closer to the nose.

â

Negativism. Patients are said to show negativism when they do the
opposite of what is asked, and actively resist efforts to persuade them
to comply.

â

Echopraxia occurs when the patient imitates the interviewer's movement
automatically, even when asked not to do so.

â

Mitgehen (going along with) describes another kind of excessive
compliance in which the patient's limbs can be moved into any position
with the slightest pressure.

â

Ambitendence. Patients are said to exhibit ambitendence when they
alternate between opposite movements---for example, putting out the arm
to shake hands, then withdrawing it, extending it again, and so on
repeatedly.

Disturbances of the body image The body image or body schema is a
person's subjective representation against which the integrity of their
body is judged and the movement and positioning of its parts assessed.
Specific abnormalities of the body image arise in neurological
disorders. These abnormalities include the awareness of a phantom limb
after amputation, unilateral lack of awareness or neglect (usually
following stroke), hemiasomatognosia (in which the person feels,
incorrectly, that a limb is missing), and anosognosia (lack of awareness
of loss of function, often of hemiplegia). These abnormalities are
described in textbooks of neurology and in David et al.Â (2009a).

Distorted awareness of size and shape of the body occurs occasionally in
healthy people when they are tired or falling asleep. The experience,
which includes feelings that a limb is enlarging, becoming smaller, or
otherwise being distorted, also occurs in migraine, as part of the aura
of epilepsy, and after taking LSD. The person is aware that the
experience is unreal. However, changes in the shape and size of body
parts are described by some schizophrenic patients, and in this instance
the symptoms are delusional or hallucinatory and there is no insight.
Coenestopathic states are localized distortions of body awareness---for
example, when the nose feels as if it is made of cotton wool. A general
distortion of the body image occurs in anorexia nervosa, where the
patient is convinced that they are fat when in fact they are
underweight, sometimes to the point of emaciation. The reduplication
phenomenon is the experience that the body has doubled, or that part of
the body has done so---for example, that there are two left arms. The
experience is reported very occasionally in migraine, temporal lobe
epilepsy, and schizophrenia. The related experience of autoscopic
hallucinations was described on page 7.

Disturbances of the self The experience of self has several aspects. It
is more than the awareness of the body; we have a feeling of unity
between the various aspects of the self, we recognize our activities as
our own, we recognize a boundary between the self and the outside world,
and we have a feeling of continuity between our past and present selves.
The concept of self is closely related to, but distinct from, that of
the body image. Although the body image is usually experienced as part
of the self, it can also be experienced in a more objective way, as when
we say 'my leg hurts'. Some of these aspects of the self are changed in
certain psychiatric disorders. The experiences are often associated with
other abnormal phenomena, so that the account of abnormalities of the
self overlaps with several other parts of this chapter.

Disturbances concerned with activities We take it for granted that,
other than in a metaphorical or religious sense, our actions are our
own. Patients with delusions of control (see page 11) lose this
awareness. They have the experience that thoughts are not their own and
believe instead that these have been inserted from outside. Some
patients lose the conviction that their actions are their own, and
believe instead that they have been imposed by an outside agency.

17

18

18

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders

Disturbed awareness of the unity of the self Some patients lose the
normal experience of existing as a unified being. Patients with
dissociative identity disorder (see page 655) have the experience of
existing as two or more selves, alternating at different times. In the
experience of autoscopy and the related experience of the Doppelganger
(see page 7), the person experiences two selves, present at the same
time, but with the conviction that each is a version of the self.

Disturbances of the unity of the self Although we recognize that we
change over time, we retain a conviction of being the same person.
Rarely, this feeling of continuity is lost in schizophrenia. For
example, a patient may say that he is a different person from the one
who existed before the disorder began, or that a new self has taken over
from the old one.

Disturbances of the boundaries of the self This type of disorder is
experienced by some people after taking LSD or other drugs, who may
report that they felt as if they were dissolving. Hallucinations can be
regarded as involving a loss of awareness of what is within the self and
what is located outside. The same inability to determine what is part of
the self, and what is not, is seen in passivity phenomena, in which
actions willed by the patient are experienced as initiated from outside.

Disturbances of memory The features of memory disturbance and its
assessment are discussed in detail in Chapters 3 and 14. In this chapter
we introduce some key terms and concepts. Failure of memory is called
amnesia. The related term dysmnesia is occasionally used. Paramnesia is
distortion of memory. Several kinds of disturbed memory occur in
psychiatric disorders, and it is usual to describe them in terms of the
temporal stages that approximate crudely to the scheme of memory derived
from psychological research. A discussion of this subject can be found
in textbooks of neuropsychology or in David et al. (2009a,b). â

Immediate memory concerns the retention of information over a short
period, measured in minutes. It is tested clinically by asking the
patient to remember a novel name and address and to recall it about 5
minutes later.

â

Recent memory concerns events that have taken place in the past few
days. It is tested clinically by asking about events in the patient's
daily life which

are known also to the interviewer directly or via an informant (for
example, what the patient has eaten) or in the wider environment (for
example, wellknown news items). â

Long-term (remote) memory concerns events that have occurred over longer
periods of time. It is tested by asking about events before the presumed
onset of memory disorder.

When testing any state of memory, a distinction is made between
spontaneous recall and recognition of information. In some conditions,
patients who cannot recall information can recognize it correctly.
Memory loss most commonly occurs in dementia and delirum. It usually
affects recall of recent events more than recall of distant ones. In
dementia, it usually progresses with time and becomes severe, but is
rarely total. Some organic conditions give rise to an interesting
partial effect known as amnestic disorder, in which the person is unable
to remember events that occurred a few minutes earlier, but can recall
remote events (see page 354). Total loss of all memory, or selective
loss of personal identity, strongly suggests psychogenic causes (see
below) or malingering. Some patients with memory disorder recall more
when given cues. When this happens, it suggests that the disorder is
concerned at least in part with retrieval. After a period of
unconsciousness, memory is impaired for the interval between the ending
of complete unconsciousness and the restoration of full consciousness
(anterograde amnesia). Some causes of unconsciousness (e.g.Â head injury
and electroconvulsive therapy) also lead to inability to recall events
before the onset of unconsciousness (retrograde amnesia).

Disturbances of recognition Several disorders of recognition occur
occasionally in neurological and psychiatric disorders. â

Jamais vu is the failure to recognize events that have been encountered
before.

â

DÃ©jÃ  vu is the conviction that an event is repeating one that has been
experienced in the past, when in fact it is novel.

â

Confabulation is the confident recounting of quite false 'memories' for
recent events, and is characteristic of amnestic syndrome. For example,
a patient with no memory of what they ate for breakfast may confabulate
a completely incorrect menu. This is done in a plausible manner without
any apparent difficulty, and without any awareness of the falsity of the
information.

19

Descriptions of symptoms and signs Recall of events can be biased by the
mood at the time of recall. Importantly, in depressive disorders,
memories of unhappy events are recalled more readily than other events,
a process which adds to the patient's low mood.

â

Clouding of consciousness refers to a state that ranges from barely
perceptible impairment to definite drowsiness in which the person reacts
incompletely to stimuli. Attention, concentration, and memory are
impaired to varying degrees, and orientation is disturbed. Thinking
appears to be muddled, and events may be interpreted inaccurately.
Clouding of consciousness is a defining feature of delirium.

â

Stupor, in the sense used in psychiatry, refers to a condition in which
the patient is immobile, mute, and unresponsive, but appears to be fully
conscious in that the eyes are usually open and follow external objects.
If the eyes are closed, the patient resists attempts to open them.
Reflexes are normal and resting posture is maintained. Stupor may occur
in catatonia (see page 16). Note that in neurology the term 'stupor' is
used differently and generally implies an impairment of consciousness.

â

Confusion means an inability to think clearly. It occurs
characteristically in states of impaired consciousness, but it can occur
when consciousness is normal. In delirium, confusion occurs together
with partial impairment (clouding) of consciousness, along with other
features. In the past, delirium was called a confusional state, with the
result that the term 'confusion' was used to mean impairment of
consciousness as well as muddled thinking.

Psychogenic amnesia This is thought to result from an active process of
repression which prevents the recall of memories that would otherwise
evoke unpleasant emotions. The ideas arose from the study of
dissociative amnesia (see page 654), but the same factors may play a
part in some cases of organic amnesia, helping to explain why the return
of some memories is delayed longer than that of others.

False memory syndrome It is a matter of dispute whether memories can be
repressed completely but return many years later. The question arises
most often when memories of sexual abuse are reported during
psychotherapy by a person who had no recollection of the events before
the psychotherapy began, and the events are strongly denied by the
alleged abusers. Many clinicians consider that these recollections have
been 'implanted' by overzealous questioning, while others contend that
they are true memories that have previously been completely repressed.
Those who hold the latter opinion point to evidence that memories of
events other than child abuse can sometimes be completely lost and then
regained, and also that some recovered memories of child abuse are
corroborated subsequently by independent evidence (for review, see
Brewin, 2000). Although the quality of the evidence has been questioned,
the possibility of complete and sustained repression of memories has not
been ruled out. However, it seems likely that only a small minority of
cases of 'recovered memory syndrome' can be explained in this way.

Disturbances of consciousness Consciousness is awareness of the self and
the environment. The level of consciousness can vary between the
extremes of alertness and coma. The quality of consciousness can also
vary: sleep differs from unconsciousness, as does stupor. â

Coma is the most extreme form of impaired consciousness. The patient
shows no external evidence of mental activity, and little motor activity
other than breathing. He does not respond even to strong stimuli. Coma
can be graded by the extent of the remaining reflex responses and by the
type of EEG activity.

Other terms that are used to describe states of impaired consciousness
include the following: â

oneiroid states, in which there is dream-like imagery although the
person is not asleep; if prolonged, this may be called a twilight state

â

torpor, in which the patient appears drowsy, readily falls asleep, and
shows evidence of slow thinking and narrowed range of perception.

In addition, there are sleep--wake disorders that can present with
impaired consciousness, such as narcolepsy, in which there are often
recurrent, sudden, brief collapses owing to loss of muscle tone
(cataplexy).

Disturbances of attention and concentration Attention is the ability to
focus on the matter in hand. Concentration is the ability to maintain
that focus. The ability to focus on a selected part of the information
reaching the brain is important in many everyday situations---for
example, when conversing in a noisy place. It is also important to be
able to attend to more

19

20

20

Chapter 1 Signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders than one source of
information at the same time---for example, when conversing while
driving a car. Attention and concentration may be impaired in a wide
variety of psychiatric disorders, including depressive disorders, mania,
anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, and organic disorders. Therefore the
finding of abnormalities of attention and concentration does not assist
in diagnosis. Nevertheless, these abnormalities are important in
management. For example, they affect patients' ability to give or
receive information when interviewed, and can interfere with a patient's
ability to work, drive a car, or take part in leisure activities.

conceptualized in terms of 'impaired reality testing' or 'reality
distortion' (see Chapter 11). Insight is not simply present or absent.
It has several facets, each being a matter of degree. â

Is the patient aware of phenomena that others have observed (e.g.Â that
he is unusually active and elated)?

â

If so, does he recognize the phenomena as abnormal (rather than, for
example, maintaining that his unusual activity and cheerfulness are due
to normal high spirits)?

â

If so, does he consider that the phenomena are caused by mental illness
(as opposed to, say, a physical illness or poison administered by
enemies)?

â

If so, does he think that he needs treatment?

Insight In psychopathology, the term insight refers to awareness of
morbid change in oneself and a correct attitude to this change,
including, in appropriate cases, a realization that it signifies a
mental disorder. This awareness is difficult for a patient to achieve,
since it involves some knowledge of what are the limits of normal mental
functioning and mental experience. Furthermore, insight has to be
assessed against the background of knowledge and beliefs about
psychiatric disorder---it is not the same as complete agreement with the
views of the doctor. Insight is also influenced by cultural and
cognitive factors (Saravanan et al., 2004; Nair et al., 2014). Although,
in the past, lack of insight was said to be a feature that distinguishes
between psychosis (where it was said to be absent) and neurosis (where
it is present), this distinction is no longer thought to be reliable or
useful. The 'lack of insight' in psychosis is better

The answers to these questions are more informative and more reliable
than those of the single question as to whether insight is present or
not. The value of determining the degree of insight is that it helps to
predict whether the patient is likely to accept the need for help and
treatment. In discussions of psychotherapy, insight has a different
meaning from that considered so far which is used in general psychiatry.
In psychotherapy, insight is the capacity to understand one's own
motives and to be aware of previously unconscious aspects of mental
activity. The term intellectual insight is sometimes used to denote the
capacity to formulate this understanding, whereas the term emotional
insight refers to the capacity to feel and respond to the understanding.
For review of insight, see Landi et al.Â (2016).

Further reading Berrios GE (1996). The History of Mental Symptoms.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. (A fascinating history of
descriptive psychopathology.) Jaspers K (1963). General Psychopathology
(translated from the 7th German edition by J Hoenig and MW Hamilton).
Manchester

University Press, Manchester. (The classic work on the subject. Chapter
1 is particularly valuable.) Oyebode F (2014). Sims' Symptoms in the
Mind: an introduction to descriptive psychopathology, 5th edn. Saunders,
London. (A comprehensive and readable modern text.)

21

CHAPTER 2

Classification Introduction 21

Reliability and validity 29

Concepts of mental illness 22

Current psychiatric classifications 30

Criticisms of classification 24

Current and future issues in psychiatric

The history of classification 26 Organizing principles of contemporary

classification 32 Classification in this book 34

classifications 26

Introduction Chapter 1 outlined the symptoms and signs of psychiatric
disorder. In Chapter 3 we describe the psychiatric assessment, by which
these symptoms and signs are elicited, interpreted, and used as the
basis upon which psychiatric diagnoses are made. Before doing so, in
this chapter we discuss the principles of psychiatric diagnosis and
classification, since this provides the framework within which this
clinical process happens. The term nosology is sometimes used to refer
to classification and its study. Classification is needed in psychiatry
for several purposes: â

to enable clinicians to communicate with one another about the diagnoses
given to their patients

â

to aid patients and their families, by allowing clinicians to provide a
framework for them to understand their symptoms and difficulties, and
for proposed treatments

â

to understand the implications of these diagnoses in terms of their
symptoms, prognosis, and treatment, and sometimes their aetiology

â

to relate the findings of clinical research to patients seen in everyday
practice

â

to facilitate epidemiological studies and the collection of reliable
statistics

â

to ensure that research can be conducted with comparable groups of
subjects.

Of these, the first four are the most relevant to clinical practice.
Indeed, it is difficult to imagine, or justify, how psychiatry could be
practised in any reasonable or evidence-based manner without the order
that classification provides (Craddock and MynorsWallis, 2014). In this
respect, the position of classification as one of the fundamental and
essential 'building blocks' of psychiatry is no different from that in
the rest of medicine. However, in other respects psychiatric
classification does raise particular challenges and controversies,
largely as a consequence of the uncertain aetiology, or independent
biological validation, of most disorders, which means that its
diagnostic categories are almost entirely syndromal---a collection of
symptoms and signs. The resulting difficulties are of two kinds. The
first is conceptual, relating to the nature of mental illness and the
question of what, if anything, should be classified. The second
difficulty is a practical one, concerning how categories are defined and
organized into a classificatory scheme. In this chapter, the conceptual
issues and criticisms are covered first, followed by a historical
perspective to classification. We then describe and compare the

2

22

Chapter 2 Classification two schemes in widespread use at present,
namely Chapter V of the International Classification of Diseases, 10th
edition (ICD-10; World Health Organization,

1992b), and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
5th edition (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013a).

Concepts of mental illness In everyday speech the word 'illness' is used
loosely. Similarly, in psychiatric practice the term 'mental illness' is
used with little precision, and often synonymously with 'mental
disorder'. In this context, the terms 'mental' and 'psychiatric' are
also used interchangeably. A good definition of mental illness is
difficult to achieve, for both practical and philosophical reasons, as
outlined here. In routine clinical work the difficulty is important
mainly in relation to ethical and legal issues, such as compulsory
admission to hospital. In forensic psychiatry the definition of mental
illness (by the law) is particularly important in the assessment of
issues such as criminal responsibility. Diverse discussion of the
concepts of mental illness can be found in Lazare (1973), Kendell
(1975), Zachar and Kendler (2007), and Tyrer (2013).

available, it becomes more likely that the condition will be regarded as
a disease (Campbell et al., 1979). â

Biological disadvantage. The idea of defining disease in terms of
biological disadvantage was proposed by Scadding (1967), and is the most
extreme biomedical view of disease. Scadding never defined biological
disadvantage, but the term has been used in psychiatry to include
decreased fertility (reproductive fitness) and increased mortality.
Viewing disease in terms of 'evolutionary disadvantage' is a similar
concept (Wakefield, 1992).

â

Pathological process. Some extreme theorists, most notably Szasz (1960),
take the view that illness can be defined only in terms of physical
pathology. Since most mental disorders do not have demonstrable physical
pathology, according to this view they are not illnesses. Szasz takes
the further step of asserting that most mental disorders are therefore
not the province of doctors. This kind of argument can be sustained only
by taking an extremely narrow view of pathology. It is also arbitrary,
based on current knowledge, and is increasingly incompatible with the
evidence of a genetic and neurobiological basis to the major psychiatric
disorders, and their associated morbidity and mortality.

â

Presence of suffering. This approach has some practical value because it
defines a group of people who are likely to consult doctors. A
disadvantage is that the term cannot be applied to everyone who would
usually be regarded as ill in everyday terms. For example, patients with
mania may feel unusually well and may not experience suffering, although
most people would regard them as mentally ill.

Definitions of mental illness Many attempts have been made to define
mental illness, none of which is satisfactory or uniformly accepted. A
common approach is to examine the concept of illness in general medicine
and to identify any similarities or analogies with mental illness. In
general medicine there are five types of definition: â

â

Absence of health. This approach changes the emphasis of the problem but
does not solve it, because health is even more difficult to define. The
World Health Organization, for example, defined health as 'a state of
complete physical, mental and social well-being, and not merely the
absence of disease or infirmity.' As Lewis (1953) rightly commented, 'a
definition could hardly be more comprehensive than that, or more
meaningless.' Many other definitions of health have been proposed, all
equally unsatisfactory. Disease is what doctors treat. This definition
has the attraction of simplicity, but does not really address the issue.
The notion that disease is what doctors can treat has somewhat more
merit, since there is evidence that, as a medical treatment for a
condition becomes

Biomedical versus social concepts The above concepts may be divided into
those that view mental illnesses in purely biomedical terms, and those
that consider them to be social constructs or value judgements. This
debate is still ongoing, and depends in part on one's opinion about
their

23

Concepts of mental illness aetiology, but it is now generally accepted
that value judgements play a part in all diagnoses, even if the
disorders themselves are considered from a biomedical perspective
(Fulford, 1989). For example, beliefs and emotions are central to most
psychiatric disorders, yet it is a value judgement as to whether a given
belief or emotion is 'reasonable' or 'unhelpful' for a given individual
in their particular social context, and therefore what, if any,
diagnostic significance it has. Would we use 'useful' or 'dysfunctional'
to decide whether a belief was 'illness'? Would 'normal' or 'abnormal'
be better?

Impairment, disability, and handicap It is useful in medicine, and
particularly in psychiatry, to describe and classify the consequences of
a disorder. This approach is related to the concept of disease as
involving dysfunction (Wakefield, 1992), as incorporated into the
definitions of mental disorder used in ICD-10 and DSM5 (see below).
Three related terms, derived from medical sociology and social
psychology, are used to describe the harmful consequences of a disorder.
â

Impairment refers to a pathological example, hemiparesis after a stroke.

defect---for

â

Disability is the limitation of physical or psychological function that
arises from an impairment---for example, difficulties with self-care
that are caused by the hemiparesis.

â

Handicap refers to the resulting social dysfunction--- for example,
being unable to work because of the hemiparesis.

Incapacity may be seen as another harmful consequence of illness,
although the term usually refers in a legal sense to the effect that
illness has on one's competence to make treatment decisions, as
enshrined in the United Kingdom by the Mental Capacity Act (see Chapter
4).

Diagnoses, diseases, and disorders The term 'diagnosis' has two somewhat
different meanings. It has the general meaning of 'telling one thing
apart from another', but in medicine it has also acquired a more
specific meaning of 'knowing the underlying cause' of the symptoms and
signs about which the patient is complaining. Underlying causes are
expressed in quite different terms from the symptoms. For example, the
symptoms of acute appendicitis

are distinct from the idea that will form in the mind of the doctor that
the appendix is inflamed and producing peritoneal irritation. To be able
to make a diagnosis of this type is, of course, satisfying for the
doctor and useful for the patient, since it immediately suggests what
investigations and treatment are needed. Its clear utility also makes
redundant most theoretical or philosophical concerns about
classification. Unfortunately, for most psychiatric patients it is
rarely possible to arrive at this type of diagnosis, the only exception
to this being, by definition, 'organic' psychiatric disorders (see page
26). The lack of clear disease categories, in a medical sense, has led
to the use of the more general term 'disorder'. The definition of a
psychiatric disorder in ICD-10 is: ...a clinically recognizable set of
symptoms or behaviour associated in most cases with distress and with
interference with personal functions. Social deviance or conflict alone,
without personal dysfunction, should not be included in mental disorder
as defined here. (World Health Organization, 1992b, p.Â 5).

The DSM-5 definition of a mental disorder is longer but similar: ...a
syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance in an
individual's cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that reflects a
dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes
underlying mental functioning. Mental disorders are usually associated
with significant distress or disability in social, occupational, or
other important activities. An expectable or culturally acceptable
response to a common stressor or loss, such as the death of a loved one,
is not a mental disorder. Socially deviant behavior (e.g.Â political,
religious, or sexual) and conflicts that are primarily between the
individual and society are not mental disorders unless the deviance or
conflict results from a dysfunction in the individual, as described
above. (American Psychiatric Association, 2013a, p.Â 20).

Despite the similarity, there is an important difference between the two
definitions. 'Interference with personal functions' in ICD-10 refers
only to such things as personal care and one's immediate environment,
and does not extend to interference with work and other social roles. In
DSM-5, as in the extract above, impairment refers to all types of
functioning. Both definitions illustrate that most psychiatric disorders
are based not upon theoretical concepts, or presumptions about
aetiology, but upon recognizable clusters of symptoms and behaviours.
This reliance explains much of the debate about the reliability and
validity of the categories being classified, as will be discussed later
in this chapter.

23

24

24

Chapter 2 Classification

Criticisms of classification In contrast to the view that classification
is an essential, albeit insufficient and imperfect, basis for clinical
practice (Craddock and Mynors-Wallis, 2014; Tyrer, 2014), the use of
psychiatric classification is sometimes criticized as being
inappropriate or even harmful. In part, such criticisms arise from the
various controversies outlined above: if the concept of mental disorder
is itself disputed, then so will any classifications thereof. These
criticisms were most prevalent and trenchant at the height of the
'anti-psychiatry' movement in the 1960s, although they continue to be
voiced by a vociferous 'critical psychiatry' lobby (Bracken et al.,
2012). Three main criticisms of this kind are made. â

Allocating patients to a diagnostic category distracts from the
understanding of their unique personal difficulties. However, the good
clinician always considers and takes into account a patient's unique
experiences, qualities, and circumstances when making diagnoses, not
least because this contextual information often affects treatment and
prognosis.

â

Allocating a person to a diagnostic category is simply to label deviant
behaviour as illness. Some sociologists have argued that such labelling
serves only to increase the person's difficulties. There can be no doubt
that terms such as epilepsy or schizophrenia attract stigma (see Box
2.1, but this does not lessen the reality of disorders that cause
suffering and require treatment. However, it does emphasize that mental
illness should not be defined solely in terms of socially deviant
behaviour. The presence of the former must be separately established
based on the psychiatric history and mental state examination. Moreover,
if mental illness is inferred from socially deviant behaviour alone,
political abuse may result. A serious example of the latter occurred in
the former Soviet Union, where some psychiatrists colluded with the
government in being willing to classify political dissent as evidence of
mental illness. A further reason for excluding purely social criteria
from the definition of mental illness, and from diagnostic criteria, is
that many behaviours are appraised differently in different countries
and at different times. For example, homosexuality was considered to be
a mental disorder in the United Kingdom until the 1970s.

â

Individuals do not fit neatly into the available categories. Although it
is not feasible to classify a minority of disorders (or patients), this
is not a reason for abandoning classification for the majority.

It is certainly true that at times classification has been
inappropriately used as part of a broader abuse of psychiatry, whether
for political, financial, or other reasons. Although such abuses are
fortunately rare, they are an extreme illustration of the fact that
making diagnoses and classifying patients are not neutral acts, but
carry significant ethical and other implications (see Chapter 4). One of
these implications concerns stigma, which remains a serious problem for
patients with mental health problems, even if one does not accept the
rest of the sociological thesis outlined above. It is incumbent on all
those who use psychiatric diagnostic terms that they do so appropriately
and judiciously, paying due attention to their correct usage and
purpose, and the context in which they are being applied. Doing so can
help to reduce the problem of stigmatization, but cannot solve it,
because stigma results from many other factors too (Thornicroft, 2006).
The issue of stigma in psychiatry is discussed in Box 2.1. Although
these criticisms are important, they are arguments only against the
improper use of, or overreliance upon, classification. Disorders and
their harmful consequences cannot be made to disappear by ceasing to
give names to them. ICD-10 and DSM-5, to be discussed later, emphasize
that classification is a means of communication and a guide to
decisionmaking, but acknowledge that they are provisional and imperfect
schemes. Psychiatrists, other mental health professionals, and
researchers must use their clinical experience and common sense, as well
as being guided by the descriptions of the disorders that make up the
classifications. Other criticisms of classification in psychiatry are
mostly concerned with the specifics rather than the principles---for
example, whether a particular diagnostic category is reliable and valid,
and the severity threshold at which the diagnosis should be made. These
issues are introduced later in this chapter, and at various points
throughout the book.

25

Criticisms of classification

Box 2.1 Stigma People stigmatize others when they judge them not on
their personal qualities but on the basis of a mark or label which
assigns them to a feared or unfavoured group. The tendency to stigmatize
seems to be deeply rooted in human nature as a way of responding to
people who appear or behave differently. Stigmatization is based on fear
that those who seem different may behave in threatening or unpredictable
ways, and it is reduced when it becomes clear that the stigmatized
person is unlikely to behave in these ways.

Stigma in psychiatry People fear mental illness and they stigmatize
those who are affected by it. The reasons for this are complex. They
include the notion that people with mental illness cannot control their
own behaviour, and that they may act in odd, unpredictable, and possibly
violent ways. Thus they are seen as directly threatening, and perhaps
also as indirectly threatening because their lack of self-control
threatens our belief in our ability to control our actions. Whatever the
underlying psychological mechanisms, fear of mental illness makes people
react to mentally ill individuals in the same cautious and unfavourable
way---that is, to stigmatize them. Diagnoses, as labels, have the
potential to be stigmatizing (e.g.Â leprosy and AIDS). It has been
suggested that the stigma of mental illness would be reduced if
diagnoses such as schizophrenia were abandoned. This proposal misses the
point that the basis of stigma is fear, and that simply removing the
label does not reduce the fear. The mentally ill were stigmatized long
before modern diagnostic terms were in use, and people who fear mental
illness invent their own labels, such as 'nutter', which are far more
stigmatizing than a diagnosis. To reduce stigma it is necessary to
reduce fear, and this requires accurate information about mental illness
and better understanding of mentally ill people. Psychiatric stigma
arises from a number of false beliefs. For example, concern about
dangerousness is a major component of psychiatric stigma. Other
important components are ideas that: â people with mental illness are
unpredictable â people with mental illness feel different from the rest
of us

people with mental illness are hard to talk and relate to mental illness
cannot be cured, and people with mental illness do not recover. These
beliefs make people draw back from those with mental illness and
discourage them from engaging in social relationships. Consequently they
do not learn that their assumptions are wrong. In the same way, fear of
being stigmatized adds greatly to the problems of people with mental
illness. It discourages them from seeking help at an early stage, and
from sharing their distress with relatives and friends. Stigma also has
wider social effects---for example, it makes it harder for mentally ill
people to obtain work. Stigmatization may also affect the allocation of
resources for the care of people with mental illness, with a reluctance
to fund care in the community or to give appropriate priority to mental
health services generally.

â â

Reducing stigma Campaigns to reduce stigma generally include: â
information about the true nature of mental illness, and about the low
frequency of dangerous behaviour â encouragement to persuade public
figures who have had a mental illness to speak out about their
experiences â a focus on young people, whose attitudes may be less fixed
than those of their elders. Although stigma can be reduced, this cannot
be done easily or quickly. In the past, people with epilepsy were
stigmatized, but as knowledge of the condition spread and as treatment
improved, attitudes gradually changed. Changes are now beginning to be
seen in the stigma attached to some psychiatric disorders. For example,
autism is now generally a much less stigmatizing term than it was
previously, whereas schizophrenia is not. Thus there is an ongoing need
for public education campaigns to reduce the fear and misunderstanding
that perpetuate stigma. However, existing anti-stigma programmes have
had only modest benefits (Griffiths et al., 2014). For reviews of stigma
and its reduction, see Sartorius et al.Â (2010) and Henderson et
al.Â (2013).

25

26

26

Chapter 2 Classification

The history of classification Efforts to classify abnormal mental states
have occurred since antiquity. One reason for including a chronological
perspective here is that contemporary psychiatric classifications are,
in part, a 'hybrid' of various historical themes and opinions. The early
Greek medical writings contained descriptions of different
manifestations of mental disorder--- for example, excitement,
depression, confusion, and memory loss. This simple classification was
adopted by Roman medicine and developed by the Greek physician Galen,
whose system of classification remained in use until the eighteenth
century. Interest in the classification of natural phenomena developed
in the eighteenth century, partly stimulated by the publication of a
classification of plants by Linnaeus, a medically qualified professor of
botany who also devised a less well-known classification of diseases in
which one major class was mental disorders. Many classifications were
proposed, notably one published in 1772 by William Cullen, a Scottish
physician. He grouped mental disorders together, apart from delirium,
which he classified with febrile conditions. According to his scheme,
mental disorders were part of a broad class of 'neuroses', a term that
he used to denote diseases which affect the nervous system (Hunter and
MacAlpine, 1963). Cullen's classification contained an aetiological
principle---that mental illnesses were disorders of the nervous
system---as well as a descriptive principle for distinguishing
individual clinical syndromes within the neuroses. In Cullen's usage,
the term neurosis covered the whole range of mental disorders, as well
as many neurological conditions. The modern narrower usage developed
later (see page 27). In the early nineteenth century, several French
writers published influential classifications. Pinel's Treatise on
Insanity, which appeared in English in 1806, divided

mental disorders into mania with delirium, mania without delirium,
melancholia, dementia, and idiocy. Pinel's compatriot, Esquirol, wrote
another widely read textbook, which was published in English in 1845,
and added a new category, 'monomania', characterized by 'partial
insanity', in which there were fixed false ideas that could not be
changed by logical reasoning (i.e. delusions). Like other psychiatrists
of the time, Pinel and Esquirol did not discuss neuroses (in the modern
sense), because these conditions were generally treated by physicians.
Meanwhile, in Germany, Kahlbaum formulated two requirements for research
on nosology, namely that the total clinical picture, and its entire
course, were both fundamental to the definition of a mental illness and
thus to classification. These ideas were adopted at the end of the
nineteenth century by Emil Kraepelin, who used these criteria to make
the landmark distinction between manic--depressive psychosis (bipolar
disorder) and schizophrenia. Successive editions of Kraepelin's textbook
made further refinements to the classification of mental illness, which
form the basis of today's systems. At the same time, separate
developments in the emerging specialty of neurology led to decreasing
medical interest in the 'nervous patient', a term used throughout the
nineteenth century in the United Kingdom and North America to refer to a
large group of patients with varied complaints. These were gradually
seen as a part of the new specialty of psychiatry alongside the major
mental illnesses. The writings of Sigmund Freud and his contemporaries
led to greater recognition of the psychological causes of nervous
symptoms and 'neurotic' disorders, and to the modern concepts of
hysteria and anxiety disorder. For a review of nosological models in
psychiatry, see Pichot (1994) and Zachar and Kendler (2007).

Organizing principles of contemporary classifications As well as these
historical roots, it is worth considering the major issues that
contemporary classifications have faced with regard to their organizing
principles.

Organic and functional The first issue concerns the distinction that is
conventionally drawn between organic and functional

disorders. Organic disorders are those that arise from a demonstrable
cerebral or systemic pathological process; the core disorders are
dementia, delirium, and the various neuropsychiatric syndromes (David et
al., 2009). 'Functional disorder' is consequently an umbrella or default
term for all other psychiatric disorders. The organic--functional
dichotomy has two main implications for classification.

27

Organizing principles of contemporary classifications â

It has a philosophical dimension, being inextricably linked to dualism
and concepts of mind and body. At its extreme, the implication is that
functional disorders have no biological basis, whilst psychological and
social factors are irrelevant to organic disorders. This polarization
can be reflected in the apparent divide between psychiatry and
neurology. The same dualism may also unintentionally encourage
psychiatrists to be either 'mindless' or 'brainless', rather than seeing
that both aspects of aetiology always make a contribution (Eisenberg,
1986; Anonymous, 1994). Equally, it has led to the suggestion that the
two specialties should use a merged classificatory system (White et al.,
2012).

â

It has practical implications, since the term 'organic' defines
disorders aetiologically or pathologically, whereas all other
psychiatric disorders are, by default, purely descriptive and based on
clusters of symptoms and signs. This is not only unsatisfactory for
psychiatry (Arango and Fraguas, 2016) but leads to inconsistencies and
difficulties at the intersection; these are currently best illustrated
with regard to schizophrenia and organic schizophrenia-like disorders
(Chapter 11).

There is general agreement that, for these and other reasons, the
organic--functional dichotomy is neither valid nor helpful (Spitzer et
al., 1992). However, it has proved difficult to come up with an
alternative. The ways in which ICD-10 and DSM-5 deal with the issue are
discussed below and in Chapter 14.

Neurosis and psychosis In the past, the concepts of neurosis and
psychosis were important in most systems of classification. Although
neither is used as an organizing principle in ICD-10 or DSM-5, in
everyday clinical practice these terms are still useful as general
descriptors, so it is of relevance to understand their history.

Psychosis The term psychosis was suggested by Feuchtersleben, who in
1845 published a book entitled Principles of Medical Psychology. He
proposed the use of the term for severe mental disorders, whilst he used
the term neurosis for mental disorders as a whole. Thus he wrote that
'every psychosis is at the same time a neurosis, but not every neurosis
is a psychosis' (Hunter and MacAlpine, 1963, page 950). As the concept
of neurosis narrowed, psychosis (also used in the plural, psychoses)
came to be regarded as independent. Many of the difficulties encountered
today in defining the terms neurosis and psychosis are related to these
origins.

In modern usage, the term psychosis refers broadly to severe psychiatric
disorders, including schizophrenia, and some organic and affective
disorders. Numerous criteria have been proposed to achieve a more
precise definition, but there are problems with all of them. Greater
severity of illness is a common suggestion, but some cases are
relatively mild (and some neuroses are severe and at least as
disabling). Lack of insight is often suggested as a criterion, but
insight itself is difficult to define (see page 20). A somewhat more
straightforward criterion is the inability to distinguish between
subjective experience and external reality, as shown by the presence of
delusions and hallucinations. Indeed, the presence of a delusion is
sometimes regarded as sufficient to diagnose a psychosis. However, as
well as the problems involved in fully defining these terms (ICD-10 even
avoids defining delusion), the label 'psychosis' is unsatisfactory
because the conditions embraced by the term have little in common, and
it is usually more informative to classify the particular disorder
concerned. For these reasons, the neurosis--psychosis distinction, which
was a fundamental organizing principle, was abandoned in ICD-10 and
DSM-IV. Nevertheless, psychosis remains a convenient term for disorders
that are usually severe, and which feature delusions, hallucinations, or
unusual or bizarre behaviour (presumed to be secondary to these
phenomena), especially when a more precise diagnosis cannot yet be made.
The adjectival form is also useful, and survives in ICD-10 categories
such as 'Other nonorganic psychotic disorders'. Another example is the
use of the term 'antipsychotic' drugs.

Neurosis As already noted, the term neurosis was introduced by Cullen to
denote diseases of the nervous system. Gradually the category of
neurosis narrowed, first as neurological disorders with a distinct
neuropathology (e.g.Â epilepsy and stroke) were removed, and later with
the development of a separate category of psychosis. The objections to
the term neurosis are similar to the objections to the term psychosis,
and explain its removal as an organizing principle in current
classification. First, the concept is difficult to define (Gelder,
1986). Second, the conditions that neurosis embraces have little in
common. Thirdly, more information can be conveyed by using a more
specific and descriptive diagnosis, such as 'anxiety disorder'. A
further objection is that the term neurosis has been widely used with
the unproven assumption of an aetiological meaning in the psychodynamic
literature. In the same way as for psychosis, the terms 'neurosis' and
'neurotic' remain useful as simple descriptors,

27

28

28

Chapter 2 Classification especially if the specific disorder cannot yet
be determined, to indicate disorders that are often comparatively mild,
and usually associated with some form of anxiety. Reflecting its
familiarity and utility, ICD-10 retains the adjective in the heading of
one group of disorders, namely 'Neurotic, stress-related, and somatoform
disorders'. In DSM-5, even the adjectival form is not used.

Categories, dimensions, and axes Categorical classification
Traditionally, psychiatric disorders have been classified by dividing
them into categories that are supposed to represent discrete clinical
entities. As already noted, in the absence of knowledge of underlying
pathology, these categories can only be defined in terms of symptom
patterns and course. Such categorization facilitates the decisions that
have to be made in clinical work about treatment and management, but
presents two problems. â

Although definitions and descriptions can be agreed upon (to improve
reliability; see page 29), there is uncertainty about the extent to
which these categories represent distinct entities or 'carve Nature at
her joints' (validity; see page 30).

â

A significant proportion of patients do not closely match the
descriptions of any disorder, or meet criteria for two or more
categories (comorbidity; see page 29).

These are all significant points, and they are addressed further in the
following sections. However, a more satisfactory and practical
alternative system has not yet been devised.

Dimensional classification Dimensional classification does not use
separate categories, but characterizes the subject by means of scores on
two or more dimensions. In the past, Kretschmer and several other
psychiatrists advocated it, and subsequently it was strongly promoted by
the psychologist Hans Eysenck, on the grounds that there is no
systematic objective evidence to support the existence of discrete
categories. Eysenck (1970b) proposed a system of three
dimensions---psychoticism, neuroticism, and introversion--extroversion.
The concept of dimensionality has been revived and advanced by
epidemiological surveys that have emphasized that there is a continuum
between the healthy population and individuals with diagnosed
psychiatric disorders. This applies, for example, to psychotic symptoms,
and argues that even a severe disorder such as schizophrenia can be seen
as occurring at one end of a dimension of psychotic-like experience
(Linscott

and van Os, 2013). The dimensional view of psychiatric disorder is
comparable to that of hypertension and other medical diagnoses that are
really extremes of a normal distribution, and this view reflects the
nature of the underlying genetic predisposition and presumed
neurobiology (Cuthbert and Insel, 2013; Owen, 2014) much better than a
categorical one. However, the problem with dimensions is that they are
not of great value in clinical practice. For most patients, yes--no
decisions need to be made, the most critical of these being whether the
person has a psychiatric disorder that merits treatment, and, if so,
which one. These clinical imperatives strongly favour categorical
approaches to classification.

The multiaxial approach The term multiaxial is applied to schemes of
classifications in which two or more separate sets of information (such
as symptoms, aetiology, and personality type) are coded. Essen-MÃ¸ller
was probably the first to propose such a system for use in psychiatry,
using one axis for the clinical syndrome and another for aetiology
(Essen-MÃ¸ller, 1971). Multiaxial classification is available within
ICD-10. However, although attractive for several reasons, there is a
danger that multiaxial schemes are too complicated and time-consuming to
be suitable for everyday use, especially if the clinical utility of each
axis has not been demonstrated. Indeed, for these reasons, DSM-5 removed
the multiaxial diagnostic classification system used in DSM-IV,
replacing it with a simpler approach. A multiaxial scheme remains
popular in child and adolescent psychiatry, with the axes describing
intellectual level, functional impairment, and psychosocial adversity
(Rutter, 2011; see Chapter 16).

Hierarchies of diagnosis Categorical systems often include an implicit
hierarchy of categories. If two or more disorders are present, it has
been conventional (although not always made explicit) to assume that one
takes precedence and is regarded as the main disorder for the purposes
of treatment and recording. For example, organic disorders 'trump'
schizophrenia, and schizophrenia takes precedence over affective
disorders and anxiety. This type of assumption is justified because
there is some clinical evidence for an inbuilt hierarchy of significance
between the disorders. For instance, anxiety symptoms occur commonly
with depressive disorders, and are sometimes the presenting feature. If
the anxiety is treated, there is little response in the depressive
symptoms, but if the depressive disorder is treated, there is often
improvement in anxiety

29

Reliability and validity as well as in the depressive symptoms. These
points may be important when making decisions about the order of
treatment to be used and when deciding which disorder to record in
service statistics if only one is required. Nevertheless, they must not
obscure the importance of noting in the case record all disorders and
symptoms that are present, and how they change with time and treatment.

Comorbidity Recently, less emphasis has been placed on hierarchies of
diagnosis, with greater weight being placed on comorbidity (also called
dual diagnosis). This has occurred for three reasons. First, research
has shown that comorbidity is very common (Kessler, 2004). For example,
about 50% of patients with major depressive disorder also meet the
criteria for an anxiety disorder. Secondly, it reminds the clinician to
focus on all the various disorders that may be present, and not to
assume that the disorder highest in the hierarchy is necessarily the
only, or even the most important, target for treatment. The advent of
multiaxial systems of classification, mentioned above, in part reflects
this

perspective. Thirdly, the diagnostic 'rules' used in current
classificatory systems allow, if not encourage, multiple diagnoses to be
made, and it has been argued that at least some psychiatric comorbidity
is in fact an artefact of this (Maj, 2005), and that a simpler
classificatory system which reduced it would be desirable (Goldberg,
2010). The term comorbidity covers two different circumstances: â

Disorders that are currently considered to be distinct but which are
probably causally related. In other words, there is one disease process,
but there are two or more clinical manifestations, which are currently
diagnosed separately owing to lack of knowledge or because of clinical
convention.

â

Disorders that are causally unrelated. This refers to the chance
co-occurrence of two disorders---for example, the onset of presenile
dementia in a person with longstanding panic disorder.

Note that comorbidity applies only when the criteria for two or more
diagnoses are met. It should not be used for patients who fall between
diagnostic categories but who do not meet the criteria for any one of
them.

Reliability and validity Reliability of psychiatric diagnoses A
prerequisite for any satisfactory classification scheme, whatever its
organizing principle, is that the items (diagnoses) that are being
classified can be recognized reliably (Kendell, 1975). However, although
reliability is now known and is reasonable for most categories, this was
not the case until relatively recently, for the reasons described below.
Studies conducted in the 1950s and 1960s demonstrated substantial
diagnostic disagreement between psychiatrists, which arose for two main
reasons (Kreitman, 1961): â

â

The interviewing technique and characteristics of the psychiatrist. This
included the way in which symptoms and signs were elicited and
interpreted and the weight attached to them. These elements in turn
probably reflect many influences, including training, professional
culture, etc. The differing use of diagnostic terms and criteria. At the
time, there were no widely accepted glossaries or definitions of key
terms. Therefore it was impossible to

ensure that psychiatrists were using the same criteria for symptoms and
syndromes. A key study by Stengel (1959) illustrated 'the chaotic state
of the classifications in current use' by collecting 28 classifications
in a variety of languages. None of the 28 classifications was
accompanied by any indication of the meaning of the constituent terms.
Illustrating the importance of these factors, one study concluded that
62% of diagnostic disagreement arose from inadequate use of diagnostic
terms, 32% from inadequate interview technique, and only 5% was due to
inconsistency in the patient (Ward et al., 1962).

International studies of diagnostic criteria The increasing concern in
the 1960s about the level of diagnostic disagreement between countries
heralded international studies intended to identify the source of the
variation, and then to improve the reliability. This work adopted the
suggestion of the philosopher Carl Hempel that operational definitions
should be developed--- that is, the specification of a category (e.g.Â a
symptom) by a series of precise inclusion and exclusion statements.

29

30

30

Chapter 2 Classification A key study was the US--UK Diagnostic Study
(Cooper et al., 1972), which followed on from the demonstration that
both diagnostic and admission rates for manic depression and
schizophrenia differed considerably between the two countries. For
example, the rate for manic--depressive illness in the UK was more than
10 times that in equivalent mental hospitals in the USA, whereas the
rate for schizophrenia was about twice as high in the USA (and even
higher in New York) as it was in the UK. Another seminal study was the
International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia (IPSS), a large international
collaborative study organized by the World Health Organization, with
centres in nine countries taking part. The IPSS first demonstrated
clearly that structured interviews could be translated and used in
different cultures, enabling it to show that patients with typical
symptoms of schizophrenia could be found in all nine countries (World
Health Organization, 1973). The IPSS findings are discussed further in
Chapter 11.

Standardized interview schedules A major step towards improving
diagnostic reliability came with the development of standardized
interview schedules that minimize the variations in interviewing
technique and symptom rating between psychiatrists. This development was
closely linked with the international studies mentioned above. Thus the
US--UK Diagnostic Study used the Present State Examination (PSE), one of
the first structured psychiatric interviews (Wing et al., 1974).
Standardized interview schedules specify the content and sequence of the
interview, and provide scoring rules by which the presence and severity
of symptoms are rated. They are now widely used and both specialist and
lay forms are available, for use in different settings and with
different populations. Further examples are given in Chapter 3.

Diagnosis by computer The IPSS also revealed that, although a great deal
of the variation between psychiatrists in the rating of symptoms could
be removed by the use of structured interviews, some variation remained
in the resulting diagnoses. This was because of different diagnostic
interpretations

of the symptoms and behaviours. This led to the development of computer
programs such as CATEGO (Wing et al., 1974), which generate a diagnosis
using the symptom ratings, eliminating both the personal bias of the
diagnosticians and any chance errors made for other reasons. Although
computer-generated diagnoses inevitably reflect the diagnostic
preferences of whoever wrote the program, they have proved valuable for
epidemiological studies, and are widely used in research.

Validity of psychiatric diagnoses The above discussion has focused upon
the reliability of diagnoses, because without a reasonable level of
interobserver reliability it is not possible to test whether or not a
concept is valid. Validity is a much more difficult topic. In a general
sense, validity refers to the extent to which a concept means what it is
supposed to mean. It is also closely connected with usefulness
(utility). For a discussion of reliability and validity in psychiatry,
see Jablensky (2016). Three forms of validity are usually recognized. â

Face validity is the correspondence with the clinical concepts and
descriptions currently accepted in clinical practice. This is fairly
easy to achieve by the careful use of glossaries and lists of criteria
(illustrating the fact that reliability and validity are not wholly
separate).

â

Predictive validity is the extent to which disorders predict response to
treatment and outcome. This has high utility.

â

Construct validity is the third and most fundamental form of validity,
in which there is a demonstrable relationship between a disorder and its
underlying aetiology and pathophysiology. Unfortunately, most
psychiatric disorders have an unknown and probably low construct
validity, reflecting the descriptive criteria upon which most are
currently based.

To date, little progress has actually been made towards establishing the
validity of the existing schemes of classification.

Current psychiatric classifications The International Classification of
Diseases (ICD), Chapter V The International Classification of Diseases
(ICD) is produced by the World Health Organization (WHO) as an

aid to the collection of international statistics about disease. The
current version is the 10th edition (ICD-10). Of the 21 chapters,
Chapter V is devoted to psychiatry. Mental disorders were included for
the first time in 1948, in the sixth revision (ICD-6), but neither ICD-6
nor

31

Current psychiatric classifications ICD-7 were widely used because they
consisted merely of a list of names and code numbers by which national
statistics could be tabulated, with no glossary to indicate suggested
meanings of the constituent terms. As noted, the survey of Stengel in
1959 was an important first step in much-needed improvements in this
regard, setting the stage for an extensive and ongoing WHO programme
geared towards achieving a 'common language'. ICD-9, published in 1978,
was the first satisfactory and widely used version.

ICD-10 By the time ICD-10 was due, it had become evident that a major
process of international collaboration was needed. The objectives of
this process were that ICD-10 Chapter V should be: â

suitable for international communication about statistics for morbidity
and mortality

â

a reference standard for national and other psychiatric classifications

â

acceptable and useful to a wide range of users in different cultures

â

an aid to education.

The process started in 1982, and included extensive field trials to
demonstrate the reliability and utility of the diagnostic categories.
The final version, entitled Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic
Guidelines, was published as ICD-10 in 1992 (World Health Organization,
1992b). It contains descriptions of each of the disorders, and the
diagnostic instructions for users make it clear that these allow some
latitude for clinical judgement. All of the diagnostic codes start with
the letter F and, like the other chapters, it has 10 major divisions
(Box 2.2), each of which can be divided into 10 subdivisions, and so on.
For example, F20, schizophrenia, can be followed by a further number for
the category within the group (e.g.Â F20.1, hebephrenic schizophrenia),
and a fourth character if it is necessary to subdivide further. Although
ICD-10 is basically a descriptive classification, available knowledge
and ingrained clinical practice mean that aetiology is a defining
criterion in some of the main categories, notably organic (F0),
substance userelated (F1), and stress-related (F4). Because ICD-10 is
used for several purposes, it exists in several forms, each of which is
derived from, and compatible with, the core version. For example, the
primary healthcare version has only 27 categories, each with reminders
about likely management and treatment. There is a research version
(DCR-10), which

contains more specific diagnostic criteria, but DSM-5 is much more
widely used for research. ICD-11 is currently expected to be published
in 2018 (see page 34).

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) The history of DSM In 1952 the
American Psychiatric Association (APA) published the first edition of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-I) as an alternative to the
widely criticized ICD-6. DSM-I was strongly influenced by the views of
Adolf Meyer and Karl Menninger, and its simple glossary reflected the
prevailing acceptance of psychoanalytic ideas in the USA. DSM-II was
published in 1968, and combined psychoanalytic ideas with those of
Kraepelin. DSM-III was published in 1980, and was an important step
forward, containing five main innovations. â

Operational criteria were provided for each diagnosis, with explicit
rules for inclusion and exclusion (Feighner et al., 1972). This was the
first complete classification to do so, and the first to be based on
criteria that had been field-tested.

Box 2.2 The main categories of ICD10 Chapter V (F) F0 Organic, including
symptomatic, mental disorders F1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to
psychoactive substance use F2 Schizophrenia, schizotypal, and delusional
disorders F3 Mood (affective) disorders F4 Neurotic, stress-related, and
somatoform disorders F5 Behavioural syndromes associated with
physiological disturbances and physical factors F6 Disorders of adult
personality and behaviour F7 Mental retardation F8 Disorders of
psychological development F9 Behavioural and emotional disorders with
onset usually occurring in childhood or adolescence Source: data from
The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health
Organization.

31

32

32

Chapter 2 Classification â

A multiaxial classification was adopted, with five axes (Axis I:
Clinical syndromes; Axis II: Personality disorders; Axis III: Physical
disorders; Axis IV: Severity of psychosocial stressors; Axis V: Highest
level of adaptive functioning in the last year).

â

The nomenclature was revised and some syndromes were regrouped. For
example, the terms neurosis and hysteria were discarded, and all mood
disorders were grouped together.

â

Its approach was empirical, and psychodynamic concepts were largely
eliminated.

â

For some conditions, duration of illness was introduced as a diagnostic
criterion.

The next full revision, DSM-IV, followed in 1994. It contained some
revisions and additions to diagnostic categories, but retained the basic
structures and features from DSM-III.

DSM-5 When planning for DSM-V (later renamed DSM-5) began, it was hoped
that the classification could be based on aetiology (including the use
of biomarkers) rather than description (Hyman, 2007). It was also
intended to make much greater use of dimensions rather than categories.
However, it became apparent that for all major disorders both steps were
premature, and DSM-5 retains the same key elements as its predecessors,
albeit with some new and revised diagnostic criteria and other features
that have generated controversy for several reasons, including concerns
about specificity and sensitivity, reliability, and conflicts of
interest (Frances and Nardo, 2013; Blashfield et al., 2014). For a
history and critique of DSM, see Blashfield et al. (2014).

Comparing ICD-10 and DSM-5 ICD-10 and DSM-IV were developed in parallel
and, to avoid unnecessary differences, there was close consultation
between the working parties preparing the two documents. The efforts
were largely successful, with the systems sharing most fundamental
concepts and categories, but there were some differences (Table 2.1).
The arrival of DSM-5 has slightly increased the differences with ICD-10,
but most of these are minor and are discussed as appropriate in later
chapters. However, a few are worthy of mention here. See also Tyrer
(2014) for a comparison of ICD and DSM classifications. â

The duration of the symptoms required for a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
ICD-10 specifies 1 month, whereas DSM-5 requires a duration of 6 months,
including a prodromal period (see Chapter 11).

â

Terms such as neurotic, neurasthenia, and mental retardation are not
used in DSM-5.

â

Bereavement is an exclusion criterion for a depressive episode in ICD-10
(as it was hitherto in DSM) but this exclusion has been removed in
DSM-5.

â

Dementia and amnesic syndromes have been combined in DSM-5 in a new
category of major neurocognitive disorder (see Chapter 14).

It is important to realize that the two classifications are
complementary rather than in competition. ICD-10 results from an
international effort, and was designed for use in all countries with
their varied cultures, professional needs, and traditions. DSM-5 is a
national classification, and reflects the professional, educational, and
financial priorities of its parent organization, the American
Psychiatric Association. Notably, even in the USA, hospital records
utilize the ICD system, not DSM.

Current and future issues in psychiatric classification Many of the
issues relating to classification discussed in this chapter continue to
be topical and under active debate. This section raises some additional
issues, especially those that may influence future developments.

Cultural issues Although ICD-10 and DSM-5 make national approaches to
classification less important (see Box 2.3), local and cultural factors
remain important in classification in several respects.

Psychiatrists and physicians in countries that have their own
longstanding and comprehensive systems of ideas about health and
illness, such as India, Pakistan, and China, sometimes complain that
classifications developed in Europe and North America give too much
emphasis to separation of mind and body. For example, the concept of
somatoform disorders depends on viewing mind and body as alternatives.
This approach causes problems in western medicine and is not understood
at all elsewhere. Investigation of these issues is difficult, as
outsiders may not appreciate

3

Current and future issues in psychiatric classification

Table 2.1 Differences between ICD-10 and DSM-5 ICD-10

DSM-5

Origin

World Health Organization

American Psychiatric Association

Usage

Official global classification, for use by all health practitioners in
all health settings

Mainly American psychiatrists, and psychiatric researchers

Presentation

Different versions for clinical work, research, and use in primary care

A single document

Languages

Available in all widely spoken languages

English version only

Structure

Part of overall ICD framework

Stand alone

Content

Clinical descriptors and guidance used Guidelines and criteria do not
include social consequences of disorders

Operational criteria used Diagnostic criteria usually include
significant impairment in social functions

important cultural and local factors, or the varying ways in which
emotions and behaviour are described in different languages. A list of
so-called 'culture-specific' disorders is provided as appendices to
ICD-10. The limited and largely anecdotal information available at
present suggests that most of these conditions are culturally influenced
varieties of anxiety, depression, and violent behaviour, rather than
distinct disorders of different types.

Reflecting an increased focus on culture and health (Napier et al.,
2014), DSM-5 pays greater attention to cultural issues than earlier
versions, and distinguishes three concepts: â

Cultural syndrome: syndromes found in one cultural group.

characteristically

â

Cultural idiom of distress: terms, phrases, and ways of communicating
suffering that are characteristic of a cultural group.

Box 2.3 Other national systems of classification The widespread
international acceptance of ICD-10 and DSM-5 has diminished the
importance of pre-existing national diagnostic traditions. However, the
latter are of historical interest and, at times, still have some
influence on educational programmes. The descriptive concepts introduced
by Kraepelin and Bleuler have been very influential in most European
countries, particularly in Germany, UK, and Scandinavian countries. In
Scandinavia, emphasis has also been placed on the concept of psychogenic
or reactive psychoses (StrÃ¶mgren, 1985). In addition, Scandinavia was
notable for its early concepts of multidimensional diagnoses. In France,
Kraepelinian views of schizophrenia were less widely accepted, and two
other diagnostic categories of psychosis not commonly used elsewhere
have persisted, namely bouffÃ©e dÃ©lirante and dÃ©lires chroniques. BouffÃ©e
dÃ©lirante is the sudden onset of a delusional state with trance-like
feelings, of short

duration and good prognosis. This disorder is included in ICD-10 within
the category of 'acute transient psychotic disorder', which also
incorporates features of the Scandinavian concept of reactive psychosis.
DÃ©lires chroniques are conditions that in ICD-10 would be classified as
'persistent delusional disorders', and are subdivided into the
'non-focused', in which several areas of mental activity are affected,
and the 'focused', with a single delusional theme, such as erotomania.
These disorders are discussed in Chapter 12. Another example of
international variation is the Chinese national classification (Chinese
Classification of Mental Disorders, 3rd edition, CCMD-3), introduced in
2001. Although largely based upon ICD-10, it excludes almost all of the
somatoform disorders, so that particular prominence can be given to the
category of neurasthenia, which remains one of the most frequent
diagnoses in Chinese psychiatry.

33

34

34

Chapter 2 Classification â

Cultural explanation or perceived cause: a label for, or attribution of,
a cause of symptoms or distress that is accepted within a cultural
group.

â

In eating disorders, criteria for anorexia nervosa will be broadened,
and binge eating disorder recognized as a specific category.

â

Mental retardation will be renamed 'intellectual development disorders'.

â

The problematic areas of somatoform disorders and personality disorder
remain under review.

â

A goal of these changes is to improve the clinical utility of the
classification, especially in lower-income countries.

ICD-11 Originally it was intended that DSM-5 and ICD-11 would be
contemporaneous, and with greater harmonization than between their
predecessors. However, delays to ICD-11 (now scheduled for completion in
2018) prevented the former, and there is ongoing debate about whether
ICD-11 should strive for harmonization with DSM-5 in light of concerns
with aspects of the latter (Frances and Nardo, 2013). The main
principles and properties of ICD-11 will remain unchanged from ICD-10,
including the lack of operationalized criteria, and the intention that
it can be used by many professional groups in all cultures and health
systems. Although the detailed content of ICD11 is not finalized, the
following are some of the main changes anticipated compared to ICD-10
(Luciano, 2014): â

Sleep--wake disorders and sexuality-related conditions and dysfunctions
will have their own chapters.

â

For schizophrenia, first-rank symptoms (see page 255) will be of less
diagnostic importance, and the subtypes of schizophrenia omitted.

â

In mood disorders, bipolar II disorder will become a distinct entity (as
it is in DSM). In contrast, unlike DSM-5, reactions to bereavement will
continue to be excluded from diagnosis of a depressive episode.

Research domain criteria The scientific arguments for a dimensional
rather than categorical approach to diagnostic classification have been
outlined above. One manifestation of this was the move in 2010 by the
United States' National Institute for Mental Health to advocate
'domains', and to require these to be used as the basis for research
funding, not DSM-5 (or ICD-10) categories (Cuthbert and Insel, 2013).
Such domains may include neuropsychological constructs (such as working
memory, or reward sensitivity) or brain systems (e.g.Â corticostriatal
circuits), which underpin---and are thought to cut across---current
diagnostic categories. The advent of Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) is
having a major, if controversial, impact on psychiatric research.
However, it is not of clinical relevance until (and unless) it discovers
domains that have the necessary utility and reliability to accompany
their greater validity.

Classification in this book In this book, both ICD-10 and DSM-5
classifications are used, and compared. Where they differ, the ICD10
approach is usually adopted. As in other textbooks, disorders are
grouped in chapters for convenience. The

headings of the chapters do not always correspond to the terms used in
ICD-10 or DSM-5; any difference means that the heading more
appropriately summarizes the scope of the chapter.

Further reading American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). American
Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC. Bolton D (2008). What is Mental
Disorder? An essay in philosophy, science and values. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

Kendell RE (1975). The Role of Classification in Psychiatry. Blackwell
Scientific Publications, Oxford. World Health Organization (1992). The
ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines. 10th edn. World Health
Organization, Geneva.

35

CHAPTER 3

Assessment Introduction 35

Patient characteristics that may affect

Psychiatric interviewing 36

the interview 56

The psychiatric history 39

Integrating and evaluating the information 57

The mental state examination 44

Recording and communicating information 60

Other components of psychiatric assessment 50

Standardized assessment methods 66

Special kinds of psychiatric assessment 53

Introduction discussions about management, and to adhere to any
treatment decisions which are agreed upon.

Psychiatric assessment has three main goals: â

â

â

To make a diagnosis. Despite its limitations (see Chapter 2), diagnosis
is central to the practice of psychiatry, since it provides the basis
for rational, evidence-based approaches to treatment and prognosis
(Craddock and Mynors-Wallis, 2014). A major goal of most assessments,
especially those of new patients, is therefore to allow a diagnosis or
differential diagnosis to be made. This in turn requires that the
symptoms and signs of psychiatric disorder (see Chapter 1) can be
elicited, and their diagnostic significance appreciated. To understand
the context of the diagnosis. The psychiatrist needs to have sufficient
information about the patient's life history, current circumstances, and
personality. This is necessary to try and understand why the disorder
has occurred in this person at this time; it also has a major bearing on
decisions about management and prognosis. To establish a therapeutic
relationship. The psychiatrist must ensure that the patient feels able
and willing to give an accurate and full history. Without this skill,
the necessary diagnostic information is unlikely to be obtained. Thus,
establishment of a therapeutic relationship is essential if the patient
is to engage fully in

The process of psychiatric assessment, also known as the psychiatric
interview, can be broken down into the following stages: â

Preparation. This includes having the interviewing skills necessary to
achieve the above goals, acquiring as much background information as
possible (e.g.Â the reason for referral, and whether informants are
available) to help guide the assessment and identify areas for
particular focus, and anticipating whether the interview may need to be
adapted (e.g.Â owing to language difficulties, or a shortage of time).

â

Collecting the information. This is usually addressed by means of a
series of headings covering the psychiatric history, mental state
examination, and other components, as described below.

â

Evaluating the information to arrive at a diagnosis or differential
diagnosis. This is the hardest part of the process to describe to
readers new to psychiatry, as it requires knowledge of the diagnostic
significance of particular symptoms and symptom combinations. It is
therefore suggested that this chapter should be returned to at regular
intervals, to refine how

36

36

Chapter 3 Assessment assessments are conducted to match one's developing
knowledge and skills. â

Using the information to make treatment decisions and form prognostic
opinions.

â

Recording and communicating the information collected, and the
conclusions drawn. The information must be shared with other health
professionals involved with the care of the patient both now and in the
future, and with the patient and their significant others. Various modes
of communication are necessary (e.g. with regard to its nature and level
of detail) depending on the circumstances of the assessment and the
needs of the recipient.

This chapter covers these areas in turn, concentrating on the full
initial assessment of a patient by a general adult psychiatrist. It also
discusses how this process should be adapted in other circumstances.
First,

however, the basic process of psychiatric interviewing will be outlined.
At the outset, it is worth emphasizing that the description of
assessment in textbooks tends to make the process appear to be a
passive, even predetermined, one of extensive data collection. In
practice, however, assessment is an active, selective process, in which
diagnostic clues are pursued, hypotheses tested, and the focus of
questioning adapted to the particular circumstances. This 'dynamic'
aspect of assessment can only be learned from practical experience. It
also requires a working knowledge of the main psychiatric syndromes for
the significance of specific symptoms or history items that emerge
during the assessment to be appreciated. It was for this reason that the
preceding chapter covered psychiatric classification. It is assumed that
the reader is already competent in medical history-taking and physical
examination, and these topics are considered only briefly.

Psychiatric interviewing Preparing for the assessment Psychiatric
assessments are conducted in many settings. The following
recommendations should be followed as far as is practicable, but they
cannot always be achieved in their entirety. In some locations, such as
an Accident and Emergency department, the setting may be far from ideal.
Nevertheless, it is important to do what is possible to ensure safety
and confidentiality, and to put the patient at ease. Before starting the
interview, it is always worth finding out what is already known about
the patient and the circumstances in which the assessment has come
about. This will often be in the form of a referral letter from another
doctor, or there may be notes available from previous assessments. This
information will reveal areas of enquiry that may require particular
emphasis, and may modify the diagnosis that is subsequently made.
Equally, every assessment should, of course, begin with an open mind
(not least since prior diagnoses may be incorrect, or the present
presentation may be different). Only a small minority of patients are
potentially dangerous, but the need for precautions should be considered
before every interview. The interviewer should always: â

make sure that another person knows where and when the interview is
taking place and how long it

is expected to last. This is especially relevant to interviews in the
community; â

ensure that help can be called if it is needed. In hospital, check for
an emergency call button and its position, and otherwise try to arrange
for another person to be within earshot;

â

ensure that neither the patient nor any obstruction is between you and
the exit;

â

remove from sight any objects that could be used as weapons.

If the risk is thought to be high, or if these requirements cannot be
met, it may be necessary to defer the interview.

Starting the assessment The psychiatrist should welcome the patient by
name, give their own name and status, and explain in a few words the
reason for and purpose of the assessment. If the patient is being seen
at the request of another doctor, the interviewer should indicate this.
If the patient is accompanied, the interviewer should greet the
companion(s) and explain how long they should expect to wait and whether
they will be interviewed. It is usually better to see the patient alone
first, provided that he is able to provide an adequate history. The
interviewer should explain that notes will be taken, and that these

37

Psychiatric interviewing will be confidential. If the interview is for
the purposes of a report to an outside agency (e.g.Â a medicolegal
report), this should be made clear. The general structure of the
interview should be explained, and the time available stated; the latter
is not only a matter of courtesy but is also valuable if the
psychiatrist later needs to interrupt the patient, or ask him to give
more concise answers, to ensure the assessment can be completed. The
patient should be comfortable and the interviewer should not face the
patient directly but arrange his chair at an angle. If possible, the
interviewer should also avoid sitting at a much higher level. Whenever
possible, the interviewer should make notes (whether on paper or
electronically) during the interview, as writing up an assessment
afterwards is time-consuming and not always wholly accurate. However, it
is usually better to delay note-taking for some minutes until the
patient feels that he has the interviewer's undivided attention. The
patient should be placed at the left side of a right-handed interviewer.
With this arrangement, the interviewer can attend to the patient and
maintain an informal atmosphere while writing. The following techniques
have been shown to improve the results of the interview (Goldberg et
al., 1980). The interviewer should: â

adopt a relaxed posture and appear unhurried---even when time is short;

â

maintain appropriate eye contact with the patient and not appear
engrossed in note-taking;

â

be alert to verbal and non-verbal cues of distress as well as to the
factual content of the interview;

â

maintain control of the interview if the patient is over-talkative or
discursive.

Continuing and completing the assessment The interview should begin with
an open question (one that cannot be answered with a simple 'yes' or
'no'), such as 'Tell me about your problems or difficulties'. The
patient should be allowed to talk freely for several minutes before
further questions are asked. As the patient describes their problems,
the interviewer should observe their responses and manner---for example,
whether they are reticent or unduly circumstantial. The first step is to
obtain a clear account of the patient's problems. It is important to
separate symptoms from their consequences, and from other life problems
that the patient may want to discuss. For example, a patient may have
low mood, sexual difficulties, or

financial worries as the presenting complaint. In each case the common
denominator may prove to be depression, but it will require your
assessment to discover this. Your priority at the start is to focus upon
the symptoms and signs of psychiatric disorder, leaving the other kinds
of problem until later. From the start, consider the possible diagnoses
and, as the interview progresses, select questions to confirm or reject
these diagnoses. For example, if the patient mentions hearing voices,
this immediately raises the possibility of schizophrenia and requires
that, at some stage in the assessment, the other cardinal features of
the disorder are sought, and their presence or absence clearly noted.
The interviewer also considers what information is relevant to prognosis
and treatment. Thus, as noted earlier, interviewing is not simply the
asking of a routine set of questions. It is an active and iterative
process in which the focus of attention is directed by hypotheses formed
from the information already elicited, and modified repeatedly as more
information is collected. This active process of interviewing is
particularly necessary when time is short and when immediate treatment
decisions must be made. Obviously, as the interviewer gains confidence
and acquires more psychiatric knowledge, he or she becomes better at
thinking of possible diagnoses, and proceeding in a way that rules them
in or out more rapidly and convincingly. It is generally better to
establish clearly the nature of the symptoms before asking how and when
they developed. If there is any doubt about the nature of the symptoms,
the patient should be asked to describe specific examples. When all of
the presenting symptoms have been explored sufficiently, direct
questions are asked about others that have not come to light but which
may be relevant. In doing this, the interviewer uses his knowledge of
psychiatric syndromes to decide what further questions to ask. For
example, a person who complains of feeling depressed would be asked
about thoughts concerning the future, and about suicidal ideas. If
suicidal thoughts are acknowledged, further specific questions should be
asked. Also ask about the impact that the symptoms have had on the
patient's life, looking for evidence of functional impairment. The onset
and course of the symptoms are clarified next, together with their
relationship to any stressful events or physical illness. Considerable
persistence may be needed to date the onset or an exacerbation of
symptoms accurately. It sometimes helps to ask how the onset related to
an event that the patient is likely to remember, such as a birthday. The
patient's attempts to cope with the symptoms are noted---for example,
increased drinking of alcohol to relieve distress. If treatment has
already

37

38

38

Chapter 3 Assessment been given, its nature, timing, and effects are
noted, together with the patient's concordance with it. The interviewer
completes the relevant parts of the full assessment schedule, which is
described in later sections of this chapter. When time is adequate, the
mental state is usually examined at the end of the interview, together
with any relevant physical examination. If time is short, it may be
better to examine the mental state after the presenting complaints have
been clarified. This can make it easier to select the key points to be
asked about in the rest of the history. Throughout the interview, allow
the patient, as far as possible, to describe their problems
spontaneously. In this way, unexpected material may be volunteered that
might not be revealed by the answers to questions. However, questions
may be needed to bring the patient back to the point after a digression,
and to elicit specific information---for example, about the relationship
between symptoms and stressful events. Whenever possible, the
interviewer should use open rather than leading or closed questions (a
leading question suggests the answer, whereas a closed question allows
only the answers 'yes' or 'no'). Thus, for example, instead of the
closed question 'Are you happily married?' the interviewer might ask
'How do you and your wife get on?' When there is no alternative to a
closed question, the answer should be followed by a request for an
example. Before ending the interview, it is good practice to ask a
general question such as 'Is there anything that I have not asked you
about, that you think I should know?' It is also useful to summarize for
the patient what you consider to be the key points, to check for any
errors of fact, and to see whether the patient agrees with your initial
understanding of events. Box 3.1 summarizes some techniques that promote
effective interviewing.

Interviewing informants Whenever possible, the patient's history should
be supplemented by information from a close relative or another person
who knows them well. This is much more important in psychiatry than in
the rest of medicine, for several reasons. Some psychiatric patients are
unaware of the extent or significance of their symptoms. Others are
aware of their problems but do not wish to reveal them---for example,
people who misuse alcohol often conceal the extent of their drinking.
Patients and relatives may also give quite different accounts of
personality characteristics, or have contrasting interpretations of
recent events and symptoms. Interviews with a partner or relative are
used not only to obtain additional

Box 3.1 Some techniques for effective psychiatric assessments Help the
patient to talk freely. This can be done using open questions, and by
non-verbal cues such as nodding, or saying 'Go on' or 'Tell me more
about that' â Keep the patient to relevant topics. Again, nonverbal cues
are useful, as well as specific interventions such as 'At this point I'd
like to ask you more about how you've been feeling. We can return to
your money worries later' â Make systematic enquiries, but avoid asking
so many questions that other, unanticipated issues are not volunteered â
Check your understanding, and that you have enquired about all of the
areas the patient thinks are important, by summarizing the key points of
the history back to the patient. This step also helps you to begin to
formulate your views on the diagnosis and causes â Be flexible in
assessments, with regard to both their length and sequence. Select
questions according to the emerging possibilities regarding diagnoses,
causes, and plans of action â

information about the patient's condition, but also to assess their
attitudes to the patient and the illness, and often to involve them in
the subsequent management plan. In addition, they provide an opportunity
to learn what burdens the illness has placed on the partner or relative,
and how they have tried to cope. A history from an informant is
essential when the patient is unable to give an accurate account of his
or her condition (e.g. because of impaired memory). Finally, when it is
important to know about the patient's early development or childhood, an
interview with a parent is usually the best way to discover the relevant
information. Informants can either be seen separately from the patient,
or invited to join the interview. The choice depends on both the
assessor's and the patient's preference, but in both instances the
patient must give consent. If the patient refuses, explore the reasons
for this and explain the difficulties that it will pose. There are a few
situations in which the patient's permission is not required before
interviewing a relative or other informant---for example, if the patient
is a child, or when adult patients are mute or confused. In other cases,
the doctor should explain to the patient the reasons for

39

The psychiatric history interviewing the informant, while emphasizing
that confidential information given by the patient will not be passed
on. If any information needs to be given to a relative---for example,
about treatment---the patient's permission should be obtained. Questions
from relatives should be dealt with in the same way. The psychiatrist
begins by explaining the purpose of the interview, and may need to
reassure the informant. For example, a relative may fear that they will
be viewed as responsible in some way for the patient's problems. The
interviewer should be sensitive to such ideas and, when appropriate,
discuss them in a reassuring way, but without colluding or becoming
involved in ways that might conflict with their

primary duty to the patient. If the informant has been interviewed
separately from the patient, the psychiatrist should not tell the
patient what has been said unless the informant has given their
permission. This is important even when the informant has revealed
something that should be discussed with the patient--- for example, an
account of excessive drinking. Sometimes it is necessary to speak to
employers, educators, friends, police, or others to collect further
information. This should be done only with the patient's permission,
unless there are legal or safety issues which override this
principle---for example, if the patient is in custody, or if there are
grounds for concern that the patient may harm a third party.

The psychiatric history The main parts of a psychiatric assessment are
the psychiatric history and the mental state examination. The latter
covers the symptoms and signs present during the interview, and the
former deals with everything else. The assessment is then completed by
the physical examination, and sometimes by further investigations. This
section covers the psychiatric history, followed by the mental state
examination, and then the other aspects of the assessment. A commonly
used scheme for history-taking is given below. For ease of reference,
the scheme is presented as a list of headings and items. More details,
and some background information to the questions, are provided in the
subsequent notes. As noted above, much of the interview is designed to
elicit diagnostic symptoms, but other questions are intended to obtain
information about the patient's life and circumstances, while the
interview as a whole must try to establish the rapport needed to achieve
these goals and form the basis for a subsequent therapeutic
relationship. The following scheme is comprehensive and systematic, as
an ability to conduct this form of assessment is essential before
briefer interviews are attempted. Modification of the interview for use
in briefer or specific settings is described later. Moreover, although
it is neither possible nor necessary to take a full history on every
occasion, the information that has been elicited should always be
recorded systematically and in a standard order. This practice helps the
interviewer to remember all of the potentially important topics and to
add further information later. The practice also makes it easier for
colleagues who need to refer to the notes in the

future. This order can be followed in the written or electronic record,
even when it was not possible to elicit the information in the desired
sequence. This and all other entries in the notes should be dated and,
whenever possible, signed.

A scheme for history-taking Information is grouped under the headings
shown in Box 3.2. For clarity, this section is written in the style of
short notes and illustrative questions. The next section explains why
these topics are relevant, and some of the problems that may occur when
covering them.

Informant(s) â

Usually the principal informant is the patient. If not, state the
reason.

â

The name(s), relationship to the patient, and length of acquaintance of
any other person(s) interviewed.

â

The name of the referrer and the reasons for referral.

History of present condition Also known as the history of presenting
complaint, this section is in many ways the core of the interview,
usually providing most of the key diagnostic information. â

List the symptoms, with the onset, duration, severity, and fluctuation
of each. Quantitative information is valuable. For example, a patient
can rate their low mood on a 10-point scale.

â

Ask about and record symptoms that might have been expected but which
are not present (e.g.Â no

39

40

40

Chapter 3 Assessment

Box 3.2 Outline of the psychiatric history

Box 3.3 Outline of the personal history

Name, age, and address of the patient Name(s) of informant(s) and their
relationship to the patient History of present condition Family history
Personal history (expanded in Box 3.3) Past illness Personality
(expanded in Box 3.4)

Mother's pregnancy and the birth Early development Childhood:
separations, emotional problems, illnesses, education Occupations
Relationships and sex Children Social circumstances Substance use
Forensic history

suicidal ideation in a person with low mood; no firstrank symptoms of
schizophrenia in a patient with delusions). â

The temporal relationship between symptoms and any physical disorder, or
psychological or social problems.

â

The nature and duration of any functional impairment caused by the
symptoms.

â

Any treatment side-effects.

received,

and

its

effects

and

with teachers and other students. Note any experience of bullying
(nature, duration, and impact) or school exclusions. â

Occupations---present job (dates, duties, performance, and
satisfaction), earlier jobs (list them, with reasons for changes).

â

Significant relationships ---identity and gender of current partner,
duration and nature of relationship. Partner's health and attitude to
the patient's illness. Nature and number of previous relationships.

â

Sexual history---attitude to sex, any sexual difficulties and their
relationship to current symptoms. Knowing how, and how far, to enquire
about sexual matters is discussed further on page 42.

â

Children---identities, date of any abortions or stillbirths,
temperament, emotional development, mental and physical health. Who are
the child carers.

â

Social circumstances---accommodation, household composition, financial
situation.

â

Use of alcohol, tobacco, illicit drugs---which ones, when, and how much.
Problems arising from substance use.

â

Forensic history---arrests, convictions, imprisonment. Nature of the
offences, especially with regard to dangerousness. For a few patients,
the forensic history is a key part of the assessment (see Chapter 18.

Family history â

Parents and siblings---age, current state of health or date and cause of
death, occupation, personality, quality of relationship with patient.
Psychiatric and medical family history.

â

When the family history is complex and relevant, summarize it as a
family tree.

Personal history This is a particularly variable section of the history
(see Box 3.3). In the case of a young person with a disorder suspected
to have origins early in life, it will be important and extensive; for
older patients or some other disorders, only limited questioning may be
necessary. â

Pregnancy and birth abnormalities (e.g.Â infections, prematurity,
problems with labour).

â

Early developmental milestones---walking, talking, etc.

â

Childhood---any prolonged separation from the parents, and the patient's
reaction to it. Any emotional problems (age of onset, course, and
treatment). Any serious illness in childhood.

â

Schooling and higher education---type, courses, qualifications,
extracurricular achievements, relationships

Past psychiatric and medical history â

Past psychiatric illnesses---nature and duration, and their similarity
to current episode. Include any

41

The psychiatric history episodes of self-harm. Date, duration, nature,
location, and outcome of any treatment. â

Past medical history---illnesses, operations, accidents, and drug
treatments.

â

Current medication, including over-the-counter medicines and alternative
remedies. Any allergic or other adverse reactions.

Personality By this stage in the interview, the patient's manner and
description of their history will have provided some indication about
their personality. However, a specific focus is also necessary, covering
the domains noted in Box 3.4. Personality can be a relatively difficult
area of the history, as outlined below in the section 'Notes on
history-taking'. â

Relationships---friendships (few or many, superficial or close, with own
or opposite sex), relationships with work colleagues and superiors.

â

Use of leisure time---hobbies and interests.

â

Predominant mood and emotional tone (e.g.Â anxious, despondent,
optimistic, pessimistic, self-deprecating, overconfident, stable or
fluctuating, controlled or demonstrative).

â

Character traits (e.g.Â perfectionist, obsessional, isolated, impulsive,
sensitive, controlling).

â

Attitudes and standards (e.g.Â moral or religious; attitude towards
health).

â

'Ultimate concern'---what or who matters most in their life?

Notes on history-taking The scheme outlined above lists the items to be
considered when a full history is taken, but has not indicated why these
items are important or what sort of difficulties

Box 3.4 Assessment of personality Relationships Leisure activities
Prevailing mood and emotional tone Character Attitudes and standards
'Ultimate concern'

may arise when eliciting them. These issues are discussed in this
section, which is written in the form of notes approximating to the
headings used above.

The reason for referral Only a brief statement need be given---for
example, 'severe depression with somatic symptoms'. The reason for
referral usually, but not always, proves to be the main focus of the
interview. Check that the patient has the same understanding as to why
they have been referred. If not, this in itself is useful information.
For example, the patient may disagree that they are depressed, believing
that their somatic symptoms are due to cancer. This may affect their
willingness to engage fully in the assessment or accept the treatment
for depression that is subsequently recommended.

History of present condition Because it is central to the assessment, it
is always worth spending sufficient time on this part of the history to
identify the key elements. There will often be several such symptoms,
and each should be characterized fully to appreciate its diagnostic
significance. Record the severity and duration of each symptom, how and
when it began, what course it has taken (increasing or decreasing,
constant or intermittent), and what factors affect it. Indicate which
symptoms co-vary. As noted above, record any symptoms or features that
would have diagnostic significance but which are not present (e.g.Â lack
of anhedonia in a person complaining of low mood). Note any treatments
that have been given during this episode, the response, and any adverse
effects. If a drug was ineffective, ask whether the patient took it
regularly and at the required dosage.

Family history A family history of psychiatric disorder may indicate
genetic or environmental influences. A genetic contribution is more
likely for some disorders than for others, and increases as more
relatives are affected. Although family environment has, as a rule,
proved to be less important than genes in explaining family history (see
Chapter 5), knowledge about the family's circumstances remains part of
the basic information required for understanding the origin and
presentation of the patient's problems. Recent events in the family may
have been stressful to the patient---for example, the serious illness or
divorce of a family member. Events in the family may throw light on the
patient's concerns. For example,

41

42

42

Chapter 3 Assessment the death of an older sibling from a brain tumour
may partly explain a patient's extreme concern about headaches.

Personal history Pregnancy and birth Events in pregnancy and delivery
are most likely to be relevant when the patient is learning disabled,
although they are also risk factors for several psychiatric disorders
which have their onset in childhood, adolescence, or early adulthood. An
unwanted pregnancy may be followed by a poor relationship between mother
and child.

Child development Few patients know whether they have passed through
developmental stages normally. Failure to do so may be a sign of
learning disability and also a risk factor for later disorders such as
schizophrenia. However, this information is usually more important if
the patient is a child or adolescent, in which case the parents are
likely to be available for interview. The effects of separation from the
mother vary considerably, and depend in part on the age of the child,
the duration, and the reason for separation. Questioning about the
child's emotional development provides information about early
temperament and emerging personality, and abnormalities or delays may
serve as risk factors for, or early signs of, later problems. However,
childhood behavioural characteristics as a rule are weak predictors of
adult disorders, and only require detailed consideration when assessing
children and adolescents. Assessment in child psychiatry is covered in
Chapter 16.

Education The school record gives an indication of intelligence,
achievements, and social development. Ask whether the patient made
friends and got on well with teachers, and about success at games and
other activities. Bullying is a risk factor for later psychological
difficulties, and other negative events such as exam failures may be
important stressful memories. Similar questions are relevant to higher
education.

Occupational history Information about the present job helps the
interviewer to understand the patient's current abilities, interests,
and financial and social circumstances, and may be a potential source of
stress. A list of previous jobs and reasons for leaving is relevant to
the assessment of personality. If the status of jobs has declined, this
may reflect chronic illness or substance misuse.

Marital history This heading includes all enduring intimate
relationships. Ask about the current and any previous lasting
relationships, preferably phrased in a way that does not assume the
gender of the partner(s). Frequent broken relationships may reflect
abnormalities of personality. The partner's occupation, personality, and
state of health are relevant to the patient's circumstances and, like
the nature of the relationship itself, will affect the partner's role in
the care and management of the patient.

Sexual history The interviewer should use common sense when deciding how
much to ask the individual patient, depending on the response to initial
questions, demographic factors (such as age and relationship status),
and the nature of the presenting complaint. Usually the interviewer is
concerned to establish generally whether the patient's sexual life is in
any way involved in their current difficulties, whether as a cause, a
correlate, or a consequence. If so, then more detailed enquiry is
appropriate. Judgement must also be used about the optimal timing and
amount of detail of questioning about childhood abuse, especially sexual
abuse. Unfortunately, such past experiences are sufficiently common to
merit enquiry. However, often it may not be appropriate to raise the
matter in a first interview, unless prompted by the patient or in the
light of background information available to the interviewer. The
decision to raise the topic also depends on the clinical suspicion, and
the time and expertise available to the interviewer. Sensitivity is also
necessary when deciding what information to record and with whom it
should be shared. Assessment of sexual history and sexual disorders is
considered further in Chapter 13.

Children Pregnancy, childbirth, miscarriages, and terminations are
events that are sometimes associated with adverse psychological
reactions. Information about the patient's children is relevant to
present worries and the pattern and characteristics of family life.
Consideration of the welfare and needs of any children is always
integral to an assessment, as their health and care may be adversely
affected by the parent's illness or its treatment. For example, if a
seriously depressed woman has a young baby, due steps to ensure the
baby's wellbeing are essential, and the situation may influence
decisions about the mother's care (e.g.Â about medication if she is
breastfeeding, and about hospital admission). In turn, any concerns
about the care or welfare of children

43

The psychiatric history should be clearly recorded, and followed by
appropriate discussions and, if necessary, interventions. Such
considerations are increasingly covered by guidelines, protocols, and
legislation (which differ from country to country), and the reader is
advised to keep up to date in this respect.

Social circumstances Questions about housing, finances, and the
composition of the household help the interviewer to understand the
patient's circumstances. Assets and resources (including potential
carers) are assessed, as well as problems and sources of stress. There
can be no general rule about the amount of detail to elicit, and this
must be guided by common sense.

Substance use and misuse This includes past as well as present
consumption of alcohol and other substances, and the impact of their use
on the patient's health and life. Misuse of prescribed drugs should also
be considered. The patient's answers may be evasive or misleading, and
may need to be checked with other informants and sources of information
(e.g.Â urine screens, blood tests). See Chapter 20 for further
information about interviewing in this area.

Past psychiatric and medical history In many instances, a patient being
assessed will have a past psychiatric history. A previous diagnosis
increases the probability that the current diagnosis will prove to be
similar, but it is important always to keep an open mind, as the
diagnosis may have changed, or the previous diagnosis may have been
incorrect. Patients or relatives may be able to recall the general
nature of the illness and treatment, but it is nearly always appropriate
to request information from others who have treated the patient. The
medical history is also important (Phelan and Blair, 2008). A medical
disorder or its treatment may be directly related to the presentation
(e.g.Â a recurrence of hypothyroidism presenting with lethargy, or mania
induced by corticosteroids), but may also be indirectly relevant
(e.g.Â via the psychosocial effects of chronic ill health, or as a sign
of somatoform disorder).

Assessment of personality This is important because: â

it helps the interviewer to understand the patient as a person, and to
put their current difficulties into context;

â

personality traits can be a risk factor for psychiatric disorders
(e.g.Â obsessionality increases the risk of developing a depressive
disorder);

â

personality traits can colour the presentation of psychiatric disorder;

â

personality can be disordered, and personality disorder may be a
differential or comorbid diagnosis.

Aspects of personality can be assessed by asking for a self-assessment,
by asking others who know the patient well, and by observing behaviour.
Good indications of personality can often be obtained by asking how the
patient has behaved in particular circumstances, especially at times
when social roles are changing, such as when starting work, or becoming
a parent. However, mistakes can arise from paying too much attention to
the patient's own assessment of their personality, especially during a
single interview. Some people give an unduly favourable or unfavourable
account. For example, antisocial people may conceal the extent of their
aggressive behaviour or dishonesty and, conversely, depressed patients
often judge themselves negatively and critically. When assessing
personality from behaviour at interview, take into account the
artificiality of the situation and the anxiety that it may provoke.
These factors mean that it is essential to interview other informants
whenever possible, and to avoid drawing premature or unjustified
conclusions about personality. Personality tests are now rarely used in
clinical practice, but interview schedules for diagnosis of personality
disorder are widely used in forensic and other settings (see Chapters 15
and 18).

Relationships Is the patient shy or do they make friends easily? Are
their friendships close and are they lasting? Leisure activities can
throw light on personality, by reflecting the patient's interests and
preference for company or solitude, as well as their levels of energy
and resourcefulness.

Mood and emotional tone Ask whether the patient is generally cheerful or
gloomy and whether they experience marked changes of mood, and, if so,
how quickly these moods appear, how long they last, and whether they
follow life events. Information about prevailing mood and mood swings
may also reveal evidence suggestive of mood disorder, which can be
enquired about further.

Character Common sense and experience will indicate the depth and focus
of character assessment that are needed for

43

4

44

Chapter 3 Assessment each patient. If the patient (or informant) has
difficulty describing their character with an open question, offer them
options---for example, 'Would you call yourself an optimist or a
pessimist? A loner or a socialite?' Do not focus entirely on negative
attributes, but ask about positive ones, including resilience in the
face of adversity. This is important not just to gain a balanced
impression,

but because strengths are usually better targets for intervention if
personality proves to be therapeutically relevant. For details on the
assessment of personality, see Cloninger (2009). The assessment of
personality disorder has been described by Tyrer et al.Â (2015), and is
discussed further in Chapter 15.

The mental state examination The history records symptoms up to the time
of the interview. The mental state examination is concerned with
symptoms, signs, and behaviour during the interview, and is usually
conducted after the history. Although the distinction is traditional,
and conceptually useful, in practice the boundary between the history
and the mental state examination is somewhat blurred. In particular,
very recent symptoms and signs are often recorded in the mental state
examination, even if the phenomena are not experienced or elicited
during the interview. The mental state examination is also sometimes
used to elicit and record symptoms and signs which, for whatever reason,
have not been covered previously in the interview (e.g.Â whether the
patient is suicidal). For a history of the mental state examination, see
Huline-Dickens (2013). The mental state examination uses a standard
series of headings under which the relevant phenomena, or their absence,
are recorded (see Box 3.5). The symptoms and signs referred to in the
following account are described in Chapter 1 and, with a few exceptions,
are not repeated. Mental state examination is a skill that should be
learned by watching experienced interviewers and by practising
repeatedly under supervision, as well as by reading. The mental state
examination provides,

Box 3.5 Mental state examination headings Appearance and behaviour
Speech Mood Thoughts Perceptions Cognitive function Insight

in conjunction with the history of the present condition, most of the
key diagnostic information. The ability to carry out and record an
accurate and comprehensive mental state examination is therefore a core
skill required by all psychiatrists and other mental health
professionals. It is also specified by the United Kingdom General
Medical Council as a requirement for all newly qualified doctors
(General Medical Council, 2009).

Appearance and behaviour General appearance Much diagnostically useful
information can be obtained from the patient's appearance and behaviour.
Indeed, as discussed later, experienced clinicians often make
provisional diagnoses within minutes of meeting a patient, relying
heavily on this information. The process of observation starts from the
first moment you see the patient. For example, what is their manner and
behaviour in the waiting room? Are they sitting quietly, pacing around,
or laughing to themselves? When greeted, what is their response? As they
walk towards the interview room, is there evidence of parkinsonism or
ataxia? Note their general attire. A dirty, unkempt appearance may
indicate self-neglect. Manic patients often dress brightly or
incongruously. Occasionally an oddity of dress may provide the clue to
diagnosis---for example, a rainhood worn on a dry day may be the first
evidence of a patient's belief that rays are being shone on their head
by persecutors. An appearance suggesting recent weight loss should alert
the observer to the possibility of depressive disorder, anorexia
nervosa, or physical illness.

Facial appearance and emotional expression The facial appearance
provides information about mood. In depression, the corners of the mouth
are turned down, and there are vertical furrows on the brow. Anxious
patients have horizontal creases on

45

The mental state examination the forehead, widened palpebral fissures,
and dilated pupils. Facial expression may reflect elation, irritability,
or anger, or the fixed 'wooden' expression due to drugs with
parkinsonian side-effects. The facial appearance may also suggest
physical disorders (e.g. thyrotoxicosis).

Posture and movement Posture and movement also reflect mood. A depressed
patient characteristically sits with hunched shoulders, with the head
and gaze inclined downwards. An anxious patient may sit on the edge of
their chair, with their hands gripping its sides. Anxious people and
patients with agitated depression may be tremulous and restless---for
example, touching their jewellery or picking at their fingernails. Manic
patients are overactive and restless. Other abnormalities of movement
include tardive dyskinesia (see page 729) and the motor signs seen
mainly in catatonic schizophrenia (see page 256).

Social behaviour The patient's social behaviour and interactions with
the interviewer are influenced by their personality and by their
attitude to the assessment, as outlined above. However, their behaviour
can also be influenced by psychiatric disorder, so it provides another
potential source of diagnostic information. Manic patients tend to be
unduly familiar or disinhibited, whereas those with dementia may behave
as if they were somewhere other than in a medical interview. A person
with schizophrenia may be withdrawn and preoccupied, whilst a person
with antisocial personality disorder may behave aggressively. If the
patient's social behaviour is highly unusual, note what exactly is
unusual, rather than simply using imprecise terms such as 'bizarre'.

Speech Speech and thoughts are recorded in different parts of the mental
state examination, even though it is only through speech that thoughts
become known to the interviewer. By convention, the 'speech' section
covers the rate, quantity, volume, and flow of speech, and any delays in
responding to questions or apparent difficulties producing or
articulating speech. The content of speech, in the sense that it reveals
the patient's thoughts (e.g.Â preoccupations about death, grandiose
delusions) is deferred until the 'Thoughts' section.

Rate and quantity Speech may be unusually fast and increased in amount,
as in mania ('pressure of speech'), or slow, sparse, and monotonous, as
in depression. Depressed or demented patients may pause for a long time
before replying to questions, and then give short answers, producing
little spontaneous speech. The same may be observed among shy people or
those of low intelligence.

Difficulties with speaking If the patient is having problems finding or
articulating words, consider the possibility of dysphasia or dysarthria.
For further details, see Box 3.6 and consult a neurology textbook
(e.g.Â Kaufman and Milstein, 2017).

Neologisms Neologisms are private words invented by the patient, often
to describe morbid experiences. If the interviewer is uncertain whether
a word is a neologism, ask the patient to repeat and spell the word, and
explain its meaning.

Flow of speech Abnormalities in the flow of speech may simply reflect an
anxious, distracted patient, or one of low intelligence. More
significantly, such abnormalities may be evidence of disturbances in the
stream or form of thoughts. For example, sudden interruptions may
indicate thought blocking, and rapid shifts from one topic to another
suggest flight of ideas. For a description of these features, see
Chapter 1. It can be difficult to be certain about these abnormalities;
if possible, write down a representative example.

Mood Conventionally, the mood section includes recording of other
emotions such as anxiety, and also related phenomena, including suicidal
thoughts. The phenomenology of mood and its disorders are discussed in
more detail in Chapters 9 and 10.

Depression and mania The assessment of mood begins with the observations
of behaviour described already, and continues with direct questions such
as 'What is your mood like?' or 'How are you in your spirits?' To assess
depression, questions should be asked about a feeling of being about to
cry (actual tearfulness is often denied), pessimistic thoughts about the
present, hopelessness about the future, and guilt about the past.
Suitable questions are 'What do you

45

46

46

Chapter 3 Assessment

Box 3.6 The neuropsychiatric examination Language abilities Dysarthria
is difficulty in the production of speech by the speech organs.
Dysphasia is partial failure of language function of cortical origin; it
can be receptive or expressive. Testing for dysarthria can be done by
giving difficult phrases such as 'West Register Street' or a tongue
twister. Receptive dysphasia can be detected by asking the patient to
read a passage of appropriate difficulty or, if they fail in this,
individual words or letters. If they can read the passage, they are
asked to explain it. Comprehension of spoken language is tested by
asking the patient to listen to a spoken passage and explain it (first
checking that memory is intact) or to respond to simple commands (e.g.
to point at named objects). Expressive dysphasia is detected by asking
the patient to name common objects such as a watch, key, and pen, and
some of their parts (e.g.Â the face of a watch), and parts of the body.
The patient is also asked to talk spontaneously (e.g.Â about hobbies) and
to write a brief passage, first to dictation, and then spontaneously, on
a familiar topic (e.g.Â the members of the family). A patient who cannot
do these tests should be asked to copy a short passage. Language
disorders point to the left hemisphere in right-handed people. In
left-handed patients localization is less certain, but in many it is
still the left hemisphere. The type of language disorder gives some
further guide to localization. Expressive dysphasia suggests an anterior
lesion, receptive dysphasia suggests a posterior lesion, mainly auditory
dysphasia suggests a lesion towards the temporal region, and mainly
visual dysphasia suggests a more posterior lesion.

Construction abilities Apraxia is inability to perform a volitional act
even though the motor system and sensorium are sufficiently intact for
the person to do so. Apraxia can be tested in several ways. â
Constructional apraxia is tested by asking the patient to draw simple
figures (e.g.Â a bicycle, house, or clock face). â Dressing apraxia is
tested by asking the patient to put on some of their clothes.

Ideomotor apraxia is tested by asking the patient to perform
increasingly complicated tasks to command, usually ending with a
three-stage sequence such as: (1) touch the right ear with (2) the left
middle finger while (3) placing the right thumb on the table. Apraxia,
especially if the patient fails to complete the left side of figures or
dressing on the left side, suggests a right-sided lesion in the
posterior parietal region. It may be associated with other disorders
related to this region, namely sensory inattention and anosognosia.
Agnosia is the inability to understand the significance of sensory
stimuli even though the sensory pathways and sensorium are sufficiently
intact for the patient to be able to do so. Agnosia cannot be diagnosed
until there is good evidence that the sensory pathways are intact and
consciousness is not impaired. â Astereognosia is failure to identify
three-dimensional form; it is tested by asking the patient to identify
objects placed in their hand while their eyes are closed. Suitable items
are keys, coins of different sizes, and paper clips. â Atopognosia is
inability to locate the position of an object on the skin. â In finger
agnosia the patient cannot identify which of their fingers has been
touched when their eyes are closed. Right--left confusion is tested by
touching one hand or ear and asking the patient which side of the body
has been touched. â Agraphognosia is failure to identify letters or
numbers 'written' on the skin. It is tested by tracing numbers on the
palms with a closed fountain pen or similar object. â Anosognosia is
failure to identify functional deficits caused by disease. It is seen
most often as unawareness of left-sided weakness and sensory
inattention. â Agnosias point to lesions of the parietal association
cortex posterior to the primary somatosensory cortex. Lesions of either
parietal lobe can cause contralateral astereognosia, agraphognosia, and
atopognosia. Sensory inattention and anosognosia are more common with
right parietal lesions. Finger agnosia and right--left disorientation
are said to be more common with lesions of the dominant parietal region.
â

47

The mental state examination think will happen to you in the future?' or
'Have you been blaming yourself for anything?' Questions about elevated
mood correspond to those about depression--- for example, 'How are you
in your spirits?' followed, if necessary, by direct questions such as
'Do you feel in unusually good spirits?' Note that the mood in mania can
be irritable as well as cheerful. It can be useful to ask the patient to
rate their current mood on a numerical or other scale. A distinction is
sometimes drawn between 'objective' and 'subjective' mood. The latter is
the patient's view of their own mood; the former refers to the
interviewer's conclusion based upon their observation of the patient
during the interview and the responses to their questions. On occasion
the two may differ---for example, a severely depressed person may deny
low mood. It is important therefore to record the presence of the
various symptoms and signs of depression (or mania) during the mental
state examination. Both depressed and elevated mood, if clinically
significant, are accompanied by other features of depression and mania,
respectively---for example, anhedonia, tiredness, or poor concentration
in depression. In practice, therefore, it is common to extend this part
of the mental state examination to include questioning about other
diagnostic features of mood disorder, if these have not been asked about
already. Whether the interviewer chooses to record them in the notes
under this heading or to insert them into the relevant part of the
history is a matter of personal preference and convenience.

Fluctuating and incongruous mood As well as assessing the prevailing
mood, the interviewer should ascertain how mood varies. When mood varies
excessively, it is said to be labile---for example, the patient appears
dejected at one point in the interview but quickly changes to a normal
or unduly cheerful mood. Any lack of emotional response, sometimes
called blunting or flattening of affect (see page 5), should also be
noted. Normally, mood varies during an interview in parallel with the
topics that are being discussed. The patient appears sad while talking
about unhappy events, angry while describing things that have irritated
them, and so on. When the mood is not suited to the context, it is
recorded as incongruent---for example, if the patient giggles when
describing the death of their mother. Before concluding that such
behaviour reflects an incongruous mood, consider whether it could be a
sign of embarrassment or an effort to conceal distress.

Suicidal ideation Some inexperienced interviewers are wary of asking
about suicide due to fear that they may suggest it to the patient. There
is no evidence to warrant this caution, and an explicit assessment of
suicide risk should be part of every mental state examination.
Nevertheless, questioning should be handled sensitively and in stages,
starting with open questions such as 'Have you ever thought that life is
not worth living?' and, if appropriate, going on to ask 'Have you ever
wished that you could die?' or 'Have you ever considered any way in
which you might end your life?' and then leading on to direct
questioning about current suicidal intent or plans. The interviewer may
also be concerned that they will not be able to cope if the patient does
admit to being suicidal. A basic training in this topic, and knowledge
of self-harm and suicide, should preclude these worries. Questions about
suicide are considered further on page 000.

Anxiety Anxiety is assessed both by asking about subjective feelings and
by enquiring about the physical symptoms and cognitions associated with
anxiety, as well as by observation. For example, the interviewer should
start with a general question such as 'Have you noticed any changes in
your body when you feel upset?' and then go on to enquire specifically
about palpitations, dry mouth, sweating, trembling, and the various
other symptoms of autonomic activity and muscle tension. Such features
may also be apparent during the interview. To detect anxious thoughts,
the interviewer can ask 'What goes through your mind when you are
feeling anxious?' Possible replies include thoughts of fainting or
losing control. Many of these questions overlap with enquiries about the
history of the disorder.

Depersonalization and derealization These are usually symptoms of
anxiety disorders, but occasionally they are diagnosed as a separate
disorder (see page 656). Their importance in the mental state
examination is largely due to the fact that they are easily mistaken for
psychotic symptoms and must be distinguished from them. Patients who
have experienced depersonalization and derealization find them difficult
to describe, and patients who have not experienced them may say that
they have done so because they have misunderstood the questions. Try to
obtain specific examples of the patient's experiences. It is useful to
begin by asking 'Do you ever feel that things around you are unreal?'
and 'Do you ever feel unreal or that part of your body is unreal?'
Patients with derealization often

47

48

48

Chapter 3 Assessment describe things in the environment as seeming
artificial and lifeless. Patients with depersonalization may say that
they feel detached, unable to feel emotion, or as if they are acting a
part.

Thoughts In this section, any predominant content of the person's
thoughts can first be noted. For example, there may be a preoccupation
with persecutory themes, negative or selfdeprecating responses to
questions, or a repeated return of the conversation to diet and body
shape. This information may signify a delusional disorder, depression,
and an eating disorder, respectively, and indicate areas for further
questioning. However, the main purpose of this section is to determine
the nature of the patient's thoughts, and in particular to identify
obsessions and delusions. Thinking can also be abnormal in terms of the
flow of thoughts, and the links from one topic to another, called formal
thought disorder. This was introduced in Chapter 1 (see page 15).

Obsessions Obsessions were described on page 13. An appropriate question
is 'Do any thoughts keep coming into your mind, even though you try hard
to stop them?' If the patient says 'Yes', they should be asked for an
example. Patients may be ashamed of obsessional thoughts, especially
those about violence or sexual themes, so persistent but sympathetic
questioning may be required. Before recording thoughts as obsessional,
the interviewer should be certain that the patient accepts them as their
own (and not implanted by an outside agency).

Compulsions Many obsessional thoughts are accompanied by compulsive acts
(see page 14). Some of these can be observed directly (although rarely
during the interview), but others are private events (e.g.Â repeating
phrases silently), and are detected only because they interrupt the
patient's conversation. Appropriate questions are 'Do you have to keep
checking activities that you know you have completed?', 'Do you have to
do things over and over again when most people would have done them only
once?', and 'Do you have to repeat exactly the same action many times?'
If the patient answers 'Yes' to any of these questions, the interviewer
should ask for specific examples.

Delusions A delusion cannot be asked about directly, because the patient
does not recognize it as differing from other beliefs. Because of the
difficulty that this poses for the interviewer, and the diagnostic
significance of delusions, these were described in detail in Chapter 1.
The interviewer may be alerted to the possibility of delusions by
information from other people or by events in the history. When
searching for delusional ideas, it is useful to begin by asking what
might be the reason for other symptoms or unpleasant experiences that
the patient has described. For example, a patient who says that life is
no longer worth living may be convinced that he is thoroughly evil and
that his internal organs are already rotting away. Some patients hide
delusions skilfully, and the interviewer needs to be alert to evasions,
changes of topic, or other hints that information is being withheld.
However, once the delusion has been uncovered, patients often elaborate
on it without much prompting. When ideas are revealed that could be
delusional, the interviewer needs to determine whether they meet the
criteria for a delusion (see page 9). First, ascertain how strongly they
are held. Achieving this without antagonizing the patient requires
patience and tact. The patient should feel that they are having a fair
hearing. If the interviewer expresses contrary opinions to test the
strength of the patient's beliefs, their manner should be enquiring
rather than argumentative. The next step is to decide whether the
beliefs are culturally determined convictions rather than delusions.
This judgement may be difficult if the patient comes from a culture or
religious group whose attitudes and beliefs are not known to the
interviewer. In such cases any doubt can usually be resolved by finding
an informant from the same country or religion, and by asking this
person whether others from the same background share the patient's
beliefs. Some types of delusion, which are characteristic of
schizophrenia and included in the list of first rank symptoms (see page
255), present particular problems of recognition: â

Delusions of thought broadcasting must be distinguished from the belief
that other people can infer a person's thoughts from his expression or
behaviour. When eliciting such delusions an appropriate question is 'Do
you ever feel that other people know what you are thinking, even though
you have not spoken your thoughts aloud?' If the patient says 'Yes', the
interviewer should ask how other people know this. (Some patients answer
'Yes' when they mean that others can infer their thoughts from their
facial expression.)

49

The mental state examination â

â

Delusions of thought insertion. A suitable question is 'Have you ever
felt that some of the thoughts in your mind were not your own but were
put there from outside?' A corresponding question about delusions of
thought withdrawal is 'Do you ever feel that thoughts are being taken
out of your head?' In each case, if the patient answers 'Yes', detailed
examples should be sought. Delusions of control (passivity of thought)
present similar difficulties. It is appropriate to ask 'Do you ever feel
that some outside force is trying to take control of you?' or 'Do you
ever feel that your actions are controlled by some person or thing
outside you?' Some patients misunderstand the question and answer 'Yes'
when they mean that they have a religious or philosophical conviction
that man is controlled by God or some other agency. Others think that
the questions refer to the experience of being 'out of control' during
extreme anxiety, while some say 'Yes' when in fact they have experienced
auditory hallucinations commanding them to do things. Therefore positive
answers should be followed by further questions to eliminate these
possibilities.

Finally, the reader is reminded of the various categories of delusion
described in Chapter 1 (see page 10). The interviewer should also
distinguish between primary and secondary delusions, and be alert for
the (rare) experiences of delusional perception and delusional mood.
These issues only need to be addressed when there is already clear
evidence of a psychosis, when they are useful in distinguishing
schizophrenia from other psychotic disorders.

Perceptions When asking about hallucinations, as with delusions,
enquiries should be made tactfully to avoid distressing the patient and
to encourage them to elaborate on their experiences without being
ridiculed. Questions can be introduced by saying 'Some people find that,
when their nerves are upset, they have unusual experiences.' This can be
followed by enquiries about hearing sounds or voices when no one else is
within earshot. Whenever the history makes it relevant, corresponding
questions should be asked about visual hallucinations and those in other
modalities. Conversely, in assessments where there has been no previous
evidence of psychosis at all, it may be appropriate to omit assessment
of them altogether.

Auditory hallucinations If the patient describes auditory
hallucinations, certain further questions are required depending on the
type of experience, because of their diagnostic significance. Has the
patient heard a single voice or several? If there were several voices,
did they appear to talk to the patient or to each other about the
patient in the third person? The latter experience must be distinguished
from that of hearing actual people talking and believing that they are
discussing the patient (an idea or delusion of reference). If the
patient says that the voices are speaking to them, the interviewer
should find out what the voices say and, if the words are experienced as
commands, whether the patient feels that they must be obeyed. Note down
examples of the words spoken by hallucinatory voices.

Visual hallucinations Visual hallucinations must be distinguished from
visual illusions. Unless the hallucination is experienced at the time of
the interview, this distinction may be difficult because it depends on
the presence or absence of a visual stimulus which has been
misinterpreted. Ascertaining whether there is an 'as if' quality to the
image, or asking if it is seen 'out there, or in your mind's eye' may
aid the distinction. The interviewer should also distinguish
hallucinations from dissociative experiences. The latter are described
by the patient as the feeling of being in the presence of another person
or a spirit with whom they can converse. Such experiences are reported
by people with histrionic personality, although they are not confined to
them, and are encouraged by some religious groups. They have little
diagnostic significance.

Cognitive function Early on in the interview, any significant cognitive
difficulties will have already become apparent from the patient's
interactions with the interviewer and their responses to questions. If
so, the assessment of cognitive function should be brought forward, as
the result may lead the interviewer to curtail the rest of the interview
or to postpone it until an informant is available. The Mini-Mental State
Examination (Folstein et al., 1975) is a widely used cognitive screen in
the elderly or where dementia or other organic disorder is suspected;
see Chapter 14 for discussion of cognitive assessment in these contexts.
Conversely, if the interview is nearing completion and no evidence or
suspicion of any

49

50

50

Chapter 3 Assessment difficulties with memory or attention has arisen,
cognition can be assessed very briefly.

Orientation This is assessed by asking about the patient's awareness of
time, place, and person. Specific questions begin with the day, month,
and year. When assessing the replies, remember that many healthy people
do not know the exact date and that, understandably, patients in
hospital may be uncertain about the day of the week or their precise
location. If the patient cannot answer these basic questions correctly,
they should be asked about their own identity; this is preserved except
in severe dementia, dissociative disorders, or malingering.

Attention and concentration While taking the history the interviewer
should look out for evidence of attention and concentration. In this way
an opinion will already have been formed about these abilities before
reaching the mental state examination. Formal tests add to this
information, and can provide a semi-quantitative indication of changes
between occasions. A useful first test is 'serial sevens': the patient
is asked to subtract 7 from 100 and then to keep subtracting 7 from the
remainder until the resulting number is less than 7. The time taken to
do this is recorded, together with the number of errors. If poor
performance seems to be due to lack of skill in arithmetic, the patient
should be asked to do a simpler subtraction, or to state the months of
the year in reverse order.

Memory While taking the history the interviewer should compare the
patient's account of past events with those of any other informants, and
be alert for gaps or inconsistencies. If memory is impaired, any
evidence of confabulation (see page 355) should be noted. During the
mental state examination, tests are given of short-term, recent, and
remote memory. Since none of these is wholly satisfactory, the results
should be assessed alongside other information about memory and, if
there is any doubt, supplemented

by standardized psychological tests. Objective evidence of memory
impairment and its impact on normal activities (e.g.Â shopping, dressing)
is also essential. Short-term memory can be assessed by asking the
patient to memorize a name and a simple address, to repeat it
immediately (to make sure that it has been registered correctly), and to
retain it. The interview continues on other topics for 5 minutes before
recall is tested. A healthy person of average intelligence should make
only minor errors. If recall is imperfect, memory can be prompted
(e.g.Â by saying '35, Juniper . . .' and the patient may then recall
'Street'). Memory for recent events can be assessed by asking about news
items from the last few days. Remote memory can be assessed by asking
the patient to recall personal events or well-known items of news from
former years. Personal items could be the birth dates of children or the
names of grandchildren (provided these are known to the interviewer),
and news items could be the names of well-known former political
leaders. Awareness of the sequence of events is as important as the
recall of individual items. The reader is again referred to Chapter 14
for detailed assessment of cognitive functioning.

Insight A note that merely records 'insight present' or 'no insight' is
of little value. Instead the interviewer should enquire about the
different aspects of insight discussed on page 20. This includes the
patient's appraisal of their difficulties and prospects, and whether
they ascribe them to illness or to some other cause (e.g.Â persecution).
If the patient recognizes that they are ill, do they think that the
illness is physical or mental, and do they think that they need any
treatment? If so, what are their views on medication, psychotherapy, or
admission, as appropriate? The interviewer should also find out whether
the patient thinks that stressful life experiences or their own actions
have played a part in causing their illness. The patient's views on
these matters are a guide to their likely collaboration with treatment.

Other components of psychiatric assessment Although the psychiatric
history and mental state examination are the main parts of the
psychiatric assessment, several other elements may also be necessary as
part of the 'work-up' of a patient. This section does not cover more

specialized aspects of assessment (e.g.Â the use of rating scales; see
below) or those not directly linked to diagnosis or initial management
(e.g.Â assessment for psychotherapy).

51

Other components of psychiatric assessment

Physical examination Physical examination provides three kinds of
information in the assessment. â

It may reveal diagnostically useful signs (e.g.Â a goitre or absent
reflexes), and it is therefore particularly important in the diagnosis
or exclusion of organic disorders (see Chapter 14). Neurological
(including cerebrovascular) and endocrine systems most commonly require
detailed examination, although other systems should not be neglected.
The reader should consult a relevant textbook (e.g.Â Kaufman and
Milstein, 2017) if instruction is required in these aspects of clinical
practice.

â

Psychotropic drugs may produce physical side-effects, which need to be
identified or measured (e.g.Â hypertension, parkinsonism, or a rash).

â

The patient's general health, nutritional status, and self-care may all
be affected by psychiatric disorders.

For these reasons, a physical examination is an integral part of the
psychiatric assessment. In practice, however, the extent of the physical
examination, and the medical responsibility for it, vary. For example,
in the United Kingdom, the general practitioner may have recently
carried out an appropriate physical examination, and hence the latter is
unnecessary for most patients seen in outpatient clinic or the
community. In the case of inpatients, the psychiatrist is generally
responsible for their physical as well as their mental health, and every
newly admitted patient should have a full physical examination. Whatever
the circumstances, the psychiatrist should decide what physical
examination is relevant, and either carry it out themselves or ensure
that this is or has been done by another doctor. Discussion with a
neurologist or other physician is appropriate if the initial examination
reveals equivocal or complex findings, or if a second opinion is sought.
In some cases, more detailed assessment of higher neurological functions
is required, as in the neuropsychiatric examination, which is summarized
in Box 3.6. This may be a prelude to formal neuropsychological or
neurological assessment.

biochemical screening may be needed---for example, if there is a strong
suspicion of a treatable organic disorder, a familial dementia, or
learning disability. There is no one set of routine investigations that
is applicable to every case although, by convention, routine blood tests
(full blood count, renal, liver, and thyroid function) are usually
carried out on admission to hospital. Investigations are discussed
further in the chapters on individual syndromes and drug treatments.

Psychological assessment Clinical psychologists and psychological
testing can contribute to psychiatric assessment in several ways.
However, they are not required in most cases, and their availability is
increasingly limited in many settings. We therefore only introduce the
topic briefly here, illustrating the main forms and roles of
psychological assessment. For further information, see Powell (2009).

Neuropsychological assessment There are many psychometric tests
available that measure different aspects of neuropsychological
performance, ranging from overall intelligence to specific domains of
memory, speed of processing, or tests that putatively assess functioning
of a particular part of the brain (Lezak et al., 2012).
Neuropsychological testing in psychiatry is primarily used in the
following areas (Adams and Grant, 2009): â

In learning disability, where IQ defines the severity of the condition.

â

In dementia, where tests measure the severity and domains of cognitive
impairment.

â

If a decline in performance from premorbid abilities is suspected. In
this instance, a discrepancy may be seen between verbal and performance
IQ.

â

To monitor the progress of neuropsychological deficits during the course
of illness, by repeated administration of tests.

â

To reveal deficits that may be subtle and neglected clinically, but
which may be functionally important. For example, in schizophrenia there
are persistent impairments in specific domains of memory and attention,
and these predict poor outcome (see Chapter 11).

â

If an organic cause of psychiatric disorder is suspected, he profile of
test results may suggest the location of the lesion. However, this use
of neuropsychological testing to localize brain lesions has largely been
replaced by neuroimaging.

Laboratory and other investigations These vary according to the nature
of the differential diagnosis, the treatments that are being given, the
patient's general health, and the resources available. At one extreme,
no investigations may be necessary. At the other, extensive brain
imaging, genetic testing, and

51

52

52

Chapter 3 Assessment

Cognitive assessment The term 'cognitive' is sometimes used
interchangeably with the term 'neuropsychological'. In the present
context, however, cognitive assessment refers to the assessment of a
patient's cognitions (thoughts), assumptions, and patterns of thinking.
It is used to determine the suitability for, and focus of, cognitive
therapy (see Chapter 24).

Behavioural assessment Observations and ratings of behaviour are useful
in everyday clinical practice, especially for inpatients. When no
ready-made rating scale is available, ad hoc ratings can be devised. For
example, a scale could be devised for the nurses to show how much of the
time a patient with depression was active and occupied. This could be a
five-point scale, in which the criteria for each rating refer to
behaviour (e.g.Â playing cards or talking to other people) relevant to
the individual patient. As well as providing baseline information, the
scale could also help to monitor progress and response to treatment.
Behavioural assessment is also used to evaluate the components of a
patient's disorder---for example, in a phobia, the elements of
anticipatory anxiety, avoidance, and coping strategies, and their
relationship to stimuli in the environment (e.g.Â heights), more general
circumstances (e.g.Â crowded places), or internal cues (e.g.Â awareness of
heart action). Behavioural assessment is a necessary preliminary to
behaviour therapy (see page 683).

Personality assessment In the past, detailed personality testing,
including the use of 'projective' tests such as the Rorschach test, was
often part of psychiatric assessment. These tests are now rarely used in
psychiatry, as they do not measure aspects of personality that are most
relevant to psychiatric disorder, and they have not been shown to be
valid predictors of diagnosis or outcome. Instead, personality is
assessed descriptively as part of the history (described above),
supplemented for research purposes with schedules for diagnosing
personality disorders (see Chapter 15).

Risk assessment Risk assessment is an essential part of psychiatric
assessment. Risk in this context refers to risk of harm to others
(through violence or neglect) and risk to self

(through suicide, deliberate self-harm, or neglect). A failure to carry
out and clearly document a risk assessment, and the resulting risk
management plan, is a common criticism of enquiries that follow
homicides and suicides involving psychiatric patients. All assessments,
however brief, should include assessment of risk, and include a
statement about the presence and magnitude of any acute risks in the
record of the assessment. Risk to self is covered in Chapter 21. Here we
consider assessment of the risk of violence to others. Three kinds of
information are used to assess such risks---personal factors, factors
related to illness, and factors in the mental state. These factors are
summarized in Box 3.7, with the most important ones in each category
indicated by means of an asterisk. Further information on risk
assessment, in the context of forensic psychiatry, can be found in
Chapter 18. A history of violence is the best predictor of future
violence. Therefore it is important to seek full information on this not
only by questioning the patient but, in appropriate cases, from
additional sources, including relatives and close acquaintances,
previous medical and social services records, and in certain cases the
police. Antisocial, impulsive, or irritable features in the personality
are a further risk factor. Social circumstances at the time of any
previous episodes of violence may reveal provoking factors, and should
be compared with the patient's current situation (see below). A parental
history of violence, social isolation, and a recent life crisis also
increase the risk. Among the illness factors, psychotic disorder and
drug or alcohol misuse are important, and the combination of psychosis,
substance misuse, and personality disorder is associated with the
highest risk of violence. The mental state factors in Box 3.7 require
careful consideration. Thoughts of violence to others are very
important, especially if they are concerned with a specific person to
whom the patient has access. The entry concerning suicidal ideas refers
to the occasional killing, usually of family members, by a patient with
severe (usually psychotic) depression. Features of morbid jealousy and
other delusional disorders may pose specific risks of harm against a
perceived aggressor or rival (see page 307). Situational factors are
extremely important. Actual or perceived confrontational behaviour
towards the patient by others may trigger violence, as may a return to
situations in which violence has been expressed in the past.

53

Other components of psychiatric assessment

Box 3.7 Risk factors for harm to others Personal factors

Factors in the mental state

Previous violence to others\* Antisocial, impulsive, or irritable
personality traits Male and young Recent life crisis Poor social network
Divorced or separated Unemployed Social instability Parent with history
of violence

Irritability, hostility, anger Suspiciousness Thoughts of violence
towards others Threats to people to whom patient has access *Planning of
violence* Persecutory delusions Delusions of jealousy Delusions of
influence Hallucinations commanding violence to others Suicidal ideas
with severe depression Clouding of consciousness Lack of insight about
illness

Illness-related factors Pychotic symptoms *Substance abuse*
Treatment-resistant Poor compliance with treatment Stopped medication
recently

Situational factors Confrontation and provocation by others Situations
associated with previous violence Ready availability of weapons\*

Asterisks denote the most important factors in each category.

Enquiries should always be made about the availability of weapons.
Clinical experience and common sense have to be used to combine the risk
factors into an overall assessment. Risk assessment schedules have been
developed, but they cannot replace thorough and repeated clinical
assessment (Fazel et al., 2011). The assessment of risk should be shared
among the members of the team treating the patient or, if the patient is
in individual treatment, it may need to be discussed with a colleague.
In certain circumstances the assessment may need to be made known to an
individual at risk. Risk assessments should be reviewed regularly,
combining information from the members of the clinical team. For further
information, see Mullen and Ogloff (2009). Although risk assessment is
essential, and can be of value in a number of respects (Abderhalden et
al., 2008), it is also important to put it in context. First, the vast
majority of psychiatric patients pose no risk to others, and are more
likely to be the victims than the perpetrators of violence. The
assumption that all patients with severe mental illness, especially
schizophrenia, are potentially violent, is unwarranted and contributes
to the stigma that is attached to all psychiatric patients. Secondly, as
the physicist Niels Bohr said, 'Prediction

is very difficult, especially about the future.' Even a complete risk
assessment provides only a weak guide to future harm to others. Many
such acts are carried out by people with no past history of violence,
and many of those who have multiple risk factors will never commit
further acts of violence (Szmukler, 2001; Fazel et al., 2011c).

Assessment of needs For patients with severe or enduring mental illness,
particularly psychosis, it is important to focus on their needs in the
broadest sense (e.g.Â physical health, hygiene, social isolation,
domestic skills, etc.). The concern arises from findings that such needs
are often substantial, and are neither well recognized nor met. Although
the conceptual status of needs is not as straightforward as is often
implied, interest in its measurement is well established. The Camberwell
Assessment of Need scale is widely used. This rates 22 domains as
absent, present, or modified, has versions for different age and patient
groups (e.g.Â those with learning disability), and is available in
several languages (Phelan et al., 1995).

53

54

54

Chapter 3 Assessment

Special kinds of psychiatric assessment So far this chapter has been
concerned with the complete psychiatric assessment as carried out by
psychiatrists on patients who are being seen in a psychiatric setting,
and for whom sufficient time is available. However, most assessments do
not meet all of these criteria. Many are conducted by non-specialists in
non-psychiatric settings, with limited time and imperfect surroundings.
Nevertheless, a well-focused interview can often yield a reliable
diagnosis and plan of action in a surprisingly short time. This section
considers how psychiatric assessment and interviewing are modified in
these circumstances.

Interviews in an emergency In an emergency, the interview has to be
brief, focused on the key issues, and effective in leading to a
provisional diagnosis and a plan of immediate action. These assessments
generally involve acutely distressed or disturbed patients, and often
take place in difficult settings, such as a police station or medical
ward. The diagnoses that are usually in question are the psychoses
(schizophrenia, mania, drug-induced), and delirium and other organic
brain disorders. Throughout, the interviewer should consider which
questions need to be answered at the time and which can be deferred. The
most important issues are those that impact on immediate management
decisions. The latter are likely to include whether the patient should
be detained, whether laboratory investigations are indicated, whether
medication should be given, and whether acute medical treatment is also
required. Because the assessment may be limited by the patient's ability
or willingness to participate fully, seek out all available information
before commencing the interview. For example, ask whoever is
accompanying the person what they know about the patient and the recent
events. The patient's belongings may reveal evidence of prior illness or
medication. If the patient has a past psychiatric history, strenuous
efforts should be made to obtain their case notes or to contact a
professional involved in their care. The safety of the patient and those
around them must also be actively considered when planning the nature
and location of the interview. An emergency assessment should, wherever
possible, include the following core information:

â

The presenting problem in terms of symptoms or behaviours, together with
their onset, course, and present severity.

â

Other relevant symptoms, together with their onset, course, and
severity.

â

History of psychiatric or medical disorder.

â

Current medication.

â

Use of alcohol and drugs.

â

Recent stressful precipitants.

â

Social circumstances, and the possibilities of support.

â

Risk assessment, including the immediate risks of harm to self and
others.

circumstances

and

possible

Interviews in general practice In general practice, many presentations
are with psychiatric disorders, notably depression and anxiety
disorders, as well as substance misuse and somatoform disorders. Such
cases commonly present with physical complaints (e.g.Â chronic pain,
fatigue), and the doctor needs to be aware of the possibility that the
symptoms reflect an underlying psychiatric disorder. The interplay of
physical and psychological factors is emphasized by the finding that
general practitioners who diagnose psychiatric disorder accurately, as
compared with a standard assessment, have a good knowledge of general
medicine (Goldberg and Huxley, 1980). Other patients present in primary
care with an explicit psychological complaint (e.g.Â low mood, panic
attacks). Whether the presentation is physical or psychological, it is a
challenge to undertake an effective psychiatric assessment, given the
very limited time that is usually available. There are two components to
achieving this goal. First, the chances of detecting psychiatric
disorder can be increased by attending to the way that the interview is
conducted---for example, by being alert to cues in the patient's
history, appearance, and behaviour. Secondly, screening questions can be
used that detect the common disorders and identify areas that may
require more detailed assessment (see Table 3.1). Goldberg and Huxley
(1980) reported the first substantive work in this field, and described
how the assessment of a patient in general practice whose complaint may
have a psychological cause should cover four areas:

5

Special kinds of psychiatric assessment â

General psychological adjustment: fatigue, irritability, poor
concentration, and the feeling of being under stress.

â

Anxiety and worries: physical symptoms of anxiety and tension, phobias,
and persistent worrying thoughts.

â

Symptoms of depression: persistent depressive mood, tearfulness, crying,
hopelessness, self-blame, thoughts that life is unbearable, ideas about
suicide, earlymorning waking, diurnal mood variation, weight loss, and
loss of libido.

â

The psychological context (i.e.Â the patient's personality and
circumstances): although often known to the general practitioner from
previous contacts, this should be reviewed and brought up to date.

Subsequently, more formalized sets of screening questions for
psychiatric disorders were developed which are suitable for brief
interviews in primary care, and which focus on the disorders that are
commonly encountered in this setting. The questions in Table 3.1 are
adapted from Spitzer et al.Â (1994). If the interview is conducted with
psychological issues in mind, and screening questions are used
appropriately, then it should be possible to identify

Table 3.1 Brief screening questions for psychiatric disorders During the
past month

Screening for

1.  Have you felt low in spirits?

Depression

2.  Do you enjoy things less than you usually do?

Depression

3.  Have you been feeling generally anxious?

Neurosis (anxiety)

4.  Are you worried about your health or other specific things?

Neurosis (health anxiety)

5.  Has your eating felt out of control?

Eating disorder

6.  Do you drink alcohol? If so, ask the FAST or CAGE questions\*

Alcohol problem

7.  Present three items and ask patient to recall them after 2 minutes

Dementia/delirium

many psychiatric disorders in the 10 to 15 minutes that are available in
primary care. A preliminary plan can be made, and a further appointment
arranged to evaluate the diagnosis and discuss management in more
detail.

Interviews in a general hospital Similar considerations apply to
interviews that are conducted in a general medical setting, such as an
accident and emergency department or a medical ward (Segal and Ranjith,
2016). In these situations, particular attention again needs to be given
to physical symptoms and the possibility of somatoform disorder, and to
the assessment of suicidal risk. Delirium and the possibility of other
organic disorders is also a common reason for a psychiatric consultation
involving a medical or surgical inpatient, and hence a focused
assessment of cognitive function is often required.

Interviews in the patient's home Many services now try to assess a
significant proportion of patients at home, particularly in the case of
severely ill and disorganized patients who would otherwise fail to
attend for assessment. Such a visit often throws new light on the
patient's home life and gives a more realistic evaluation of the
relationship between family members. Home visits are especially
important in the assessment of elderly patients for whom psychiatric and
physical difficulties frequently coexist. Before arranging a visit the
psychiatrist should, if possible, talk to the general practitioner, who
often has firsthand knowledge of the patient and their family. The
safety of the interviewer should always be considered before embarking
on a domiciliary visit. The interviewer should ensure that another
member of the team is aware of the location and time of the visit. If
there is any concern about potential risk, a joint assessment should be
made.

Interviews with the family

- FAST and CAGE each consist of four questions designed to detect
  alcohol misuse (see Chapter 20.

In child and adolescent psychiatry in particular, an interview is
usually conducted with several family members together to find out their
attitudes to the patient and the illness, and the nature of any
conflicts within the

55

56

56

Chapter 3 Assessment family (see Chapter 16). The interviewer should
remember that the family has usually tried to help the patient but
failed, and may be feeling demoralized, frustrated, or guilty, so they
should be careful not to add to these feelings. The interviewer should
ask the following questions: â

How has the illness affected family life, and how has the family tried
to cope?

â

How do different members of the family perceive the illness and its
origins?

â

Are the family members willing to try new ways of helping the patient?

For further information about family interviews, see Goldberg (1997).
Family interviewing in the context of family therapy is covered in
Chapter 16.

Patient characteristics that may affect the interview Interviews can
prove difficult for a variety of reasons. Many of these reflect the
situation (e.g.Â noisy surroundings, lack of time) or interviewer
characteristics (e.g. inexperience, tiredness). However, other problems
arise from the characteristics of the patient, and these are outlined
here. Remember that such problems can be diagnostically useful---for
example, a patient may be monosyllabic because of depression, and a
disturbed patient may have delirium.

Anxious patients Although anxiety may be part of the patient's disorder,
it may also relate to the interview. If the person seems unduly anxious,
the interviewer can say that many people feel anxious when they first
take part in a psychiatric interview, and then go on to explore the
patient's concerns.

Taciturn patients Taciturn patients can be encouraged to speak more
freely if the interviewer shows non-verbal expressions of concern
(e.g.Â leaning forward a little in the chair with an expression of
interest), in addition to verbal expressions that are part of any good
interview.

Garrulous patients It is not easy to curb an over-talkative patient. If
efforts to focus the interview are unsuccessful, the interviewer should
wait for a natural break in the flow of speech and then explain that,
because time is limited, they will need to interrupt from time to time
to help the patient to keep focused on the issues that are important for
planning treatment. If this proposal is made tactfully, most garrulous
patients will accept it.

Overactive patients Some patients are so active and restless that
systematic questioning about their mental state is difficult. The
interviewer then has to limit their questions to a few that seem
particularly important, and concentrate on observing the patient's
behaviour. However, if the patient is being seen in an emergency, some
of their overactivity may be a reaction to other people's attempts to
restrain them. In such cases a quiet but confident approach by the
interviewer may calm the patient enough to allow more adequate
examination.

Confused patients When the patient gives a history in a muddled way, or
appears perplexed, the interviewer should test cognitive functions early
in the interview. If there is evidence of impaired cognition or
consciousness, the interviewer should try to orientate and reassure the
patient, before starting the interview again in a simplified form. In
such cases every effort should be made to interview another informant.

Uncooperative or 'difficult' patients Some patients are reluctant to be
interviewed and have come at the insistence of a third party (e.g.Â their
partner). If the patient seems unwilling to collaborate, the interviewer
should talk over the circumstances of the referral, and try to persuade
them that the interview will be in their own interests. Remember that
lack of cooperation may occur because the patient does not realize that
they are ill (e.g.Â some patients with delirium, or with psychosis). In
such cases it may be necessary to interview an informant before
returning to the patient.

57

Patient characteristics that may affect the interview Some patients (or,
in the case of a child, their parents) try to dominate the interview,
while others adopt an unduly friendly approach that threatens to convert
the interview into a social conversation. In either case, the
interviewer should explain why he needs to guide the patient towards
relevant issues. In the longer term, developing a manner which is
confident and assertive, but not domineering, helps to avoid such
problems.

Unresponsive patients If the patient is mute or stuporous, it is
essential to interview an informant who can describe the onset and
course of the condition. With regard to the mental state, the
interviewer can only observe behaviour, but this can be informative.
Because some stuporous patients change rapidly from inactivity to
violent overactivity, it is wise to have help available when seeing such
a patient. Before deciding that a patient is mute, the interviewer
should allow adequate time for reply, and try several topics. If the
patient still fails to respond, attempt to persuade them to communicate
in writing. Apart from observations of behaviour, the interviewer should
note whether the patient's eyes are open or closed. If they are open,
note whether they follow objects, move apparently without purpose, or
are fixed. If the eyes are closed, find out whether the patient opens
them on request and, if not, whether attempts at opening them are
resisted. A physical examination, including neurological assessment, is
essential in all such cases. In addition, certain signs that are found
in catatonia should be sought (see page 16).

Patients with learning disability When interviewing people with learning
disability, certain points should receive particular attention.
Questions should be brief and worded in a simple way. It may be
difficult to avoid closed questions, but if they are used the answers
should be checked. For example, if the question 'Are you sad?' is
answered 'Yes', the question 'Are you happy?' should not be answered in
the same way. People with learning disability may have difficulty in
timing the onset of symptoms or describing their sequence, and to obtain
this and other information it is important to interview an informant.
For further discussion of the assessment of patients with learning
disability, see Chapter 17.

Patients from another culture The interviewer may be unfamiliar with the
patient's culture and may find it more difficult to ascertain the
significance of the patient's manner and appearance. Certain factors may
have different implications for a patient from another culture to those
that they would have in the interviewer's culture. The stigma of mental
illness may be greater. Priorities within the family may be different,
with the wellbeing of the family outweighing that of its individual
members. Emotional disorder may be experienced more in terms of physical
symptoms than of mental ones. Expectations and fears about treatment may
be based on knowledge of health services in the country of origin.
Behaviours that suggest illness in one culture may be socially
sanctioned ways of expressing distress in others (e.g.Â displays of
extreme emotion). Ideas about causation may differ, an extreme example
being that distress may be ascribed to the actions of evil spirits. It
may be particularly difficult to decide whether strongly held ideas are
delusional or normal within the culture or subculture. The influence of
cultural differences on diagnosis and classification was discussed on
page 32.

Patients who do not speak the same language as the interviewer If the
patient and interviewer do not speak the same language, it will need to
be decided who the best choice of interpreter is. There are advantages
to a family member interpreting, as they are often trusted by the
patient and can potentially help the interviewer understand some of the
complexities of a different cultural context. However, there are
disadvantages, including incorrect translations and possible reluctance
of the interviewee to share sensitive information with their relative.
If an official interpreter is used, it is valuable if they are also a
health care professional as they can then assist in the assessment
itself. Whatever interpreter is used, bear in mind gender issues; in
particular, women from paternalistic cultures or from some religious
groups may be reluctant to describe personal matters to a male
interviewer. The presence of a third person and the process of
translation affect the interview and lengthen it considerably. It may
therefore be necessary to focus on the essential topics in a first
assessment, and complete the process in a second interview.

57

58

58

Chapter 3 Assessment

Children and the elderly Psychiatric assessment of children and
adolescents is described in Chapter 16 and discussed by Bostic and

Martin (2009). Assessment in elderly patients is described in Chapter 19
and by Jacoby (2009).

Integrating and evaluating the information So far this account of
assessment has been largely about data gathering. The following section
explains how the facts that emerge are evaluated and integrated with
knowledge of psychiatry to arrive at a diagnosis, provide prognostic
information, and determine treatment decisions. We emphasize again that,
in practice, information is evaluated as it is collected, with
hypotheses being tested as they arise during the assessment. Clearly,
this skill takes time to learn and also requires a solid foundation of
psychiatric knowledge.

Drawing conclusions and making decisions The areas in which an opinion
must be formed, or a decision made, are listed in Box 3.8. It may also
be useful to think in terms of a set of rhetorical questions that need
to be answered: â

What is the diagnosis?

Box 3.8 Topics to be evaluated in a psychiatric assessment The patient's
problem and its consequences â Diagnosis â Impact on self and others
(dysfunction) â Risk to self and others â Effects on others The patient
and their circumstances â Personal history â Current circumstances â
Personality Aetiology The response to the patient's problem â Treatment
â Prognosis The patient's understanding of the above

â

What are the effects on the patient's life?

â

Are there immediate risks that need to be managed?

â

What are the patient's current circumstances?

â

Does the patient have any dependants?

â

Why has the disorder occurred?

â

What treatment is indicated?

â

What is the prognosis?

â

What other information is needed to answer these questions?

â

What does the patient need and want to know?

What is the diagnosis? The first step is to make a diagnosis using
information about the symptoms and signs that have been obtained from
the history and mental state examination and, in relevant cases, from
the physical examination and any investigations that have been
performed. This information is then used to make a diagnosis based upon
knowledge of psychiatric classification and the criteria for each
diagnostic category. Sometimes a diagnosis has to be provisional, or
several diagnostic possibilities entertained, until further information
becomes available. The diagnosis of specific psychiatric disorders is
discussed in subsequent chapters; here we are concerned with the general
approach to assessment. Diagnosis is accompanied by an assessment of the
severity of the disorder to determine whether it is mild, moderate, or
severe. Remember that the outcome of some assessments is that the
patient does not have evidence of any psychiatric disorder.

What are the effects on the patient's life? When patients describe their
problems, they will include both symptoms and other matters. A key
purpose of the assessment is to identify and characterize the
psychopathology, as it is these that determine which disorder will be
diagnosed. However, it is also necessary to enquire about the effects
that the patient's symptoms are having on their life, in part since
evidence of impaired functioning is relevant to, or an essential part
of, most diagnoses. It is therefore helpful to ascertain the

59

Integrating and evaluating the information patient's usual level of
functioning and how far the current state differs from it.

Are there immediate risks that need to be managed? As we have discussed,
risk assessment is a core part of the psychiatric assessment. Once any
risks have been identified, they need to be managed. For example, if the
patient is at risk of self-neglect or self-harm, this will influence
whether compulsory admission is necessary. If a risk of harm to another
party has been identified, that individual may need to be warned. Risk
management is covered in Chapter 18.

What are the patient's current circumstances? Knowledge of the patient's
accommodation, finances, interests, values, and relationships may
influence both management and prognosis. For example, a homeless person
will require a different care package from a patient with the same
disorder who has a stable home and a carer. The current circumstances
may also act as maintaining factors for the disorder, and therefore be a
target for intervention. If the patient has children or other
dependants, their welfare must be taken into account. If necessary, more
information should be obtained, and a plan developed, to ensure that
this duty of care can be discharged.

Why has the disorder occurred? Aetiology is discussed in Chapter 5. Here
we are concerned with how aetiological factors are applied to the
individual patient. A useful approach is a chronological one, with
causes being divided into those that are predisposing, precipitating,
and perpetuating. Predisposing factors may be genetic or related to
temperament, or to damage to the brain in early life. Precipitating
factors are often stressful life events. Perpetuating (maintaining)
factors may be continuing stressors or be related to the way that the
patient attempts to cope with stressors (e.g.Â avoiding anxiety-provoking
situations, misusing alcohol). Perpetuating factors are highly relevant
to treatment. Intersecting this chronological approach to causation, one
can divide the causal factors into biological, psychological, and
social. A comment about personality is appropriate here. Clear
appreciation of a patient's personality is part of the full
understanding of their life history and their psychiatric disorder. For
this reason we emphasize the collection of sufficient and reliable
information about personality during the assessment. As well as aiding

the aetiological formulation, this knowledge is useful when planning
management and predicting outcome. For example, comorbid personality
disorder worsens the prognosis of many conditions, and may also
influence decisions about psychological treatment.

What treatment is indicated? A key decision to be made is what, if any,
treatment the patient requires. If treatment is indicated, the options
should be discussed with the patient, and the evidence for each possible
treatment presented in terms of efficacy, side-effects, etc. These
issues are discussed in later chapters, especially Chapters 24 and 25.

What is the prognosis? The prognosis depends primarily on the disorder
concerned. It also depends on the individual characteristics of the
patient (e.g.Â their age, severity of symptoms, comorbid conditions,
etc.). Not all of this information may be available after an initial
assessment. However, it is usually possible to make a cautious
prediction about the short-term outcome at this stage, and most patients
will expect and appreciate this. The patient can be told that more
accurate and longer-term prognostic judgements will be possible as
further information is obtained, and the course of the disorder is
followed over subsequent weeks and months.

What other information is needed to answer these questions? For many
patients, assessment is not complete after one interview. Assessment
should be viewed as an iterative process in which opinions and
conclusions undergo continuing review (both within the initial interview
and thereafter), as further information about the patient and their
illness is obtained. For descriptive purposes, this chapter focuses on
the diagnostic purpose of assessment, but in practice there is no firm
distinction between this and the other goals of assessment (e.g.Â to
assess risk, or response to treatment). Each interaction between the
psychiatrist and the patient contains a mixture of assessment,
evaluation, review, and decision-making. Assessment, and its revision,
is a process that continues throughout treatment and follow-up.

What does the patient need and want to know? The guiding principle is
that, as a rule, a patient (and their carer) should be given as much
information as possible about the diagnosis, and the likely prognosis
and presumed causation, and should be fully involved in,

59

60

60

Chapter 3 Assessment and aware of, all decisions that affect them. The
practical implications are introduced below, and are discussed in later
chapters with regard to specific disorders and treatments.

Other issues that affect how the information is evaluated Disease and
illness These concepts were introduced in Chapter 2, but a brief mention
is required here. Illness refers to a patient's experience, and disease
refers to the pathological cause of this experience. Patients can be
diseased without feeling ill, or feel ill without having an identifiable
disease. In general medicine, patients tell doctors about their
experience of illness, and doctors seek to discover the disease that is
causing the illness, as this will guide treatment. Patients and their
relatives also want to find a cause and a treatment for their illness,
but they do not always understand how a medical diagnosis helps in
finding these. Psychiatrists also search for disease as a cause of
illness, but should always look for other causes, too. The patient's
experience can be understood sometimes as an extreme variation from the
norm, sometimes as a reaction to circumstances, and sometimes as a
combination of both. Other mental health professionals may emphasize one
or other of these factors to a greater extent, depending on their
background. For example, psychologists focus on variation from the norm,
whereas social workers focus on the role of reaction to circumstances
and the place of the patient in a

family and social context. These differences in emphasis can lead to
apparent disagreements during multidisciplinary assessment. It is
important that psychiatrists are aware of this possibility, so that they
can help to integrate the social, psychological, and medical approaches,
and thereby use the various skills of the multidisciplinary team to best
help the patient.

Evaluations by experienced psychiatrists Throughout this chapter, a
systematic and logical approach to assessment has been advocated, in
which information is collected carefully and eliciting of symptoms and
signs forms the basis of diagnosis. Anyone new to psychiatry should
follow this approach closely until they have mastered the process and
have a good grounding of psychiatric knowledge. However, studies show
that experienced psychiatrists actually carry out assessments rather
differently. They make rapid diagnoses, often within the first few
minutes of the interview, that presumably reflect the predictive power
of the patient's initial appearance, behaviour, and utterances (Gauron
and Dickinson, 1966; Kendell, 1975). The psychiatrist may not realize
the cues and clues that they are using to form these diagnostic
judgements. Schwartz and Wiggins (1987) called this process
typification. The rest of the interview then functions primarily to
confirm and refine this diagnostic opinion. Regardless of their
seniority and experience, the interviewer should always ensure that they
have not come to premature conclusions about a case, causing them to
fail to gather necessary information, to interpret findings in a biased
way, or to disregard contrary evidence.

Recording and communicating information Having completed the assessment,
it is necessary to record and communicate your understanding of the
patient, their disorder, and its management. These records and
communications take a variety of forms (e.g.Â written, verbal,
electronic), and differ according to their source, purpose, and intended
recipients. As with assessment itself, it is helpful to learn the
'traditional' and relatively detailed formats for communicating
information (e.g.Â case summaries and formulations), while also
appreciating that in practice many other--- and briefer---modes of
communication are the norm. Regardless of format, all communications
should follow certain basic principles.

â

Information should be presented clearly and concisely. Include important
negatives (e.g.Â 'He is not suicidal'). Avoid repetition of information
that is already known to the recipient. Use subheadings to highlight key
points (e.g.Â 'Diagnosis: . . . .', 'Current medication: . . . .', 'Acute
risks: . . . .').

â

In many countries, patients are entitled to read what is written about
them. This information may also be used for legal purposes. In some
countries, including the UK, it is now expected that patients are copied
into all correspondence between doctors that concerns them, unless there
is a compelling reason not to do so or unless they decline the offer.
Ensure that all information is accurate, and that any opinions

61

Recording and communicating information or inferences you make are
reasonable, and avoid unwarranted or unnecessarily personal comments. It
is sometimes better to communicate verbally with the doctor or other
health professional to expand on some details of the case. â

All communications should be kept confidential.

Here we consider a range of ways in which information is recorded and
shared---within the psychiatric team, and between the psychiatrist and
other doctors, but first, between the psychiatrist and the patient.

Discussing the diagnosis and management plan with the patient When
discussing the conclusions from your assessment with the patient, and
with their relatives, it may be useful to begin by briefly summarizing
the key points for them. This helps to ensure that you have understood
the history correctly and have not omitted anything which in their
opinion is significant. This process is also helpful in that it
demonstrates your engagement and empathy with the patient, and sets the
scene for discussion about the diagnosis and how you propose to proceed.
When introducing the diagnosis, do not use medical terms without
explaining them. The patient may misunderstand their meaning or make
incorrect assumptions about their implications. Explain the significance
of the diagnosis in terms of cause, prognosis, and treatment
options---and any diagnostic uncertainty that remains. When discussing
the proposed plan of management, it is useful to begin by asking what
treatment the patient has been expecting, and whether they have strong
views---for example, with regard to the use of medication. Whether drug
treatment or psychological treatment is planned, there are several
relevant issues to raise and discuss (see Chapters 24 and 25). It is
important to set aside enough time for this explanation during the
interview, as it is likely to improve concordance with the treatment
plan. If, after they have been given a full explanation, the patient
refuses to accept part of the plan, the interviewer should document
this, and try to negotiate an acceptable alternative. Box 3.9 summarizes
the points that should be considered when communicating with patients
and their relatives. In the NHS in the UK, this information will usually
be recorded on a pro forma as part of the Care Programme Approach (CPA)
for any patients who require either prolonged or complex secondary care
(see Chapter 26).

Box 3.9 Communicating with patients and relatives The diagnosis What is
the diagnosis? If uncertain, what are the main possibilities? â What
further information or investigations are required? â What are the
implications of the diagnosis for this patient? â What may have caused
the condition? â

The care plan What is the plan, and how will it help the patient and
their family? â Are there any legal powers to be used? If so, why, and
what is their effect? â What needs to be communicated about medication
or psychological treatments? â

Who does what? What is the role of the psychiatrist, and how often will
they see the patient? â Who is the key worker and what will they do? â
What is the role of the other members of the psychiatric team? â What is
the role of the general practitioner? â What can the family (or other
carers) do to help? â

Emergencies What are the likely acute risks, and how might they be
avoided? â Are there possible early warning signs? â Who should be
approached in an emergency, and how can they be contacted? â

The importance of case notes Good case records, whatever their format,
are important in every branch of medicine. In psychiatry they are vital
because a large amount of information has to be collected from a variety
of sources. It is important to summarize the information in a way that
allows essential points to be grasped readily by someone new to the
case, especially a colleague who has been called to deal with an
emergency. Case notes are not just an aide-mÃ©moire for the writer---they
are important for others concerned with the patient. They are also of
medicolegal importance. If a psychiatrist is called upon to justify
their actions after

61

62

62

Chapter 3 Assessment a serious untoward incident, after a complaint has
been made, or in court, he or she will be greatly assisted by notes
which are comprehensive but concise, well organized, and legible.
Indeed, imagining being in a situation of this kind may help the
psychiatrist to judge what constitutes appropriate record-keeping, not
just for case notes but for other forms of communication.

Inpatient notes Admission notes When a patient is admitted to hospital
urgently, the doctor often has only limited time available. The
admission note should contain at least the following: â

The reasons for admission.

â

Any information that is required for a decision about provisional
diagnosis and immediate treatment. This may include a physical
examination and laboratory investigations.

â

Any other relevant information that will not be available later, such as
details of the mental state on admission (and prior to medication), and
information from any informant who may not be available again.

If there is time, a systematic history can be added. However,
inexperienced interviewers sometimes spend too much time on details that
are not essential to the immediate decisions, while failing to record
details of the mental state that may be transitory and yet of great
importance in diagnosis. The rest of the assessment can always be
completed over the next few days. The admission note should end with a
brief plan of immediate management, which has been agreed with the
senior nurses caring for the patient at the time.

Continuation (progress) notes Continuation notes for both inpatients and
patients in the community need to be succinct, clear, and regularly
updated, and to contain specific information if they are to be of value.
Instead of recording merely that the patient feels better or is behaving
more normally, record in what ways they feel better (e.g.Â less
preoccupied with thoughts of suicide). The notes should also record
treatments, including both medication and other interventions,
accompanied by a brief explanation of the rationale for the treatment,
and the temporal relationship between a change in treatment (e.g.Â dose
of drug) and change in clinical state. A note should be

made of any information or advice given by the doctor to the patient or
their relatives. This should be sufficient to make it clear whether the
patient was appropriately informed when consenting to any new treatment.
Observations of progress are made not only by psychiatrists but also by
nurses, occupational therapists, clinical psychologists, and social
workers. These other professionals may also keep separate notes, but it
is desirable that important items of information are written in the
medical record. A note should also be kept of formal discussions between
members of the team.

Discharge notes It is particularly important to set out clearly the
plans made for the patient's further care on discharge from hospital,
including the identity of the key worker, and how the patient or their
carer can contact the team in an emergency. These arrangements are
formalized in the UK in the CPA (see above and Chapter 26), in part
because it is recognized that the days after discharge are a
particularly high-risk period for suicide. A phone call to the patient's
general practitioner is desirable if there are any acute concerns about
the patient's welfare, or if there is any delay anticipated in
production of the discharge letter or case summary. A statement of the
diagnosis at the time of discharge is also important, since it may have
changed since admission.

Case summaries Case summaries are generally used for inpatients, but
they are valuable for all patients with complex, longstanding, or
recurrent disorders. In the inpatient setting they are ideally written
in two parts, the first part being written soon after admission, to
record the initial presentation, and the second part being written at
discharge, filling in the subsequent progress. In practice, however, a
single summary covering all of the salient aspects of the case is often
produced, not least since inpatient stays are generally much shorter
than was the case in the past. Summaries should be brief but
comprehensive, written in telegraphic style using a standard format, to
help other people to find particular items of information. A completed
summary should seldom need to be any longer than 1--1.5 typewritten
pages. An example is given in Box 3.10. The completed summary will
provide a valuable record should the patient

63

Recording and communicating information

Box 3.10 Example of a case summary Patient: Mrs AB. Date of birth:
7.2.83 Consultant: Dr C. Summary compiled by Dr D (CT2 core trainee)
Admitted: 27.6.17 Discharged: 12.8.17 Reason for referral: Attempted
suicide by hanging. Continuing suicidal intent and low mood. Family
history: Father, 66, retired gardener, well, mood swings, not close to
patient. Mother died from cancer when patient aged 4. Sister, 37,
divorced, well. Mental illness: father's brother---'manic depression';
father's sister---depression. Personal history and current
circumstances: Birth and early development normal. Childhood health
good. School 6--16, uneventful, 5 GCSEs. Few friends. Worked 16--22,
shop assistant. Several boyfriends; married at 22, husband 2 years
older, lorry driver. Unhappy in last year after discovering his
infidelity. Children: Jane, 7, well; Paul, 4, epileptic. Current
financial worries. Previous illness: Aged 31, (postnatal) depressive
illness lasting a few weeks, saw counsellor. Hypothyroidism, on
thyroxine. Previous personality: Cyclothymic, but usually anxious and
with low self-esteem. Interested in supernatural phenomena. Drinks
occasionally, non-smoker, no illicit drugs. History of present illness:
For 3 months, increasingly low and tearful, waking early, worse in
morning. Anhedonic, loss of appetite and weight. Worrying about
marriage, and has become preoccupied that she is responsible for her
son's epilepsy. Strong suicidal ideation, culminating in abortive
attempt to hang herself on night of admission. Getting worse despite
venlafaxine 75--150 mg/day for 2 months, taken regularly. On waiting
list for CBT. On examination: Physical: n.a.d., no evidence of
myxoedema. Mental state: dishevelled, agitated, psychomotor retardation.
Speech: slow, quiet, normal form. Thoughts: the preoccupations noted
above are held intensely, and the belief that she caused her son's
epilepsy (because she did not take enough care in pregnancy) is
delusional in nature. Prominent suicidal ideation, and

become ill again, especially if they are under the care of a different
team. Some of the items in the summary call for comment.

intent, wishing she were dead. Mood: subjectively and objectively very
depressed, with self-blame, hopelessness. Perceptions: imagines she sees
and hears her dead grandmother talking to her 'as if she was still
alive'. Cognition: attention and concentration poor. Memory not formally
tested. Insight: accepts she might be ill, consents to admission; her
views on treatment are unclear.

Special investigations: Haemoglobin, electrolytes, TSH, n.a.d. Treatment
and progress: Initially on close observations. Venlafaxine increased to
225 mg/day, augmented by olanzapine, 10 mg nocte. However, condition
deteriorated, and given course of six right unilateral ECTs (with
consent). Mood improved after several treatments, suicidal ideation
reduced, and no longer delusional. Condition on discharge: Moderate
residual depressive symptoms. No suicidal thoughts and realizes her
son's epilepsy was not her fault. Hopeful but worried about future of
marriage. Childcare---no concerns, husband and patient's sister (lives
nearby) are supportive. Diagnosis: (ICD-10, on admission) F33.3
Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode severe with psychotic
symptoms. Now resolving. Prognosis: Short-term prognosis is good, but at
risk of further depressive episodes. Prognosis will be improved by
compliance with treatment, and by resolving marital problems

Further management Under CPA. Key worker is Jo Smith, community
psychiatric nurse, who will visit on 17.8.17. â Continue venlafaxine 225
mg daily and olanzapine 10 mg nocte. GP to prescribe, and to monitor for
metabolic syndrome (due in 1 month). Plan to remain on antidepressant
for at least 9 months; olanzapine to be reviewed after 3 months. â On
waiting list for CBT---expected to start in a few weeks. â Patient and
husband will arrange marriage counselling. â Patient has a copy of her
care plan, and she and her husband know who to contact in an emergency.
â First review with psychiatrist in 2 weeks. â

â

The reason for referral should state the problem rather than anticipate
the diagnosis---for example, 'found wandering at night in an agitated
state, shouting about the devil', rather than 'schizophrenia.'

63

64

64

Chapter 3 Assessment â

Unless an abnormality has been found, the results of the physical
examination and investigations can be summarized briefly.

Statement of the problem Differential diagnosis Aetiology Plan of
treatment Prognosis

â

When the mental state is recorded, a comment should be made under each
heading as to whether or not any abnormality has been found.

â

Diagnoses should be made using ICD-10 or DSM-5 criteria. If the
diagnosis is uncertain, alternatives can be listed, with an indication
of which is judged to be more likely.

The description of personality is important. The writer should strive to
find words and phrases that characterize the person in a non-judgemental
way.

â

The summary of treatment should include the dosage and duration of any
medication. The roles of the mental health team and of the general
practitioner and

Box 3.11 The formulation

â

Box 3.12 Example of a formulation (Note: This formulation refers to the
case summarized in Box 3.10, at the time of admission. By comparing the
two ways of condensing information, the reader can appreciate the
difference between the two approaches.)

Opening statement Mrs AB is a 34-year-old married woman with a 3-month
history of worsening depression, now with psychotic features. Admitted
following serious suicide attempt.

Differential diagnosis Recurrent depressive disorder (current episode:
psychotic). For: subjective and objective low mood, anhedonia, anergia,
poor concentration, early-morning waking, loss of appetite and libido,
self-blame. Suicidal. Delusional belief that she caused her son's
epilepsy. Past history of depressive episode. Against: none, unless
current depressive episode is better explained by one of the diagnoses
listed below. Bipolar disorder (current episode: depressive). For:
depressive symptoms as listed above; longstanding mood variability,
family history of bipolar disorder. Against: no evidence of past
clinically significant mood elevation, nor current hypomanic or mixed
affective symptoms. Organic mood disorder. For: history of
hypothyroidism. Against: no current symptoms or signs of hypothyroidism
(or other abnormalities on physical exam); TSH normal. Schizophrenia.
For: delusional belief regarding her son's epilepsy; hears and sees her
dead grandmother. Against: the delusion is mood-congruent given her
severe depression. The perceptual abnormalities are not true

hallucinations, and are consistent with her supernatural beliefs. She
has no first-rank symptom of schizophrenia.

Conclusions: Psychotic depression. F33.3 Recurrent depressive disorder,
current episode severe with psychotic symptoms.

Aetiology Predisposing: genetic---family history of mood disorder. Death
of mother when aged 4. Unhappy childhood and not close to father.
Personality traits. Previous depressive episode. Precipitating:
discovery of husband's infidelity. Perpetuating: about debts.

ongoing

marital

arguments,

worry

Treatment Given her diagnosis, and non-response to an adequate trial of
venlafaxine, plan to increase dose and augment with an antipsychotic
(olanzapine). ECT may be required if no response. Is on waiting list for
CBT. Joint interviews with the patient and her husband may help to
reduce the marital problems. Suggest sources of financial advice to
reduce this stressor.

Prognosis Mrs AB has a good chance of a full therapeutic response to the
planned treatment plan, especially if the marital problems can be
improved. However, given her history and the predisposing factors noted
above, she is at increased risk of further depressive episodes,
particularly at times of stress.

65

Recording and communicating information any other agencies in the
treatment plan should be made clear. â

The prognosis should be stated briefly but as definitely as possible.
Statements such as 'prognosis guarded' are of little help to anyone.

Formulations A formulation is an exercise in clinical reasoning that
helps the writer to think clearly about the diagnosis, aetiology,
treatment, and prognosis (see Box 3.11). Although now uncommon in
clinical practice, formulations are extremely useful for developing
skills in diagnostic reasoning, for understanding how psychiatric
knowledge can be applied to the individual patient, and for learning how
to prioritize and focus on the problems that require attention. We
therefore encourage all psychiatrists in training to use formulations as
an integral part of their work. Even for an experienced psychiatrist, a
formulation remains a valuable exercise and aid. A formulation is
divided into several sections, as in the example shown in Box 3.12. A
short opening statement is followed by the differential diagnosis. This
consists of a list of reasonable possibilities in decreasing order of
probability, together with a note of the evidence for and against each
alternative. To produce a good differential diagnosis, it is necessary
to have elicited and interpreted the key symptoms and signs (see
Chapter 1) and to know the cardinal features of the major psychiatric
disorders and how they are classified (see Chapter 2). Under aetiology,
predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating, causes should be
identified. This requires a grounding in the causation of psychiatric
disorders (see Chapter 5). There follows a list of outstanding problems
and any further information that is needed. Next a concise plan of
management is outlined, and finally there is a statement about
prognosis.

Problem lists A problem list is useful in cases where there are multiple
issues to be addressed, especially complex social problems. The list
identifies the range of problems (or needs), summarizes the solution(s)
proposed, states who is responsible for each action, and gives a review
date. It is best to draw up the list with the patient, to ensure that
they are fully involved in the identification of problems and in how
these will be addressed. This is formalized in problem-solving
counselling (see page 685). Table 3.2 shows a problem list that might be
drawn up following the initial assessment of a man who had taken a
serious overdose and was found to have anxiety symptoms, psoriasis, and
social problems, including concerns about how he and his partner were
caring for their son. As progress is made in dealing with problems in
this list, new ones may be added or existing ones modified or removed.

Letters to the general practitioner When a letter is written to a
general practitioner after an initial assessment, consider what they
already know about the patient and what questions were asked when they
referred them. If the referral letter outlined the salient features of
the case, there is no need to repeat these in the reply. If the patient
is less well known to the general practitioner, or if the referral has
come from another source, more detailed information should be given. The
letter should state clearly the diagnosis (if one has been made) or the
range of differential diagnoses that are still being considered.
Treatment and prognosis are dealt with next. When discussing treatment,
the dosage, timing, and duration of any drug treatment should be stated.
Name any key

Table 3.2 A problem list Problem

Action

Agent

Review

1 Concern over son's care

Initially, discuss with GP

Key worker and GP

2 weeks

2 Relationship problems

Seek counselling

Patient and girlfriend to arrange

3 months

3 Housing unsatisfactory

Visit housing department

Patient

2 weeks

4 Panic attacks

Assess for CBT

Psychologist (via GP)

2 months

5 Psoriasis

GP to review

Patient

1 month

65

6

66

Chapter 3 Assessment worker, therapists, and other agencies involved,
and the nature of their involvement. State the date of the patient's
next appointment, and whether you have advised the patient to see the
general practitioner in the interim (e.g.Â for blood tests).
Responsibility for physical health care, and for prescribing, should be
made clear. Ideally, all these details should be discussed and agreed
with the general practitioner by phone before the letter is written to
confirm them. The letter should emphasize a collaborative approach, and
encourage the general practitioner to get in touch if they are unclear
about the arrangements, or are concerned about the patient. The same
principles apply to subsequent correspondence during psychiatric care.
That is, keep letters concise, focusing only on those issues that have
changed since the last letter (e.g.Â symptoms, circumstances, treatments,
and what is expected of the general practitioner). It is also helpful to
highlight at the top of the letter the diagnosis, current state, current
treatments (especially drugs and doses), and date of the next
appointment. As noted earlier, it is now standard practice for patients
(and their carers, if requested) to be sent copies of all correspondence
about them. All letters and other documents should be prepared with this
in mind.

Electronic records and new technologies A switch from paper to
electronic health records is occurring in many settings and poses
significant challenges, even though the same principles apply with
regard to the records' content and nature, whether digital or not (Ennis
et al., 2014). For example, it may raise extra concerns about
confidentiality, and about responsibility for backdating, updating, and
maintaining the electronic records. Equally, developments in computing
and 'digital health' provide many opportunities both for clinical
practice and research (e.g.Â Druss et al., 2014). Potential advantages
include having access to patient records from any location and at all
times, and the ability to keep in contact with patients remotely via
mobile phone or internet (e.g.Â for monitoring of symptoms using apps, or
to send text prompts about clinic appointments). Psychiatrists need to
be aware of the policies and procedures regarding electronic records and
'digital health' in their own clinical setting, and to keep up to date
with the rapid and significant developments that will undoubtedly occur
in the coming years (Glenn and Monteith, 2014).

Standardized assessment methods In research, and sometimes in clinical
practice, it is helpful to use standardized methods to assess symptoms
and syndromes, as well as disabilities and other consequences of
psychiatric disorders. Such methods improve reliability and facilitate
comparison of findings across time and between psychiatrists. For a
review of rating scales in psychiatry, see Tyrer and Methuen (2007).
Standardized methods of assessment are of four main types. Three are
considered in turn below: â

Those that rate symptoms to make a diagnosis; these have been important
in the development of contemporary psychiatric classifications, and were
introduced in Chapter 2. The Mini-Mental State Examination is another
example of this type.

â

Those that rate the severity of a symptom or group of symptoms.

â

Those that assess the overall evidence for and effects of psychiatric
disorder; these are called global rating scales, and they include
quality-of-life measures.

In addition there are schedules for the assessment of need, as discussed
earlier (see page 53).

Standardized diagnostic assessments A range of diagnostic assessment
schedules has been developed. The leading ones in current use are
mentioned here. An important distinction is between those schedules
designed for use by interviewers with training in psychiatry, and those
for use by interviewers without such training. Schedules in the latter
category (generally used in large-scale epidemiological research)
require more precise rules for detecting symptoms and for diagnosing
syndromes.

67

Standardized assessment methods

Present State Examination and Schedules for Clinical Assessment in
Neuropsychiatry The Present State Examination (PSE) is the archetypal
interview schedule for use by trained psychiatrists. Its development
began in the late 1950s, and the ninth edition was the first to be
published for use by others (Wing et al., 1974). It became widely used,
notably in seminal international studies on the diagnosis of
schizophrenia (see Chapter 11). The interviewer identifies abnormal
phenomena that have been present during a specified period of time and
rates their severity. Each of the 140 items is defined in detail in a
glossary. Computer programs generate a symptom score, a diagnosis
(CATEGO), and a measure of the severity of non-psychotic symptoms (the
Index of Definition). The tenth edition of the PSE was incorporated into
the Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry (SCAN), a more
extensive schedule that can be used to diagnose a broader range of
disorders, including eating, somatoform, substance abuse, and cognitive
disorders, using ICD-10 or DSM-IV criteria (World Health Organization,
1992a).

Structured Clinical Interview for Diagnosis The Structured Clinical
Interview for Diagnosis (SCID) is a diagnostic assessment procedure
designed to make DSM diagnoses (Spitzer et al., 1987). It can be used by
the clinician as part of a normal assessment procedure, or in research
or screening as a systematic evaluation of a whole range of medical
states. SCID-5 is the version released for use with DSM-5.

Composite International Diagnostic Interview The Composite International
Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) combines aspects of an earlier interview
schedule, the Diagnostic Interview Schedule (DIS), with the PSE (Robins
et al., 1988). It was designed for lay interviewers to make diagnoses
according to ICD and DSM criteria. It is available in many languages and
intended for use in different cultures. The interview includes questions
about symptoms and problems experienced at any time in life, as well as
questions about current state.

Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview The Mini International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) is a short structured interview
(15--20 minutes, compared to 90 minutes for CIDI) for lay interviewers
to make ICD and DSM diagnoses (Lecrubier et al., 1997). It focuses on
current disorders only, and is widely used in surveys and screening for
clinical trials.

Instruments for measuring symptoms In addition to instruments designed
to make diagnoses, other scales measure the severity of symptoms or
their fluctuation with time. Some such instruments rate one or a few
symptoms, while others rate a broad group of symptoms as an overall
measure of the severity of a disorder.

Ratings of affective symptoms Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression The
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D or HRSD; Hamilton, 1967) is
available in 17- and 21-item versions, and is filled in by a trained
interviewer who uses an unstructured interview. It measures the severity
of the depressive syndrome rather than the symptom of depression.

Beck Depression Inventory The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck et
al., 1961) is a 21-item inventory that is completed by the patient. Each
item has four statements, and the patient chooses the one that applies
best to their feelings during the previous week.

Montgomery-Ãsberg Depression Rating Scale The Montgomery-Ãsberg
Depression Rating Scale (MADRS; Montgomery and Ãsberg, 1979) inventory
has 10 items rated on a 4-point scale by an interviewer using
definitions for each point. Only psychological symptoms of depression
are rated. Along with the HAM-D, it is widely used in antidepressant
drug trials.

Patient Health Questionnaire 9 This self-report questionnaire (PHQ-9;
Kroenke et al., 2001) rates each of the nine DSM-IV criteria for
depression on a scale of 0 to 3. It is adapted from an American
questionnaire called Prime-MD. A score of â¥10 has a sensitivity and
specificity of 88% for major depression. The PHQ-9 has been used as a
screening tool for depression in primary care, and in monitoring of
outcome. A PHQ2 is also available, in which the two questions ask about
depressed mood and anhedonia.

Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology The Quick Inventory of
Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS; Rush et al., 2003) is an increasingly
popular 16item scale for rating of depressive symptoms. It is usually
used in a self-report format (QIDS-SR) and is available in many
languages. The QIDS has good psychometric

67

68

68

Chapter 3 Assessment properties, is sensitive to change, and is useful
for clinical and research purposes.

Ratings of mania Severity of manic symptoms can be rated by patient and
clinician using the 11-item Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS; Young et
al., 1978) or by patients using the briefer Altman Self-Rating Mania
Scale (Altman et al., 1997).

Ratings of anxiety symptoms

Ratings of motor symptoms A range of scales is available, especially
related to sideeffects of antipsychotic medication. They include the
Extrapyramidal Symptoms Rating Scale (ESRS; Chouinard et al., 1980) and
the Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS; Barnes, 1989).

Ratings of personality and its disorders These are discussed in Chapter
15.

Hamilton Anxiety Scale

Ratings of broad groups of symptoms

In the Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAS; Hamilton, 1959), 13 items are rated
by an interviewer on 5-point scales, each on the basis of a brief
description. The interviewing method is for the rater to decide. Some
depressive symptoms are included so that the scale is in fact a measure
of the severity of the anxiety syndrome and not of the symptoms of
anxiety.

General Health Questionnaire

The State--Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI; Spielberger et al., 1983) The
State--Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI; Spielberger et al., 1983) is a
self-rating scale with 20 statements, which is completed in two
ways---as the person feels when they are completing the scale (state),
and how they feel generally (trait).

Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale The Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale (HADS; Zigmond and Snaith, 1983) has seven questions
about anxiety and seven about depression, and is used to assess symptom
severity and caseness in psychiatric and medical patients, and in the
general population.

Ratings of other symptoms

The General Health Questionnaire (GHQ; Goldberg and Hillier, 1979) is
designed for use as a screening instrument in primary care, general
medical practice, or community surveys. The original instrument
contained 60 items, but shorter versions (e.g.Â GHQ-12 and GHQ-30) have
also been developed. Even the full version can be completed within 10
minutes. The symptom ratings are added to a score that indicates overall
severity, which is expressed by whether a psychiatrist would judge the
patient to be a 'case' or a 'non-case'.

Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale This instrument (BPRS; Overall and
Gorham, 1962) has 16 items, each scored on a 7-point scale. There are
criteria to define the symptom items, but not for the severity ratings.
The time period is not defined and must be decided by the rater. The
BPRS is used mainly for rating psychotic disorders.

Global rating scales Clinical Global Impression (CGI; Guy, 1976)

The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; Folstein et al., 1975) has
already been introduced. Other scales that are used to assess cognitive
impairment, and the behavioural symptoms of dementia, are discussed in
Chapter 14.

The Clinical Global Impression (CGI; Guy, 1976) rating scale has two
items. The main one, global severity, requires the clinician to rate the
overall severity of the patient's illness at the time of interview,
relative to other patients with the same diagnosis. The global change
item rates change relative to a baseline assessment. The CGI is often
used as a measure of efficacy in drug trials.

Ratings of symptoms of schizophrenia

WHO Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0

These are discussed in Chapter 11. The Positive and Negative Syndrome
Scale (PANSS) is widely used in research (Kay et al., 1987).

WHODAS 2.0 is a generic assessment instrument for assessing level of
disability. It covers six domains of functioning (e.g.Â self-care, life
activities, cognition) and can be administered in less than 20 minutes.

Ratings used in the assessment of cognitive impairment and dementia

69

Further reading

Global Assessment of Functioning The Global Assessment of Functioning
(GAF) is a 100point scale, derived from the earlier Global Assessment
Scale, on which the clinician rates the overall functioning of the
patient (Phelan et al., 1994). Each decile has a brief description of
psychological, social, and occupational performance. The GAF was
included in

DSM-IV and is widely used, but has been removed from DSM-5.

Health of the Nation Outcome Scale The HoNOS (Wing et al., 1998) is a
12-item scale that rates clinical problems and social functioning. It
was developed as an instrument to measure progress towards a UK NHS
target to improve the health and

69

70

CHAPTER 4

Ethics and civil law Introduction 71

Consent to treatment 76

General issues 71

The Mental Health Act 80

Ethical problems in psychiatric practice 73

Informal coercion 82

Confidentiality 73

Some aspects of civil law 84

Introduction This chapter is concerned with the ways in which general
ethical principles, relating to matters such as confidentiality,
consent, and autonomy, are applied in the care of people with mental
disorders. We assume that the reader has already studied ethical aspects
of general medicine, otherwise they should consult Hope et al.Â (2008) or
a comparable textbook of medical ethics (Beauchamp and Childress, 2013).
Ethical considerations are important in all branches of medicine.
However, in psychiatry they have additional importance because some
patients lack the capacity to make judgements about their own need for
care, and because of the power of involuntary treatment. Questions about
capacity to consent to treatment of psychiatric illness commonly arise,
and psychiatrists are sometimes asked by colleagues in other specialties
for advice about capacity to consent to treatment for physical illness.

In this chapter we also consider some aspects of the Mental Health Act
and the law relevant to psychiatry. These aspects are necessarily
general ones because the specific provisions of the law differ from one
country to another. It is important that the reader makes themself
familiar with legal provisions in their own country and, if in any
doubt, always seek expert advice. The chapter is divided into four
parts: 1. General issues. 2. Ethical problems in psychiatry. 3. The
Mental Health Act. 4. Some aspects of civil law that are relevant to the
practice of psychiatry. Ethical problems that relate specifically to
issues discussed elsewhere in this book are considered in those chapters
(see Box 4.1).

General issues The conclusion that it is ethically right to act in one
way rather than another should be: â

based on agreed ethical approaches and principles;

â

logically sound;

â

consistent across decisions.

Ethical approaches In psychiatry, as in ethics generally, two broad
approaches to ethical problems are employed---a dutybased approach and a
utilitarian approach. The duty-based approach sets out clinicians'
obligations in a series of rules---for example, doctors must not

72

72

Chapter 4 Ethics and civil law

Box 4.1 Ethical problems discussed in other chapters Classification
(Chapter 2) Diagnosis on the basis of moral or political judgements
(page 24) Evidence-based approaches (Chapter 6) Placebo-controlled
trials and randomization (page 123) Eating disorders (Chapter 13)
Compulsory treatment in anorexia nervosa (page 320) Personality and
personality disorder (Chapter 15) Stigma and patient involvement (page
412) Child psychiatry (Chapter 16) Conflict of interest,
confidentiality, and consent (page 481) Intellectual disability (Chapter
17) Normalization, autonomy, and conflict of interests (page 510)
Consent to treatment, and consent to research (page 510) Drugs and other
physical treatments (Chapter 20) Drug treatment (page 715) ECT and
psychosurgery (pages 769 and 772) Suicide and deliberate self-harm
(Chapter 21) Patients who harm themselves and refuse treatment (page 629
(Box 21.10)) Psychiatry in medical settings (Chapter 22) Patients who
refuse treatment (page 661 (Box 22.14)) Genetic counselling (page 660)
HIV (page 665)

have sexual relationships with their patients. These rules may be
brought together in a code of practice, leaving clinicians in no doubt
about their duties. However, this approach is inflexible and is
difficult to apply to complex problems. The utilitarian approach
balances judgements about benefit and harm. Instead of applying specific
rules, each case is assessed individually on the assumption that the
correct action is the one with the best foreseeable overall
consequences. This approach takes into account clinical complexities,
but can result in a contested conclusion, as people may give different
weight to the benefits and harms in a particular case. In practice the
two approaches overlap. A duty-based approach may include a duty to do
that which will result in the best outcome, and in a utilitarian
approach the best outcome may result from the application of a rule.

Ethical principles Three ethical principles are widely adopted in
medical ethics (Beauchamp and Childress, 2013). 1. Beneficence (and
non-malevolence): doing what is best for patients (and not doing harm).
In practice this usually means doing what the body of professional
opinion judges to be best. 2. Respect for autonomy: involving patients
in health care decisions, informing them so that they can make the
decisions, and respecting their views. 3. Justice: acting fairly and
balancing the interests of different people. Ethical principles can, and
do, regularly conflict with each other. In psychiatry this most often
occurs when beneficence is in conflict with respect for autonomy---for
example, when a patient refuses treatment that professional opinion
judges to be essential, and the Mental Health Act has to be used (see
below). The essay 'Two Concepts of Liberty' by the philosopher Isaiah
Berlin outlines this dilemma in distinguishing between 'freedom from'
and 'freedom to' (Berlin, 1958). Autonomy is not always served simply by
ensuring the absence of coercion if the individual is not in a position
to act on their liberty. The Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen argues that our
sensitivity to injustice informs our balancing of ethical principles,
and not vice versa (Sen, 2007).

Codes of practice Codes of practice and guidelines are prepared and
overseen by professional organizations such as the American Psychiatric
Association (2013b) and, in the UK, the General Medical Council (2009a)
and the Royal College of Psychiatrists (2010). In some countries ethical
codes are enforced not by the professions but by government. Loss of
confidence in the professions has led to some demands for this
arrangement in the UK. The other professions involved in psychiatric
care, such as nursing and psychology, have their own codes of practice,
and these are not identical in every respect to those of the medical
profession. Such differences may sometimes complicate decisions in
multidisciplinary teams. Values-based practice has recently been
proposed as a complement to evidence-based practice (Fulford et al.,
2012). Ethical values can be in conflict, and routinely need to be
balanced. The relative weight assigned to different values by the
members of multidisciplinary

Confidentiality teams (as well as the patient) may vary considerably.
Values-based practice encourages the exploration of this in arriving at
decisions, aiming to ensure that the traditional hierarchy in such teams
does not inhibit their expression. For example, the psychiatrist may
privilege treatment effect, whereas a nurse may

privilege the patient's self-respect and the social worker may privilege
the patient's rights. All of the team members acknowledge the relevance
of all of these values, but they weight them differently and best
practice, and effective teamworking, requires that they are
accommodated.

Ethical problems in psychiatric practice In the following sections of
this chapter we shall discuss ethical problems relating to: â

the doctor--patient relationship

â

confidentiality

â

consent

â

compulsory treatment

â

research.

â

Impose their own values and beliefs on their patients--- for example,
when counselling about termination of pregnancy. This influence may be
overt---for example, when a doctor refuses termination of pregnancy,
stating that it is morally wrong. Alternatively, it may be covert---for
example, when the doctor expresses no opinion but nevertheless gives
more attention to the arguments against termination than to those for
it. Similar problems may arise, for example, in marital therapy when
therapists' values may intrude on their approach to the question of
whether a couple should separate.

â

Put the interests of third parties before those of patients--- for
example, the interests of family or employers. This does not mean the
interests of patients should be considered in isolation. When allocating
scarce resources or with potentially dangerous patients, the interests
of the patient have to be balanced against those of others. These
difficult decisions are discussed further on pages 798.

â

Exploit patients sexually. Medical codes of practice contain an absolute
prohibition against sexual relationships with a patient. Particular care
is needed if sexual problems and intimate relationships are prominent in
psychotherapy.

â

Exploit patients for financial gain---for example, by prolonging
treatment in private practice beyond that truly necessary.

As mentioned previously, ethical problems that arise in particular
aspects of practice are discussed in other chapters (see Box 4.1).

The doctor--patient relationship A relationship of trust between doctor
and patient is the basis of ethical medical practice. This relationship
should be in the patient's interests and based on the principles
outlined above of respect for autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence,
and justice.

Abuse of the relationship The more intense the doctor--patient
relationship, and the more vulnerable the patient, the more readily that
relationship can be abused. For these reasons, particular care has to be
taken not to abuse the relationship during psychotherapy. Therapists
abuse the doctor--patient relationship when they:

Confidentiality Confidentiality is central to the trust between patients
and doctors. It is particularly important in psychiatry because
information often concerns private and highly sensitive matters. As a
general rule, information should not be disclosed without the patient's
explicit consent. As will be discussed later, there are defined
exceptions

to this rule. The rule is an ancient one, stated in the Hippocratic
Oath: Whatever, in connection with my professional practice or not in
connection with it, I see or hear in the life of men, which ought not to
be spoken abroad, I will not divulge, reckoning that all such should be
kept secret.

73

74

74

Chapter 4 Ethics and civil law The rule was restated in 1948 in the
Declaration of Geneva, which added the important point that the
obligation of confidentiality continues after a patient's death: I will
respect the secrets which are confided in me, even after the patient has
died.

In many countries, national professional organizations publish
guidelines that deal with common clinical situations such as protecting
records, sharing information with relatives, and disclosing information
to third parties (see, for example, General Medical Council, 2009a, and
the updated website http://www.gmcuk.org). Confidentiality is also
enforced by law and by employment contract. Although professional
guidelines do not have the force of law, they are taken seriously by the
courts as evidence of generally accepted standards. Many countries have
laws of privacy, and laws that govern the ways in which written and
electronic records can be held and that set out patients' rights to see
their personal information. Psychiatrists should be aware of the ethical
and legal requirements in the place in which they are working. In the
UK, the relevant legislation includes the Data Protection Act (1998). In
English law, it is in the public interest, as well as that of the
individual, that patients should be able to trust their doctors to
maintain confidentiality. Whether it is unlawful for a doctor to breach
confidentiality is generally answered by balancing two conflicting
public interests rather than a private against a public interest.

Ethical principles relating to confidentiality Safeguarding information
Personal information must be safeguarded and records kept securely, and
consideration must be given to the security of mobile phones or email.
Unintentional disclosure should be avoided by carrying out consultations
where they cannot be overheard, sometimes difficult on home visits or on
a medical ward. Discussions between professional staff should be avoided
in places where they might be overheard.

Consent to disclosure of information Confidentiality is not breached
when a patient has given informed consent to disclosure. Informed
consent implies consent based on a full understanding of the reasons for
disclosure, what will be disclosed, and the likely consequences of
disclosure. In principle, confidentiality

is not breached when the patient cannot be identified--- for example, in
a disguised case report. Nevertheless, it is usual for journals and
books to require that patients give informed, signed consent to
publication, even when their identities have been disguised. This
obligation, unlike libel laws, continues after death. Poorly anonymized
case reports of deceased patients, from which these individuals have
been identified, have led to professional complaints from families.

Confidentiality in the care of children These and other ethical problems
in the care of children are discussed in Chapter 16. Here it is
sufficient to note that children over a stated age (usually 16 years)
have the same rights of confidentiality as adults. For younger children,
clinical information is usually shared with parents, who have a legal
duty to act in their children's best interests and therefore need to be
properly informed.

Situations in which there may be problems regarding confidentiality
Seeking information from others As a rule, patients' permission should
be obtained before information is sought from other individuals. If the
patient is too unwell to give an account of himself, the psychiatrist
must decide whether to seek it without the patient's consent. The
guiding principles are to act in the patient's best interests, and as
far as possible to obtain the information from close relatives.

Disclosing information to others Information should be disclosed only
with the patient's consent, except in the special circumstances
discussed below. Disclosure should be limited to the minimum necessary
information. Relatives often ask for information, but this should
usually be given only with the patient's consent. This is a very
contentious issue in the era of community care when the family may be
the main carers and run the greatest risk (see below). When the patient
is unable to consent to disclosure (e.g.Â as a result of dementia),
information may be shared provided that disclosure is in the patient's
best interests.

Assessment on behalf of a third party Often a patient is assessed on
behalf of a third party; for example, an assessment of fitness to work
carried out for an employer. It is essential to ensure at the outset

Confidentiality that the patient understands the purpose of the
assessment and the obligations of the doctor towards the third party.
Written consent should be obtained. Otherwise disclosure can be made
only in the public interest (see below), usually to prevent death or
serious harm.

Care in the community Patients should know from the start that
information will be shared as necessary with other members of the care
team, and these team members must follow the principles of
confidentiality. Some members of the team (e.g.Â social workers) may be
required to discuss information with their supervisors, or to pass on
information to other agencies (e.g.Â when helping patients with housing).
It is important to keep such matters in mind as treatment plans develop,
and to discuss them with the patient when this becomes necessary. When
visits are made to patients, neighbours may become aware of the visits.
Moreover, outreach programmes may need to ask neighbours about high-risk
patients who have not kept appointments. These and similar potential
problems should be anticipated as far as possible and discussed with the
patient so that the necessary permissions are obtained in advance. In an
emergency, the right to privacy has to be balanced against the risks to
the patient or to others, should the necessary enquiries not be made. If
a patient refuses the disclosure of information despite clear
information about the likely consequences of non-disclosure, their
wishes must be respected unless this would put others at serious risk.

Group therapy Group therapy presents special problems of confidentiality
because patients reveal personal information not only to the therapist
but also to other members of the group. Before treatment begins, the
therapist should explain the requirement to treat as confidential the
revelations of the other group members from everyone in the group.

Therapy with couples Often couples' therapy is preceded by an interview
with each partner separately. Information obtained in this way should
not be revealed without an agreement. It is much better if all relevant
information is revealed by the partner concerned during the joint
sessions. If, during therapy, an individual interview is needed (e.g. to
assess symptoms of depression), it may be better to ask a colleague.
Similar problems may arise in family therapy.

Exceptions to the rule of confidentiality Exceptions in the patient's
interest In exceptional circumstances, doctors may disclose information
to a third party without the patient's consent, when this disclosure is
in the patient's best interest. An example is when information is
requested urgently by another doctor who is dealing with the patient in
an emergency, or when a patient is incapable of giving informed consent
because of severe mental or physical illness, and the disclosure is
essential for their care.

Exceptions in the public interest Although there is a general legal
obligation for doctors to keep confidential what patients tell them,
there are special circumstances in which doctors are obliged to disclose
information. There are statutory obligations to do so in relation, for
example, to communicable disease, the use of certain controlled drugs,
unfitness to drive, and suspected child abuse. There is also an
obligation to disclose relevant information in response to a Court
Order, and when there is evidence of serious crime, usually a crime that
will put some person at risk of death or serious harm (e.g.Â the abuse of
a child). Child protection has become a particularly sensitive area for
professional confidentiality. Society's tolerance of the potential abuse
or neglect of dependent children is almost zero now in most countries.
The current expectation is that professionals' threshold for breaking
confidentiality should be very low in cases where there are any
concerns, even without clear evidence. Every effort should be made to
persuade the patient to agree to disclosure but, if they refuse, the
reasons for the disclosure should be explained and written down.

Exceptions for legal representatives A patient's legal representative,
like the patient, may read their clinical notes and letters, although
there may be restrictions in relation to the possibility of harm to
others and for information given in confidence by informants. For
further information about problems related to confidentiality, see Hope
et al.Â (2008).

75

76

76

Chapter 4 Ethics and civil law

Consent to treatment Consent is relevant to the whole of medical
practice, and in the account that follows we assume that the reader is
familiar with the relevant concepts and procedures from their general
medical training. Any readers who are not should consult the latest
General Medical Council guidelines if they are working in the UK (see
http://www.gmc-uk.org) or the equivalent document if they are working
elsewhere, and read a textbook of ethics such as that by Hope et
al.Â (2008).

Obtaining consent The patient should: 1. Have a clear and full
understanding of the nature of the condition to be treated, the
procedures available, and their probable side effects. 2. Agree freely
to receive the treatment. 3. Be competent to take decisions (i.e.Â to
have legal capacity; see below). (Note that, in the USA, the word
'capacity' is generally used in the clinical sense rather than in the
legal sense adopted in the UK.)

Maintaining consent Some patients consent to treatment of chronic
illness but later fail to collaborate with it. When this happens, the
clinician should seek to re-establish consent and collaboration. To
achieve these, offers of additional help are justified, but threats that
help will be reduced are not. This is particularly complex in the
long-term community care of individuals with severely disabling
disorders such as psychoses. The difference between an 'offer of
additional help' and a 'threat that help will be reduced' is not always
that clear in practice, and certainly not to the patient. Is a case
manager's comment 'I can only really recommend you for this tenancy if I
can say you are taking treatment' an offer, or is it a threat? Szmukler
and Appelbaum (2008) have explored these gradations of treatment
pressures in mental health.

When explicit consent is not required There are special situations in
which explicit consent is not needed (their precise nature depends on
local law and precedent). These include:

â

Implied consent---for example, when a patient holds out his arm to have
his blood pressure measured.

â

Necessity---that is, a circumstance in which grave harm or death is
likely to occur without intervention, and there is doubt about the
patient's competence (see below).

â

Emergency---to prevent immediate serious harm to the patient or to
others, or to prevent a crime.

When consent to medical treatment is refused In the UK, the law
distinguishes between consent to medical treatment and consent to
psychiatric treatment. This section is concerned with refusal of medical
treatment; refusal of psychiatric treatment is discussed on page 660.
Competent adults have a right to refuse medical treatment, even if this
refusal results in death or permanent disablement. If a patient refuses
medical treatment, the doctor needs to make two judgements before
accepting that the patient has the right to refuse. 1. Does the patient
lack competence, i.e.Â the legal capacity (see below) to consent to or
refuse treatment, by reason of mental illness? 2. Has the patient been
influenced by others to the extent that a refusal has been coerced or is
not voluntary?

Refusal by competent patients Refusal may, of course, be a rational
decision, having weighed up the pros and cons (pain, discomfort,
separation from family versus improvement in symptoms or increased life
expectancy). However, it is often the result of misunderstanding or fear
about the illness and its treatment. Clinicians should set aside the
time needed to understand the patient's concerns and understanding of
their condition before explaining the medical issues once more. With
such an approach, agreement can usually be reached on a treatment plan
that is both medically appropriate and acceptable to the patient.
Nevertheless, some competent adult patients continue to refuse treatment
even after a full discussion, and it is their right to do so.

Refusal by incompetent patients In the UK and most other countries the
doctor has the right to act in the patient's best interests and give

Consent to treatment immediate treatment in life-threatening emergencies
when the patient lacks capacity to consent, as when they are unconscious
or delirious. Whenever possible, other health workers should be
consulted and a careful record should be kept of the reasons for the
decision. Doctors should know the relevant law in the country in which
they are working. For further discussion of this issue, see Hope et
al.Â (2008). The 2005 Mental Capacity Act for England and Wales addresses
the previously neglected area of the treatment of incompetent patients
who are not actively refusing treatment but who cannot be considered to
have consented. It also addresses those who may have previously
indicated (when competent) what they would have wished.

Refusal by mentally disordered patients If a patient who refuses medical
treatment has an accompanying mental disorder that appears to impair
their ability to give informed consent, the mental disorder should be
treated, if necessary and appropriate, under compulsory legal powers. In
English law, such powers do not allow treatment of the physical illness
against the patient's wishes. However, they do allow the treatment of
the mental disorder. After successful treatment of the mental disorder,
the patient may then give informed consent for the treatment of the
physical illness that was previously refused but, if not, their decision
must be respected no matter how perverse it may seem.

Legal aspects of consent The legal concept of capacity to consent
relates to a patient's ability to comprehend and retain information
about the treatment, to believe this information, and to use it to make
an informed choice. Patients may lack the capacity to give informed
consent by reason of the following: 1. Young age---parents give consent
for children and adolescents below the age at which, in law, they are
able to consent (consent to treatment for children and adolescents is
considered in Chapter 16). 2. Learning disability. 3. Mental disorder.
Psychiatrists may be asked to assess patients who are thought to be in
this third group; they should do so by making the enquiries listed in
Box 4.2. Judgements of legal capacity to consent are specific to the
particular decision. Thus a patient with a severe mental disorder may be
incompetent in other respects, but none the less competent to decide
whether to consent

to a particular treatment. For example, a patient with schizophrenia and
paranoid delusions may be capable of deciding about medical treatment of
a heart attack.

Consent in advance Advance statements, sometimes called 'living wills',
are accepted in many countries. They are designed to ensure that those
who previously had the capacity to take decisions but then lose it
(usually because of dementia) are treated as they would have wished when
competent. To make an advance statement, the person must be competent
and well informed at the time. Advance statements respect the principle
of autonomy and are generally considered by doctors and patients to be
helpful. Since the 2005 Mental Capacity Act (MCA) regularized the
situation, advance statements now have some legal authority in England
(the Act does not apply to Scotland). The MCA distinguishes between an
advance statement and an 'Advance Decision to Refuse Treatment' (ADRT).
Advance statements are relatively informal and may be recorded in notes
or care plans (e.g.Â 'Only use second-generation antipsychotics if I am
compulsorily treated', 'Do not inform my sister if I am admitted'). They
can even be verbal. They are not legally binding, but it is good
practice to follow them if possible and also to encourage patients to
update them. If they are not followed, the reasons should be recorded.
Because of the relapsing nature of many severe mental illnesses, advance
directives are often based on the patient's previous experiences. In
general medicine they are more often based on how the individual assumes
that they would feel about treatment if and when they lost capacity,
usually through dementia. The incorporation of advance statements as
part of 'joint care plans' has been tested in some services. Although
patients seem reluctant to make them, they do appear to improve
relationships and may improve treatment even if they have not been shown
to reduce relapses (Thornicroft et al., 2013). However, the ADRT is
binding, even if the decision may result in death. To have this force it
must be a written and witnessed statement with confirmation that the
individual had capacity at that time. The provision also allows for the
naming of a 'surrogate decisionmaker', who can give consent on behalf of
the patient. The ADRT can be overridden if the Mental Health Act is
used, apart from the advance decision to refuse ECT, which is absolute.
Compulsory treatment overriding an advance decision may be used in
acutely unwell patients most often (but not only) when there are risks
to others. Psychiatry is the only area of medicine

77

78

78

Chapter 4 Ethics and civil law

Box 4.2 Assessment of competence of adult patients Step 1 Identify the
decision required and the information relevant to it: â the decision to
be made â the alternative reasonable decisions â the pros and cons of
each reasonable decision. Step 2 Assess cognitive ability. Assess
whether the patient has the cognitive ability to: â understand the
information â retain the information â evaluate the information and
reach a decision. Step 3 Consider the possible causes of impaired
cognitive ability: â delirium â dementia â other neurological disorders
that may impair cognition â learning disability. Step 4 Assess other
factors that may interfere with capacity. Mental illness: â delusions â
hallucinations â mood disorder. Lack of maturity: â assess emotional and
cognitive maturity.

where this override is possible, and some view this as discriminatory.

Deprivation of liberty and the 'Bournewood Gap' An adult man with autism
was admitted to Bournewood Hospital against the wishes of his informal
carers, but did not himself actively object to being in hospital. An
individual was then only considered to have their liberty restricted if
they were actively objecting to their treatment. The Bournewood case
indicated a 'gap' in the legislation, namely the failure to protect an
individual who was deprived of his liberty although not resisting it.
This was ruled to conflict with European human rights legislation. The
distinction between deprivation of liberty and restriction of liberty
can be a fine judgement. To comply with European legislation it must be
clearly in the patient's best interests (i.e.Â not for the protection

of others). A consequence of this legislation is the Deprivation of
Liberty Safeguards, which were introduced in the 2007 amendments to the
Mental Health Act. These are complex and usually dealt with by a 'Best
Interests Assessor', who may call on a psychiatrist to advise on the
capacity or diagnosis of such patients. The implication for
psychiatrists is to pay attention to any restrictions on incapacitous
patients, even if they are not objecting.

Consent by a proxy In English law, if an adult patient does not have the
capacity to consent to treatment, proxy consent on behalf of that
patient can only be given if there is a written advance statement. In
some other jurisdictions there is provision for a form of proxy consent
such as, in Scottish law, the appointment of a guardian. When there is
no legal provision for proxy consent and the patient has not made an
advance directive, and a decision as to whether to give treatment must
be made, this is done on the basis of the patient's best interests. Best
interest is judged by the responsible clinician in accordance with
general medical opinion. It is wise to consult relatives and to discuss
the case with other professional staff. Detailed notes should be kept of
the reasons for the decision and of the consultations that took place.

Ethics of research Psychiatric research is bound by the ethical
principles that apply to all medical research. These derive from the
first internationally agreed guidelines on research involving people,
referred to as 'The Helsinki Declaration'. The main issues that should
always be considered are summarized in Box 4.3. These principles
followed the revelations of the appalling abuse of medical research in
Nazi Germany, and were first published by the World Medical Association
in 1964 (see World Medical Association, 2000). Since then there have
been several national and international guidelines, generally enforced
by national and local research ethics committees. The ethical problems
of psychiatric research are the same as those of other medical research
as set out, for example, in the UK General Medical Council guidelines
(see http://www.gmc-uk.org) or the website of the UK Health Regulatory
Authority (http://www.hra.nhs. uk). They pay particular attention to
issues related to consent by competent but vulnerable adults who may
feel under pressure to consent, and by those who lack capacity.

Consent to treatment

Informed consent to research Box 4.3 Assessment of some ethical issues
relating to research Note: Ethical problems related to recruitment for
and conduct of clinical trials are considered on page 123.

Scientific merits Will the findings be of value? â Are the methods and
the size of the groups likely to achieve the aims? â What are the
sources of financial and other support, and are there any potential
conflicts of interest? â Are there any potential conflicts of interest
for any of the investigators? â Could the aims be achieved in an
ethically better way?

Informed consent is crucial to the ethical conduct of research. â

Patients must be made specifically aware that the research is not being
conducted for their individual benefit.

â

Patients must be free from any coercion or inducement.

â

Patients have the right to withdraw from the study at any time without
any kind of penalty or impact on their broader treatment.

â

In addition to the investigator, a family member or other suitable
person should be encouraged to monitor the patient's condition and
report to the investigator if there are concerns.

â

In placebo-controlled trials, patients must understand clearly the
probability of receiving placebo, the lack of improvement that might
result, and the possibility of symptomatic worsening.

â

Safety Are the procedures safe? If there is a risk, are all of the
necessary precautions being taken? â Is the assessed level of risk
acceptable to investigators, subjects, and relatives? â

Consent Will the subjects be competent to give consent? â Will the
subjects receive clear and sufficient information? â Will they have
adequate time to consider and, should they wish to do so, to withdraw
consent? â Will it be clear that refusal will not affect the quality or
quantity of care provided? â Is the relationship between subject and
investigator potentially coercive (e.g.Â a supervisor and a student)? â
Is any payment to subjects excessive and acts as an overwhelming
incentive to consent? â Is the researcher under any pressure to recruit
subjects (e.g.Â receiving payments from a sponsoring company)? â

Confidentiality Have subjects consented to the use of confidential
information in the research? â Will the data from the research be kept
securely?

Research involving people who cannot give informed consent Most
psychiatric patients can give informed consent, but a few have a
disorder that impairs judgement and decision-making. To exclude these
patients from all research could deprive future similar patients of the
benefits of research. Ethical protocols for involving such patients have
received intense scrutiny in the design of treatment trials for
unconscious trauma victims. The decision as to whether to include such
patients is made after considering the following: â

any potential benefit of the research to the person who is being asked
to consent;

â

any possible discomfort or risk to this person;

â

the potential benefit to others who have a similar problem and
incapacity;

â

any signs or other indications that suggest unspoken objection.

â

Adapted from Hope T, Savelescu J and Hendrick J, Medical Ethics and Law:
The Core Curriculum, 2nd Edition, Copyright (2008), with permission from
Elsevier.

It is advisable to consult with relatives or others who may be able to
take an informed view of the patient's situation. Jurisdictions vary in
the extent to which this is a legal requirement, and investigators
should take great care to follow local ethical and legal procedures.

79

80

80

Chapter 4 Ethics and civil law

The Mental Health Act Compulsory treatment for mental disorders Specific
legislation exists to ensure that people with severe mental illness can
be treated involuntarily. Such treatment is subject to careful scrutiny,
and is found in all developed societies. Legal provision for the
detention of disturbed individuals, then described as the 'the furiously
mad', was introduced early to the asylum movement in the 1820s. How that
legislation is drafted and who has the decision-making powers vary
across time and jurisdictions. In the 1825 UK Act it was magistrates who
made the decisions and doctors had little say, whereas by the time of
the 1959 Mental Health Act, decisions were essentially all clinical.
Now, in the light of the European Convention on Human Rights, the
emphasis is shifting back more towards greater legal involvement in the
process. Compulsory treatment has always been a feature of psychiatry
and a legitimate and important responsibility for psychiatrists. In most
countries outside the UK its imposition of compulsory admission or
treatment is by a legal body (judge, magistrate, etc.). However, the
reality in most legislations is that the medical recommendation carries
considerable weight. Several states distinguish between compulsory
detention and compulsory treatment. In the Netherlands, Austria, and
parts of Switzerland a patient can be detained but still must agree to
treatment. There is evidence that, after some decades of decline,
compulsion is increasing across Europe (Priebe et al., 2005). When using
the Mental Health Act it is essential that psychiatrists familiarize
themselves with the local provisions and requirements. Not only do these
vary from one country to another, but they can vary within countries.
For example, the Scottish and Northern Ireland Mental Health Acts differ
in important details from that for England and Wales, each state in the
USA has its own legislation, and different cantons of Switzerland impose
different conditions. Mental health legislation is often long and
obscure---the 2007 amendment runs to several hundred dense pages, and
the accompanying Code of Practice likewise. Practising clinicians
generally only need to know the main provisions and procedures for the
practices outlined in Box 4.4. The major provisions of the 1983/2007
Mental Health Act for England and Wales will be used as the reference
point for outlining the principles and practices in what follows. Local
training with regular updates is essential and is now obligatory.

Criteria for detention Until recently all compulsory care required
admission to a psychiatric hospital, so the expression 'detained under
the Mental Health Act' is still widely used to indicate involuntary
care, whether in or outside hospital. The UK Mental Health Acts are
broadly very similar, and indeed they all adhere relatively closely to
the 1959 Mental Health Act in spirit, differing mainly in detail. The UK
acts are 'permissive'---that is, they outline what a doctor may do but
not what they must do. The decision to admit or treat a patient against
their will is still a clinical decision. The wording of the new Act is
deliberately loose in its definitions of both mental disorder and
treatment, allowing considerable scope for clinical discretion. The
conditions for detention are worded differently for treatment and
assessment, but there are essentially four of them. 1. You consider that
the patient is likely to be suffering from a mental disorder (detention
may sometimes be necessary to establish this). 2. Detention is necessary
for the health or safety of the patient or of others. 3. The patient
refuses voluntary admission. 4. Appropriate treatment is available (for
treatment orders). Until the 2007 revision there were four classes of
mental disorder subject to detention (mental illness, mental impairment,
severe mental impairment, and psychopathic disorder), but these were
replaced by a single category of mental disorder. This was to remove
individual requirements for specific disorders. The UK criteria are
quite paternalistic by international standards---they prioritize the
potential for patient benefit. Many

Box 4.4 Key clinical procedures in the Mental Health Act Criteria for
detention Assessment orders â Treatment orders â Transfer from prisons
and courts â Police powers and powers of entry â Community Treatment
Orders â â

The Mental Health Act countries (especially those with strong
libertarian civil rights traditions, such as the USA) emphasize risk
rather than patient benefit. In many US and some European states,
patients must pose an immediate risk to physical safety (their own or
that of others). Finally, patients must always be given the opportunity
to accept voluntary treatment ('the least restrictive option') before
compulsion can be used. Historically families (or their formal
representatives) made applications for detention, but the 1959 Mental
Health Act permitted social workers to do this on their behalf. Over
time this has become the accepted practice, although families can still
appeal to discharge their members. The social worker has a specific role
in ensuring that the patient's civil rights are properly protected and
that less restrictive alternatives have not been overlooked. Apart from
emergencies, two medical opinions are needed, preferably one who knows
the patient (often their GP) and one who is a qualified psychiatrist.
Note that this is preferable. Although it is worth aiming for, it is not
essential. Patients or their families should not be put at risk by
delays in trying to comply rigidly with it. Reviews of the legality of
detention are conducted by Mental Health Tribunals, which follow
automatically at set periods and also if requested by patients. The main
sections of the Act used by clinicians are summarized in Table 4.1.

Assessment and treatment sections The Assessment Order, Section 2, is
for 4 weeks (in emergencies, Section 4 is for 72 hours). It allows
patients who are not already known and diagnosed to be admitted and
assessed if their condition is serious and warrants this. It cannot be
repeated. Necessary medication to manage the assessment safely is
permitted, but if the diagnosis is confirmed and involuntary treatment
is to be instituted, the patient should be transferred to Section 3.
There is considerable variation in how much intervention is permitted
while the patient is on Section 2. Some social services have advocated
for the use of Section 2 as a matter of course, even when patients and
their disorders are known to the team. This is to 'assess' their
response to this admission. There seems to be little logic to this, and
generally a Section 3 should be used when the patient is known to those
admitting them, or if the clinical picture is clear and a confident
diagnosis can be made. Section 3 is for up to 6 months in the first
instance, and can be repeated. Patients on Section 3 can be allowed out
of hospital 'on leave' while still under compulsion using Section 17.
There is no specific time limit for Section 17 beyond that

imposed by the Section 3, which stays in force. The Code of Practice
proposes that it should be reviewed every 7 days and the alternative of
a Community Treatment Order considered if extended beyond 7 days.
Voluntary patients can be detained for assessment if their condition
deteriorates and they attempt to discharge themselves under the
provision of Section 5.

Restriction orders and transfers Patients can be transferred from courts
on Section 37 (equivalent to a Section 3) for treatment. Their
management is the same as for a Section 3, and they can be discharged
when well. Similarly, a prisoner who becomes seriously unwell can be
transferred on Section 47 for treatment (again following the same
principles as Section 3), but has to be returned to prison when they
have recovered. The equivalent assessment order (up to 28 days) is
Section 35. The Home Office can impose a restriction order (37/ 41) on a
patient. This means that the psychiatrist cannot

Table 4.1 Sections of the England and Wales Mental Health Act commonly
used by clinicians Section number Purpose

Duration

Section 2

Assessment

28 days

Section 3

Treatment

6 months, repeatable

Section 4

Emergency assessment

72 hours

Section 5

Detention of informal inpatient

72 hours

Section 17

Leave while on Section 3

Section 3 still in force

Section 17a

Treatment in community (Community Treatment Order)

6 months, renewable

Section 35

Transfer for assessment

28 days

Section 37

Transfer for treatment

6 months

Section 37/41

Restriction order

Imposed by Home Office

Section 135

Forced entry

72 hours

Section 136

Police powers to convey

72 hours

81

82

82

Chapter 4 Ethics and civil law discharge them from their section without
permission. However, they can be managed on leave in the community with
the Home Office's permission.

Police powers and power of entry The police have the power to detain
anyone whom they find in a public place who is manifestly disturbed and
whom they consider to need urgent psychiatric assessment. In the UK this
is Section 136 of the Act, and it allows the police to bring the patient
to a place of safety for assessment by a psychiatrist and an approved
mental health professional (AMHP). The person can be held for up to 72
hours, but the Code of Practice recommends assessment within 6 hours. In
the past, police stations were the usual place of safety (and they
sometimes still are), but it is considered good practice for assessment
to take place in an agreed psychiatric assessment suite. Section 136 is
predominantly used in metropolitan settings, and there is little reason
to believe that it is overused (the police have quite high thresholds
for using it). A local study in North London conducted some years ago
indicated that a higher proportion of Section 136s were converted to
treatment sections than were Section 2 assessment orders. The right of
individuals to be undisturbed in their own homes is a very ancient one,
and one that is vigorously protected. Unless there is overwhelming
evidence of immediate risk, entry cannot be forced. Where it is believed
that a known patient is deteriorating and requires assessment but they
are refusing entry to their home, a warrant from a magistrate is needed.
This is Section 135, usually obtained within a day by the social worker.
The warrant allows admission by the police officer, accompanied by a
psychiatrist and an AMHP, who generally assess for Section 2 or 3.

Community Treatment Orders The most significant change introduced by the
2007 amendment of the 1983 Mental Health Act was the

introduction of Community Treatment Orders (CTOs), often referred to as
Section 17a, in official documents. These introduced an effective
mechanism for ensuring treatment in the community for patients with
established severe disorders and poor compliance with treatment
('revolving-door patients'). Forms of compulsory treatment in the
community had been in widespread use in the USA, Canada, Australia, and
New Zealand for over three decades (Dawson, 2005). They have attracted
strong clinician and family support, although the scientific evidence is
that they do not improve outcomes. The three randomized controlled
trials that have been published found no impact on relapse and
readmission. This has not, however, slowed their use (Swartz et al.,
1999; Steadman et al.,2001; Burns et al., 2013). The UK provision can
only be applied when a patient is already detained on Section 3. They
are subject to a legal requirement to attend for monitoring in the
community. The CTO mirrors the inpatient treatment order (i.e. 6 months
repeatable in the first instance, with repeat renewals of 12 months
subsequently, and regular tribunal assessments). It is strengthened by a
requirement for an independent second opinion in all cases. Beyond this
statutory condition for a second opinion, other clinically determined
conditions can be added. The commonest are to reside at a stated address
and to allow regular access by the clinical team. CTOs do not permit any
force outside hospital, but allow for patients to be returned to a
clinical setting for up to 72 hours for assessment and treatment. About
4000 CTOs per year are initiated in England and Wales. CTOs in the UK
are generally imposed for substantial periods, and during the first
years of their introduction very few of them have been revoked. This
reflects the UK's 'paternalistic' approach, with CTOs being used to
stabilize functioning in patients with frequently relapsing psychoses.
In the USA most are imposed for a short period while patients pose an
active risk. However, those who remain on them beyond this early phase
stay on them for months or even years.

Informal coercion Traditionally research into coercion in psychiatry has
been based on rates of legal detention. Investigations into how patients
perceived their care, however, revealed that it is not so clear-cut.
Many voluntary

inpatients felt that they were not really free to come and go or refuse
treatment (Kaltiala-Heino, 1996; atsakou et al., 2011) and some
community patients in Assertive Community Treatment Team care have
reported that

Informal coercion they found the assertive outreach coercive (Watts and
Priebe, 2002; Krupa et al., 2005). The research focus has shifted from
simply enumerating the number of patients legally detained to better
understanding their experiences of mental health care. Much of this
research has used a rating scale developed by a US research group---the
MacArthur Perceived Coercion Scale (Gardner et al., 1993). This simple
15question scale has three components---perceived coercion, negative
pressures, and procedural justice. Initially developed to measure the
experience of psychiatric admission, the scale has been adapted for
community care. A striking finding is that how a compulsory admission is
handled (procedural justice---whether the patient feels listened to and
understood) makes a big difference in how coercive they rate the
admission (Bonsack and Borgeat, 2005).

Hierarchy of pressures and leverage With the growing awareness that many
community patients experienced their care as coercive, attempts have
been made to classify the different types of coercion and to measure
some of them. Szmukler and Applebaum (2008) have proposed a hierarchy of
treatment pressures arranged on five levels (Box 4.5). Not all levels of
persuasion are considered coercive but certainly the last two are. What
Szmukler and Applebaum refer to as inducement has been called 'leverage'
in later literature. Leverages are when access to benefits (or avoidance
of unwanted consequences) are explicitly linked to adherence to
treatment. Leverage is when the clinician says to the patient 'if you
take your treatment regularly I can help you get a flat, or better
benefits, or probation rather than prison'. A survey of leverage with
1011 patients in public mental health services in five states in the US
found that nearly half of them reported feeling pressurized in this way
into cooperate with treatment (Monahan et al., 2005). The leverages were
classified as financial, housing, and criminal justice (usually avoiding
or reducing a sentence). A similar pattern, albeit at lower levels
(around 30--35%) has been reported in the UK (Burns et al., 2011) and
Switzerland (JÃ¤ger and RÃ¶ssler, 2010). Access to separated children has
also emerged as

Box 4.5 Levels of persuasion Persuasion (includes providing information,
appreciation of patient's preferences, and discussion and collaboration
between clinician and patient). â Interpersonal leverage (based on a
patient's emotional dependency on clinician; patient agrees to adhere to
please clinician. â Inducement (clinician offers reward for adherence).
â Threats (clinician proposes negative or prevents positive consequences
of a patient's non-adherence). â Compulsion (involuntary). â

Reproduced from Journal of Mental Health, 17(3), Szmukler G and
Appelbaum P, Treatment pressures, leverage, coercion and compulsion in
mental health care, pp.Â 233--44, Copyright (2008), with permission from
Taylor & Francis.

an important leverage, particularly in individuals with substance abuse
(Burns et al., 2011). Contingency management is a special form of
leverage where a direct reward is provided for adherence to treatment.
The most controversial schemes involve paying patients to cooperate and
have been used mainly with socially marginalized individuals such as
homeless sufferers from tuberculosis and even to encourage antenatal
care for pregnant teenagers. The approach generates very strong
feelings, and many clinicians find it quite unacceptable as it seems to
devalue the therapeutic relationship. One trial of paying psychosis
patients to comply with their depot injections did find an improvement
(Priebe et al., 2013), but there is little evidence of any widespread
acceptance of the approach. The recent focus on informal coercion has
underlined just how common it is and also that it is a legitimate part
of the therapeutic relationship. All human relationships involve some
degree of trying to influence each other, either explicitly or
implicitly. The recent attention has made clear the absence of any
professional consideration of the practice (Dunn et al., 2014; Valenti
et al., 2015) and the need for more structured discussion to permit the
emergence of some consensus on what is good practice and what may be
overstepping the mark.

83

84

84

Chapter 4 Ethics and civil law

Some aspects of civil law Civil law deals with the rights and
obligations of individuals to one another, including family law, which
is a particular concern of child psychiatrists. In this respect civil
law differs from criminal law, which is concerned with offences against
the state (although some are directed against an individual,
e.g.Â homicide). As well as the issues discussed earlier in this chapter,
civil law is concerned with property, inheritance, and contracts.
Proceedings in civil law are undertaken by individuals or groups who
believe that they have suffered a breach of the civil law, in contrast
to criminal law proceedings, which are undertaken on behalf of the
state. Psychiatrists are sometimes asked to submit written reports on a
patient's mental state in relation to a civil case. Such reports should
be prepared only after full discussion with the patient, and only with
the patient's informed consent, and they should be concise and factual.
The structure should follow the plan set out on page 536 (Box 18.10). It
is advisable to seek legal advice about the relevant aspects of law
relating to the case. The following sections are based on the law in
England and Wales, although the principles apply more widely.

Testamentary capacity This term refers to the capacity to make a valid
will. If someone is suffering from mental disorder at the time of making
a will, its validity may be in doubt and other people may challenge it.
The will may still be legally valid if the testator was of 'sound
disposing mind' (see below) at the time of making it. Psychiatrists may
be asked to report in relation to two issues: 1. Testamentary capacity.
2. The possibility that the testator was subjected to undue influence.
To decide whether or not a testator is of sound disposing mind, the
doctor should decide whether the person making the will: â

Understands what a will is and its consequences.

â

Knows the nature and extent of his property (not necessarily in detail).

â

Knows the names of close relatives and can assess their claims to his
property.

â

Is free from an abnormal state of mind that might distort feelings or
judgements relevant to making the will. A deluded person may
legitimately make a

will, provided that the delusions are unlikely to influence it. To
decide these matters, the doctor should first interview the testator
alone and then interview relatives or friends to check the accuracy of
factual statements. Assessment of undue influence is more complex, and
requires an assessment of the relationship between testator and
beneficiary, the mental state of the testator, and what is known of the
person's earlier intentions.

Power of attorney and receivership If a patient is incapable of managing
their possessions by reason of mental disorder, alternative arrangements
need to be made, particularly if the incapacity is likely to last for a
long time. Such arrangements may be required for patients who are living
in the community as well as for those who are in hospital. In English
law two methods are available---power of attorney and receivership.
Power of attorney is the simpler method, and requires only that the
patient gives written authorization for someone else to act for them
during their illness. In signing such authorization, the patient must be
able to understand what they are doing. They may revoke it at any time.
Receivership is the more formal procedure, and is more likely to be in
the patient's interests. In England and Wales an application is made to
the Court of Protection, which may decide to appoint a receiver. The
procedure is most commonly required for the elderly. The question of
receivership places special responsibility on the psychiatrist. If a
patient is capable of managing their affairs on admission to hospital,
but later becomes incapable by reason of intellectual deterioration,
then it is the doctor's duty to advise the patient's relatives about the
risks to property. If the relatives are unwilling to take action, then
it is the doctor's duty to make an application to the Court of
Protection. The doctor may feel reluctant to act in this way, but any
actions taken subsequently are the Court's responsibility and not that
of the doctor.

Aspects of family law A marriage contract is not valid if, at the time
of the marriage, either party was so mentally disordered as not to

Further reading understand its nature. If mental disorder of this degree
can be proved, a marriage may be decreed null and void by a divorce
court. If a marriage partner becomes of 'incurably unsound mind' later
in a marriage, this may be grounds for divorce, and a psychiatrist may
be asked to give a prognosis. A doctor may also be asked for an opinion
about the capacity of parents or a guardian to care adequately for a
child.

Torts and contracts Torts are wrongs for which a person is liable in
civil law as opposed to criminal law. They include negligence, libel,
slander, trespass, and nuisance. If such a wrong is committed by a
person of unsound mind, then any damages awarded in a court of law are
usually only nominal. In this context the legal definition of unsound
mind is restrictive, and it is advisable for a psychiatrist to take
advice about it from a lawyer. If the person makes a contract and
subsequently develops a mental disorder, the contract remains binding.
If a person is of unsound mind when the contract is made, in English law
a distinction is made between the 'necessaries' and 'non-necessaries' of
life. A contract made for necessaries is always binding and that for
nonnecessaries is binding unless it can be shown both that the person
did not understand what they were doing and that the other person was
aware of the incapacity.

Personal injury Psychiatrists may be asked to write reports in relation
to claims for compensation by patients with post-traumatic stress
disorder or one of the other psychological sequelae of accidents (see
page 667). Such reports should be set out to accord with the relevant
local legal procedures and should state clearly the sources of
information, the

history of the trauma, the psychiatric and social history, and the
post-accident course. They should include a detailed assessment of
function and of the relationship between the trauma and any subsequent
symptoms and disability.

Fitness to drive Questions of fitness to drive arise in relation to many
psychiatric disorders. Dangerous driving may result from suicidal
inclinations or manic disinhibition, panicky or aggressive driving may
result from persecutory delusions, and indecisive or inaccurate driving
may be due to dementia. Concentration on driving may be impaired in
severe anxiety or depressive disorders. The question of fitness to drive
also arises in relation to the sedative and other side effects of some
psychiatric drugs, such as some anxiolytic or antipsychotic drugs in
high dosage. Doctors should be aware of and follow the legal criteria
for fitness to drive in the places in which they are working. These
criteria may differ somewhat for drivers of cars and drivers of heavy
goods vehicles (the latter are stricter). UK holders of driving licences
have a duty to inform the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) if
they have a condition that may affect their safety as a driver. Doctors
should inform patients if they have such a condition, and make sure that
they understand their duty to report it. When deciding on a patient's
fitness to drive, doctors should consider whether the patient's
condition or its treatment is liable to cause loss of control, impair
perception or comprehension, impair judgement, reduce concentration, or
affect motor functions involved in handling the vehicle. If, after full
discussion, a patient with such a condition continues to drive, a doctor
working in the UK should disclose the relevant medical information to
the medical adviser of the DVLA.

Further reading In many countries, national medical and psychiatric
organizations publish guidelines about the ethical and legal aspects of
practice. American Psychiatric Association (2001). Ethics Primer of the
American Psychiatric Association. American Psychiatric Association,
Washington, DC. Bloch S, Chodoff P and Green S (eds) (1999). Psychiatric
Ethics. 3rd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (A series

of reviews by leading writers covering the principal theoretical
issues.) Hope T, Savelescu J and Hendrick J (2008). Medical Ethics and
Law: the core curriculum. 2nd edn. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. (A
comprehensive introductory text.) Montgomery J (2002) Health Care Law.
2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (A useful work of reference.)

85

86

CHAPTER 5

Aetiology Approaches to aetiology in psychiatry 87

The contribution of scientific disciplines

General issues relating to aetiology 87 Aetiological models 90

to psychiatric aetiology 96 Relationship of this chapter to those

The historical development of ideas of aetiology 93

on psychiatric syndromes 118

Approaches to aetiology in psychiatry Psychiatrists are concerned with
aetiology in two ways. First, in everyday clinical work they try to
discover the causes of the mental disorders presented by individual
patients. Secondly, in seeking a wider understanding of psychiatry they
are interested in aetiological evidence obtained from clinical studies,
community surveys, or

laboratory investigations. Correspondingly, the first part of this
chapter deals with some general issues relating to aetiology in the
assessment of the individual patient, while the second part deals with
the various scientific disciplines that have been applied to the study
of aetiology.

General issues relating to aetiology Aetiology and intuitive
understanding When the clinician assesses an individual patient, he
draws on a common fund of aetiological knowledge that has been derived
from the study of groups of similar patients, but he cannot understand
the patient in these terms alone. He also has to use everyday insights
into human nature. For example, when assessing a depressed patient, the
psychiatrist should certainly know what has been discovered about the
psychological and neurochemical changes that accompany depressive
disorders,

and what evidence there is about the aetiological role of stressful
events, and about genetic predisposition to depressive disorder. At the
same time he will need intuitive understanding to recognize, for
example, that this particular patient feels depressed because he has
learned that his wife has cancer. Common-sense ideas of this kind are an
important part of aetiological formulation in psychiatry, but they must
be used carefully if superficial explanation is to be avoided.
Aetiological formulation can be done properly only if certain conceptual
problems are clearly understood. These problems can be illustrated by a
case history.

8

88

Chapter 5 Aetiology

For 4 weeks a 38-year-old married woman became increasingly depressed.
Her symptoms started soon after her husband left her, saying that he
wanted to live by himself. In the past the patient's mother had received
psychiatric treatment on two occasions, once for a severe depressive
disorder and once for mania; on neither occasion was there any apparent
environmental cause for the illness. When the patient was 14 years old,
her father went away to live with another woman, leaving his children
with their mother. For several years afterwards the patient felt
rejected and unhappy, but she eventually settled down. She later
married, and she had two children, aged 13 and 10 years, at the time of
her illness. Two weeks after leaving home the patient's husband
returned, saying that he had made a mistake and really loved his wife.
Despite his return the patient's symptoms persisted and worsened. She
began to wake early, gave up her usual activities, and spoke at times of
suicide.

When thinking about the causes of this woman's symptoms, the clinician
would first draw on knowledge of aetiology derived from scientific
enquiries. Genetic investigations have shown that, if a parent suffers
from mania as well as depressive disorder, a predisposition to mood
disorder is particularly likely to be transmitted to the children.
Therefore it is possible that this patient received this predisposition
from her mother. Clinical investigation has also provided some
information about the effects of separating children from their parents.
In the present case, the information is not helpful because it refers to
people who were separated from their parents at a younger age than the
patient. On scientific grounds, therefore there is no particular reason
to focus on the departure of the patient's father, but intuitively it
seems very likely that this was an important event. From everyday
experience it is understandable that a woman should feel very upset if
her husband leaves her. It is also understandable that she is likely to
feel even more distressed if this event recapitulates a related
distressing experience in her own childhood. Therefore the clinician
would recognize intuitively that the patient's depression is likely to
be a reaction to the husband's departure and having to manage the
distress of her children. The same sort of intuition might suggest that
the patient would start to feel better when her husband came back, but
in the event she did not recover. This simple case history illustrates
some important aetiological issues in psychiatry: â

the complexity of causes

â

the classification of causes

â

the concept of stress

â

the concept of psychological reaction

â

the relative roles of intuition and scientific knowledge in aetiological
formulations.

The complexity of causes in psychiatry In psychiatry, the study of
causation is complicated by three problems. These problems are
encountered in other branches of medicine, but to a lesser degree.

Lack of temporal association The first problem is that causes are often
remote in time from the effects that they produce. For example, it is
widely believed that childhood experiences partly determine the
occurrence of emotional difficulties in adult life. It is difficult to
test this idea, because the necessary information can only be gathered
either by studying children and tracing them many years later, which is
difficult, or by asking adults about their childhood experiences, which
is unreliable.

Cause and effect The second problem is that a single cause may lead to
several effects. For example, being deprived of parental affection in
childhood has been reported to predispose to antisocial behaviour,
suicide, depressive disorder, and several other disorders. Conversely, a
single effect may arise from several causes. The latter can be
illustrated either by different causes in different individuals or by
multiple causes in a single individual. For example, learning disability
(a single effect) may occur in several children, but the cause may be a
different genetic abnormality or environmental stressor in each child.
On the other hand, depressive disorder (a single effect) may occur in
one individual through a combination of causes, such as genetic factors,
adverse childhood experiences, and stressful events in adult life.

Indirect mechanisms The third problem is that aetiological factors in
psychiatry rarely exert their effects directly. For example, the genetic
predisposition to depression may be mediated in part through
temperamental factors that make it more likely that the individual
concerned will experience adverse life events. Thus aetiological effects
are usually mediated through complex intervening mechanisms, which also
need to be investigated and understood.

The classification of causes A single psychiatric disorder, as just
explained, may result from several causes. For this reason a scheme for

General issues relating to aetiology classifying causes is required. A
useful approach is to divide causes chronologically into those that are
predisposing, precipitating, and maintaining.

Predisposing factors These are factors, many of them operating from
early in life, that determine a person's vulnerability to causal factors
acting close to the time of the illness. They include genetic endowment
and the environment in utero, as well as physical, psychological, and
social factors in infancy and early childhood. The term 'constitution'
is often used to describe the mental and physical make-up of a person at
any point in their life. This make-up changes as life goes on under the
influence of further physical, psychological, and social influences.
Some writers restrict the term constitution to the make-up at the
beginning of life, while others also include characteristics that are
acquired later (this second usage is adopted in this book). The concept
of constitution includes the idea that a person may have a
predisposition to develop a disorder (e.g.Â schizophrenia) even though
the latter never manifests itself. From the standpoint of psychiatric
aetiology, one of the important parts of the constitution is the
personality. When the aetiology of an individual case is formulated, the
personality is always an essential element. For this reason, the
clinician should be prepared to spend sufficient time talking to the
patient and to people who know them to build up a clear picture of their
personality. This assessment often helps to explain why the patient
responded to certain stressful events, and why they reacted in a
particular way. The obvious importance of personality in the individual
patient contrasts with the small amount of relevant scientific
information so far available. Therefore, when evaluating personality it
is particularly important to acquire sound clinical skills through
supervised practice.

Precipitating factors These are events that occur shortly before the
onset of a disorder and which appear to have induced it. They may be
physical, psychological, or social. Whether they produce a disorder at
all, and what kind of disorder, depends partly on constitutional factors
in the patient (as mentioned above). Examples of physical precipitants
include cerebral tumours and drugs. Psychological and social
precipitants include personal misfortunes such as the loss of a job or
an important relationship, and changes in the routine of life, such as
moving home. Sometimes the same factor can act in more than one way. For
example, a head injury can induce psychological disorder either through
physical changes in the brain or through its stressful implications for
the patient.

Maintaining factors These factors prolong the course of a disorder after
it has been provoked. When planning treatment, it is particularly
important to pay attention to these factors. The original predisposing
and precipitating factors may have ceased to act by the time the patient
is seen, but the maintaining factors may well be treatable. For example,
in their early stages many psychiatric disorders lead to secondary
demoralization and withdrawal from social activities, which in turn help
to prolong the original disorder. It is often appropriate to treat these
secondary factors, whether or not any other specific measures are
carried out. Maintaining factors are also called perpetuating factors.

The concept of stress Discussions about stress are often confusing
because the term is used in two ways. First, it is applied to events or
situations, such as working for an examination, which may have an
adverse effect on someone. Secondly, it is applied to the adverse
effects that are induced, which may involve psychological or
physiological change. When considering aetiology it is advisable to
separate these components. The first set of factors can usefully be
called stressors. They include a large number of physical,
psychological, and social factors that can produce adverse effects. The
term is sometimes extended to include events that are not experienced as
adverse at the time, but which may still have adverse long-term effects.
For example, intense competition may produce an immediate feeling of
pleasant tension, although it may sometimes lead to unfavourable
long-term effects. The effect on the person can usually be called the
stress reaction, to distinguish it from the provoking events. This
reaction includes autonomic responses (e.g.Â a rise in blood pressure),
endocrine changes (e.g.Â the secretion of adrenaline and noradrenaline),
and psychological responses (e.g.Â a feeling of being keyed up). Much
current neurobiology research is involved in studying the effects of
stressors on the brain, and in particular how stressors affect the
mechanisms involved in the regulation of mood and processing of
emotional information (see Chapter 7).

The concept of a psychological reaction As already mentioned, it is
widely recognized that psychological distress can occur as a reaction to
unpleasant

89

90

90

Chapter 5 Aetiology

These three criteria are useful in clinical practice, although they can
be difficult to apply (particularly the second criterion).

He used 'ErklÃ¤ren' to refer to the sort of causative statement that is
sought in the natural sciences. It is exemplified by the statement that
a patient's aggressive behaviour has occurred because he has a brain
tumour. He used 'Verstehen' to refer to psychological understanding, or
the intuitive grasp of a natural connection between events in a person's
life and his psychological state. In colloquial English, this could be
called 'putting oneself in another person's shoes'. It is exemplified by
the statement 'I can understand why the patient became angry when her
children were shouted at by a neighbour.' These distinctions are
reasonably clear when we consider an individual patient, but confusion
sometimes arises when attempts are made to generalize from insights
obtained in a single case to widely applicable principles. Understanding
may then be mistaken for explanation. Jaspers suggested that some
psychoanalytical ideas are special kinds of intuitive understanding that
are derived from the detailed study of individuals and then applied
generally. They are not explanations that can be tested scientifically.
They are more akin to insights into human nature that can be gained from
reading great works of literature. Such insights are of great value in
conducting human affairs. It would be wrong to neglect them in
psychiatry, but equally wrong to see them as statements of a scientific
kind.

Understanding and explanation

The aetiology of a single case

As already mentioned, aetiological statements about individual patients
must combine knowledge derived from research on groups of patients with
intuitive understanding derived from everyday experience. Jaspers (1963,
page 302) has called these two ways of making sense of psychiatric
disorders 'ErklÃ¤ren' and 'Verstehen', respectively. In German, these
terms mean 'explanation' and 'understanding', respectively, and they are
usually translated as such in English translations of Jaspers' writing.
However, Jaspers used them in a special sense.

How to make an aetiological formulation was discussed in Chapter 3. An
example was given of a woman in her thirties who had become increasingly
depressed. The formulation showed how aetiological factors could be
grouped under headings of predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating
factors. It also showed how information from scientific investigations
(in this case genetics) could be combined with an intuitive
understanding of personality and the likely effects of family problems
on the patient. The reader may find it helpful to re-read this
formulation before continuing with this chapter.

events. Sometimes the association between event and distress is
evident---for example, when a woman becomes depressed after the death of
her husband. In other cases it is far from clear whether the
psychological disorder is really a reaction to an event, or whether the
two have coincided fortuitously---for example, when a person becomes
depressed after the death of a distant relative. Jaspers (1963, page
392) suggested three criteria for deciding whether a psychological state
is a reaction to a particular set of events: â

The events must be adequate in severity and closely related in time to
the onset of the psychological state.

â

There must be a clear connection between the nature of the events and
the content of the psychological disorder (in the example just given,
the person should be preoccupied with ideas concerning their distant
relative).

â

The psychological state should begin to disappear when the events have
ceased (unless, of course, it can be shown that perpetuating factors are
acting to maintain it).

Aetiological models Before considering the contribution that different
scientific disciplines can make to psychiatric aetiology, attention
needs to be given to the kinds of aetiological model that have been
employed in psychiatry. A model

is a device for ordering information. Like a theory, it seeks to explain
certain phenomena, but it does so in a broad and comprehensive way that
cannot readily be proved false.

Aetiological models

Reductionist and non-reductionist models Two broad categories of
explanatory model can be recognized. Reductionist models seek to
understand causation by tracing back to increasingly simple early
stages. Examples include the 'narrow' medical model, which is described
below, and the psychoanalytic model. This type of model can be
exemplified by the statement that the cause of schizophrenia lies in
disordered neurotransmission in a specific area of the brain.
Non-reductionist models try to relate problems to wider rather than
narrower issues. The explanatory models that are used in sociology are
generally of this kind. In psychiatry, this type of model can be
exemplified by the statement that the cause of a patient's depression
lies in her family; the patient is the most conspicuous element in a
disordered group of people. In the same way it can be asserted that
certain depressive states are associated with indices of social
deprivation and isolation, and can be best understood as being caused by
these factors.

The neuroscience approach The technical and conceptual advances in brain
sciences have led to what is often called the neuroscience approach.
Kandel (1998) outlined the key assumptions underlying this approach to
aetiology, which can be summarized as follows. â

All mental processes derive from operations of the brain. Thus all
behavioural disorders are ultimately disturbances of brain function,
even where the original 'cause' is clearly environmental.

â

Genes have important effects on brain function and therefore exert
significant control over behaviour.

â

Social and behavioural factors exert their effects on the brain in part
through changes in gene expression. Changes in gene expression leading
to altered patterns of synaptic connectivity underlie the ability of
experiences to produce learning and psychotherapy to change behaviour.

The latter concept derives from the ability of a wide range of
environmental stimuli to modulate gene expression by various mechanisms,
including epigenetic modifications (see below). Thus while genes coding
for particular proteins are inherited, environmental and developmental
influences are involved in determining whether and to what extent a
particular gene is expressed. This provides a plausible mechanism by

which nature and nurture interact in the production of a behavioural
phenotype. The neuroscience approach therefore seeks to comprehend the
role of social, family, and personal factors in behaviour by relating
them to changes in brain function. For example, in understanding the
effect of childhood neglect on liability to adult depression, it may be
important to find out how adverse childhood experiences might alter
relevant brain mechanisms (e.g.Â the endocrine response to stress), and
how this abnormality might predispose to depression when the individual
is exposed to difficulties in adulthood. Thus, although a neuroscience
approach encompasses the importance of social and personal factors, it
seeks to understand their consequences in a reductionist way.

Medical models Several models are used in psychiatric aetiology, but the
so-called medical model is the most prominent one. It represents a
general strategy of research that has proved useful in medicine,
particularly in studying infectious diseases. A disease entity is
identified in terms of a consistent pattern of symptoms, a
characteristic clinical course, and specific biochemical and
pathological findings (see Chapter 2 regarding models of disease). When
an entity has been identified in this way, a set of necessary and
sufficient causes is sought. In the case of tuberculosis, for example,
the tubercle bacillus is the necessary cause, but it is not by itself
sufficient. However, the tubercle bacillus in conjunction with either
poor nutrition or low resistance is sufficient cause. The importance of
personal and social factors in the presentation and course of illness is
now well recognized in general medicine, and modern medical models are
therefore considerably broader than those based on the elucidation of
the mechanism of infectious disease. Modern medical models also
recognize that much illness is characterized by quantitative rather than
qualitative deviations from normal (e.g.Â high blood pressure). This also
applies to certain disorders in psychiatry, particularly anxiety and
milder depressive disorders, which can therefore be accommodated in a
broad medical model. Difficulties with the medical model arise,
particularly in relation to disorders that are characterized principally
by abnormalities of conduct and social behaviour, such as antisocial
behaviour and substance misuse. As mentioned above, current neuroscience
approaches would seek to understand these disorders through changes in
relevant brain systems. This is because causal factors in abnormal
social behaviour, such as childhood maltreatment and deprivation, must
ultimately express

91

92

92

Chapter 5 Aetiology their effects on behaviour through changes in brain
mechanisms. Although the latter view appears theoretically valid, the
key decision for both clinician and policy-maker is at what level the
disorder is best understood and managed. For example, it is possible to
understand problems in substance misuse as arising from a defect in
brain reward systems which, in a vulnerable individual, results in
'normal' experimentation with illicit substances leading to substance
misuse, with adverse personal and social consequences. Equally, one can
see excessive drug misuse in society as a 'symptom' of social
deprivation and family disruption (see Chapter 20). Both aetiological
models may be valid, but each would suggest different forms of research
activity and therapeutic intervention.

The behavioural model As explained above, certain disorders that
psychiatrists treat, particularly those defined in terms of abnormal
behaviour, do not fit readily into the medical model. The latter include
deliberate self-harm, the misuse of drugs and alcohol, and repeated acts
of delinquency. The behavioural model is an alternative way of
comprehending these disorders. In this model the disorders are explained
in terms of factors that determine normal behaviour. These include
drives, reinforcements, social and cultural influences, and internal
psychological processes such as attitudes, beliefs, and expectations.
The behavioural model predicts that there will not be a sharp
distinction between the normal and the abnormal, but a continuous
gradation. This model can therefore be a useful way of considering many
of the conditions that are seen by psychiatrists. Although the
behavioural model is mainly concerned with psychological and social
causes, it does not exclude genetic, physiological, or biochemical
causes. This is because normal patterns of behaviour are partly
determined by genetic factors, and because psychological factors such as
reinforcement have a basis in physiological and biochemical mechanisms.
Also, the behavioural model employs both reductionist and
non-reductionist explanations. For example, abnormalities of behaviour
can be explained in terms of abnormal conditioning (a reductionist
model) or in terms of a network of social influences.

Developmental models Medical and behavioural models incorporate the idea
of predisposing as well as precipitating causes (i.e.Â the idea

that past events may determine whether or not a current cause gives rise
to a disorder). Some models place even more emphasis on past events in
the form of a sequence of experiences leading to the present disorder.
This approach has been called the 'life story' approach to aetiology.
One example is Freud's psychoanalysis (see Box 5.1) and another is
Meyer's psychobiology. These ideas are considered further below.

Political models ('antipsychiatry', 'critical psychiatry') The models
outlined above rely on a scientific approach to psychiatric aetiology.
This implies that psychiatric disorders, like other medical conditions,
can be studied and understood in an objective and empirical way using
the methods of natural sciences. In the history of psychiatry this view
has often been regarded as far from self-evident, and other conceptual
frameworks have sometimes been advocated. For example, it was customary
in the Middle Ages to explain mental illness in terms of demonic
possession and witchcraft (see below). Over the past 50 years, however,
criticisms of scientific approaches to aetiology have most often taken
the view that psychiatric illness is defined by social and political
imperatives, and represents at best a cultural value judgement and at
worst an abusive means of controlling those whom society finds
inconvenient or troubling. Arguments of this nature were put forward
strongly by the French philosopher, Michel Foucault (1926--1984), and
were further developed by psychiatrists such as RD Laing (1927--1989),
who employed a phenomenological approach to argue that schizophrenia is
an understandable response of an individual to a culture of exploitation
and alienation. Lack of faith in a scientific approach to mental
experience was exemplified by the psychiatrist Thomas Szasz
(1920--2012), who commented that 'There is no psychology; there is only
biography and autobiography.' These ideas are sometimes called
'antipsychiatry' to emphasize their fundamental contrast with the
medical models employed by conventional psychiatry. Most psychiatrists
have believed that these formulations do not advance the understanding
of mental illness, and in fact provide rather poor explanations of the
range of clinical psychopathology. For example, they seem unable to
account for the existence of schizophrenia in all human societies (see
Chapter 11). However, political and cultural perceptions of mental
illness are important because they have powerful effects on the stigma
associated with mental illness, the way that

The historical development of ideas of aetiology

Box 5.1 Psychoanalysis Psychoanalysis is derived from clinical
experience rather than from basic sciences, and consists of elaborate
theories of both normal and abnormal mental development. Compared with
experimental psychology it is more concerned with irrational aspects of
mental activity. Psychoanalytic theories are derived from data obtained
in the course of psychoanalytic treatment, and relate to the patient's
thoughts, dreams, and fantasies, as well as their memories of childhood
experiences and relationships with carers and siblings. Therefore
psychoanalytic theories are forms of intuitive understanding
('Verstehen') rather than scientific explanation ('ErklÃ¤ren') (see page
3). Freud developed a number of ideas about the unconscious mind, from
which he believed all mental processes originated. The unconscious mind
has three key features that are important in the genesis of
psychological problems. 1. It is divorced from reality. 2. It is dynamic
and contains powerful forces. 3. It is in conflict with the conscious
mind. Freud believed that the unconscious mind could be probed by dream
analysis and free association. The manifest content of a dream can be
traced back to a latent content, which is an infantile wish. This wish
is disguised by dreamwork, which, through various psychological
mechanisms, transforms the latent content into a manifest form that is
more acceptable to consciousness.

mentally ill people are treated, and the services provided (see Chapter
26). Furthermore, there is no doubt that horrifying abuse of psychiatric
patients has occurred, as demonstrated by the cooperation of many
leading German psychiatrists with the euthanasia programmes of the Nazi
regime (Torrey and Yolken, 2010).

The unconscious mind is the seat of powerful instinctual drives
(e.g.Â sexual and aggressive impulses). The forces in the unconscious
mind struggle against the conscious mind, which can give rise to
anxiety. This anxiety can be reduced by a variety of defence mechanisms,
which can be discerned in the behaviour of healthy people as well as
those with psychological disorders (see Chapter 7). Sexual impulses are
present from the earliest stages of child development, and there is a
progression through different stages of organization (oral, anal, and
genital) as the child grows. Failure to pass through these stages
effectively can lead to sexual energy (libido) becoming fixated, which
results in the individual exhibiting infantile patterns of behaviour or
regressing to them when under stress. The object of libido also changes
with development, first focusing on the self and then focusing on the
mother. In the course of this maternal attachment, boys experience angry
feelings towards their father (the Oedipus complex), while girls develop
reverse attachments. Difficulties in resolving these conflicted
attachments can give rise to problems in interpersonal relationships
later in life. Freud's theories were developed by many others. Melanie
Klein's work, which addresses pre-Oedipal aggressive and sexual drives
in a theory of object relations, has been influential in the UK.

While this is an extreme and abhorrent example, political analyses of
psychiatric practice highlight the need for the rights of patients to be
respected and their experiences understood in a personal and social
context as outlined above. (For a discussion of the limits of scientific
approaches to psychiatric illness, see Bracken et al., 2012.)

The historical development of ideas of aetiology From the earliest
times, theories of the causation of mental disorder have recognized both
somatic and psychological influences. Greek medical literature referred
to the causes of mental disorders, mainly in the Hippocratic writings
(fourth century bc). Serious mental illness was ascribed mainly to
physical causes, which

were represented in the theory that health depended on a correct balance
of the four body 'humours' (blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile).
Melancholia was ascribed to an excess of black bile. Most of the less
severe psychiatric disorders were thought to have supernatural causes
and to require religious healing. An

93

94

94

Chapter 5 Aetiology exception was hysteria, which was thought to be
physically caused by the displacement of the uterus from its normal
position. Roman physicians generally accepted the causal theories of
Greek medicine, and developed them in some respects. Galen accepted that
melancholia was caused by an excess of black bile, but suggested that
this excess could result either from cooling of the blood or from
overheating of yellow bile. Phrenitis, the name given to an acute
febrile condition with delirium, was thought to result from an excess of
yellow bile. Throughout the Middle Ages these early ideas about the
causes of mental illness were largely neglected, although they were
maintained by some scholars, such as Bartholomeus Anglicus. The causes
of mental illness were now formulated in theological terms of sin and
evil, with the consequence that many mentally ill people were persecuted
as witches. It was not until the middle of the sixteenth century that
beliefs in the supernatural and witchcraft were strongly rejected as
causes of mental disorder, notably by the Flemish writer Johan Weyer
(1515--1588) in his book De Praestigiis Daemonum, published in 1563.
Earlier, the renowned physician Paracelsus (1493--1541) had emphasized
the natural causes of mental illness. In the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, a more scientific approach to the causation of mental illness
developed as physicians became interested in mental disorders, mainly
hysteria and melancholia. The English physician Thomas Willis attributed
melancholia to 'passions of the heart', but considered that madness
(illnesses with thought disorder, delusions, and hallucinations) was due
to a 'fault of the brain'. Willis realized that this fault was not a
recognizable gross structural lesion, but a functional abnormality. In
the terminology of the time, he referred to a disorder of the 'vital
spirits' that were thought to account for nervous action. He also
pointed out that hysteria could not be caused by a displacement of the
womb, because the organ is firmly secured in the pelvis. Another
seventeenth-century English physician, Thomas Sydenham, rejected the
alternative theory that hysteria was caused by a functional disorder of
the womb ('uterine suffocation'), because he had observed the condition
in men. Despite this renewed medical interest in the causes of mental
disorder, the most influential seventeenth-century treatise was written
by a clergyman, Robert Burton (1577--1640). This work, The Anatomy of
Melancholy, published in 1621, described in detail the psychological and
social causes (such as poverty, fear, and solitude) that were associated
with melancholia and seemed to cause it.

Aetiology depends on nosology. Unless it is clear how the various types
of mental disorder relate to one another, little progress can be made in
understanding causation. From his observations of patients with
psychiatric disorders, the Italian physician Giovanni Battista Morgagni
(1682--1771) became convinced that there was not one single kind of
madness, but many different ones; further attempts at classification
followed. One of the best known was proposed by William Cullen, who
included a category of neurosis for disorders not caused by localized
disease of the nervous system. The idea that individual mental disorders
are caused by lesions of particular brain areas can be traced back to
the theory of phrenology proposed by Franz Gall (1758-- 1828) and his
pupil Johann Spurzheim (1776--1832). Gall proposed that the brain was
the organ of the mind, that the mind was made up of specific faculties,
and that these faculties originated in specific brain areas. He also
proposed that the size of a brain area determined the strength of the
faculty that resided in it, and that the size of brain areas was
reflected in the contours of the overlying skull. Thus the shape of the
head reflected a person's psychological make-up. Although the last steps
in Gall's argument were erroneous, the ideas of cerebral localization
were to develop further. An increased interest in brain pathology led to
theories that different forms of mental disorder were associated with
lesions in different parts of the brain. It had long been observed that
serious mental illness ran in families, but in the nineteenth century
this idea took a new form. Benedict Augustin Morel (1809--1873), a
French psychiatrist, put forward ideas that became known as the 'theory
of degeneration'. He proposed not only that some mental illnesses were
inherited, but also that environmental influences (such as poor living
conditions and the misuse of alcohol) could lead to physical changes
that could be transmitted to the next generation. Morel also proposed
that, as a result of the successive effect of environmental agents in
each generation, illnesses appeared in increasingly severe forms in
successive generations. It was inherent in these ideas that mental
disorders did not differ in kind but only in severity, with neuroses,
psychoses, and mental handicap being increasingly severe manifestations
of the same inherited process. These ideas were consistent with the
accepted theories of the inheritance of acquired characteristics, and
they were widely accepted. They had the unfortunate effect of
encouraging a pessimistic approach to treatment. They also supported the
Eugenics Movement, which held that the mentally ill should be removed
from society to prevent them from reproducing. These

The historical development of ideas of aetiology developments are an
important reminder that aetiological theories may give rise to
undesirable attitudes to the care of patients. Mid-nineteenth-century
views of the causation of mental illness can be judged from the widely
acclaimed textbooks of Jean-Ãtienne Esquirol (1772--1840), a French
psychiatrist, and of Wilhelm Griesinger (1817-- 1868), a German
psychiatrist. Esquirol focused on the causes of illness in the
individual patient, and was less concerned with general theories of
aetiology. He recorded psychological and physical factors, which he
believed to be significant in individual cases, and he distinguished
between predisposing and precipitating causes. He regarded heredity as
the most important of the predisposing causes, but he also stressed that
predisposition was acted on by psychological causes and by social (at
that time called 'moral') causes such as domestic problems,
'disappointed love', and reverses of fortune. Important physical causes
of mental disorder included epilepsy, alcohol misuse, excessive
masturbation, childbirth and lactation, and suppression of menstruation.
Esquirol also observed that age influenced the type of illness. Thus
dementia was not observed among the young, but mania was uncommon in old
age. He recognized that personality was often a predisposing factor. In
Pathology and Therapy of Mental Disorders, Griesinger maintained that
mental illness was a physical disorder of the brain, and he considered
at length the neuropathology of mental illness. He paid equal attention
to other causes, including heredity, habitual drunkenness, 'domestic
unquiet', disappointed love, and childbirth. He emphasized the
multiplicity of causes when he wrote: A closer examination of the
aetiology of insanity soon shows that in the great majority of cases it
was not a single specific cause under the influence of which the disease
was finally established, but a complication of several, sometimes
numerous causes, both predisposing and exciting. Very often the germs of
the disease are laid in those early periods of life from which the
commencement of the formation of character dates. It grows by education
and external influences. (Griesinger, 1867).

British views on aetiology in the late nineteenth century can be judged
from A Manual of Psychological Medicine by Bucknill and Tuke, published
in 1858, and from The Pathology of Mind by Henry Maudsley, published in
1879. Maudsley described the causes of mental disorder in terms similar
to those of Griesinger. Thus causes were multiple, while predisposing
causes (including heredity and early upbringing) were as important

as the more obvious proximal causes. Maudsley held that mistakes in
determining causes were often due to 'some single prominent event, which
was perhaps one in a chain of events, being selected as fitted by itself
to explain the catastrophe. The truth is that in the great majority of
cases there has been a concurrence of steadily operating conditions
within and without, not a single effective cause' (Maudsley, 1879, The
Pathology of Mind, page 83). Although these nineteenth-century writers
and teachers of psychiatry emphasized the multiplicity of causes, many
practitioners focused narrowly on the findings of genetic and
pathological investigations, and adopted a pessimistic approach to
treatment. However, Adolf Meyer (1866--1950), a Swiss psychiatrist who
worked mainly in the USA, emphasized the role of psychological and
social factors in the aetiology of psychiatric disorder. Meyer applied
the term psychobiology to this approach, in which a wide range of
previous experiences was considered and then common-sense judgements
used to decide which experiences might have led to the present disorder.
Meyer acknowledged the importance of heredity and brain disorder, but
emphasized that these factors were modified by life experiences, which
often determined whether or not a particular disorder would be
clinically expressed. Meyer's approach remains the basis of the
evaluation of aetiology for the individual patient. The aetiological
theories considered so far have been mainly concerned with the major
mental illnesses. Less severe disorders, particularly those that came to
be called neurosis, hysteria, and hypochondriasis, and milder states of
depression, were treated mainly by physicians. Pierre Charcot, a French
neurologist, carried out extensive studies of patients with hysteria and
of their response to hypnosis. He believed that hysteria resulted from a
functional disorder of the brain and could be treated by hypnosis. In
the USA, Weir Mitchell proposed that conditions akin to mild chronic
depression were due to exhaustion of the nervous system---a condition he
called neurasthenia. In Austria, another neurologist, Sigmund Freud,
tried to develop a more comprehensive explanation of nervous diseases,
first of hysteria and then of other conditions. After an initial
interest in physiological causes, Freud proposed that the causes were
psychological, but hidden from the patient because they were in the
unconscious part of the mind. Freud took a developmental approach to
aetiology, believing that the seeds of adult disorder lay in the process
of child development (see see Box 5.1). In France, Pierre Janet
developed an alternative psychological explanation, which was based

95

96

96

Chapter 5 Aetiology on variations in the strength of nervous activity
and on narrowing of the field of consciousness. Interest in
psychological explanations of the whole range of mental disorders grew
as neuropathological and genetic studies failed to yield new insights.
Freud and his followers attempted to extend their theory of the neuroses
to explain the psychoses. Although the psychological theory was
elaborated, no new objective data were obtained about the causes of
severe mental illness. Nevertheless, the theories provided explanations
that some psychiatrists found more acceptable than an admission of
ignorance. Psychoanalysis became increasingly influential, particularly
in American psychiatry, where it predominated until the 1970s. Since
that time there has been renewed interest in genetic, biochemical, and
neuropathological causes of mental disorder---an approach that has
become known as biological psychiatry (Guze, 1989).

Perhaps the most important lesson to learn from this brief overview of
the history of ideas on the causation of mental disorder is that each
generation bases its theories of aetiology on the scientific approaches
that are most active and plausible at the time. Sometimes psychological
ideas prevail, sometimes neuropathological ones, and sometimes genetic
ones. Throughout the centuries, however, observant clinicians have been
aware of the complexity of the causes of psychiatric disorders, and have
recognized that neither aetiology nor treatment should focus narrowly on
the scientific ideas of the day. Instead, the approach should be
broader, encompassing whatever psychological, social, and biological
factors seem to be most important in the individual case. Modern
psychiatrists are working in an era of rapid development of the
neurosciences, but they need to keep the same broad clinical perspective
of aetiology while assimilating any real scientific advances.

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology The
main groups of disciplines that have contributed to the knowledge of
psychiatric aetiology are shown in Box 5.2. In this section each group
is discussed in turn, and the following questions are asked: â

What sort of problem in psychiatric aetiology can be answered by each
discipline?

â

How, in general, does each discipline attempt to answer the questions?

â

Are any particular difficulties encountered when applying its methods to
psychiatric disorders?

Box 5.2 Scientific disciplines that contribute to psychiatric aetiology
Clinical descriptive studies Epidemiology Social sciences Experimental
and clinical psychology Genetics Biochemical studies Pharmacology
Endocrinology Physiology Neuropathology

Clinical descriptive studies Before reviewing more elaborate scientific
approaches to aetiology, attention is drawn to the continuing value of
simple clinical investigations. Psychiatry was built on such studies.
For example, the view that schizophrenia and the mood disorders are
likely to have separate causes depends ultimately on the careful
descriptive studies and follow-up enquiries carried out by earlier
generations of psychiatrists. Anyone who doubts the value of clinical
descriptive studies should read the paper by Aubrey Lewis on
'melancholia' (Lewis, 1934). This paper describes a detailed
investigation of the symptoms and signs of 61 cases of severe depressive
disorder. It provided the most complete account in the English language
and it remains unsurpassed. It is an invaluable source of information
about the clinical features of depressive disorders untreated by modern
methods. Lewis's careful observations drew attention to unsolved
problems, including the nature of retardation, the relationship of
depersonalization to affective changes, the presence of manic symptoms,
and the validity of the classification of depressive disorders into
reactive and endogenous groups. None of these problems has yet been
solved completely, but the analysis by Lewis was important in focusing
attention on them. Another good example of this approach is the study
conducted by Judd and colleagues (2002) who assessed

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology the
natural history of bipolar disorder by prospectively following up 146
patients with bipolar I disorder over a mean of 12 years. Their work
showed that bipolar disorder is not, as has often been thought, an
illness of discrete episodes of mood disturbance followed by clinical
remission. Instead, despite treatment, the patients were symptomatic
almost half the time. The majority of this morbidity was attributable to
depressive symptomatology. This work stimulated the search for better
treatments of depression in bipolar disorder (see Chapter 10).
Well-conducted clinical enquiries are likely to retain an important
place in psychiatric research for many years to come.

Epidemiology Epidemiology is the study of the distribution of a disease
in space and time within a population, and of the factors that influence
this distribution. Its concern is with disease in groups of people, not
in the individual person.

Concepts and methods of epidemiology The basic concept of epidemiology
is that of rate, or the ratio of the number of instances to the numbers
of people in a defined population. Instances can be episodes of illness,
or people who are or have been ill.Â Rates may be computed on a
particular occasion (point prevalence) or over a defined interval
(period prevalence). Other concepts include inception rate, which is
based on the number of people who were healthy at the beginning of a
defined period but became ill during it, and lifetime expectation or
risk, which is based on an estimate of the number of people who could be
expected to develop a particular illness in the course of their whole
life. In cohort studies, a group of people are followed for a defined
period of time to determine the onset of, or change in, some
characteristic with or without previous exposure to a potentially
important agent (e.g.Â lung cancer and smoking). Three aspects of method
are particularly important in epidemiology: â

defining the population at risk

â

defining a case

â

finding cases.

It is essential to define the population at risk accurately. Such a
population can be all the people living in a limited area (e.g.Â a
country, an island, or a catchment area), or a subgroup chosen by age,
gender, or some other potentially important defining characteristic.

Defining a case is the central problem of psychiatric epidemiology. It
is relatively easy to define a condition such as Down's syndrome, but
until recently the reliability of psychiatric diagnosis has not been
satisfactory. The development of standardized diagnostic criteria (see
Chapter 2) has greatly improved the reliability and validity of
epidemiological studies. Two methods are used for case finding. The
first is to enumerate all cases known to medical or other agencies
(declared cases). Hospital admission rates may give a fair indication of
rates of major mental illnesses, but not, for example, of most mood or
anxiety disorders. Moreover, hospital admission rates are influenced by
many variables, such as the geographical accessibility of hospitals,
attitudes of doctors, admission policies, and the law relating to
compulsory admissions. The second method is to search for both declared
and undeclared cases in the community. In community surveys, the best
technique is often to use two stages--- preliminary screening to detect
potential cases with a self-rated questionnaire such as the General
Health Questionnaire (Goldberg, 1972), followed by detailed clinical
examination of potential cases with a standardized psychiatric
interview.

Aims of epidemiological enquiries In psychiatry, epidemiology attempts
to answer three main kinds of question: â

What is the prevalence of psychiatric disorder in a given population at
risk?

â

What are the clinical and social correlates of psychiatric disorder?

â

What factors may be important in aetiology?

Prevalence can be estimated in community samples or among people
attending general practitioners or hospital cases. Studies of prevalence
in different locations, social groups, or social classes can contribute
to aetiology. Studies of associations between a disorder and clinical
and social variables can do the same, and may be useful for clinical
practice. For example, epidemiological studies have shown that the risk
of suicide is increased in elderly men with certain characteristics,
such as living alone, misusing drugs or alcohol, suffering from physical
or mental illness, and having a family history of suicide.

Causes in the environment Epidemiological studies of aetiology have been
concerned with predisposing and precipitating factors, and with the
analysis of the personal and social correlates of

97

98

98

Chapter 5 Aetiology mental illness. Among predisposing factors, the
influence of heredity has been examined in studies of families, twins,
and adopted people, as described below in the section on genetics. Other
examples are the influence of maternal age on the risk of Down's
syndrome, and the psychological effects of parental loss during
childhood. Studies of precipitating factors include life-events
research, which is described below in the section on the social
sciences. Epidemiological approaches to aetiology can be illustrated by
the results of studies of environmental correlates of mental disorders.
For example, it has been apparent for many years that schizophrenia is
more common in urban environments, particularly in disadvantaged inner
city areas. This finding could be of aetiological importance or it could
be a consequence of the experience of schizophrenia, with, for example,
people in the early stages of illness isolating themselves. In a study
of this question, van Os et al.Â (2003) confirmed that the prevalence of
psychosis increased linearly with the degree of urbanicity (overall odds
ratio, 1.57; 95% confidence interval \[CI\], 1.30--1.89). This
significant effect remained after adjustment for factors such as age,
gender, education level, parental psychiatric history, and country of
birth. As expected, there was, in addition, an independent and highly
significant influence of a family history of psychosis on the risk of an
individual developing psychosis (odds ratio, 4.59; 95% CI, 2.41--8.74).
Further analysis showed that the effect of urbanicity on increasing the
risk of psychosis was much greater in individuals with a family history
of psychosis than in those without such a history. These findings
suggest an important interaction between genes and environment, such
that the adverse environmental effects of urbanicity are expressed
particularly in individuals with a genetic predisposition to psychosis.

Social sciences Many of the concepts used by sociologists are relevant
to psychiatry (see Table 5.1). Unfortunately, some of these potentially
fruitful ideas have been used uncritically--- for example, in the
suggestion that mental illness is no more than a label for socially
deviant people, the so-called 'myth of mental illness'. This development
points to the obvious need for sociological theories to be tested in the
same way as other theories by collecting appropriate data. Some of the
concepts of sociology overlap with those of social psychology---for
example, attribution theory, which deals with the way in which people
interpret

the causes of events in their lives, and ideas about selfesteem. An
important part of research in sociology, namely the study of life
events, uses epidemiological methods.

Transcultural studies Studies conducted in different societies help to
make an important causal distinction. Biologically determined features
of mental disorder are likely to be similar in different cultures,
whereas psychologically and socially determined features are likely to
be dissimilar. Thus the 'core' symptoms of schizophrenia have a similar
incidence in people from widely different societies, which suggests that
a common neurobiological abnormality is likely to be important in
aetiology (see Chapter 11). By contrast, depressive disorders have a
wide range of prevalence. The World Health Survey studied the prevalence
of depression in 53 countries using the Composite International
Diagnostic Interview to generate ICD diagnoses of depressive episode.
Prevalence ranged from 0.4% in Vietnam to 15.7% in Morocco.
Interestingly, economic variation between countries accounted for
relatively little of the contrasting prevalence rates, and individual
factors seemed more important. The latter included female gender, being
separated, divorced, or widowed as well as having fewer years of
education or material assets (Rai et al., 2013).

The study of life events Epidemiological methods have been used in
social studies to examine associations between illness and certain kinds
of events in a person's life. Wolff (1962) studied the morbidity of
several hundred people over many years, and found that episodes of
illness clustered at times of change in the person's life. Holmes and
Rahe (1967) attempted to improve on the highly subjective measures used
by Wolff. They used a list of 41 kinds of life event (e.g.Â in the areas
of work, residence, finance, and family relationships), and weighted
each according to its apparent severity (e.g.Â 100 for the death of a
spouse, and 13 for a spell of leave for a serviceman). In later
developments the study of the psychological impact of life events has
been further improved in a number of ways. â

To reduce memory distortion, limits are set to the period over which
events are to be recalled.

â

Efforts are made to date the onset of the illness accurately.

â

Attempts are made to exclude events that are not clearly independent of
the illness (e.g.Â losing a job because of poor performance).

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology

Table 5.1 Some applications of social theory to psychiatry Concept

Application

Social class and subculture

Epidemiology of substance misuse

Stigma and labelling

Analysis of social exclusion of the seriously mentally ill in the
community

Institutionalization

Negative behavioural effects of institutions

Social deviance

Delinquent behaviour

Abnormal illness behaviour

Psychological consequences of physical illness

â

Events are characterized in terms of their nature (e.g. losses or
threats) as well as their severity.

â

Data are collected with a semi-structured interview and rated reliably.

Although they are significant, life events taken in isolation may be
less important than first appears to be the case. For example, in one
study, events involving the loss or departure of a person from the
immediate social field of the respondent ('exit events') were reported
in 25% of patients with depressive disorders, but in only 5% of
controls. This difference was significant at the 1% level and appears
impressive, but Paykel (1978) questioned its real significance on the
basis of the following calculation. The incidence of depressive disorder
is not accurately known, but if it is taken to be 2% for new cases over
a 6-month period, a hypothetical population of 10,000 people would yield
200 new cases. If exit events occurred for 5% of people who did not
become cases of depressive disorder, in the hypothetical population,
exit events would occur for 490 of the 9800 people who were not new
cases. Among the 200 new cases, exit events would occur for 25% (i.e.Â 50
people). Thus the total number of people experiencing exit events would
be 490 plus 50, or 540, of whom only 50 (less than 1 in 10) would
develop depressive disorders. Thus the greater part of the variance in
determining depressive disorder must be attributed to something else;
that is, life events trigger depression largely in predisposed
individuals. This idea leads us on to the consideration of vulnerability
and protective factors. However, at this point it is also worth noting
that studies of genetic epidemiology

have taken life events research a stage further by showing that the
tendency to experience adverse life events is itself partly genetically
determined. For example, individuals differ genetically in their
liability to 'select' those environments that put them at relatively
higher risk of experiencing adverse life events. Presumably this is one
way in which the genetic vulnerability to depression may be expressed
(see Kendler et al., 2004).

Vulnerability and protective factors People may differ in their response
to life events for three reasons. First, the same event may have
different meanings for different people, according to their previous
experience. For example, a family separation may be more stressful to an
adult who has suffered separation in childhood. Thus adverse experiences
that are remote in time from the adverse life event itself may
predispose to the later development of psychiatric disorder. The other
reasons are that certain contemporary factors may increase vulnerability
to life events or protect against them. Ideas about these last two
factors derive largely from the work of Brown and Harris (1978), who
found evidence that, among women, vulnerability factors include being
responsible for the care of small children and being unemployed, while
protection is conferred by having a confidant with whom problems can be
shared. The idea of protective factors has been used to explain the
observation that some people do not become ill even when they are
exposed to severe adversities.

Causes in the family It has been suggested that some mental disorders
are an expression of emotional disorder within a whole family, not just
a disorder in the person seeking treatment (the 'identified patient').
This approach is important in childhood psychiatric disorders. Although
family problems are also common among adults with psychiatric disorder,
their general importance in aetiology is almost certainly overstated in
this formulation, as emotional difficulties in other family members may
be the result of the patient's problems, rather than its cause. In
addition, emotional difficulties in close relatives may result from
shared genetic inheritance. For example, the parents of children with
schizophrenia have an increased risk of schizotypal personality disorder
(see Chapter 11). It seems more likely that family difficulties may
modify the course of an established disorder. For example, high levels
of 'expressed emotion' from family members increase the risk of relapse
in patients with schizophrenia (see Chapter 11). However, in terms of
aetiology,

99

10

100

Chapter 5 Aetiology twin studies show that shared (family) environment
is less important than shared genes in explaining familial clustering in
most psychiatric phenotypes.

Migration

â

The idea of continuity between the normal and abnormal. This idea leads
to investigations that attempt to explain psychiatric abnormalities in
terms of processes that determine normal behaviour.

â

Concern with the interaction between the person and their environment.
The psychological approach differs from the social approach in being
concerned less with environmental variables and more with the person's
ways of processing information that is coming from the external
environment and from their own body.

â

An emphasis on factors that maintain abnormal behaviour. Psychologists
are less likely to regard behavioural disorders as resulting from
internal disease processes, and more likely to assume that persisting
behavioural problems are maintained by unhelpful coping mechanisms
(e.g.Â by anxiety-reducing avoidance strategies).

Moving to another country, or even to an unfamiliar part of the same
country, is a life change that has been suggested as a cause of various
kinds of mental disorder. A number of possible mechanisms have been
identified: â

Selective migration. People in the early stages of an illness such as
schizophrenia may migrate because of failing relationships in their
country of origin.

â

Process of migration. Events relating to the process of migration itself
(e.g.Â physical and emotional trauma, prolonged waiting periods,
exhaustion, and social deprivation and isolation) may cause several
different kinds of stress-related disorder.

â

Post-migration factors. Many factors come into play after migration that
could influence the risk of developing mental illness. These include
social adversity caused, for example, by racial discrimination and
acculturation, in which the breakdown of traditional cultural structures
results in loss of self-esteem and social support. Social exclusion and
poverty are also common problems for migrants. Disparities between
aspiration and achievement may also cause stress and depression.
Finally, immigrants may be exposed to unfamiliar viruses, which could
conceivably affect intrauterine development and predispose to
psychiatric disorder in the next generation.

It is fairly well established that immigration is associated with higher
rates of psychosis in several ethnic groups, but the mechanisms involved
are unclear (see Chapter 11). The effects of immigration on other
psychiatric disorders are less consistent, and some groups experience a
relative improvement in mental health compared with their native
populations. Clearly, refugees who have fled persecution are likely to
have elevated rates of stressrelated symptomatology, and many of them
will meet the formal diagnostic criteria for post-traumatic stress
disorder. It is important that such symptoms are interpreted sensitively
in the context of the relevant cultural ways of dealing with trauma, but
this should not prevent appropriate evidence-based treatment being
offered.

Experimental and clinical psychology The psychological approach to
psychiatric aetiology has a number of characteristic features:

Neuropsychology Neuropsychological approaches share common ground with
biological psychiatry in attempting to identify the neurobiological
substrates for psychological phenomena. Various methodologies are
employed, but the aim is to understand psychopathology in the context of
brain science. Investigations may therefore involve animal experimental
work or a range of human studies, including neurological patients with
defined brain lesions and patients with psychiatric disorders. For
example, animal experimental models have shown that there is a crucial
role for the amygdala in fear conditioning. Furthermore, because of its
connections to the thalamus, the amygdala is activated by threatening
stimuli and can produce autonomic fear responses before there is any
conscious awareness of threat. LeDoux (1998) has related this circuitry
to traumatic anxiety by proposing an imbalance between the implicit
(unconscious) emotional memory system involving the thalamus and
amygdala and the explicit (conscious) declarative memory system in the
temporal lobe and hippocampus (see below). In addition to animal
experimental studies, neuropsychological investigations also involve
different groups of human subjects. Valuable information may be gained
from subjects who have suffered well-defined brain lesions. For example,
patients with bilateral amygdala lesions can recognize the personal
identity of faces, but not the facial expression of fear. This supports
the notion that the amygdala is important in the processing of
fear-related stimuli. Current neuropsychological approaches also make
extensive use of functional brain imaging techniques. This

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology
allows localization of the brain regions and neural circuitry involved
in specific psychological processes, and facilitates comparisons between
healthy subjects and patients who experience abnormalities in the
processes concerned. For example, in a magnetic resonance imaging
investigation it was found that when patients with depression were shown
pictures of sad facial expressions, they exhibited greater activation
than controls in brain circuitry related to the processing of emotion,
including the amygdala. This increased activation was attenuated by
treatment with antidepressant medication (Victor et al., 2010). This
suggests that increased activity of the amygdala may play a role in the
emotional preoccupations characteristic of depression, and that
antidepressants may act by decreasing amygdala function.

Information processing The information theory approach to psychology
proposes that the brain can be regarded as an information channel, which
receives, filters, processes, and stores information from sense organs,
and retrieves information from memory stores. This approach, which
compares the brain to a computer, suggests useful ways of thinking about
some of the abnormalities in psychiatric disorders. There are various
mechanisms involved at different stages of information processing and
therefore different points at which dysfunctional processing could give
rise to psychiatric disorder. Two of these mechanisms are attention and
memory, changes in which have been linked to psychiatric symptomatology.

Attention Attention is viewed as an active process of selecting, from
the mass of sensory input, the elements that are relevant to the
processing that is being carried out at the time. There is evidence that
attentional processes are disturbed in some psychiatric disorders. For
example, anxious patients attend more than non-anxious controls to
stimuli that contain elements of threat, and depressed mothers attend
less to the cues of their infants. This can be shown experimentally as a
disruption of psychological performance where the task involves ignoring
threat-related words. One example is the use of a modified Stroop test,
where subjects have to name the colour of a background on which a word
is written. When the word is a threatening one (e.g.Â 'kill'), the
latency taken to name the background colour is increased, and this
increase is exaggerated in anxious subjects. Subsequent studies have
made two additional observations that are clinically important. First,
the

attentional bias in anxiety disorders is probably due to a failure to
disengage attention from threat-related stimuli, rather than to
excessive initial orientation towards them. Secondly, anxious subjects
still produce greater responses to threat-related stimuli than controls,
even when the stimuli are 'masked' so that they are received outside
conscious awareness. Masking is achieved by presenting the stimulus for
a very short time (less than 40 milliseconds), immediately followed by
the longer presentation of another stimulus (the mask). The fact that
masked stimuli elicit greater behavioural responses in anxious subjects
suggests that the abnormal attentional mechanisms in anxiety involve the
non-conscious threat-processing pathways associated with the amygdala
(LeDoux, 1998). Although these findings are of interest, it is important
to remember that they may in fact be a consequence of the anxiety
disorder rather than a causal mechanism. However, even in the former
case they could still play a role in maintaining symptomatology.

Memory The information-processing model has been applied fruitfully to
the study of memory. It suggests that there are different kinds of
memory store, namely sensory stores in which sensory information is held
for short periods while awaiting further processing, a short-term store
in which information is held for only 20 seconds unless it is
continually rehearsed, and a long-term store in which information is
retained for long periods. There is a mechanism for retrieving
information from this longterm store when required, and this mechanism
could break down while memory traces are intact. This model has led to
useful experiments. For example, patients with the amnestic syndrome
(see Chapter 14) score better on memory tests that require recognition
of previously encountered material than on tasks that require unprompted
recall. This finding suggests a breakdown of information retrieval
rather than of information storage. It is well established that low mood
facilitates recall of unhappy events. This can be demonstrated in
healthy subjects undergoing a negative mood induction as well as in
depressed patients. Once again, it is not clear whether in depressed
patients this phenomenon is a manifestation of depressed mood, or one of
its causes. However, it is possible that it could play a role in
maintaining the depressive state. More recent research has focused on
the way that patients with mood disorders recall personal memories. For
example, when asked to think of a specific event associated with the
word 'happy', a depressed patient may give the response 'when I used

101

102

102

Chapter 5 Aetiology to go for long walks by myself', which is a rather
general reply. In contrast, a non-depressed person is more likely to
respond quite specifically---for example, 'when I went for a walk in
Leighton Forest last Sunday with my family'. This over-generalized style
of memory recall is associated with a history of negative life events,
and might also be linked to impaired problem-solving ability (Hermans et
al., 2008). As noted above, there is increasing interest in how explicit
declarative and implicit emotional memories might be involved in the
processing of traumatic events. It has been suggested that, during
highly traumatic experiences, explicit memory of the event is relatively
poor whereas implicit (unconscious emotional memory) is vivid. This
could give rise to the automatic intrusions and poor explicit memory
that are seen in posttraumatic stress disorder (Amir et al., 2010).

Beliefs and expectations The information processing model also predicts
that responses to information, including emotional responses, are
determined by beliefs and expectations. This idea proposes that
behaviour of all individuals is guided by their beliefs, and that
psychopathology is associated with altered content of beliefs about the
self and the world. Cognitive psychology assumes that such beliefs are
organized into schemas. Schemas have important properties in relation to
different kinds of psychopathology. â

They influence information processing, conscious thinking, emotion, and
behaviour.

â

Although not necessarily accessible to direct introspection, their
content can usually be reconstructed in verbal terms (known as
assumptions or beliefs).

â

In patients with psychiatric disorders, these beliefs are dysfunctional,
resistant to refutation, and play a part in the aetiology and
maintenance of the disorder.

These ideas have been used in the development of cognitive therapy,
where researchers aim to identify the dysfunctional beliefs associated
with particular disorders and apply techniques that help the patient to
re-evaluate and change them. For example, experimental work has shown
that patients with panic disorder (see Chapter 8) have inaccurate
expectations that sensory information about rapid heart action predicts
an imminent heart attack. This expectation results in anxiety when the
information is received, with the result that the heart rate accelerates
further and a vicious circle of mounting anxiety is set up. Changing
these expectations can help alleviate panic attacks.

Ethology and evolutionary psychology Many psychological studies involve
quantitative observations of behaviour. In some of these investigations,
use is made of methods that were originally developed in the related
discipline of ethology. Complex behaviour is divided into simpler
components and counted systematically. Regular sequences are noted as
well as interactions between individuals (e.g.Â between a mother and her
infant). Such methods have been used, for example, to study the effects
of separating infant primates from their mothers, and to compare this
primate behaviour with that of human infants separated in the same way.
More recent applications of ethology have used insights from the field
of evolutionary psychology to understand both normal and abnormal
behaviour in an evolutionary context. This approach attempts to explain
why various behaviours might have arisen in terms of evolutionary
adaptation. For example, because depressive states are ubiquitous in
human societies, it is reasonable to ask what their adaptive value may
be. One suggestion is that depression may reflect a form of
subordination in animals who have lost rank in a social hierarchy.
Rather than fighting a losing battle, the depressed individual withdraws
and conserves their emotional resources for another day. Such ideas are
not readily testable experimentally, but can give rise to hypotheses
concerning possible brain mechanisms. One theoretical difficulty is that
psychiatric disorders often appear to represent maladaptive rather than
adaptive behaviours. For example, Wolpert (1999) has drawn an analogy
with cancer, in which the consequences of abnormal cell growth are
clearly maladaptive and injurious to the individual. As cancer can be
regarded as normal cell division 'gone wrong', so depression might be
normal emotion (e.g.Â sadness) 'gone wrong'. From this viewpoint the
question is not what is the adaptive value of the abnormal behaviour,
but rather what is the adaptive value of the normal behaviour to which
the abnormal state is related.

Genetics Most psychiatric disorders have a genetic contribution, and a
significant amount of aetiological research is currently devoted to
identifying the genes concerned, and the mechanisms by which they
influence the risk of illness or other phenotypes (an observable
characteristic, such as a personality trait, or a cognitive ability).

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology The
concepts, methods, and terminology of psychiatric genetics are complex,
and will only be introduced briefly here. For more detailed coverage,
the textbook by Plomin et al.Â (2013) provides a useful starting point,
and can be supplemented by reviews such as that by Doherty and Owen
(2014).

The genetic contribution to psychiatric disorders The first clue that a
disorder has a genetic component usually comes from studying aggregation
in families. In psychiatry, this is often complemented by adoption
studies. However, it is twin studies that provide the most compelling
evidence. Positive findings then provide the impetus to use techniques
of molecular genetics to locate and identify the genes concerned.

Family studies In family studies, the investigator determines the risk
of a psychiatric condition among the relatives of affected individuals
and compares it with the expected risk in the general population. The
affected individuals are usually referred to as index cases or probands.
Such studies require a sample that has been selected in a strictly
defined way. Moreover, it is not sufficient to ascertain the current
prevalence of a psychiatric condition among the relatives, because some
of the population may go on to develop the condition later in life. For
this reason, investigators use corrected figures known as expectancy
rates (or morbid risks). Family risk studies have been used extensively
in psychiatry. Since families share environments as well as genes, these
studies by themselves cannot clearly reveal the importance of genetic
factors. However, by demonstrating that the disorder of interest shows
familial clustering, they are a valuable first step, pointing to the
need for other kinds of investigation.

Adoption studies Adoption studies provide another useful means of
separating genetic from environmental influences. The basic method is to
compare rates of a disorder in biological relatives with those in
adoptive relatives. Three main designs are used: â

Adoptee study: the rate of disorder in the adopted-away children of an
affected parent is compared with that in adopted-away children of
healthy parents.

â

Study of the adoptee's family: the rate of disorder in the biological
relatives of affected adoptees is compared with the rate in adopted
relatives.

â

Cross-fostering study: the rate of disorder is measured in adoptees who
have affected biological parents but unaffected adoptive parents, and
compared with the rate in adoptees who have healthy biological parents
but affected adoptive parents.

Adoption studies are affected by a number of biases, such as the reasons
why the child was adopted, the consequences of adoption itself, the
non-random nature of the placement (i.e.Â efforts are made to match the
characteristics of the child to those of the adoptive parents), and the
effects on adoptive parents of raising a difficult child. A more
fundamental limitation is that adoption studies do not control for the
prenatal environment, which may be important for disorders associated
with intrauterine factors or birth complications. The value and
limitations of adoption studies are perhaps best illustrated in
schizophrenia research (see Chapter 11).

Twin studies In twin studies the investigator seeks to separate genetic
and environmental influences by comparing rates of concordance
(i.e.Â where both co-twins have the same disorder) in uniovular
(monozygotic, MZ) and binovular (dizygotic, DZ) twins (Kendler, 2001).
If concordance for a psychiatric disorder is higher in MZ twins than in
DZ twins, a genetic component is presumed; the greater the difference in
concordance, the greater the heritability (see below). As well as
showing the size of the genetic contribution, modern twin studies allow
the environmental contribution to be divided into that which is unique
to the individual ('non-shared') and that which reflects the common
('shared') environment experienced by the twins. This is usually done
using a statistical approach called structural equation modelling.
Despite their key role in genetic epidemiology, the results of twin
studies should not be accepted uncritically, as they make several
assumptions, which are outlined in Box 5.3.

Heritability Heritability is a measure of the extent to which a
phenotype is 'genetic'. More precisely, it refers to the proportion of
the liability to the phenotype that is accounted for by additive genetic
effects (Visscher et al., 2008). Recent estimates for common psychiatric
disorders, based on population-based twin studies, are shown in Table
5.2 (see also Box 5.6). The data show that most psychiatric
disorders---like most biological and behavioural traits---are heritable
to a degree, and many show a substantial heritability.

103

104

104

Chapter 5 Aetiology

Box 5.3 Considerations in the interpretation of twin studies in genetic
epidemiology Has zygosity been accurately determined? Although MZ
co-twins are virtually genetically identical, there can be minor
differences. â It is assumed that MZ and DZ twin pairs both experience
the same degree of environmental sharing, and this 'equal environments
assumption' appears to hold for most disorders. However, this may not
necessarily be true, especially with regard to the prenatal environment;
counterintuitively, this is more dissimilar for MZ than for DZ co-twins.
It should also be noted that gene and environment effects interact with
each other, and so their effects are not simply additive. For example,
parents with antisocial personality disorder may pass on genes that
increase the risk that their children will inherit a liability to
conduct disorder, but may also produce a family environment that itself
increases the risk of behavioural disturbance. â Most twin studies are
now population based, rather than being derived from psychiatric case
registers. This reduces the biases of the latter, but does mean that
relatively few cases are detected even in large samples, resulting in
estimates that can have wide confidence intervals. In addition, the
reliability of diagnoses may be less certain. â Being a twin might in
itself affect the risk of developing a psychiatric disorder. However,
there is little evidence of this. â

Given the importance of the concept, some further comments on
heritability estimates and their interpretation are relevant here. â

Estimates of heritability may vary in different populations under
different environmental conditions.

â

Heritability cannot be applied to an individual, only to a population.
For example, some cases may not have a genetic predisposition, and are
called phenocopies.

â

Heritability does not give any indication as to the number, nature, or
mechanisms of the genes involved.

â

Heritability should not be confused with concordance, or with
penetrance. A phenotype can show high concordance in MZ twins without
being genetic (e.g. religious faith or football team supported).
Equally,

Table 5.2 Heritability estimates for selected psychiatric disorders
Disorder

Heritability estimate (%)

Bipolar disorder

85

Schizophrenia

81

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

80

Cocaine use disorder

72

Anorexia nervosa

60

Alcohol dependence

56

Panic disorder

43

Major depression

37

Generalized anxiety disorder 28 Reproduced from Psychological Medicine,
41(1), Bienvenu OJ, Davydow DS and Kendler KS, Psychiatric 'diseases'
versus behavioral disorders and degree of genetic influence, pp.Â 33--40,
Copyright (2011), with permission from Cambridge University Press, and
other sources.

modest concordance rates between MZ twins may still denote high
heritability---it is the difference in concordance rates between MZ and
DZ twins that denotes heritability. Penetrance refers to the likelihood
that a specific phenotype occurs in people who carry a particular
genotype. This does not always happen, probably reflecting protective
genetic or environmental factors, or 'stochastic factors' (i.e.Â chance).
Indeed, only a few conditions are fully penetrant.

The mode of inheritance A useful intermediate step between finding that
a disorder or other phentoype clusters in families and is heritable, and
applying molecular methods to find the gene(s) responsible, is to
determine the mode of inheritance. In essence, the question is whether
the disorder has the characteristics of a Mendelian trait (i.e.Â whether
the family history shows a classic Mendelian pattern of dominant,
recessive, or X-linked inheritance). If it does, the disorder can be
assumed to be caused by a single major gene. Indeed, in the rare
instances where this pattern is observed in psychiatry, causative genes
have in many cases already been discovered (e.g.Â for familial
Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease). However, such examples
are very rare. Most psychiatric disorders, like most common medical
disorders, do not show classic Mendelian patterns of inheritance. They
are called non-Mendelian or complex genetic disorders. No gene is either
necessary or sufficient to cause the disorder; these

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology
susceptibility genes are best considered as risk factors that set the
genetic threshold of vulnerability. Within the large category of
non-Mendelian disorders, the 'genetic architecture' of most psychiatric
disorders (i.e.Â the number of genes and genetic variants, and how they
operate to increase risk) is unclear (Frazer et al., 2009). Most of the
heritability is thought to come from genetic variants (polymorphisms;
see below) that are common in the population and which, although they
are important epidemiologically, confer only a small increase in risk to
the individual (the common disease-- common variant model). There may
also be genetic variants that are rare in the population, but which,
when present, put the individual at a more substantial risk. The
relative importance of these two forms of genetic variation is unclear,
and likely differs between psychiatric disorders (Gratten et al, 2014).

Linkage and association The distinction between Mendelian and
non-Mendelian disorders has implications for how best to find the genes
involved. The former are best studied using genetic linkage, in which
affected and unaffected individuals within large families are compared
with genetic markers to identify which region (locus) of which
chromosome segregates with (shows linkage to) the illness. The result is
usually expressed as the logarithm of the odds of detection of linkage
(LOD score). A LOD score of 3 or more is conventionally regarded as
reasonable evidence for linkage. Having identified the locus, the gene
itself is then sought using other approaches. In contrast, linkage does
not work well in nonMendelian disorders (largely because there is no one
gene, nor therefore one locus, to be found). Hence, linkage strategies
have been largely unsuccessful in psychiatry. In this situation, genetic
association is a more feasible and powerful approach. The basic design
involves comparing cases with unaffected, unrelated control subjects to
find out whether the groups differ in the frequency of specific genetic
polymorphisms (see below), measured using a chi-squared test or another
similar test. If a significant difference is found, that variant is said
to be genetically and statistically associated with the disorder
concerned; whether the association reflects a true aetiological role of
the variant in the disorder requires further study. Genetic association
studies, which have become the work-horse of psychiatric genetics, are
described further below. For a discussion of linkage and association,
and other methods for finding genes, see Altshuler et al.Â (2008) and
Burmeister et al.Â (2008).

Types of genetic variation and their psychiatric relevance Genetic
differences between individuals are of several different types. Each is
relevant in the causation of psychiatric disorders.

Chromosomal (cytogenetic) abnormalities Cytogenetics is concerned with
identifying structural abnormalities in chromosomes. The abnormality can
be in the number of chromosomes (aneuploidy), a deletion or duplication
of part of a chromosome, or translocation of part of one chromosome to
another. Cytogenetic abnormalities are usually suspected on the basis of
a characteristic physical appearance. They are often associated with
learning disability, and can be diagnosed relatively easily by clinical
geneticists using karyotyping, in which the chromosomes are visualized.
A good example in psychiatry is Down's syndrome, which is usually caused
by an additional copy of chromosome 21 (trisomy 21, an example of
aneuploidy), although some result from translocation of part of
chromosome 21 with a portion of another chromosome. Other examples
involve the X and Y chromosomes, such as Turner's syndrome (XO) and
Klinefelter's syndrome (XXY). Prominent examples of a more subtle
cytogenetic disorder are fragile X syndrome, in which part of the X
chromosome is abnormal, and velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS), in which
part of one copy of the long arm of chromosome 22 is deleted. Although
cytogenetic abnormalities are extremely rare causes of psychiatric
disorders other than those involving learning disability, their
occurrence provides important clues as to where susceptibility genes may
be located. For example, it was the observation that Alzheimer's disease
occurs earlier and more commonly in Down's syndrome, which encouraged
investigators to search chromosome 21 for genes that might cause the
disease even in non-trisomic subjects. In this way the role of the
amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene was identified (see Chapter 14).
Similarly, the markedly increased frequency of psychosis in people with
VCFS has focused attention on genes located in that region of chromosome
22 as predisposing to psychosis in general (see Chapter 11).

Mutations and polymorphisms Most genetic variation between individuals,
and their vulnerability to disease, is attributable to changes in one or
a few nucleotides (bases) of DNA sequence. These are called mutations or
polymorphisms. These and related

105

106

106

Chapter 5 Aetiology terms are discussed in Box 5.4 gives three examples
of polymorphisms that are relevant to psychiatry.

Copy number variation Between the extremes of a cytogenetic abnormality
and a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), an intermediate type of
genetic variation has become apparent, called structural variation or
copy number variation (CNV). CNVs are duplications or deletions of
stretches of DNA ranging in size from thousands to millions of
nucleotides, and they may be thought of as miniature chromosomal
abnormalities. Indeed, there is no absolute distinction from the latter;
VCFS is a large CNV. CNVs are a feature of the normal genome, but they
are also genetic risk factors for some psychiatric disorders, notably
schizophrenia, autism, and learning disability. The pathogenicity of
CNVs depends on their size, their co-occurrence with other variants, and
their location in the genome. Large CNVs, and those that

disrupt key genes, are more likely to be harmful. Such CNVs are very
rare (e.g.Â less than 1 in 5000 people), yet, when present, typically
have a significant effect on disease risk (e.g.Â an odds ratio of 10);
these features contrast with SNPs, which (by definition) are common yet
have only a very small effect on risk of a disorder (typically odds
ratio of less than 1.2). CNVs can either be inherited or occur de novo
(i.e.Â are not seen in either parent). For a review, see Kirov (2015).

Genetic association studies We have already noted that multiple SNPs
appear to underlie much of the genetic predisposition to psychiatric
disorders, and that their role is investigated using genetic
association. Genetic association studies are of two main types.

Candidate gene studies As noted earlier, an association study measures
the frequency of a genetic polymorphism in a group of

Box 5.4 The terminology of molecular genetic variation: polymorphisms,
alleles, and mutations No two people share precisely the same genome
(the total genetic information contained on our 23 pairs of chromosomes,
about 3 billion base pairs of DNA). Each person has a unique DNA
sequence (with the exception of MZ twins). DNA sequence variants are
called polymorphisms or allelic variants. Most polymorphisms involve a
change in a single nucleotide, hence the term single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP). SNPs occur on average about every 1000 base pairs
(around 2 million SNPs in total), both within genes and in the stretches
of DNA between genes. A given polymorphism can be rare, or both variants
(alleles) can occur at equal frequency in the population. â The term
mutation can be used to refer to any very rare polymorphism (i.e.Â one
present in less than 1% of people). However, it is often used in a more
restricted way to denote a change in DNA sequence which is by definition
harmful---that is, it causes a disease. This differs from polymorphisms
in general, which, as noted above, often have no consequences at all; if
they do, they can be beneficial, neutral, or harmful, and any effects
are not deterministic but merely change the probability of a particular
phenotype. The term mutation is therefore used largely with reference to
Mendelian disorders. â Most polymorphisms have no functional
significance because they do not lead to an amino acid change â

in the encoded protein (called synonymous or conservative
polymorphisms), either because the SNP is in non-coding parts of the DNA
or because of some redundancy in the coding region. However, some SNPs
do have functional correlates, or affect disease risk, and it is these
that are sought in genetic association studies. â Because we have two
copies of every autosomal gene (autosomes are chromosomes other than X
or Y), one from each parent, at any point in the genome the two alleles
may be identical (homozygosity), or they may differ (heterozygosity). â
SNPs that are close together tend to be inherited together. They are
said to be in linkage disequilibrium, and the SNPs together comprise a
haplotype. These properties and concepts are important for the conduct
and interpretation of genetic association studies. For example, linkage
disequilibrium means that if one SNP is measured and shown to be
genetically associated with a disorder, it cannot be concluded that it
is the biologically important variant; it might simply be a marker for
another SNP within the haplotype that is in fact the important one. And
the haplotype itself might be more significant than any one of its
constituent SNPs. For a review of this subject, see Slatkin (2008).

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology
individuals who have the phenotype of interest, and compares it with the
frequency in a group of matched healthy controls. Such studies have been
widely used in psychiatry, as it is relatively easy to collect samples
(DNA can be extracted from blood or a cheek swab), and then to genotype
using methods based on the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Until a
decade or so ago, for technical and financial reasons, only a very
limited number of genes and SNPs were studied at a time. A gene would be
selected for study because researchers considered it to be a candidate
gene---that is, one that they considered to be a plausible candidate for
contributing to the phenotype in question (e.g.Â a dopamine receptor for
schizophrenia). Within the gene, the specific polymorphism was chosen
because it was common (providing more statistical power), easy to
measure, or had been the subject of a previous positive report. There
have been a huge number of candidate gene association studies in
psychiatry. Some findings have proved robust, but most have not,
reflecting several major limitations. â

The fundamental problem is that there are about 25,000 protein-coding
genes in the human genome, and over two million SNPs. The prior
probability that any one gene, let alone any one polymorphism, is truly
associated with the phenotype that one is measuring is therefore very
small, unless there is already compelling evidence implicating the gene
(which is rarely the case in psychiatry). There is therefore a high
probability of obtaining a false-positive result, especially as these
are more likely to be published than is a negative result.

â

The groups that are being compared must have closely similar ethnic
backgrounds, as the frequency of polymorphisms can vary markedly. For
example, the COMT-Met158 allele (see Box 5.4) varies from 1% to 60% in
populations across the world. This can lead to artefactual group
differences owing to ethnic stratification. One method of avoiding this
problem is not to use a control group, but to genotype the parents of
the cases to see whether affected children inherit alleles more often
than would be expected by chance. These family-based association studies
often use the transmission disequilibrium test.

â

Other problems include genotyping errors and inadequate sample sizes.

Genome-wide association studies Candidate gene association studies have
now been supplanted by genome-wide association studies (GWAS), in

which hundreds of thousands of SNPs, selected to cover the whole of the
genome, can be tested at the same time. This is done using a silicon
'chip', which contains probes for the SNPs, and on to which the person's
DNA is added. A scanner then 'reads' the genotype at each SNP. (It was
from these readouts that the existence and importance of CNVs became
apparent.) The fundamental advantage of GWAS is that the whole genome is
surveyed without the need to have prior hypotheses (or biases). The
major problem is that of multiple testing. Because so many SNPs are
tested, the criterion for statistical significance between groups must
be correspondingly lowered, to approximately P â¤ 10--8. This in turn
requires very large samples to provide the necessary power (tens of
thousands of cases, and a similar number of controls). Studies of this
size, and meta-analyses of these, are now being reported for several
psychiatric disorders, with significant progress being made in psychosis
and autism, as well as in some neurodegenerative disorders. However,
there is still considerable debate about the value and limitations of
GWAS in psychiatry, and how to interpret the results. For example, GWAS
are suited to detecting common but not rare variants. Also, many
associations are to regions of the genome with no known genes.
Furthermore, the need for large samples often means that the clinical
evaluation of the subjects is limited. For a review of GWAS concepts and
methods, see Craddock (2013).

Exome and genome sequencing The latest technologies move on from
sampling or 'tagging' the genome (using SNPs) to sequencing the DNA
(Bras et al., 2012). Exome sequencing is the term used to describe
sequencing limited to the stretches of DNA that encode expressed genes
(i.e.Â present in messenger RNA). Whole genome sequencing is where the
genome is sequenced in its entirety. These methods are rapidly being
adopted in genetics research and clinical diagnostics, and data are
beginning to emerge in autism and some other psychiatric disorders.
Their attraction is that the complete genetic information is captured,
but there are several reasons why this is not necessarily an advantage,
including the huge amounts of data needing to be stored and analysed,
and considerable uncertainty as to how to interpret the results. In
particular, sequencing is revealing many more genetic differences
between individuals than anticipated, and it is usually unclear which of
these are of any functional or pathological significance. For review,
see Biesecker and Green (2014).

107

108

108

Chapter 5 Aetiology

Other aspects of psychiatric genetics Relationships between genotype and
phenotype Genes do not code for psychiatric disorders---they code for
RNA and protein, and it is these gene products which in turn influence
the functioning of cells, tissues, organs, and, ultimately, individuals.
This simple point has several implications (Kendler, 2005). First, it is
not surprising that genes do not map closely on to our current
diagnostic categories. For example, one gene can contribute to various
phenotypes (pleiotropy). Secondly, it may contribute to the difficulty
in finding genes for disorders because there are so many intervening
steps that may mask the relationship. In response to this problem,
researchers often study endophenotypes (also called intermediate
phenotypes), which are features that are thought to be more closely
related to a disorder's underlying genetic basis than is the clinical
syndrome itself. For example, eye-tracking dysfunction, impaired working
memory, and neuroimaging abnormalities are all endophenotypes in
schizophrenia. For a review of the concept, see Gottesman and Gould
(2003). In terms of molecular mechanisms, there are two main ways in
which genetic variation can affect phenotype and the risk of a disorder.
If the variant alters the sequence of the encoded protein, the function
of that protein may be impaired. Even a single amino acid change can be
significant---for example, the APP mutations that cause familial
Alzheimer's disease, or the apoE4 and COMT Val158Met SNPs mentioned in
Box 5.5. Larger deletions or insertions within proteins caused by CNVs
are also likely to impair, inactivate, or change the function of the
protein. However, most SNPs that have been associated with psychiatric
disorders to date do not alter the protein sequence, and may not even be
located within a proteincoding gene at all (see Box 5.4). Their effects
on disease risk probably occur because they alter the way in which the
gene is regulated (i.e.Â the amount, timing, and location of gene
expression and the synthesis of the protein; Harrison, 2015), or they
impact on the function of the large number of non-protein coding genes
now recognized (Barry, 2014). For review see Albert and Kruglyak (2015).

Epistasis Epistasis refers to the non-additive interactions between two
or more genes (Phillips, 2008). For example, an SNP in gene A and an SNP
in gene B each confer an odds ratio of 1.2 for a disorder. However,
individuals who happen to have both of these risk SNPs have an odds
ratio of 6. Epistasis has a major role in the genetics of cancer and
many other complex traits. It may well be similarly

important in the heritability of psychiatric disorders, but the data are
limited for various technical and statistical reasons. For an example of
epistasis in schizophrenia, see Nicodemus et al.Â (2010).

Gene--environment interactions and correlations Genes and the
environment are sometimes considered separately, but they are
inextricably linked in aetiology (Rutter, 2006). That is, genes affect
our susceptibility to environmental factors (gene--environment
interaction; Thomas, 2010). They also affect our exposure to particular
environments (gene--environment correlation; Jaffee and Price, 2007).
Although this importance is clear from epidemiological studies, few
interactions between a specific gene variant and a specific
environmental factor have yet been demonstrated in psychiatry (see Box
5.5 for one controversial example), probably because they require very
large samples and also careful measurements of the environment. Note
that heritability estimates such as those in Table 5.2 can be affected
by gene--environment interactions and correlations (Visscher et al.,
2008).

Clinical and ethical implications of psychiatric genetics For some
inherited neuropsychiatric conditions (e.g. Huntington's disease and
Down's syndrome) genetic counselling and testing are regarded as
helpful. Until recently, the only information available for major
psychiatric disorders such as bipolar disorder and schizophrenia came
from findings from genetic epidemiology indicating, for example, that,
while a child of a patient with schizophrenia had a tenfold increase in
the risk of schizophrenia, the absolute risk was still only around one
in ten. Advances in molecular genetics raise the possibility of moving
from risk counselling based on family history to more specific genetic
testing of individuals (Gershon and Alliey-Rodriguez, 2013). As noted
above, GWAS are increasingly successful at detecting SNPs that
contribute to the genetic risk of highly heritable disorders such as
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and autism. However, the increase in
risk conferred by any of these variants considered singly is very small;
in addition, even adding the various risk genes together explains only a
limited amount of the variance in inherited liability. Therefore current
GWAS findings are not likely to be useful in genetic counselling.
However some illness-associated CNVs carry much larger risk for people
in the particular families in which they occur. For example, it has been
estimated that an individual with a deletion in 3q29 has a one in three
chance of developing schizophrenia. Tracking abnormal CNVs through
affected families may therefore provide

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology

Box 5.5 Examples of polymorphisms in psychiatry Apolipoprotein E4 in
Alzheimer's disease The apoE gene on chromosome 19 exists in three
common forms (alleles): apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4. ApoE3 is the commonest
variant in the population. Since 1993, dozens of studies involving
thousands of people have shown an unequivocal association between apoE4
and Alzheimer's disease---a higher proportion of patients have the apoE4
variant of the gene than do age-matched subjects without the disease. In
some populations, apoE2 is protective. ApoE4 is thus said to be
genetically associated with Alzheimer's disease and, as such, is a
genetic risk factor for it. Individuals with one copy of apoE4
(heterozygotes, with their other chromosome carrying apoE3 or apoE2) are
two to three times more likely to develop Alzheimer's disease, and the
risk is over fivefold greater in apoE4 homozygotes (in whom both copies
of the gene are apoE4). In other words, apoE4 accounts for about
onethird of all cases of Alzheimer's disease. However, about half of all
Alzheimer's disease occurs in people without an apoE4 allele, and some
apoE4 homozygotes never develop it. ApoE4 represents the best
established example of a genetic risk factor for a common psychiatric
disorder. However, it also emphasizes that apoE4, like most genes
involved in psychiatric disorder, acts as a risk factor, not a
determinant; it is neither necessary nor sufficient. The apoE genotype
also affects the risk of developing certain other neurological
conditions, illustrating the fact that genes can have effects across
different disorders. For a further discussion of apoE4, see Chapter 14,
and for a review, see Verghese et al.Â (2011).

Catechol-O-methyl transferase and dopaminergic function and dysfunction
The enzyme catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) metabolizes monoamines,
especially dopamine. It occurs as a high-activity form and a
low-activity form, which in turn results in lesser or greater
availability of dopamine in the synapse. The difference is due to a SNP
in the gene (called Val158Met), which leads to a single amino acid being
changed in the COMT protein. The high-activity allele encodes valine
(Val-COMT) and the low-activity allele encodes methionine (Met-COMT).
Egan et al. (2001) showed that subjects with Val-COMT had a less

efficient prefrontal cortex, and tended to perform less well during
working memory tasks compared with MetCOMT subjects. In other situations
(e.g.Â during emotional processing), Val-COMT subjects are more efficient
than Met-COMT subjects. The COMT Val158Met is perhaps the best
psychiatric example of a polymorphism that is known to be functional
(i.e.Â it affects the protein that the gene encodes, and since that
protein regulates dopamine, it in turn affects dopamine-mediated brain
functions). For that reason it has been extensively studied in a range
of behaviours, and in many psychiatric disorders. However, the results
have generally not been conclusive, and have led to controversies about
the data and their interpretation. Possible reasons for the inconclusive
results include the occurrence of sex differences in COMT function, and
the presence of other SNPs in the gene which interact with Val158Met to
determine COMT activity. For a review of this subject, see Tunbridge et
al.Â (2006).

5-HT transporter gene, stress, and depression The 5-HT transporter
(5-HTT) regulates synaptic 5-HT availability and is the target of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Its gene contains a
polymorphism in its 'upstream' promoter region (which regulates the
expression of the gene). The polymorphism is unlike the above examples
in two ways. First, it is non-coding (i.e. it does not change the amino
acid sequence of the protein). Secondly, it is not an SNP, but is a
polymorphism in the length of the DNA, the two alleles being called
short (S) and long (L). Lesch et al.Â (1996) showed that the S allele was
associated with neuroticism (trait anxiety), and Caspi et al.Â (2004)
found that it influenced whether a person who had experienced adverse
early-life events developed depression. The polymorphism may also
contribute to individual differences in the therapeutic response to, and
side-effects of, SSRIs. The finding of Caspi et al.Â (2004) is a
prominent example of a gene--environment interaction (see below). It is
also a prime example of the controversies in the field, since there have
been multiple subsequent studies, and controversies as to whether the
result is robust, with different meta-analyses coming to opposite
conclusions. For a review of this subject, see Karg et al.Â (2011).

109

10

110

Chapter 5 Aetiology information of great clinical significance to
members of those families. The growing availability of knowledge of this
nature will require much ethical discussion about issues such as
parental genetic testing, the rights of family members to genetic
information about each other, as well as preimplantation screening and
selection of embryos. Fundamental to such debate are questions about the
impact (both positive and negative) of psychiatric disorder for affected
individuals, their families, and society. Here the role of stigma must
be closely examined. It is sobering that 'genetic' explanations of
psychiatric disorder do not guarantee that the stigma of illness will be
lessened---if anything, the reverse may be the case (Angermeyer et al.,
2011). For a review of these issues, see Gershon and Alliey-Rodriguez
(2013).

Epigenetics Epigenetics describes chemical modifications of DNA and of
its binding proteins (called histones), which regulate gene activity
without changing the DNA sequence. Important examples are methylation of
cytosine nucleotides in the promoter region of genes, and the
acetylation of specific histone amino acids. A range of environmental
factors, including drugs, childhood abuse, and stress, have been shown
to affect these modifications. As such, epigenetic regulation provides
one mechanism, perhaps the most important one, by which genes and
environment interact. There is also interest in the possibility that
some epigenetic 'marks' may be heritable. For a review of this subject,
see Petronis (2010). Epigenetics, together with epistasis and gene--
environment interactions, may help to reconcile the relatively high
heritability of psychiatric disorders with the very small odds ratios
associated with all of the individual SNPs discovered so far, and the
fact that, cumulatively, SNPs only explain a fraction of the
heritability (Maher, 2008). They also provide some of the reasons why
finding genes for psychiatric disorders has proved so difficult, as
discussed in this section and summarized in Box 5.6.

Biochemical studies Biochemical studies can be directed either to the
causes of diseases or to the mechanisms by which disease produces its
effects. The methods of biochemical investigation are too numerous to
consider here, and it is assumed that the reader has some knowledge of
them. The main aim here is to consider some of the problems of using
biochemical methods to investigate psychiatric disorder.

Box 5.6 Some reasons why finding genes for psychiatric disorders is
difficult Starting with the 'wrong' clinical phenotype. Genes are highly
unlikely to map on to current diagnostic categories, yet samples are
usually collected based upon the latter. Stronger genotype--phenotype
relationships may be seen if categories are broadened (e.g.Â 'psychosis'
rather than schizophrenia and bipolar disorder) or decomposed
(e.g.Â schizophrenia into cognitive deficits and psychotic symptoms,
etc.). â No 'major genes' exist. Each gene on its own contributes only a
small fraction of the heritable risk. â Different genes may affect risk
in different people (genetic heterogeneity). â Within a given gene,
different variants may affect risk in different people (allelic
heterogeneity). â The presence of phenocopies and de novo mutations. â
Gene--gene interactions (epistasis). â Gene--environment interactions. â

It will be clear from the above account that the scope for molecular
genetic studies is greatly enhanced by the presence of a biochemical
abnormality that reliably distinguishes patients with a particular
psychiatric disorder. The value of such an abnormality would be greater
still if the biochemical abnormality concerned played a significant role
in the cause of the illness or its pathophysiology. However, the nature
of the biochemical changes associated with most psychiatric disorders
remains unknown. This is due both to our lack of knowledge about the
biochemical complexities of the normal brain and to the difficulty of
investigating the biochemistry of the living human brain directly.
Moreover, because most psychiatric disorders do not lead to death (other
than by suicide), post-mortem material is not widely available except
among the elderly. Because of these problems, workers have adopted a
variety of indirect methods involving sampling of peripheral tissues and
fluids, such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood cells, and urine. These
studies, although more feasible to carry out, are not always easy to
interpret. For example, concentrations of neurotransmitters and their
metabolites in lumbar CSF have an uncertain relationship to the
corresponding functionally active neurotransmitter in the brain.
Equally, neurotransmitter receptors and their second messengers in blood
platelets

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology and
lymphocytes often appear to be regulated in a different way to their
brain counterparts. Finally, measures in plasma and urine are very
susceptible to confounding dietary and behavioural changes (see below).
The reader will find accounts of the results of biochemical research in
subsequent chapters, especially those on mood disorders and
schizophrenia. At this point a few examples will be given of the
different kinds of investigation that are used.

Post-mortem studies Post-mortem studies of the brain can provide direct
evidence of chemical changes within it. Unfortunately, interpretation of
the findings is difficult, because it must be established that any
changes in the concentrations of neurotransmitters or enzymes did not
occur after death. Moreover, because psychiatric disorders do not lead
directly to death, the ultimate cause of death is another condition
(often bronchopneumonia or the effects of a drug overdose) that could
have caused the observed changes in the brain. Even if this possibility
can be ruled out, it is still possible that the biochemical changes are
the result of treatment rather than of disease. For example, the
increases in density of dopamine receptors in the nucleus accumbens and
caudate nucleus in patients with schizophrenia might be interpreted as
supporting the hypothesis that schizophrenia is caused by changes in
dopamine function in these areas of the brain. On the other hand, the
finding could equally be the result of long-term treatment with
antipsychotic drugs which block dopamine receptors and might lead to a
compensatory increase in the number of receptors. As mentioned above,
molecular genetic techniques can be used to complement biochemical
investigations in post-mortem brain or to quantify mRNA or other
parameters of gene expression. Although these techniques have the
benefits of greater sensitivity and molecular specificity, they suffer
from the same inherent limitations.

Brain biochemistry and brain imaging Over the past few years, effective
methods of studying biochemical events in the living brain have become
available and have been used in some studies of psychiatric disorders.
These methods include the following: â

magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

â

single-photon emission tomography (SPET)

â

positron emission tomography (PET).

The use of these techniques to measure cerebral structure and blood flow
is discussed below under the

relevant headings. However, brain imaging can also be employed to
measure aspects of brain biochemistry. For example, it is possible to
carry out in-vivo receptor binding in different groups of psychiatric
patients using positron-labelled ligands and PET or SPET imaging.

Receptor binding with PET and SPET The 5-HT1A receptor plays an
important role in the regulation of 5-HT neurotransmission and is an
important target for antidepressant medications. Using PET imaging in
conjunction with a positron-labelled 5-HT1Areceptor antagonist, a number
of groups have found that the binding of 5-HT1A receptors in the brain
is decreased in patients with major depression. Moreover, this
abnormality appears to persist in patients who have recovered from
depression and are no longer taking medication. This suggests that low
5-HT1A-receptor binding might represent a trait marker for vulnerability
to depression. Alternatively, the diminished receptor availability could
be a consequence of having been depressed (see Meyer 2013). For reasons
of cost, studies employing PET are likely to remain restricted to a
small number of specialist research centres. However, SPET imaging is
more widely available, and increasing numbers of specific receptor
ligands suitable for SPET studies are being developed. For example,
there are already several studies using SPET in conjunction with
specific dopamine-receptor ligands examining dopamine-receptor binding
in mood disorders and schizophrenia.

Neurotransmitter release in vivo Studies using PET and SPET in
conjunction with specific dopamine-receptor ligands have enabled
estimation of dopamine release in vivo. The principle is to scan
subjects on two occasions---after administering a drug that modulates
endogenous dopamine release (e.g.Â amphetamine) and after administering
placebo. Amphetamine increases dopamine release presynaptically, and the
increased levels of endogenous dopamine compete with the tracer ligand
for access to postsynaptic receptors. Therefore the specific binding of
the tracer is reduced and the difference in tracer signal between the
amphetamine and placebo scans provides a measure of how much dopamine
was released by the amphetamine. A similar approach can be used with
drugs that lower endogenous dopamine release, such as the tyrosine
hydroxylase inhibitor, Î±-methyl-para-tyrosine (AMPT). Use of these
models has led to the conclusion that dopamine release is increased in
patients with acute schizophrenia (see Chapter 11). Current studies are

111

12

112

Chapter 5 Aetiology investigating how these techniques can be applied to
the release of other neurotransmitters.

Magnetic resonance imaging MRI has the advantage over SPET and PET that
subjects are not exposed to radiation. Although MRI has proved to be an
excellent tool for structural brain imaging and, more recently, for the
examination of cerebral blood flow (see below), its application to the
study of brain biochemistry (magnetic resonance spectroscopy; MRS) has
been somewhat limited by its lack of sensitivity. However, there are
growing numbers of applications of MRS to the study of psychiatric
disorders and their treatment (Dager et al., 2008). â

Proton (1H) MRS can be used to detect a number of compounds of
neurobiological interest, including the important amino acid
neurotransmitters, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate (see
Table 5.3).

â

MRS can also be used to identify the spectrum of phosphorus-containing
compounds, and thus can provide information about energy metabolism and
intracellular pH.

â

A number of psychotropic drugs (e.g.Â fluoxetine) possess fluorine atoms,
which can be imaged by MRS. This provides a means of imaging the
distribution of such drugs at their specific receptor sites in the
brain.

â

MRS has also been used to image lithium in the human brain, where it
appears that brain levels of lithium are about half those seen in
plasma.

One reasonably consistent finding from proton MRS is that patients with
depression have decreased levels of glutamate in anterior brain regions
(Cowen, 2015). This has shed some new light on a condition where
aetiological hypotheses have been dominated for decades by the monoamine
theory (see Chapter 9).

Peripheral measures There have been longstanding doubts as to whether
changes in the composition of neurotransmitters in the CSF reflect
functionally significant changes in the brain. However, there are
reasonably reproducible links between lowered CSF levels of
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) and impulsive aggressive behaviour
across various psychiatric disorders (Moberg et al., 2011). This
suggests that CSF 5-HIAA does correlate with certain defined aspects of
behaviour. The major limitation of CSF studies is that it is often
ethically and practically difficult to obtain CSF samples from
psychiatric patients. In addition, it is not feasible to monitor
time-dependent

Table 5.3 Neuronal metabolites and transmitters measured by MRS H-NMR

31

N-Acetyl-aspartate (NAA)

ATP

Creatinine

Phosphocreatine

Myoinositol

Inorganic phosphate

GABA

Phosphodiesters

Glutamate

Phosphomonoesters

1

P-NMR

changes in neurotransmitter metabolism by repeated sampling. Ingenious
attempts have been made to infer biochemical changes in the brain from
measurements of substances in the blood. For example, it is known that
the rate of synthesis of 5-HT depends on the concentration of the 5-HT
precursor tryptophan in the brain. Several studies have shown that
plasma tryptophan levels are decreased in patients with major
depression, a finding that supports the hypothesis that brain 5-HT
function may be impaired in depressive disorders. However, it cannot be
assumed that a modest reduction in concentrations of plasma tryptophan
will necessarily be associated with impaired brain 5-HT
neurotransmission. Furthermore, the same reduction in plasma tryptophan
levels is found when healthy people lose weight by dieting. Therefore it
is quite possible that the decrease in plasma tryptophan levels found in
depressed patients is a consequence of concomitant weight loss.
Interestingly, recent theories concerning the role of inflammation in
depression have suggested that low tryptophan levels in depressed
patients may be due to induction of the tryptophan-metabolizing enzyme,
indoleamine 2,3dioxygenase (Maes et al., 2011). Investigations of
biochemical abnormalities in blood and urine have so far not proved
particularly fruitful in understanding the aetiology of psychiatric
disorders. A recent example of the approach is provided by assay of
serum levels of brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) in the hope that
such measures might correlate with the elaboration of BDNF in the brain,
and therefore permit examination of the neurotropic hypothesis of
depression (see Chapter 9). Indeed, the majority of published studies
suggest that serum BDNF levels are lowered in depressed patients and
increased after antidepressant treatment. However, before the serum
measures can be taken as a valid index of BDNF changes in relevant brain

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology
regions, it will be necessary to clarify the origin of serum BDNF
(Groves, 2007). In contrast, peripheral biochemical measures have proved
useful in the field of learning disability, where measurement of
metabolites in blood and urine can provide a valid picture of the
abnormalities present in the brain, as well as valuable diagnostic
tests. A good example is phenylketonuria (Chapter 17). Peripheral blood
cells such as platelets and lymphocytes possess receptors for
neurotransmitters that often resemble the analogous receptor-binding
sites in the brain. There have been many studies of monoamine receptors
in the platelets of depressed patients, but the findings tend to be
inconsistent and easily confounded by factors such as drug treatment. In
addition, it is far from clear whether abnormalities found in these
peripheral binding sites will necessarily also be present in the brain.
Indeed, those studies that have looked simultaneously at peripheral
receptor binding and in-vivo receptor imaging have not found
correlations. Similar comments apply to the use of blood cells to
investigate neurotransmitter-linked second messengers and ion flux
processes such as calcium entry. Despite these limited successes,
peripheral tissue studies of psychiatric disorder are entering a
renaissance because of the ability to create induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) from accessible cells such as skin fibroblasts or
keratinocytes. iPSCs can in turn be 'reprogrammed' into neurons (or
other cell types), and are being used both to study cellular mechanisms
of disease and treatment, and may also be viewed as potential therapies
of the future (see Haggarty and Perlis, 2014; Licinio and Wong, 2016).

Pharmacology The study of effective treatment of disease can often throw
light on aetiology. In psychiatry, because of the great problems of
studying the brain directly, research workers have examined the actions
of effective psychotropic drugs in the hope that the latter might
indicate the biochemical abnormalities in disease. Of course, such an
approach must be used cautiously. If an effective drug blocks a
particular transmitter system, it cannot be concluded that the disease
is caused by an excess of that transmitter. The example of parkinsonism
makes this clear---anticholinergic drugs modify the symptoms, but the
disease is caused by a deficiency in dopaminergic transmission and not
an excess of cholinergic transmission. It is assumed here that the
general methods of neuropharmacology are familiar to the reader, and
attention is focused on the particular difficulties involved in using
these methods in psychiatry. There are two main

problems. First, most psychotropic drugs have more than one action, and
it is often difficult to decide which action is relevant to the
therapeutic effects. For example, although lithium carbonate has a large
number of known pharmacological effects (see Chapter 25), it has so far
not been possible to link any of these effects definitively to its
remarkable ability to stabilize mood in bipolar illness. The second
difficulty arises because the therapeutic effects of many psychotropic
drugs are slow to develop, whereas most pharmacological effects
identified in the laboratory are quick to appear. For example, it has
been suggested that the beneficial effect of antidepressant drugs
depends on alterations in the reuptake of transmitter at presynaptic
neurons. However, changes in reuptake occur quickly, whereas obvious
therapeutic effects are usually delayed for a number of weeks,
suggesting that 'adaptive' responses of the brain to medication are
important in clinical antidepressant action. Over the years several
different adaptive responses to antidepressant drugs have been
identified, but none of them has yet led to new kinds of antidepressant
medication. Current ideas in this area focus on the effects of
antidepressants in modifying synaptic growth and plasticity via actions
on gene transcription factors and neurotropins such as BDNF (Duric and
Duman, 2013). The introduction of new drugs with different
pharmacological actions from conventional compounds can often be used to
generate hypotheses about the mode of action of beneficial treatments
and the pathophysiology of the disorder concerned. For example, with the
introduction of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), it
became clear that only drugs with potent 5-HT reuptake inhibitor
properties are effective in the pharmacological treatment of
obsessive--compulsive disorder. Conventional tricyclic antidepressants
(with the exception of clomipramine) are not useful in this context.
This suggests that the pathophysiology of obsessive--compulsive disorder
is likely to differ from that of major depression, for which both
classes of compounds are equally effective. Another drug that has
stimulated research in this way is clozapine, an antipsychotic drug that
is effective in a significant proportion of patients who are
unresponsive to traditional antipsychotic agents. Most antipsychotic
drugs are believed to produce their therapeutic effects through blockade
of dopamine D2 receptors, but clozapine has a weak affinity for this
binding site. In fact, clozapine binds potently to certain 5-HT receptor
subtypes, particularly 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors. This has led to the
development of numerous 'atypical' antipsychotic agents, which have
combined 5HT2 and dopamine D2 receptor-antagonist properties.

113

14

114

Chapter 5 Aetiology Although these agents may have some advantages over
conventional antipsychotic drugs in terms of a lower risk of movement
disorders, they do not seem to be as effective as clozapine in patients
with treatment-resistant illness (see Chapter 11).

Endocrinology Changes in circulating concentrations of hormones can have
profound effects on mood and behaviour, while abnormalities in endocrine
function are responsible for a number of well-defined clinical
syndromes, some of which have characteristic neuropsychiatric
presentations (e.g.Â depression in Cushing's disease). The onset of
puberty is associated with a sharp increase in rates of anxiety and
depression. Despite these intriguing associations, measurement of basal
plasma hormone levels in psychiatric disorders has not, in general,
shown consistent abnormalities in psychiatric patients or thrown much
light on aetiology. The exception is major depression, in which a
significant proportion of patients hypersecrete cortisol. Elevated
cortisol levels in depression have been postulated to play a role in the
pathophysiology of depression, perhaps leading to cellular and synaptic
neuropathology. It is also possible that persistent elevation in
cortisol may be a factor in the medical comorbidities associated with
depression, such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cognitive
impairment (see Cowen, 2015).

hormone can be used to assess the function of the neurotransmitters
involved in its release. For example, stimulation of brain 5-HT function
with a specific drug gives rise to an increase in plasma prolactin
levels. Accordingly, the rise in prolactin concentration that
accompanies administration of a standard dose of the drug gives a
measure of the functional state of brain 5-HT pathways. These
neuroendocrine challenge tests provide dynamic functional measures of
brain neurotransmitter pathways, and in certain psychiatric disorders
they have yielded consistent evidence of impairments in neurotransmitter
function. For example, in depressed patients there is good evidence that
the prolactin response to 5HT stimulation is blunted, and that it
remains blunted on clinical recovery. This suggests that depressive
disorders are associated with a deficit in brain 5-HT neurotransmission.
However, as with other biological measures, great care must be taken to
control for possible confounding effects such as weight loss and
impaired sleep (for a review of this field, see Cowen, 2015).

Physiology Physiological methods can be used to investigate the cerebral
and peripheral disorders associated with disease states. The following
methods have been used: â

Psychophysiological methods, including measurements of pulse rate, blood
pressure, blood flow, skin conductance, and muscle activity.

â

Studies of cerebral blood flow.

â

Electroencephalographic (EEG) studies.

Peptide-releasing factors Hormones such as thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) are regulated by
peptide-releasing factors that have additional signalling roles in other
brain regions, often those involved in the regulation of emotion. These
peptides often coexist with classical neurotransmitters---for example,
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is colocalized with 5-HT in 5-HT
neurons. There is growing interest in the development of drugs that act
on peptide receptors; for example, the use of corticotropic-releasing
hormone (CRH) antagonists in depressed patients who hypersecrete
cortisol. However, results from trials of neuropeptide drugs in anxiety
and depressive disorders have thus far proved disappointing (Griebel and
Holsboer, 2012).

Neuroendocrine tests Another use of plasma hormone measurement is to
monitor the functional activity of brain neurotransmitters. The
secretion of pituitary hormones is controlled by a variety of
neurotransmitters. Under certain circumstances, changes in the
concentration of a plasma

Psychophysiological measures Psychophysiological measures can be
interpreted in at least two ways. The first interpretation is
straightforward. The data are used to provide information about the
activity of peripheral organs in disease---for example, to determine
whether electromyographic (EMG) activity is increased in the scalp
muscles of patients who complain of tension headaches. The second
interpretation depends on the assumption that peripheral measurements
can be used to infer changes in the state of arousal of the central
nervous system. Thus increases in skin conductance, pulse rate, and
blood pressure are taken to indicate greater arousal.

Measurement of cerebral blood flow, metabolism, and neuronal function
Advances in brain imaging methods have led to increasing sophistication
in the measurement of cerebral blood

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology flow
in psychiatric disorders. The use of tomographic techniques allows a
three-dimensional measurement of regional cerebral blood flow to be
achieved both 'at rest' and following various kinds of challenges,
usually either neuropsychological or pharmacological. The aim is to
detect abnormal cerebral blood flow, which can then be linked to
particular psychiatric disorders or symptom clusters.

Functional MRI An important development is the demonstration that MRI
techniques that use the water proton signal are sufficiently sensitive
to define regional increases in cerebral blood flow following neuronal
activation. This technique is usually referred to as functional MRI
(fMRI). The principal method of fMRI is blood oxygenation-leveldependent
(BOLD) imaging. The use of BOLD depends on the fact that
deoxyhaemoglobin is paramagnetic, and therefore aligns with an applied
magnetic field, making the local magnetic field stronger. By contrast,
oxygenated haemoglobin is only slightly diamagnetic, and creates weak
local field disturbances. Increases in neuronal activity are associated
with increases in local cerebral blood flow, which cause decreases in
deoxyhaemoglobin. This is because under normal conditions of activation
there is a relatively greater increase in blood flow than neuronal
oxygen consumption. The change in local deoxyhaemoglobin levels can be
imaged and measured to provide an indirect measure of cerebral blood
flow and thereby of local neuronal activity. The advantages of fMRI are
that it has greater spatial and temporal resolution than PET and SPET,
and does not require the use of radioactivity. It is also possible to
use fMRI to measure cerebral blood flow more directly than the BOLD
signal allows. One method, dynamic susceptibility contrast, uses
intravenous injection of a gadolinium-based contrast agent. Another less
invasive approach is provided by arterial spin labelling (ASL), which
uses a radiofrequency inversion pulse to label or magnetically 'tag' the
blood water in arterial vessels. A second scan in which the blood is not
labelled enables cortical blood flow to be estimated by subtraction.
This technique allows the rapid generation of a whole brain map of
cortical blood flow (Lu et al., 2013).

PET imaging PET imaging can be used to measure either cerebral
metabolism or cerebral blood flow. Usually the two measures are closely
correlated. In the adult brain, functional activity is almost entirely
dependent on oxidative metabolism, which requires glucose and oxygen as

substrates. Therefore rates of cerebral metabolism can be determined by
measuring the utilization of oxygen or the accumulation of deoxyglucose.
Measurements of regional cerebral blood flow can be made by assessing
the accumulation of radioactivity in the brain during inhalation of
suitably labelled CO2 or H2O.

SPET Measurement of blood flow with SPET employs lipophilic radiotracers
such as technetium-labelled hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime
(99mTc-HMPAO). Following intravenous administration, these compounds are
retained in the brain in a stable form for several hours. This enables
high-resolution images to be obtained with the use of a conventional
detector such as a rotating gamma camera. The uptake of 99mTc-HMPAO is
linearly related to cerebral blood flow. However, unlike PET, SPET
cannot provide an absolute measure of regional cerebral blood flow.
Therefore the results of SPET studies are often expressed by comparing
the radioactive counts in each brain region of interest with a reference
area, usually either whole brain or cerebellum.

Cerebral blood flow in psychiatric disorders 'Resting studies': there
have been many studies of 'resting' blood flow in various psychiatric
disorders, but the results of different investigations have often been
contradictory. To a large extent the conflicting data may result from
the considerable methodological difficulties in standardizing the
imaging conditions and the patient population. Despite these
difficulties, more recent carefully controlled investigations in
rigorously assessed drug-free patients are reaching a greater level of
consensus. For example, PET studies of patients with depression have
revealed decreased metabolic activity and blood flow in brain regions
associated with the regulation of emotion (the dorsomedial and
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) and increased blood flow in areas
concerned with the perception and experience of emotion (the
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and
amygdala) (see Price and Drevets, 2012). In addition, further
information can be obtained by correlating basal regional cerebral blood
flow with the psychopathology of the patient at the time of scanning.
This approach has been successful in mapping symptom clusters in
patients with schizophrenia to specific brain regions (see Table 11.1).
More recent work using fMRI has investigated the functional connectivity
of different brain regions when subjects rest quietly in the camera.
Appropriate mathematical modelling can then be used to delineate various
resting state networks which show synchronized fluctuations in the BOLD
signal and presumptively, therefore,

115

16

116

Chapter 5 Aetiology in neural activity. These networks often subsume
wellcharacterized functions of brain activity (e.g.Â the motor and visual
networks). Of particular interest to psychiatry is the default mode
network, consisting of the precuneus, medial frontal, inferior parietal,
and temporal regions. This network is more active when subjects are at
rest, and has been linked to cognitive activities such as mind wandering
and the integration of cognitive and emotional processing (see Lu et
al., 2013).

Activation paradigms Psychological activation paradigms have been widely
used in PET and fMRI studies of healthy volunteers to map the brain
regions and distributed neuronal circuits involved in fundamental
processes such as memory and language. Within-subject activation
paradigms can also be applied to patients with psychiatric disorders,
with perhaps more consistent results emerging than are usually obtained
with 'resting state' blood flow studies. This is because, where patients
act as their own controls, potential confounders such as effects of
motion, changing mental state, and psychotropic drug treatment are less
likely to produce systematic bias (Weinberger and Radulescu, 2016). For
example, when normal control subjects undertake the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Test, there is an increase in blood flow in the prefrontal
cortex. On this test, patients with schizophrenia perform less well than
controls, and produce a different pattern of blood flow in the
corresponding cortical area. This suggests that some patients with
schizophrenia may have a dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex, which is
associated with poor performance on tasks that depend on increased
neuronal activity in this brain region. More recent studies have linked
this altered performance and change in neural activity with
polymorphisms of the gene for catecholO-methyltransferase (COMT), an
enzyme involved in the metabolism of dopamine and a candidate gene for
schizophrenia (see Box 5.5). Investigations that integrate genetic
polymorphisms with variance in cognitive performance and changes in
regional cerebral blood flow have been a popular research area but, as
often in biological psychiatry, the problem of replication remains
substantial (see Murphy et al., 2013).

Electroencephalography Methods The electroencephalograph (EEG) provides
a measure of cortical neuronal activity through detection of potential
differences across the scalp. The following techniques are relevant to
studies of aetiology in psychiatry:

â

standard (analogue) EEG

â

quantified (digital) EEG

â

sleep EEG (polysomnogram)

â

magnetoencephalography (MEG)

â

evoked potentials.

Standard EEG The standard clinical EEG is a qualitative assessment of a
paper trace by a trained observer using visual inspection. These kinds
of recordings have been most helpful when studying the relationships
between epilepsy and psychiatric disorders, but otherwise have not been
particularly informative about aetiology. About 30% of psychiatric
patients who are referred for an EEG are reported to have an abnormal
recording, but the relevance of this has proved elusive. Artefacts from
drug treatment are probably common. The standard EEG has good temporal
but relatively poor spatial resolution.

Quantified EEG The EEG signal can also be examined quantitatively using
a number of different mathematical approaches. The most commonly used
method employs power spectral analysis with Fourier transformation.
Characteristic spectral patterns have been reported for certain
disorders, although relating these to underlying brain mechanisms is not
straightforward. Statistical removal of EEG artefact is also
problematic. So far the main clinical research application has been in
the analysis and detection of the effects of different drugs, with the
hope of developing an objective method of screening for novel
psychotropic compounds.

Sleep EEG (polysomnogram) During sleep the EEG shows a characteristic
recurrent pattern of waves, which can be divided into stages. The
fundamental distinction is between rapid eye movement (REM or dream
sleep) and non-REM (or quiet) sleep. The sleep EEG or polysomnogram
shows fairly consistent abnormalities in depressed patients, notably a
decrease in the latency to the onset of REM sleep. Some of these
abnormalities may persist into clinical remission and may indicate
vulnerability to mood disorder. The main disadvantage of polysomnography
has been the need for a specialized facility (a 'sleep laboratory').
However, the development of home-based monitoring with ambulatory
equipment has been helpful in this respect. The polysomnogram has also
been useful for measuring the effects of drugs on sleep quality and
architecture, and can be helpful in the diagnosis and management of
sleep disorders.

The contribution of scientific disciplines to psychiatric aetiology

Magnetoencephalography MEG is able to measure changes in extracranial
magnetic fields to detect ion fluxes in cortical neurons. Like EEG, MEG
has the ability to detect changes in physiological signals over time
intervals of the order of milliseconds. It can provide better
localization of signals than EEG, but the most useful information may
come from using the techniques in combination, or by combining MEG with
other imaging modalities. In this way superior temporal and spatial
resolution of cortical processing can be obtained. Neither MEG nor EEG
is generally helpful in identifying changes in subcortical neuronal
activity. MEG can be used to measure cortical oscillations, and
particular frequencies have been linked to the activity of the
large-scale neuronal networks identified in resting state fMRI studies.

Evoked potentials EEG techniques can also be used to detect changes in
brain electrical activity in response to environmental stimuli. These
evoked (or event-related) potentials can be detected by computerized
averaging methods, and can be identified as waveforms occurring at
particular times after the stimulus. For example, the P300 response is a
positive deflection that occurs 300 milliseconds after a subject has
identified a target stimulus embedded in a series of irrelevant stimuli.
The P300 wave probably corresponds to the cognitive processes required
for the recognition, retrieval from memory, and evaluation of a specific
stimulus. In patients with schizophrenia, the amplitude of the P300 wave
is reduced. It is notable that the same abnormality can be found in
first-degree relatives of schizophrenic patients and those with
schizotypal personalities (Bramon et al., 2005). In these subjects, the
change in the P300 response is likely to stem from an abnormality in
information processing, and may represent a vulnerability trait marker
factor for the development of schizophrenia. However, these changes are
not specific in that they can also be found in patients with other
disorders, such as bipolar disorder and alcohol misuse. In addition,
interpretation of evoked potentials in terms of brain mechanism is not
easy, because the potential recorded from the scalp is far from its
generational source and is likely to reflect the activity of many
different neural systems operating in parallel.

Neuropathology Neuropathological studies attempt to answer the question
of whether a structural change in the brain accompanies a particular
kind of mental disorder. Brain structure

can now be studied in life, usually with MRI scans, as well as by the
traditional direct post-mortem examination of the brain. MRI structural
imaging continues to develop, and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) can be
used to obtain detailed images of white matter tracts in vivo by
measuring the diffusion of water in neural tissue. A review of studies
in mood disorders indicated consistently reduced anisotropy of white
matter in the frontal and temporal lobes, which suggests a loss of the
integrity of white matter, although the precise pathological cause has
yet to be established (Sexton et al., 2009). Neuropathology has been
central to the understanding of dementia and a few other psychiatric
disorders in which lesions can readily and reliably be found and, if
necessary, quantified. It has not shown equivalent diagnostic kinds of
lesion in other psychiatric disorders, a factor that contributed to the
conventional view that most psychiatric conditions were functional as
opposed to organic disorders. However, the advent of MRI and improved
neuropathological methods has shown that there are structural correlates
of many psychiatric disorders. For example, the brain is smaller and
lighter in schizophrenia, associated with changes in its cellular and
synaptic composition (see Chapter 11). Similarly, alterations in volume
of parts of the limbic system and its cytoarchitecture have been
reported in depression (see Chapter 9). Although none of these changes
can yet be used for diagnostic purposes (because of overlap in each
parameter with comparison subjects, and across diagnostic boundaries),
they do argue strongly against the functional versus organic dichotomy.
These research advances are also a useful reminder that the methods of
investigation that are available at a particular time may fail to detect
relevant biological abnormalities even when the latter are present. For
example, Alois Alzheimer (1864--1915) spent a decade searching for the
neuropathology of schizophrenia before he came across the case of
presenile dementia and identified the lesions which now define the
disease that is named after him. In addition, as neuropathological
investigations embrace the molecular level, drawing distinctions between
'functional' and 'structural' disorders becomes somewhat arbitrary.
Finally, it is worth noting that progress in determining aetiology is
most likely to be made through the combination of genetic, pathological,
and biochemical investigations, and combining these with epidemiological
ascertainment and careful clinical, psychological, and social
characterization of subjects. In this way the various approaches can be
used to inform and guide each other, and a more integrated view of
psychiatric aetiology can ultimately emerge.

117

18

118

Chapter 5 Aetiology

Relationship of this chapter to those on psychiatric syndromes This
chapter has reviewed several diverse approaches to aetiology. It may be
easier for the reader to put these approaches into perspective when
reading the sections

on aetiology in the chapters on the different psychiatric syndromes,
especially those on mood disorders (see Chapters 9 and 10) and
schizophrenia (see Chapter 11).

Further reading Charney DS et al.Â (2013). Neurobiology of Mental
Illness. 4th edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (A comprehensive
overview of the developing methods and concepts in biological
psychiatry.) Jaspers K (1963). General Psychopathology (translated by J
Hoenig and MW Hamilton). Manchester University Press, Manchester.

pp.Â 301--11, 355--64, 383--99. (The classical text: these selected pages
explain the concepts of meaningful connections and psychological
reactions.) Plomin R et al.Â (2013) Behavioural Genetics. 6th edn. Worth
Publishers, New York.

91

CHAPTER 6

Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry What is evidence-based medicine?
119

Evaluation of evidence-based medicine 130

Individual treatment studies 121

Other applications of evidence-based medicine 131

Systematic reviews 124

Qualitative research methods 133

Implementation of evidence-based medicine 129

Evidence-based medicine in psychiatry 134

What is evidence-based medicine? Evidence-based medicine (EBM) is a
systematic way of obtaining clinically important information about
aetiology, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. The evidence-based
approach is a process in which the following steps are applied: â

formulation of an answerable clinical question;

â

identification of the best evidence;

â

critical appraisal of the evidence for validity and utility;

â

implementation of the findings;

â

evaluation of performance.

The principles of EBM can be applied to a variety of medical procedures.
For psychiatry, the main use of EBM at present is to assess the value of
therapeutic interventions. For this reason, in the following sections
the application of EBM will be linked to studies of treatment.
Applications to other areas, such as diagnosis and prognosis, are
discussed later.

History of evidence-based approaches Examples of what we now might call
'evidence-based approaches' to the investigation of treatments have a

long, if sporadic, history in medicine. For example, in 1747 a naval
surgeon, James Lind, studied six pairs of sailors 'as similar as I could
have them' who were suffering from scurvy. The sailors who received
oranges and lemons recovered within a few weeks, in contrast to those
who simply received the same housing and general diet. Lind's study was
not carried out 'blind', but in 1784 Benjamin Franklin applied
blindfolds to the participants in a mesmerism study, who were therefore
unaware whether or not the treatment was being applied. The 'blinding'
abolished the treatment effect of mesmerism, providing strong evidence
that its effects were mediated by suggestion (Devereaux et al., 2002).
The application of modern randomized trial methodology to medicine is
attributed to Sir Austin Bradford Hill (1897--1991), who designed the
Medical Research Council (MRC) trial of streptomycin treatment of
tuberculosis in 1948. Subsequently, Bradford Hill lent his influence to
the application of randomized trials in the evaluation of psychiatric
treatments, often in the face of vociferous opposition from the
profession. The first psychiatric trial to use this methodology was
carried out at the Maudsley Hospital in 1955 by David Davies and Michael
Shepherd, who demonstrated that, relative to placebo, reserpine had
beneficial effects in anxiety and depression. A few years later, Ackner
and Oldham (1962) used double-blind randomized

120

120

Chapter 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry methods to debunk
insulin coma therapy (see Chapter 25). Subsequently, in 1965, an MRC
group reported the first large-scale, multicentre, randomized controlled
trial in psychiatry, in which imipramine and electroconvulsive therapy
(ECT) were shown to be therapeutically superior to placebo in the
treatment of hospitalized depressed patients (see Tansella, 2002). More
recent developments in evidence-based approaches owe much to Archibald
Cochrane (1909-- 1988), an epidemiologist and author of an influential
book, Effectiveness and Efficiency: Random reflections on health
services, which was published in 1972. Cochrane emphasized the need,
when planning treatment provision, to use evidence from randomized
controlled trials because it is more reliable than any other kind. In a
frequently cited quotation (Cochrane, 1979), he wrote: 'It is surely a
great criticism of our profession that we have not organized a critical
summary, by specialty or subspecialty, adapted periodically, of all
relevant randomized controlled trials.' Cochrane's views were widely
accepted, and two further developments enabled his vision to be
realized. First, the availability of electronic databases and
computerized searching made it feasible to find all (or nearly all) of
the relevant randomized trials when gathering evidence on particular
therapeutic questions. Secondly, the statistical techniques of
meta-analysis enabled randomized trials to be combined, providing
greater power and allowing a reliable quantification of treatment
effects. Results from studies using these methodologies are called
'systematic reviews' to distinguish them from the more traditional, less
reliable, 'narrative reviews' in which the judgement of the authors
plays a major role in deciding what evidence to include and what weight
to give it. The Cochrane Collaboration, which was formed in 1993, is now
the largest organization in the world engaged in the production and
maintenance of systematic reviews (http://www.cochrane.org). In the UK,
the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, based at the University of
York, maintains an up-to-date database of systematic reviews of
healthcare interventions (http://www. york.ac.uk/inst/crd/index.htm).
Similarly, the Campbell Collaboration provides systematic reviews of
evidencebased social interventions in the field of education, the
criminal justice system, social welfare, and international development
(http://www.campbellcollaboration.org/).

Why do we need evidencebased medicine? There are two main related
problems in clinical practice that can be helped by the application of
EBM:

â

The difficulty in keeping up to date with clinical and scientific
advances.

â

The tendency of practitioners to work in idiosyncratic ways that are not
justified by the available evidence.

With the burgeoning number of clinical and scientific journals, the most
assiduous clinician is unable to keep up to date with all of the
relevant articles even in their own field. In fact, it has been
estimated that to accomplish this task would require scrutiny of at
least 20 publications a day! Clinicians therefore have to rely on
information gathered from other sources, which might include, for
example, unsystematic expert reviews, opinions of colleagues,
information from pharmaceutical companies, and their own clinical
experiences and beliefs. This can lead to wide variations in
practice---for example, those described for the use of ECT (see UK ECT
Review Group, 2003).

Kinds of evidence The fundamental assumption of EBM is that some kinds
of evidence are better (i.e.Â more valid and of greater clinical
applicability) than others. This view is most easily elaborated for
questions about therapy. A commonly used 'hierarchy' is shown in Box
6.1. In this hierarchy, evidence from randomized trials is regarded as
more valid than evidence from nonrandomized trials, while systematic
reviews of randomized trials are seen as the gold standard for answering
clinical questions. This assumption has itself yet to be

Box 6.1 Hierarchy of the quality of research about treatment Ia Evidence
from a systematic review of randomized controlled trials Ib Evidence
from at least one randomized controlled trial IIa Evidence from at least
one controlled study without randomization IIb Evidence from at least
one other type of quasi-experimental study III Evidence from
non-experimental descriptive studies, such as comparative studies,
correlation studies, and case--control studies IV Evidence from expert
committee reports or opinions and/or clinical experience of respected
authorities

12

Individual treatment studies tested systematically, and some argue that
large trials with simple clinically relevant endpoints may be more valid
than meta-analyses (see Furukawa, 2004). It is

certainly important that clinicians are trained in critical evaluation
of systematic reviews before they apply their results to clinical
practice (see Geddes, 1999).

Individual treatment studies Validity The key criterion for validity in
treatment studies is randomization. In addition, clinicians entering
patients into a therapeutic trial should be unaware of the treatment
group to which their patients are being allocated. This is usually
referred to as concealment of the randomization list. This means that
clinicians must not be aware of the likely treatment allocation of the
next patient. Such awareness could influence their decision as to
whether or not to enter a patient into the trial. Without concealed
randomization, the validity of a study is questionable and its results
may be misleading. Other important points to consider when assessing the
validity of a study include the following: â

Were all of the patients who entered the trial accounted for at its
conclusion?

â

Were patients analysed in the groups to which they were allocated
(so-called 'intention-to-treat' analysis)?

â

Were patients and clinicians blind to the treatment received (a
different question to that of concealed randomization)?

â

Apart from the experimental treatment, were the groups treated equally?

â

Did the randomization process result in the groups being similar at
baseline?

Presentation of results

If the odds ratio of an event such as admission to hospital is 1.0, this
means the rates of admission do not differ between the control and
experimental groups. Therefore if the confidence interval of the odds
ratio of an individual study includes the value of 1.0, the study has
failed to show that the experimental and control treatments differ from
each other. Relative risk also measures the relative likelihood of an
event occurring in two distinct groups. It is regarded as a more
intuitive measure of effectiveness than the odds ratio. For example, if
action A carries a risk of 99.9% and action B carries a risk of 99.0%,
the relative risk is just over 1, which seems intuitively correct for
two such similar outcomes. However, the calculated odds ratio is almost
10! With relatively infrequent events, the odds ratio and relative risk
become more similar. Measures of relative risk cannot be used in
case--control designs and are hard to adjust by covariance for
confounding variables.

Effect sizes In many studies the outcome measure of interest is a
continuous variable, such as a mean score on the Hamilton Rating Scale
for Depression. It is possible to use the original measure in the
meta-analysis, although more often an estimate of effect size is made
because it is more statistically robust. Effect sizes are obtained by
dividing the difference in effect between the experimental group and the
control group by the standard deviation of their difference. The
clinical interpretation of the effect size is discussed below.

Odds ratios and relative risk When the outcome of a clinical trial is an
event (e.g. admission to hospital), a commonly used measure of
effectiveness is the odds ratio. The odds ratio is the odds of an event
occurring in the experimental group divided by the odds of it occurring
in the control group. The odds ratio is given with 95% confidence
intervals (which indicate the range of values within which we have a 95%
certainty that the true value falls). The narrower the confidence
intervals are, the greater is the precision of the study.

Clinical utility of interventions Risk reduction and number needed to
treat An important part of EBM involves using the results of randomized
trials of groups of patients to derive the impact of an intervention at
the level of the individual patient. A useful concept when assessing the
value of a treatment is that of absolute risk reduction (ARR). This
compares the proportion of patients receiving the experimental treatment
who experienced a clinically

121

12

122

Chapter 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry significant adverse
outcome (e.g.Â clinical relapse) with the rate in patients receiving the
comparison treatment. These rates are known as the experimental event
rate (EER) and control event rate (CER), respectively, and are
calculated as percentages. The difference between these two outcome
rates is the ARR. The ARR can be converted into a more clinically useful
number, known as the number needed to treat (NNT). The NNT is the
reciprocal of the ARR, and it tells us how many patients would need to
be treated to experience one more positive outcome event compared with a
comparator treatment (or no treatment) (see Box 6.2). Like odds ratios,
NNTs are usually given with 95% confidence intervals.

Example Paykel et al.Â (1999) randomized 158 patients with residual
depressive symptoms following an episode of major depression to either
clinical management or clinical management with 18 sessions of cognitive
behaviour therapy (CBT). Over the following 68 weeks the relapse rate in
the CBT-treated group (29%) was significantly less than that in the
clinical management group (47%; P = 0.02).

The ARR in relapse with CBT is 47 â 29 = 18%. The NNT is the reciprocal
of this number, which is approximately six (usually the NNT is rounded
up to the next highest integer). This means that six patients with
residual depressive symptoms have to be treated with CBT to avoid one
relapse. In general, an NNT of less than 10 denotes a useful treatment
effect. However, interpretation of the NNT will also depend on the
nature of the treatment, together with the extent of its therapeutic and
adverse effects. The NNTs for some common psychiatric treatments are
shown in Table 6.1. Overall NNTs of psychiatric interventions are
comparable to those employed in general medicine (Leucht et al., 2012).
If the outcome measure of an intervention is a beneficial event
(e.g.Â recovery) rather than avoidance of an adverse event, the effect of
the intervention is calculated as the absolute benefit increase (ABI) in
the same way as the ARR (see above), with the NNT being similarly
computed. A concept related to NNT is the number needed to harm (NNH),
which describes the adverse risks of particular therapies
(e.g.Â extrapyramidal symptoms with antipsychotic drugs).

Computing the NNT from odds ratios

Box 6.2 Indices for translating research results into clinical practice
Experimental treatment, X

Control treatment, Y

Positive outcome

a

b

Negative outcome

c

d

Control event rate (CER) = b/(b + d)

If a study or meta-analysis provides an odds ratio, it is possible to
compute an NNT that may be more relevant to the clinical circumstances
of the practitioner and their patient. For example, in the example given
above (Paykel et al., 1999), relapses occurred in 35 of 78 subjects in
the clinical management group, compared with 23 of 80 subjects in the
CBT group. This gives an odds ratio of the risk of relapse between the
two treatments of 0.49. To obtain an NNT from the odds ratio it is
necessary to know, or to estimate, the expected relapse rate in the
control group. This is known as the patient expected event rate (PEER).
The PEER is combined with the odds ratio (OR) in the following formula:

Experimental event rate (EER) = a/(a + c) Absolute risk reduction (ARR)
The difference in the proportions with a positive outcome on treatments
X and Y = (CER -- EER) Relative risk = EER/CER Odds ratio (OR) The ratio
of the odds of a positive outcome on treatments X and Y = (a/c)/(b/d) =
ad/bc Number needed to treat (NNT)---the number of patients that need to
be treated with treatment X to obtain one more positive outcome than
would be expected on treatment Y (= 1/AAR)

NNT =

1 â PEER(1 â OR) (1 â PEER) PEER(1 â OR )

If we take the relapse rate in the patients who were in the clinical
management group in the above study (45%), we have: NNT =

1 â 0.45 Ã (1 â 0.49) (1 â 0.45) Ã 0.45 Ã (1 â 0.49)

This gives an NNT of about 6, which we also derived from the other
method of calculation involving the

123

Individual treatment studies

Table 6.1 Examples of number needed to treat for interventions in
psychiatry Intervention

Outcome

NNT

Maintenance antidepressant treatment

Prevention of relapse

4

Lithium augmentation in resistant depression

Clinical response (50% decrease in symptom score)

4

Antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia

Relapse prevention

3

Family therapy in schizophrenia

Relapse at 1 year

7

Atypical antipsychotic augmentation of SSRI-resistant depression

Clinical response (50% decrease in symptom score)

9

SSRIs compared with TCAs in acute depression

Remain in treatment at 6 weeks

33

SSRI, Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic
antidepressant.

ARR. However, if from a local audit we know that in our own service the
relapse rate of patients with residual depressive symptoms is about 20%
(rather than the figure of 45% reported by Paykel et al.), using the
above formula the NNT becomes about 11. This means in our own service we
would need to treat 11 patients with CBT to obtain one less relapse.
Thus odds ratios can be used to adjust NNTs to local clinical
conditions, thereby aiding decisions about the applicability of
interventions.

Clinical relevance of effect size Like the odds ratio, the effect size
is not easy to interpret clinically. A useful approach is to use the
effect size to estimate the degree of overlap between the control and
experimental populations. In this way we obtain the proportion of
control group scores that are lower than those in the experimental
group. (A negative effect size simply means that scores in the control
group are higher than those in the experimental group.) For example, in
a review of the effects of benzodiazepines and zolpidem on total sleep
time relative to placebo, Nowell et al.Â (1997) found an overall effect
size of 0.71. From normal distribution tables this means that 76% of
controls had less total sleep time than the average sleep time in the
hypnotic-treated patients. Effect sizes have been classified in the
following way: â

0.2 = small

â

0.5 = moderate

â

â¥0.8 = large.

The effect size of antidepressant medication relative to placebo is
about 0.4--0.5. At the kind of response levels seen in
antidepressant-treated patients (response rate of around 30% in the
placebo group and 60% in the experimental group), an effect size of 0.2
is equivalent

to an NNT of about 10. With an effect size of 0.5, the NNT falls to 5.

Ethical aspects of therapeutic trials Randomization As we have seen,
randomization is a key process in the conduct of an evidence-based
clinical trial, because it is the best way of avoiding bias owing to
chance and random error. However, a clinician may feel uncomfortable
about randomization if, for example, he has a strong belief in the
efficacy of one of the treatments that is being assessed. Randomization
is ethical where there is genuine uncertainty about the best treatment
for the individual concerned. In fact, EBM suggests that this situation
is more common than clinicians may realize, in that many strongly held
beliefs about the efficacy of therapeutic interventions are based on
anecdotal experience rather than systematic evidence.

Use of placebo The use of drug placebo in trials of psychotropic agents
is controversial. However, such studies are required by many
drug-licensing authorities before, for example, a new antidepressant
drug is licensed. The arguments for the use of placebo in antidepressant
drug trials have been summarized as follows (see Kader and Pantelis,
2009): â

The placebo response in major depression is variable and unpredictable,
and is not infrequently equivalent in therapeutic effect to active
treatment.

â

Placebo is required to establish the efficacy of new antidepressants.
Comparison against an active treatment is not methodologically
sufficient because, while a finding of 'no difference' in antidepressant
activity

123

124

124

Chapter 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry might mean that the
new and established treatments have equivalent efficacy, it might also
mean that neither treatment was actually effective under the particular
trial conditions employed. â

The lack of placebo-controlled design in antidepressant drug development
might lead to the marketing of a drug that is ineffective, thereby
harming public health.

These arguments have to be weighed against the knowledge that
antidepressants are generally somewhat more effective than placebo in
the treatment of depression. Therefore a patient who is treated with
placebo in a randomized trial is not receiving the best available
therapy. One way of trying to deal with this is to ensure that patients
in such trials receive particularly close clinical monitoring, which
will result in their being withdrawn from the study if they are not
doing well. An unintended consequence of this problem is that patients
in placebo-controlled trials may not be representative of the patients
who will receive the treatment concerned in real- world conditions. For
example, in placebo- controlled studies of depression, patients are
recruited by advertisement, and there can be inflation of depression
scores by raters prior to treatment so that individuals will meet the
cut- off score for recruitment into the trial. Such patients tend to do
well, whether they are receiving placebo or active treatment, making it
difficult to show convincing clinical differences between drug and
placebo. In addition, the clinical characteristics

of such patients differ significantly from those treated routinely
(Wisniewski et al., 2009).

Informed consent The role of informed consent is crucial to the ethical
conduct of randomized and placebo-controlled trials. This raises
difficulties with some psychiatric disorders in which the judgement and
decision-making abilities of patients may be impaired. Kader and
Pantelis (2009) have outlined a number of important factors. â

Patients must be made specifically aware that the trial is not being
conducted for their individual benefit.

â

With placebo treatment there must be clear specification of the
probability of receiving placebo, the lack of improvement that might
result, and the possibility of symptomatic worsening.

â

Patients must inducement.

â

Patients have the right to withdraw from the study at any time without
any kind of penalty.

â

In addition to the investigator, a family member or other suitable
person should be encouraged to monitor the patient's condition and
report to the investigator if there are any concerns.

be

free

from

any

coercion

or

The key issues therefore are open and explicit information sharing with
the patient and their family, and all necessary measures to avoid
placebo treatment leading to harm to the subject. However, the issue
remains controversial.

Systematic reviews Validity The most common aim of a systematic review
is to obtain all of the available valid evidence about a specific
procedure or intervention, and from this to provide a more precise
quantitative assessment of its efficacy. Other uses of systematic
reviews (e.g.Â to examine prognosis) are discussed later in this chapter
under the heading, 'Other applications of evidence-based medicine' (page
131). Two advances have greatly increased the feasibility of systematic
reviews---first, the availability of electronic databases such as
Medline and Scopus and, secondly, new statistical techniques through
which results from different studies can be combined in a quantitative
manner. Because a meta-analysis uses all

of the available valid data, its statistical power is greater than that
of an individual study. It may therefore demonstrate moderate but
clinically important effects of treatment that were not apparent in
individual randomized studies. A problem with systematic review is that,
particularly in areas such as psychiatry, where clinical trials are
difficult, it can lead to much randomized evidence being excluded from
consideration because of perceived lack of quality. For example, a
systematic review of the effects of methylphenidate treatment on
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), considered 185 trials
of over 12,000 participants, but only six trials, with 183 participants,
were regarded as adequate. Such reduction of evidence can lead to

125

Systematic reviews much uncertainty about the benefits and harms of
widely used interventions. In addition, systematic reviews are rarely
able to provide endpoints that are meaningful to clinicians, patients,
and their families. This indicates the need, when assessing the value of
interventions, to integrate perspectives from multiple research designs,
including observational and qualitative studies. This approach may be
more helpful in capturing the treatment effects that are most relevant
to patients and those caring for them (Fazel, 2015). Systematic reviews
of treatment, like single therapeutic studies, have to be tested for
validity and quality. The following questions should be posed. â

â

â

Is it a systematic review of relevant and randomized studies? We have
already seen that the first task in the EBM process is to ask a clearly
formulated question. It is therefore necessary to determine whether the
subject of the systematic review is truly relevant to the therapeutic
question that needs to be answered. The next step is to make sure that
only randomized studies have been included. Systematic reviews that
contain a mixture of randomized and non-randomized studies may give
misleading results. Do the authors describe the methods by which
relevant trials were located? Although electronic searching greatly
facilitates the identification of clinical trials, up to half of the
relevant studies may be missed because of miscoding. It is therefore
important for authors to make clear whether they supplemented electronic
searching with hand-searching of appropriate journals. They may also,
for example, have contacted authors of trials, as well as relevant
groups in the pharmaceutical industry. In general, negative studies are
less likely to be published than positive ones, which can lead to
falsely optimistic conclusions about the efficacy and tolerability of
particular treatments. For example, analysis of all completed studies of
new antidepressants in adolescents indicated that some selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and venlafaxine might increase the
risk of suicidal behaviour. This potentially important finding was not
apparent from analyses of the published data alone (Whittington et al.,
2004). How did the authors decide which studies should be included in
the systematic review? In a systematic review, authors have to decide
which of the various studies that they identify should be included in
the overall analysis. This means defining explicit measures of quality,
which will be based on the factors outlined above. Because these
judgements are in part

subjective, it is desirable for them to be made independently by at
least two of the investigators. â

Were the results of the therapeutic intervention consistent from one
study to another? It is common to see differences in the size of the
effect of a therapeutic intervention from one study to another. However,
if the effects are mixed, with some studies showing a large clinical
effect while others find none at all, the trials are said to show
heterogeneity. Sometimes heterogeneity can be accounted for by factors
such as lower doses of a drug treatment or differences in patient
characteristics. As noted above, systematic reviews should carry a
measure of quality, and sometimes effects are found only in the high- or
low-quality studies. If there is no likely explanation for
heterogeneity, the results of the review must be considered tentative.

â

Did the review follow Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines? The PRISMA guidelines are aimed
at standardizing the information provided in publications about how a
particular systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted, analysed,
and presented (see Moher et al., 2009).

Presentation of results Combining odds ratios The results of
meta-analyses are often presented as a 'forest plot', in which the
findings of the various studies are shown in diagrammatic form (see
Figure 6.1). As noted above, studies in which the outcome is an event
are presented as odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals. The aim of
meta-analysis is to obtain a pooled estimate of the treatment effect by
combining the odds ratios or effect sizes of all the studies. This is
not simply an average of all the odds ratios, but is weighted so that
studies with more statistical information and greater precision (with
narrower confidence intervals) contribute relatively more to the final
result. The pooled odds ratio also has a 95% confidence interval. Once
again, if this interval includes the value of 1.0, the experimental
intervention does not differ from the control. In Figure 6.1 some of the
studies show a significant effect of assertive community treatment (ACT)
in decreasing readmission, while others do not. The two pooled analyses
are difficult to interpret because the confidence intervals of one of
them (the fixed effects model) do not overlap with 1.0, making ACT
significantly different from the control, whereas the other (the random
effects model) just overlaps with 1.0 and is therefore of marginal
statistical significance.

125

126

126

Chapter 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry Audini-London

Effect sizes

Bond-Chicago 1

As noted above, where the outcome measure is a continuous variable, the
usual method of calculating results is to use effect sizes. As with odds
ratios, the effect sizes can be combined to give a pooled estimate of
greater precision.

Lehman-Baltimore Bond-Indiana 1 Test-Wisconsin Chandler-California
Pooled odds ratio (ï¬xed effects)

Clinical utility

Pooled odds ratio (random effects) 0.01

0.1 0.2 0.5 1 2

5

Figure 6.1 Effect of active community treatment on the odds of admission
to hospital. Reproduced from Evidence Based Mental Health, 1(4),
Freemantle N, Geddes J, Understanding and interpreting systematic
reviews and meta-analyses. Part 2: meta-analyses, pp.Â 102--4, Copyright
(1998), with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

We have already seen that the studies in a metaanalysis may indicate
heterogeneity. This can be tested statistically with a modification of
the chi-squared test. If significant heterogeneity is present, the most
appropriate meta-analytic technique is a pooled random effects model.
This model assumes that different treatment effects will occur in
different studies, and takes this into account in the pooled estimate.
This usually results in wider confidence intervals, as in the pooled
random effect odds ratio in the ACT studies (Figure 6.1). If the studies
suggest a single underlying population treatment effect (i.e.Â lack of
heterogeneity), the pooled treatment analysis should use a fixed effects
model. This estimate has narrower confidence intervals that may,
however, be misleading in the presence of significant heterogeneity. In
Figure 6.1 there is statistically significant heterogeneity between the
studies, and inspection of the data shows that the majority of the
benefit is contributed by two of the studies, which are not the largest.
The random and fixed effects models find a similar mean benefit of ACT
in preventing readmission, but the random effects model has a wider
confidence interval and, as noted above, just overlaps with 1.0. Because
of the heterogeneity of the studies, the random effects model is the
more appropriate way of analysing the data. Overall, therefore, we would
be cautious about accepting the efficacy of ACT in lowering readmission
rates, unless we were able to find a convincing reason for the variation
in the study results. Indeed, heterogeneity can prompt a search for
reasons that might explain it. In the ACT example, this might include
differences in patient characteristics and the 'control' treatment to
which the intervention was compared (Burns et al., 2007c).

The clinical utility of meta-analyses is assessed as described for
individual studies above. Meta-analyses will often provide figures for
the NNT. However, as shown above, it is also possible to calculate NNT
values from meta-analysis data using ARR or odds ratios.

Network meta-analysis Network meta-analysis (NMA), or multiple
treatments meta-analysis, is a development in meta-analysis that allows
indirect comparisons between multiple treatments even when particular
treatments have not been compared directly themselves. This approach
provides a useful means of assessing competing interventions and ranking
them for efficacy and acceptability. NMA therefore extends the usual
pair-wise comparison of two interventions by producing a connected
network of interventions in which information flows both directly and
indirectly. This provides the important possibility of 'indirect
comparison'. As an example we can consider two treatments, A and B, that
have both been compared with a common comparator, C. In this case the
effectiveness of A versus B can be estimated indirectly through the
common comparator C (Mavridis et al., 2015). An example of a network
plot of different treatments for acute mania is given in Figure 6.2, and
the efficacy and acceptability results of this particular analysis are
given in the section on the pharmacological treatment of acute mania
(see Chapter 10, Figure 10.1). A problem for NMA is the fact that
indirect comparisons cannot control for possible differences between
informative studies in trial methodology and patient population. The
assumption made is that differing trial characteristics are evenly
distributed across studies or do not affect trial outcome. This
assumption is known as transitivity (Mavridis et al., 2015).

Patient level meta-analysis Traditional meta-analysis combines data from
different investigations by aggregating overall findings from each
study, as in Figure 6.1. An increasingly popular approach is to use
individual patient data, where the original data

172

Systematic reviews Asenapine Risperidone

Carbamazepine

Valproate

Quetiapine

Ziprasidone

Topiramate

Olanzapine

Haloperidol

Lamotrigine

Lithium Gabapentin Aripiprazole

Placebo

Figure 6.2 Network of eligible comparisons for a multiple-treatments
meta-analysis of efficacy and acceptability of different treatments for
acute mania. The width of the lines is proportional to the number of
trials comparing every pair of treatments, and the size of every node is
proportional to the number of randomized participants (sample size).
Reproduced from The Lancet, 378(9799), Cipriani et al, Comparative
efficacy and acceptability of antimanic drugs in acute mania: a
multiple-treatments meta-analysis, pp.Â 1306-15, Copyright (2011), with
permission from Elsevier.

for each participant is obtained and used in the metaanalysis (Riley et
al., 2010). In ideal situations, results from patient level and
aggregate meta-analyses should be very similar. However, patient level
meta-analyses have the ability to apply consistent inclusion and
exclusion criteria across different studies and to harmonize and allow
for important patient characteristics, including baseline prognostic
factors. This form of analysis also facilitates the inclusion of
unpublished data, and the identification of duplicate reporting.
Finally, consistent statistical analysis can be applied to the
individual studies. The main disadvantage of the approach is the time
and practical difficulty involved in obtaining individual data from each
investigator, as well as ethical concerns regarding the maintenance of
confidentiality (Riley et al., 2010).

Problems with meta-analysis Biased conclusions Apart from a systematic
location of evidence, the aim of meta-analysis is to combine data from
multiple studies

into a single estimate of treatment effect. There are a number of ways
in which the results of such an exercise can be misleading. â

Publication bias. Evidence indicates that studies that show positive
treatment effects are more likely to be published than negative studies.
If negative studies are not included in the meta-analysis, the effect of
treatment will be inflated.

â

Duplication of publication. Just as negative treatment studies may go
unpublished, positive studies may be published several times in
different forms, sometimes with different authors! This again will
falsely elevate treatment effects if the same study is included more
than once.

â

Heterogeneity of studies. As noted above, individual studies may vary
widely in the results obtained, because of quite subtle differences in
study design, quality, and patient population. If such heterogeneity is
not recognized and accounted for in the meta- analysis, misleading
conclusions will be drawn.

127

128

128

Chapter 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry

How accurate is meta-analysis? There are some well-known examples where
the results of meta-analyses have been contradicted subsequently by
single large randomized trials. For example, a metaanalysis that showed
that intravenous magnesium improved outcome in patients with myocardial
infarction was later decisively refuted by a single large randomized
trial of 58,000 patients. The misleading result of the meta-analysis was
later explained on the basis of publication bias, poor methodological
quality in the smaller trials, and clinical heterogeneity (Baigent et
al., 2010). Reviews of this area have generally found that about 80% of
meta-analyses agree with single large trials in terms of direction of
effect of treatment, but the size and statistical significance of the
effect often differ between the two methods. Furthermore, separate
meta-analyses of the same therapeutic intervention may reach rather
different conclusions. For example, using the network meta-analysis
approach, Cipriani et al.Â (2009) found clinically significant
differences in the efficacy and acceptability of a range of newer
antidepressants, whereas Gartlehner et al.Â (2008), using essentially the
same data and approach, found no important differences between the
various medications.

effects is to randomize very large numbers of patients to a single
study. These large-scale randomized (simple) trials (or mega-trials)
have advantages over meta-analysis in that all of the patients can be
allocated to a single study design. Such studies need numerous
collaborators and therefore require a simple study design and a clear
endpoint. This methodology has been most successfully applied to areas
of medicine, such as cardiovascular disorders, where interventions can
sometimes be simple (e.g.Â one dose of aspirin daily) and endpoints
(e.g.Â cardiac infarction, or death) clearly identified (Baigent et al.,
2010). The challenge for psychiatric trials is to adapt such methodology
to conditions for which interventions are more complex and endpoints
more subtle.

Applicability A general problem when applying evidence from randomized
trials and meta-analysis to routine clinical work is that clinical
trials are often conducted in rather 'ideal' conditions, which in a
number of respects may not match routine clinical work: â

Patient population. Patients in controlled trials may differ
systematically from those in routine clinical care in being less
severely ill and having fewer comorbid difficulties. Thus trials may be
conducted on patients who are in fact rather unrepresentative of a usual
patient population.

â

Level of supervision. In drug trials, concordance is regularly monitored
by frequent review and supervision. Thus patients are less likely to
drop out of treatment even when drugs are not particularly well
tolerated.

â

Therapist variables. Particularly in psychotherapy trials, treatment may
be administered by skilled and experienced therapists. In routine
practice, treatments may be given by people with less experience.
Furthermore, in trials the performance of therapists is often monitored
closely to ensure that it conforms to the treatment protocol. Everyday
practice may match the protocol less well.

Funnel plots One way of improving the reliability of meta-analyses is by
the use of funnel plots. The funnel plot is based on the assumption that
the precision (confidence interval) of the estimated treatment effect
will be greater in studies with a larger sample size. Therefore the
effect sizes of larger studies should cluster around the overall mean
difference between experimental and control groups. By contrast, the
results from smaller studies should be more dispersed around the mean.
Therefore, when the precision of individual studies is plotted against
their odds ratios or effect sizes, the resulting graphical plot should
resemble a symmetrical inverted funnel (the funnel plot). Statistically
significant deviations from this plot suggest the presence of
publication bias (for example, that negative studies of treatment are
not fully represented). In this case, the findings of the meta-analysis
should be treated with caution.

Large-scale randomized trials As noted above, the advantage of
meta-analysis is that by combining individual studies it can assemble
sufficient patient numbers to allow detection of moderatesized but
clinically important therapeutic effects. Another way of detecting
moderate-sized treatment

Pragmatic trials To overcome these limitations, it has been suggested
that pragmatic trials might be a more appropriate way to study the
effect of certain psychiatric interventions. Such studies aim to conduct
randomized trials in 'reallife' situations. Methodologically they have
much in common with the mega-trials described earlier, in that they are
designed to answer simple and important clinical questions. As far as
possible, pragmatic trials are

129

Implementation of evidence-based medicine conducted in a routine
clinical setting. Other important features include the following: â

â

Randomization of very large numbers of subjects is necessary to take
account of the fact that most advances in treatment will yield only
moderate effect sizes. Blinding is seen as less important than
randomization, particularly where active treatments are compared.

â

Assessments are streamlined so that they fit in with routine clinical
practice: 'Many trials would be of much greater scientific value if they
collected 10 times less data . . . on 10 times more patients' (Baigent
et al., 2010).

â

Clinically relevant outcome measures are used. For example, in a trial
of a therapeutic intervention in schizophrenia, a rating by a patient
and family member on a simple scale of wellbeing may carry more clinical
relevance than a score on a standardized rating scale.

The process of recruitment is simplified by avoiding restrictive entry
criteria. The principle criterion is that both doctor and patient should
feel substantial uncertainty as to which of the trial treatments is
best.

Implementation of evidence-based medicine Implementing evidence-based
medicine for the individual patient Having obtained the best evidence on
a therapeutic intervention and decided that it is valid and
therapeutically useful, it is necessary to decide how applicable it is
to the individual patient you are considering. In large measure this
depends on the answers to the questions on 'applicability' listed above.
The key issues are as follows: â

â

How similar is the patient to those in the randomized trials? (This
might be particularly relevant to psychiatry, where patients with more
severe illness may be underrepresented in randomized trials.) Can the
local service deliver the intervention successfully? (For example, it is
no use recommending applied relaxation for generalized anxiety disorder
if there are no trained therapists available to carry it out.)

When making the decision about implementation, it may be useful to
adjust the NNT for local clinical conditions if the relevant information
is available (see above). A further way of taking more information into
account in clinical decision-making is provided by the concept of
'likelihood of being helped or harmed (LHH)'. For example, a
meta-analysis of the addition of atypical antipsychotic medication to
ineffective SSRI treatment found that the NNT to produce remission was
9, while the NNH to discontinue medication owing to side-effects was 17.
The LHH is calculated as the ratio of (1/NNT) to (1/NNH) or (1/9):(1/
17), which is about 2 to 1 in favour of the addition

of atypicals in these circumstances. It is also possible to weight the
NNT and NNH with factors that incorporate the patient's attitude to the
value of improving depression relative to that of experiencing adverse
effects. Whether such efforts at quantification add significantly to a
careful clinical assessment and discussion with the patient is
questionable. The important point is that results from randomized trials
need to be adapted to the differing needs of individuals.

Implementing evidence-based medicine at a service level Haynes (1999)
suggested that the following stages are important in the implementation
of a new treatment: â

Efficacy. Does the intervention work under carefully controlled
('ideal') conditions?

â

Effectiveness. Does the intervention work when provided under the usual
circumstances of health care practice?

â

Efficiency. What is the effectiveness of the intervention in relation to
the resources that it consumes (i.e.Â its cost-effectiveness or
cost--benefit)?

Ideally, the full implementation of EBM would involve successful
negotiation of all these stages, and only interventions that have
satisfied the three criteria of efficacy, effectiveness, and efficiency
would be used. In practice, many therapeutic interventions in psychiatry
(particularly drug treatment and cognitive behaviour therapy) are of
proven efficacy, but there is often uncertainty about their
effectiveness and efficiency. For example, lithium treatment is
efficacious in the prophylaxis of bipolar

129

130

130

Chapter 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry disorder, but appears
to have disappointing effectiveness, mainly because under standard
clinical conditions many patients do not take lithium reliably.

Box 6.3 Evaluation of utility of therapeutic guidelines

Clinical practice guidelines

Did preparation and publication avoid significant conflict of interest?
â Is the guideline concerned with an appropriate topic and patient
group? â Did the guideline panel include multidisciplinary, relevant
expertise? â Have subjective judgements been made explicit and
justified? â Have all relevant data been obtained and evaluated? â Has
the evidence been properly synthesised and are results obtained in
keeping with the guideline conclusion? â Are variations in medical
practice addressed? â Is the guideline clinically relevant,
comprehensive and flexible â Does the guideline take into account the
acceptability, affordability and practicality of its recommendations? â
Does the guideline describe how it should be disseminated, implemented
and reviewed? â

In some medical fields there is a substantial amount of evidence of
different kinds, but still considerable clinical uncertainty about the
best therapeutic management. In this situation it may be worth
developing clinical practice guidelines, which are explicitly
evidence-based. Such guidelines are best developed in the following way.
â

A guideline development group, composed of a multidisciplinary group and
patient representatives, decides on the precise clinical questions to be
answered.

â

The available evidence is systematically reviewed and classified
according to the hierarchy shown in Box 6.1.

â

The guideline development group makes recommendations, explicitly
demonstrating how their recommendations are linked to the available
evidence.

Clinical guidelines are best developed at a national level by
appropriate professional organizations, but usually require modification
to take local clinical conditions into account. Guidelines will only be
effective if they are actively disseminated and implemented. In the UK,
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has taken a
prominent role in analysing and promulgating evidence about therapeutic
interventions in the form of national guidelines (http://www.
nice.org.uk/). We cite many of these guidelines in this book. The
success of this process in changing clinical practice is not certain,
and may depend on other factors such as the strength and stability of
evidence, and cost issues (Freemantle, 2004). A further problem is that
sometimes the evidence used in guideline development

Reproduced from Greenhalgh T, How to Read a Paper, Copyright (2010),
with permission from John Wiley & Sons.

is based on a few trials whose relevance to the real world may be
questionable. Nevertheless, workable guidelines need relatively
definitive advice; this can lead to the issuing of rather arbitrary
guidance together with a diminished probability that more informative
studies will be carried out subsequently. Clinicians need to be aware of
the key guidelines relating to the conditions that they treat, and
should be able to justify pursuing different approaches where they have
judged this to be necessary in individual cases (Box 6.3).

Evaluation of evidence-based medicine EBM itself needs to be evaluated
through randomized trials of effectiveness. Individual practitioners can
also evaluate their EBM performance by: â

auditing what proportion of their clinical decisions are evidence-based;

â

recognizing gaps in practice that require a search for and appraisal of
relevant evidence;

â

auditing the effectiveness of evidence-based practice changes.

In this way the process of EBM can become an integral part of continuing
professional development and the audit cycle.

13

Other applications of evidence-based medicine

Other applications of evidence-based medicine The foregoing account has
focused on the use of EBM in the assessment of therapeutic interventions
in psychiatry. Other applications of EBM include the assessment of
evidence relating to diagnosis, prognosis, and aetiology. These
applications require rather different methodologies from the randomized
trials considered above, and diagnosis and prognosis will be discussed
in the remainder of the chapter. Approaches to aetiology have been
discussed in Chapter 5. All of these applications start with a focused
question, which, as with treatmentrelated questions, must: â

be directly relevant to the identified problem;

â

be constructed in a way that facilitates searching for a precise answer
(Geddes, 1999; see Table 6.2).

Diagnosis If a practitioner is trying to assess the value of a
particular study assessing a diagnostic test, they need to consider a
number of questions. â

Was there an independent, blind comparison of the test with a diagnostic
gold standard?

â

Did the sample include the range of patients to whom the test is likely
to be applied in clinical practice?

â

What is the sensitivity and specificity of the test?

â

Will it aid the management of my patients?

Example Question: How useful is the CAGE questionnaire in detecting
problem drinking in medical and surgical inpatients? The CAGE
questionnaire is a simple four-item questionnaire designed to detect
patients with alcohol misuse (see Chapter 20). Sackett (1996) describes
a study in a community-based teaching hospital in Boston where the CAGE
questionnaire was administered to 518 patients. The gold standard to
which the CAGE questionnaire was compared was an extensive social
history and clinical examination supplemented by liver biopsy where
indicated. We can therefore be reasonably confident that cases of
alcohol misuse were reliably identified. On clinical (gold standard)
grounds, 117 patients met the criteria for alcohol misuse or dependence.
Of the 61 patients who scored positively on the CAGE questionnaire
(scores of 3 or 4), 60 were found to have gold standard evidence of
alcohol misuse. The CAGE is therefore highly specific (see Figure 6.3).
However, the remaining 57 patients with alcohol misuse were not
identified by the CAGE. The CAGE therefore has only a modest sensitivity
(see Figure 6.3).

Table 6.2 Common types of clinical question Form of the question

Most reliable study architecture

How likely is a patient who has a particular symptom, sign, or
diagnostic result to have a specific disorder?

A cross-sectional study of patients suspected of having the disorder
comparing the proportion of the patients who really have the disorder
and have a positive test result with the proportion of patients who do
not have the disorder and have a positive test result

Is the treatment of interest more effective in producing a desired
outcome than an alternative treatment (including no treatment)?

Randomized evidence in which the patients are randomly allocated to
receive either the treatment of interest or the alternative (see Box
6.1)

What is the probability of a specific outcome in this patient?

A study in which an inception cohort of patients at a common stage in
the development of the illness (especially first onset) are followed up
for an adequate length of time

What has caused the disorder (or how likely is a particular intervention
to cause a specific adverse effect)?

A study comparing the frequency of an exposure in a group of people with
the disease of interest (cases) with a group of people without the
disease (controls); this may be a randomized controlled trial, a
case--control study, or a cohort study

Reproduced from Evidence based Mental Health, 2(2), Geddes J, Asking
structured and focused clinical questions: essential first step of
evidence-based practice, pp.Â 35--6., Copyright (1999), with permission
from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

131

132

132

Chapter 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry

Alcohol abuse or dependency

Number of positive answers to the four CAGE questions

3 or 4

Yes

No

60 (true +)

1 (false +) ab cd

2, 1, or none

57 (false +)

a+b c+d 400 (true +)

a+c b+d 117

61

401

457

a+b+c+d 518

a 60 = 0.51 or 51%. (a+c) 117 400 = 0.998 or 99.8%. Speciï¬city = d (b+d)
401 Sensitivity =

Figure 6.3 The CAGE questions for screening for alcohol
abuse/dependency. Reproduced from Sackett DL, Evaluation of clinical
method. In DJ Weatherall, JGG Ledingham and DA Warrell, eds, Oxford
Textbook of Medicine, 3rd edn, pp.Â 15--21, Copyright (1996), with
permission from Oxford University Press.

These results show that the CAGE is a useful screening instrument for
problem drinking in a general hospital setting, in that a positive
response is highly predictive of alcohol problems. However, the test
would have to be applied in the knowledge that a negative CAGE response
does not rule out alcohol misuse, particularly if there is other
evidence of problem drinking.

Prognosis Studies relating to prognosis should be assessed by
considering the following questions. â

Was a defined, representative sample of patients identified at a common
point, early in the course of the disorder?

â

Was the follow-up sufficiently long and was it complete?

â

Were objective outcome criteria applied in a blind fashion?

â

Are these follow-up data likely to apply to my own patients?

A common problem with prognostic studies is lack of complete follow-up.
As a rule of thumb, less than 5% dropout is ideal, and more than 20%
makes the study of questionable validity. As with treatment trials, the

applicability of the study will depend critically on the extent to which
the patients in it resemble those whom the practitioner is considering.

Example Question: How much of the time during long-term follow-up do
patients with bipolar disorder experience affective symptomatology, and
what is the pattern of symptoms? Judd et al.Â (2002) recruited 146
patients with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder and a current episode of
major mood disturbance from five tertiary care centres in the USA. They
were followed up with interviews every 6 months for the first 5 years,
and annually thereafter. At interview, affective symptoms were elicited
using Psychiatric Status Rating Scales, which were linked to the
Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC). Affective symptoms that did not meet
the criteria for RDC diagnosis were assigned to subsyndromal categories
of depression or mania. The mean follow-up period was 14.2 years, and
93% of the subjects were followed up for more than 2 years. Patients
were symptomatically ill for about half of the time. Overall, about 90%
of the patients spent 1 or more weeks during follow-up with depressive
symptoms, and almost the same number (86%) experienced at least 1 week
of manic or hypomanic symptoms. However,

13

Qualitative research methods depressive symptoms during follow-up (32%
of followup weeks) were about three times as common as manic or
hypomanic symptoms (9.3%). Most of these depressive states were
classified as subsyndromal depression or minor mood disorder rather than
major depression. At least 1 week of mood cycling or mixed affective
states was noted in about 48% of patients. This study suggests that
patients with bipolar disorder who are referred to a tertiary centre
with an episode of major mood disturbance will have some symptoms of
mood disturbance for about half of the time over the

next few years. Overall, depressive symptoms predominate, particularly
minor and subsyndromal depressive states. However, over time patients
can experience considerable fluctuation in symptoms (both manic and
depressive, or mixed). This study also has some aetiological
implications, because it suggests that bipolar disorder and other milder
depressive and hypomanic states are different expressions of the same
underlying disorder. In terms of applicability, we would note that the
patients in the study are tertiary referrals, so the findings might not
apply, for example, to patients in primary care.

Qualitative research methods Qualitative research methods are used to
collect and analyse data that cannot be easily represented by numbers
(see Brown and Lloyd, 2001). Although current evidence-based approaches
in psychiatry have focused on the use of randomized controlled trials
with quantitative endpoints, the use of qualitative approaches has a
long history and encompasses, for example, the classificatory work of
Kraepelin and the case studies of Freud. More modern case series, such
as that of Russell (1979) describing bulimia nervosa, also rely on a
qualitative approach. The key differences between qualitative and
quantitative research are summarized in Table 6.3.

When should qualitative methods be used? There are a number of
circumstances in which the application of qualitative methods is
appropriate in psychiatric research and service development: â

In the initial stages of research, to conceptualize and clarify the
relevant questions and to generate hypotheses.

â

To gather and collate the attitudes, beliefs, and experiences of service
users, carers, and professionals.

â

In the development of assessment tools and rating scales.

â

To examine the use of evidence-based interventions in practice and to
understand problems with their implementation.

From this it can be seen that qualitative and quantitative approaches
are not conflicting, but have particular uses in defined situations. For
example, Rogers

et al.Â (2003) combined a qualitative methodology with a quantitative
randomized trial, which aimed to improve the management of antipsychotic
medication in patients with schizophrenia. The qualitative study
indicated that the trial participants did not readily recall the details
of the interventions to which they had been exposed. On the other hand,
they valued the opportunity provided by the trial for greater
communication and contact with professionals. This was associated with
greater feelings of self-efficacy and clinical improvement.

Evaluation of qualitative research Like quantitative research,
qualitative research needs to be relevant and valid. Similar general
principles apply to the processes of participant selection, which should
be clear and justified. It is important to be explicit about the reasons
for choosing a qualitative approach, and to give a clear description of
the methods of data collection and analysis. The concept of
permeability, or the extent to which observations have influenced
understanding, is important in qualitative research. The following
factors influence study permeability: â

The degree of engagement with the material. How far were theories
generated by direct contact (e.g.Â through interviews, naturalistic
observation, and familiarity with textual sources)?

â

Iteration. Did the investigators continually reformulate and re-examine
their interpretations in the light of continuing observations?

â

Grounding. Were the procedures for linking interpretations with
observations clearly presented, and were illustrative examples given?

133

134

134

Chapter 6 Evidence-based approaches to psychiatry

Table 6.3 Key differences between quantitative and qualitative research

â

Quantitative research

Qualitative research

Fundamental aim

Objectivity, reliability, scientific truth

Understanding through personal encounter and observation; 'permeability'

Sampling

Random selection; designed to represent general population of subjects
and avoid bias

'Purposive;' subjects chosen deliberately to possess characteristics
relevant to study question

Data collection

Standardized, 'objective'; validated rating scales, biochemical
endpoints, etc.

Observation and interview, often interactive and open-ended; systematic
study of written material

Analysis of data

Quantitative, statistical, hypothesis testing

Narrative, generation of categories and themes; analysis occurs
iteratively with data collection

Context. Were the values and expectations of the investigator disclosed?
Was the cultural context of the research and its meaning to the
participants made explicit?

Validity The concept of validity in qualitative research refers to the
soundness and reasoning of interpretation, rather than comparison with
an objective external criterion. Validity also differs according to
role. For example, readers of a study will look for coherence and
internal consistency of material, whereas participants must feel that

their experiences are accurately described by the interpretations.
Finally, the authors of the research need to take into account the
effect that the research process itself might have on the data that they
have collected ('reflexivity'). Assessment of qualitative research is
not always straightforward, and the specialist terminology may defeat
general readers. Brown and Lloyd (2001) have pointed out the lack of
utility of evaluative checklists whose terminology is not readily
understood by health service researchers. For a further discussion of
the evaluation of qualitative research, see Greenhalgh (2010).

Evidence-based medicine in psychiatry Practising according to
evidence-based principles is an important aspect of modern psychiatry,
and is followed as far as possible in this textbook. EBM is probably
best viewed as an 'approach' whereby the key tasks for the practitioner
are to formulate a relevant clinical question and then identify the best
evidence with which to answer it. In addition, EBM provides

Further reading Greenhalgh T (2014). How to Read a Paper. Wiley
Blackwell, Oxford. (A concise handbook that provides a clear exposition
of the principles of EBM and their implementation.)

an important means by which psychiatrists can work in a way that
improves both consistency and quality of treatment. However, clinicians
work with individual patients with particular needs in specific
settings. Therefore EBM needs be tempered with the clinical skills that
an expert practitioner brings to each clinical encounter.

351

CHAPTER 7

Reactions to stressful experiences Introduction 135

Post-traumatic stress disorder 142

The response to stressful events 135

Response to special kinds of severe stress 146

Classification of reactions to stressful events 138

Adjustment disorders 149

Acute stress reaction and acute stress disorder 139

Special kinds of adjustment 151

Introduction Stressful events frequently provoke psychiatric disorders.
Such events can also provoke emotional reactions that are distressing,
but not of the nature or severity required for the diagnosis of an
anxiety disorder or a mood disorder. These less severe reactions are
discussed in this chapter, together with posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), which is an intense and prolonged reaction to a severe stressor.
With the exception of normal grief reactions, the conditions described
in this chapter are listed as disorders in ICD10 and DSM-5.

The chapter begins with a description of the various components of the
response to stressful events, including coping strategies and mechanisms
of defence. The classification of reactions to stressful experience is
discussed next. The various syndromes are then described, including
acute stress reactions, PTSD, special forms of response to severe
stress, and adjustment disorders. The chapter ends with an account of
special forms of adjustment reaction, including adjustment to
bereavement (grief) and to terminal illness, and the problems of adults
who have experienced sexual abuse in childhood.

The response to stressful events The response to stressful events has
three components: 1. An emotional response, with somatic accompaniments.
2. A coping strategy. 3. A defence mechanism. Coping strategies and
defence mechanisms are overlapping concepts, but they originated from
different schools of thought, and for this reason they are described
separately in the following account. Individuals have to

adapt to stresses, whether they are trying to make sense of specific
one-off events, or facing ongoing difficulties that require a change of
expectations. The process of coming to terms with stresses is often
referred to as 'working through' them. This term originated in
psychoanalysis to designate the subconscious processing or 'work' that
was necessary for change. It is now used to mean any coming to terms
with emotional difficulties that involves reflection and re-evaluation.

136

136

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences

Emotional and somatic responses

â

Positive reappraisal of the problem---recognizing that it has led to
some good (e.g.Â that the loss of a job is an opportunity to find a more
satisfying occupation).

These responses are of two kinds:

â

Avoidance of the problem---by refusing to think about it, avoiding
people who are causing it, or avoiding reminders of it.

1.  Anxiety responses, with autonomic arousal leading to apprehension,
    irritability, tachycardia, increased muscle tension, and dry mouth.
2.  Depressive responses, with pessimistic thinking and reduced physical
    activity. Anxiety responses are generally associated with events
    that pose a threat, whereas depressive responses are usually
    associated with events that involve separation or loss. These
    features of these responses are similar to, but less intense than,
    the symptoms of anxiety and depressive disorders (described in
    Chapters 8 and 9, respectively).

Coping strategies Coping strategies serve to reduce the impact of
stressful events, thus attenuating the emotional and somatic responses
and making it more possible to maintain normal performance at the time
(although not always in the longer term; see below). The term coping
strategy is derived from research in social psychology; it is applied to
activities of which the person is aware---for example, deliberately
avoiding further stressors. (Responses of which the person is unaware
are called defence mechanisms; see below.) Coping strategies are of two
kinds: problem-solving strategies, which can be used to make adverse
circumstances less stressful; and emotion-reducing strategies, which
alleviate the emotional response to the stressors. Problem-solving
strategies include: â

Obtaining information or advice that would help to solve the problem.

â

Solving problems---making and implementing plans to deal with the
problem.

â

Confrontation---defending one's rights, and persuading other people to
change their behaviour. Emotion-reducing strategies include:

â

Ventilation of emotion---talking to another person and expressing
emotion.

â

Evaluation of the problem---to assess what can be changed and try to
change it (by problem-solving), and what cannot be changed and try to
accept it.

Coping strategies are generally useful for reducing the problem or
lessening the emotional reaction to it. However, they are not always
adaptive. For example, avoidance may not be adaptive in the early stages
of physical illness, because it can lead to delay in seeking appropriate
treatment. Therefore a person needs not only the ability to use coping
strategies, but also the ability to judge which strategy should be used
in particular circumstances.

Maladaptive coping strategies These strategies reduce the emotional
response to stressful circumstances in the short term, but lead to
greater difficulties in the long term. Maladaptive coping strategies
include the following: â

Use of alcohol or unprescribed drugs to reduce the emotional response or
to reduce awareness of stressful circumstances.

â

Deliberate self-harm, either by drug overdose or by self-injury. Some
people gain relief from tension by cutting their skin with a sharp
instrument to induce pain and draw blood. Others take overdoses to
withdraw from the situation or to show their need for help.

â

Unrestrained display of feelings can reduce tension, and in some
societies such behaviour is sanctioned in particular circumstances
(e.g.Â grieving). In other circumstances, such behaviour can damage
relationships with people who would otherwise have been supportive.

â

Aggressive behaviour---aggression provides immediate release of feelings
of anger. In the longer term, it may increase the person's difficulties
by damaging relationships.

Coping styles When particular coping mechanisms are used repeatedly by
the same person in different situations, they are said to constitute a
coping style. Some people change their coping strategies according to
the circumstances---for example, they may use problemsolving strategies
at work but employ avoidance when unwell. Some people habitually use
maladaptive

173

The response to stressful events strategies---for example, they
repeatedly abuse alcohol or take overdoses of drugs when under stress.
More recent research has distinguished between coping style, which is
seen as a relatively enduring behavioural trait, and coping response,
which is much more specific to particular stressful environments.

Defence mechanisms Defence mechanisms (see Box 7.1) are unconscious
responses to external stressors as well as to anxiety arising from
internal conflict. They were originally described by Sigmund Freud and
later elaborated by his

Box 7.1 Defence mechanisms Repression This is the exclusion from
consciousness of impulses, emotions, or memories that would otherwise
cause distress. For example, especially painful aspects of the memory of
distressing events such as sexual abuse in childhood may be kept out of
full awareness for many years.

Denial This is a related concept, which is inferred when a person
behaves as if they are unaware of something that they may reasonably be
expected to know. For example, on learning that they are dying of
cancer, a patient may continue to live normally as if they are unaware
of the diagnosis. In this example, denial is adaptive, as it can help to
reduce depression. However, in the early stage of illness, denial may
delay help-seeking or lead to refusal of necessary investigations and
treatment. In this second example, denial is maladaptive.

Displacement This is the transfer of emotion from a person, object, or
situation with which it is properly associated, to another source. For
example, after the recent death of his wife, a man may blame the doctor
for failure to provide adequate care, and may thus avoid blaming himself
for putting his work before his wife's needs during the last months of
her life.

Projection This is the attribution to another person of thoughts or
feelings similar to one's own, thereby rendering one's own thoughts or
feelings more acceptable. For example, a person who dislikes a colleague
may attribute reciprocal feelings of dislike to him; it is then easier
to justify his own feelings of dislike for the colleague.

Regression This is the adoption of behaviour appropriate to an earlier
stage of development---for example, dependence

on others. Regression often occurs among physically ill people. In the
acute stages of illness it can be adaptive, enabling the person to
acquiesce passively to intensive medical and nursing care. If regression
persists into the stage of recovery and rehabilitation, it can be
maladaptive because it reduces the patient's ability to make efforts to
help themself.

Reaction formation This is the unconscious adoption of behaviour that is
the opposite to that which would reflect the person's true feelings and
intentions. For example, excessively prudish attitudes to sex are
sometimes (but not always) a reaction to the person's own sexual urges
that they cannot accept.

Rationalization This is the unconscious provision of a false but
acceptable explanation for behaviour that has a less acceptable origin.
For example, a husband may leave his wife at home because he does not
enjoy her company, but he may reassure himself falsely that she is shy
and would not enjoy going out.

Sublimation This is the unconscious diversion of unacceptable impulses
into more acceptable outlets---for example, turning the need to dominate
others into the organization of good works for charity. (There are, of
course, many other motives for charitable work.)

Identification This is the unconscious adoption of the characteristics
or activities of another person, often to reduce the pain of separation
or loss. For example, a widow may undertake the same voluntary work that
her husband used to do.

137

138

138

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences daughter, Anna Freud
(1895--1982). Defence mechanisms are unconscious processes (i.e.Â people
do not use them deliberately and are unaware of their own real motives,
although they may become aware of these later through introspection or
through another person's comments). Freud identified defence mechanisms
in his study of the 'psychopathology of everyday life', a term that he
applied to slips of the tongue and lapses of memory. The concept of
defence mechanisms has proved useful in understanding many aspects of
the day-to-day behaviour of people under stress, notably those with
physical or psychiatric illness. Freud also used the concept of
mechanisms of defence to explain the aetiology of mental disorders, but
this extension of his original observations has not proved useful. The
main mechanisms of defence are described in Box 7.1

Present circumstances, previous experience, and response to stressful
events Brown and Harris (1978) showed that the response to a stressful
life event is modified by present circumstances and by past experience.
Some current circumstances make a person more vulnerable to stressful
life events--- for example, the lack of a confidant with whom to share
problems. Such circumstances are called vulnerability factors. Previous
experience can also increase vulnerability. For example, the experience
of losing a parent in childhood may make a person more vulnerable in
adult life to stressful events involving loss. It is difficult to
examine these more remote associations scientifically.

Classification of reactions to stressful events Although they are
included within the classifications of diseases, not all reactions to
stressful events are abnormal. Grief is a normal reaction to the
stressful experience of bereavement, and only a minority of people have
a very severe or abnormally prolonged reaction. There is also a normal
pattern of reaction to a dangerous or traumatic event such as a car
accident. Most people have an immediate feeling of great anxiety, are
dazed and restless for a few hours afterwards, and then recover; a few
people have more severe and prolonged symptoms---an abnormal reaction.
It is difficult to decide where to draw the separation between normal
and abnormal reactions to stressful events in terms of severity or
duration, and in practice the division is arbitrary. Similarly, among
patients who are in hospital for medical or surgical treatment, most are
anxious but a few are severely anxious and show extreme denial or other
defence mechanisms that impair cooperation with treatment. ICD-10 and
DSM-5 reactions to stressful experiences are classified into three
groups (see Table 7.1).

Acute reactions to stress This category is for immediate and brief
responses to sudden intense stressors in a person who does not have
another psychiatric disorder at the time. The ICD-10 definition of acute
stress reaction requires that the response should start within 1 hour of
exposure to the stressor,

and that it begins to diminish after not more than 48 hours,
disappearing after a few days. The DSM-5 definition of acute stress
disorder states that the onset should occur while or after experiencing
the distressing event, and requires that the condition lasts for at
least 2 days and for no more than 4 weeks. It is important to recognize
that the two definitions capture different phases of the anxiety
response as the different terms, reaction and disorder, suggest. ICD10
refers to the short-lived normal response, whereas DSM-5 refers to the
more prolonged response, which is less common. Both diagnostic systems
require that the stressor must be of an 'exceptional' nature and, in the
case of DSM-5, that actual or threatened serious injury to self or
others or sexual violation has occurred. DSM-5 also requires the
presence of clinically significant distress, impairment in social or
occupational spheres. The order of the subgroups has been changed to
show the similarities and differences between the two systems.

Post-traumatic stress disorder This is a prolonged and abnormal response
to exceptionally intense stressful circumstances such as a natural
disaster or a sexual or other physical assault. It is described further
below.

139

Acute stress reaction and acute stress disorder

Table 7.1 Classification of reactions to stressful experience ICD-10

DSM-5

Acute stress reaction

Acute stress disorder

Post-traumatic stress disorder

Post-traumatic stress disorder

Adjustment disorder

Adjustment disorder

â

Brief depressive reaction

â

With depressed mood

â

Mixed anxiety and depressive reaction

â

With mixed anxiety and depressed mood

â

Predominant disturbance of other emotions

â

With anxiety

â

Predominant disturbance of conduct

â

With disturbance of conduct

â

Mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct

â

With mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct

â

Other specified symptoms

â

Unspecified

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

Adjustment disorder This is a more gradual and prolonged response to
stressful changes in a person's life. In both ICD-10 and DSM5,
adjustment disorders are subdivided, according to the predominant
symptoms, into depressive, mixed anxiety, and depressive, with
disturbance of conduct, and with mixed disturbance of emotions and
conduct. DSM-5 has an additional category of 'adjustment disorder with
anxiety'. ICD-10 has an additional category of 'predominant disturbance
of other emotion', which includes not only

adjustment disorder with anxiety, but also adjustment disorder with
anger. In ICD-10 the three types of reaction to stressful experience are
classified together under 'reactions to stress and adjustment
disorders', which is a subdivision of section F4, 'neurotic,
stress-related and somatoform disorders'. The defining characteristics
of this group of reactions to stress and of adjustment disorders are as
follows: â

They arise as a direct consequence of either acute stress or continued
unpleasant circumstances.

â

It is judged that the disorder would not have arisen without these
factors. A similar organizing principle is used in DSM-5. Adjustment
disorder is described later in this chapter.

Additional codes in ICD-10 If any of these reactions is accompanied by
an act of deliberate self-harm, another code can be added to record this
fact (codes X60--X82 list 23 methods of selfharm). It is also possible
to specify certain kinds of stressful event by adding a code from
Chapter Z. For example, Z58 denotes problems related to employment and
unemployment, and Z63 denotes problems related to family circumstances.

Coding grief reactions In ICD-10, abnormal grief reactions are coded as
adjustment disorders. Reactions to bereavement that are appropriate to
the person's culture are not included. If it is appropriate to code them
as part of the description of the patient's condition, code Z63.4 (death
of a family member) can be used. DSM-5 also codes abnormal grief
reactions under adjustment disorder. A more specific set of
bereavement-related symptoms is called persistent complex bereavement
disorder, which is coded under 'Other specified trauma and
stressor-related disorder'. Persistent complex bereavement disorder is
also listed under 'Conditions for further study'.

Acute stress reaction and acute stress disorder Clinical picture The
core symptoms of an acute psychological response to stress are anxiety
or depression. Anxiety is the response to threatening experiences, and
depression is the response

to loss. Anxiety and depression often occur together, because stressful
events often combine danger and loss---an extreme example is a road
accident in which a companion is killed. Other symptoms include feelings
of being numb or dazed, difficulty in remembering the

139

140

140

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences whole sequence of the
traumatic event, insomnia, restlessness, poor concentration, and
physical symptoms of autonomic arousal, especially sweating,
palpitations, and tremor. Anger or histrionic behaviour may be part of
the response. Occasionally there is a flight reaction---for example,
when a driver runs away from the scene of a road accident. Coping
strategies and defence mechanisms are also part of the acute response to
stressful events. Avoidance is the most frequent coping strategy, where
the person avoids talking or thinking about the stressful events, and
avoids reminders of them. The most frequent defence mechanism is denial.
Usually avoidance and denial recede as anxiety diminishes; memories of
the events can be more readily accessed and the person is able to think
or talk about them with less distress. This sequence allows the person
to work through and come to terms with the stressful experience,
although there may be continuing difficulty in recalling the details of
highly stressful events.

Variations in the clinical picture Not all responses to acute stress
follow this orderly sequence, in which coping strategies and defences
are maintained for long enough to allow the person to function until
anxiety and depression subside, and are then abandoned so that working
through can occur. Not all coping strategies are adaptive---an example
is the excessive use of alcohol or drugs to reduce distress. Defence
mechanisms may also be of a less adaptive type, such as regression or
displacement. Sometimes defence mechanisms persist for longer than is
adaptive---for example, denial may persist for so long that 'working
through' is delayed. Sometimes vivid memories of the stressful events
intrude into awareness as images and flashbacks or disturbing dreams.
Disassociation with depersonalization and derealization can also occur.

eventually develop PTSD after a trauma do not meet the criteria for
acute stress disorder soon after it. Both systems of classification
describe typical symptoms of the disorder. In DSM-5 the diagnosis of
acute stress disorder requires marked symptoms of anxiety or increased
arousal, re-experiencing of the event, and three of the following five
'dissociative' symptoms: â

a sense of numbing or detachment

â

reduced awareness of the surroundings ('being in a daze')

â

derealization

â

depersonalization

â

dissociative amnesia.

There must also be avoidance of stimuli that arouse recollections of the
trauma, and significant distress or impaired social functioning. In
ICD-10, dissociative and other symptoms are not required to diagnose the
disorder in its mild form (F43.00), but two are required for the
moderate form (F43.01) and four for the severe form (F43.02), from the
following list of seven: â

withdrawal from expected social interaction

â

narrowing of attention

â

apparent disorientation

â

anger and verbal aggression

â

despair and hopelessness

â

inappropriate or purposeless activity

â

uncontrollable and excessive grief.

The terms acute stress reaction and acute stress disorder are used only
when the person was free from these symptoms immediately before the
impact of the stressful event. Otherwise the response is classified as
an exacerbation of pre-existing psychiatric disorder.

Diagnostic conventions

Epidemiology

As noted above, 'acute stress reaction' in ICD-10 and 'acute stress
disorder' in DSM-5 capture different phases of the psychological
response to stress. The DSM-5 definition refers to cases of more
clinical importance, and it is widely used. The symptomatology of acute
stress disorder emphasizes disassociation and re-experiencing. People
who develop acute stress disorder are more likely to experience
subsequent PTSD (indeed, the symptomatology of PTSD is similar to that
of acute stress disorder, the main difference being in the timing and
duration of symptoms). However, around 50% of those who

Rates in the general population are unclear. The rate of acute stress
disorder has ranged from around 15% in motor accident survivors to over
50% in women victims of sexual assault. After the Wenchuan earthquake in
China, about 30% of the survivors met criteria for acute stress disorder
(Zhao et al., 2008).

Aetiology Many kinds of event can provoke an acute response to
stress---for example, involvement in a significant but

14

Acute stress reaction and acute stress disorder brief event (e.g.Â a
motor accident or a fire), an event that involves actual or threatened
injury (e.g.Â a physical assault or rape), or the sudden discovery of
serious illness. Some of these stressful events involve life changes to
which further adjustment is required (e.g.Â the serious injury of a close
friend involved in the same accident). Not all people who are exposed to
the same stressful situation develop the same degree of response. This
variation suggests that differences in constitution, previous
experience, and coping styles may play a part in aetiology. A history of
psychiatric disorder and particularly of depression and disassociation
prior to the trauma are predisposing factors. Biological and
psychological investigations of the aetiology of acute stress disorder
have suggested that similar mechanisms operate as those thought to be
important in PTSD (see Ehlers et al., 2009; see page 144).

Treatment Planning for disaster Planning is needed to ensure an
immediate and appropriate response to the psychological effects of a
major disaster. Such a response can be achieved by enrolling and
training helpers who can support victims and are willing to be called on
at short notice, and by agreeing procedures for contacting these helpers
promptly. At the time of the disaster, priorities have to be decided
between the needs of the victims of the disaster, those of relatives
(including children), and those of members of the emergency services,
who may be severely affected by their experiences. The essential
elements of psychological assistance for victims of disaster have been
described by Alexander (2005) (see Box 7.2).

Box 7.2 The principal components of psychological first aid Comfort and
consolation Protection from further threat and distress â Immediate
physical care â Helping reunion with loved ones â Sharing the experience
(but not forced) â Linking survivors with sources of support â
Facilitating a sense of being in control â Identifying those who need
further help (triage) â â

Debriefing After a major incident, counselling has often taken the form
known as debriefing, or critical incident stress debriefing (CISD),
provided either individually or in a group. In debriefing the victim
goes through the following stages, after the counsellor has first
explained the procedure: â

facts---the victim relates what happened

â

thoughts---they describe their thoughts immediately after the incident

â

feelings---they recall the emotions associated with the incident

â

assessment---they take stock of their responses

â

education---the counsellor offers information about stress responses and
how to manage them.

Debriefing has been widely used, but current evidence suggests that
single-session 'stand-alone' debriefing is not helpful in lowering
subsequent psychological distress, and might even be harmful for some
(Forneris et al., 2013).

Management After a traumatic event, many people talk informally to a
sympathetic relative or friend, or to a member of the professional staff
dealing with any physical injuries that originated during the incident.
If anxiety is severe, an anxiolytic drug may be prescribed for a day or
two, and if sleep is severely disrupted a hypnotic drug may be given for
one or two nights. Since in most cases stress reactions will resolve
with time, a policy of watchful waiting is appropriate, although it is
good practice to offer a follow-up appointment around two weeks after
the trauma to identify people whose symptoms are not settling and who
are therefore at increased risk of developing the more long-term and
disabling PTSD. If patients show persistent and troublesome symptoms of
acute stress disorder at this point, consideration should be given to
treatments that may help prevent the onset of PTSD. Approaches of
demonstrable efficacy involve verbal exposure to the original event and
include prolonged exposure therapy (which aims to minimize continuing
avoidance) and trauma-focused cognitive behaviour therapy (Howlett and
Stein, 2016). These treatments are superior to less specific
psychological approaches such as supportive counselling. Effective
pharmacological treatments would have the advantage of easy
implementation, but none are currently established and the use of SSRIs
in acute stress disorder to prevent the development

141

142

142

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences of PTSD has not generally
proved helpful. On the other hand, research studies indicate that there
may in future

be a role for treatments that increase corticosteroid levels (Howlett
and Stein, 2016).

Post-traumatic stress disorder This term denotes an intense, prolonged,
and sometimes delayed reaction to an intensely stressful event. The
essential features of a post-traumatic stress reaction are as
follows: 1. Re-experiencing of aspects of the stressful event. 2.
Hyperarousal. 3. Avoidance of reminders.

instead of, but also as well as, PTSD. Also, PTSD is commonly comorbid
with other psychiatric disorders, most notably depression, alcohol
dependence, substance misuse, and anxiety disorders (Sareen, 2014).

Clinical picture of posttraumatic stress disorder

Examples of extreme stressors that may cause this disorder are natural
disasters such as floods and earthquakes, man-made calamities such as
major fires and serious transport accidents, or the circumstances of
war, and rape or serious physical assault on the person. The original
concept of PTSD was of a reaction to such an extreme stressor that any
person would be affected by it. Epidemiological studies have shown that
not everyone who is exposed to the same extreme stressor develops PTSD;
thus personal predisposition plays a part. In many disasters the victims
suffer not only psychological distress but also physical injury, which
may increase the likelihood of PTSD. Other predisposing factors are
reviewed below in the section on aetiology. The condition now known as
PTSD has been recognized for many years, although under other names. The
term PTSD originated during the study of American servicemen returning
from the Vietnam War. The diagnosis meant that affected servicemen could
be given medical and social help without being diagnosed as suffering
from another psychiatric disorder. Similar psychological effects have
been reported (under other names) among servicemen in both world wars,
and among survivors of peacetime disasters such as the serious fire at
the Coconut Grove nightclub in America in 1942. For a historical review
of the concept of PTSD, see Jones and Wessely (2014).

The clinical features of PTSD can be divided into three groups (see Box
7.4). The most characteristic and diagnostically important symptoms are
related to reexperiencing (also called intrusion) and include
flashbacks, recurrent nightmares, and intrusive images or other sensory
impressions from the event. The second group of symptoms is concerned
with avoidance, and includes difficulty in recalling stressful events at
will, avoidance of reminders of the events, a feeling of detachment, and
inability to feel emotion ('numbing'). The third group of symptoms is
related to hyperarousal, and includes persistent anxiety, irritability,
insomnia, and poor concentration. Maladaptive coping responses may
occur, including persistent aggressive behaviour, the excessive use of
alcohol or drugs, and deliberate self-harm and suicide.

Other reactions to severe stress

Onset and course

PTSD occurs only after exceptionally stressful events, but not every
response to such events is PTSD. Six months after a serious accident,
major depression may actually be more frequent than PTSD. ICD-10 has a
category of 'Enduring personality changes after catastrophic experience'
(see Box 7.3). This and other conditions may occur

Symptoms of PTSD may begin very soon after the stressful event, or after
an interval, usually of days, but usually within 3 months. It is now
accepted, however, that a minority of cases of PTSD can have a delayed
onset or, more accurately, that subthreshold symptoms may not develop to
fulfil diagnostic criteria for PTSD for many

Other features Depressive symptoms are common, and guilt and shame are
often experienced by the survivors of a disaster. There can be
diminished interest in activities and an inability to experience
positive emotions. After some traumatic events, survivors feel forced
into a painful reconsideration of their beliefs about the meaning and
purpose of life. Some develop exaggeratedly negative views of the world
as well as of themselves and others. Dissociative symptoms such as
depersonalization are also prominent in some patients.

143

Post-traumatic stress disorder

Box 7.3 ICD-10 criteria for 'Enduring personality changes after
catastrophic experience' (A) At least two of the following: â a
permanent hostile or distrustful attitude towards the world â social
withdrawal â a constant feeling of emptiness or hopelessness â an
enduring feeling of being on edge or being threatened without external
cause â a permanent feeling of being changed or being different from
others. (B) The change causes significant interference with personal or
social functioning or significant distress. (C) The personality change
developed after the catastrophic event, and the person did not have a
personality disorder prior to the event that explains the current
traits. (D) The personality change must have been present for at least 2
years, and is not related to episodes of any other mental disorder
(other than PTSD) or to brain damage or disease. Source: data from The
ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health
Organization.

months or even years. In DSM-5, PTSD cannot be diagnosed until at least
1 month of symptomatology has elapsed; until then the condition is
regarded as an acute stress disorder. However, in these circumstances it
is doubtful whether the diagnosis of stress-related disorder and PTSD
represents two separate conditions. About one-third of cases of PTSD
remit within 3 months, but about 40% of patients have a chronic course
(Santiago et al., 2013).

Diagnosis The diagnostic criteria in ICD-10 and DSM-5 are similar,
although the latter are more prescriptive, with ICD10 requiring only
symptoms of re-experiencing, while numbing and avoidance, although often
present, are not essential to make the diagnosis. In DSM-5, as well as
intrusive symptoms, patients must also experience symptoms indicating
avoidance, arousal, and altered cognitions

Box 7.4 The principal symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder
Hyperarousal Persistent anxiety Irritability Insomnia Poor concentration

Re-experiencing Intense intrusive imagery 'Flashbacks' Recurrent
distressing dreams

Avoidance Difficulty in recalling stressful events at will Avoidance of
reminders of the events Detachment Inability to feel emotion
('numbness') Diminished interest in activities

and mood. By convention, PTSD can be diagnosed in people who have a
history of psychiatric disorder before the stressful events.
Differential diagnoses include the following: â

Stress-induced exacerbations of previous anxiety or mood disorders.

â

Acute stress disorder (distinguished by the time course).

â

Adjustment disorders (distinguished by the different pattern of
symptoms).

â

Enduring personality changes after catastrophic experience.

PTSD may present as deliberate self-harm or substance misuse which have
developed as maladaptive coping strategies (see 136).

Prevalence Estimates of PTSD in the general population have mainly been
obtained from the USA, where lifetime rates (using older diagnostic
criteria) have been between 6% and 9%. Rates in high-risk groups (for
example, soldiers exposed to combat) can be much higher, up to 40%
(Sareen, 2014).

143

14

144

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences

Aetiology The stressor The necessary cause of PTSD is an exceptionally
stressful event. It is not necessary that the person should have been
harmed physically or threatened personally; those involved in other ways
may develop the disorder---for example, the driver of a train in whose
path someone has thrown himself for suicide, and the bystanders at a
major accident. DSM-5 describes such events as involving actual or
threatened death or serious injury or a threat to the physical integrity
of the person or others. In a study of people affected by a volcanic
eruption, the highest rate of PTSD was found among those who experienced
the greatest exposure to the stressful events (Shore et al., 1989). Even
so, not all of those most affected by the stressor developed PTSD, a
finding that indicates that some form of personal vulnerability plays a
part. Such vulnerability might be genetic or acquired. Epidemiological
research has revealed the following findings (Ehlers, 2009): â

The majority of people will experience at least one traumatic event in
their lifetime.

â

Intentional acts of interpersonal violence, in particular combat and
sexual assault, are more likely to lead to PTSD than accidents or
disasters.

â

Men tend to experience more traumatic events in general than women, but
women experience more events that are likely to lead to PTSD
(e.g.Â childhood sexual abuse, rape, and domestic violence).

â

Women are also more likely to develop PTSD in response to a traumatic
event than men. This enhanced risk is not explained fully by differences
in the type of traumatic event.

Genetic factors Studies of twins suggest that differences in
susceptibility to PTSD are in part genetic. True et al.Â (1993) studied
2224 monozygotic and 1818 dizygotic male twin pairs who had served in
the US armed forces during the Vietnam War. After allowance had been
made for the amount of exposure to combat, genetic variation accounted
for about one-third of the variance in susceptibility to self-reported
PTSD. Self-reported childhood and adolescent environment did not
contribute substantially to this variance. The genetic liability to PTSD
is partly explained by a genetic effect on personality, which modifies
the propensity of individuals to engage in risky behaviours. However,
even when allowing for genetic effects on personality, there is an
additional genetic

influence on the liability to experience PTSD after a given trauma.
Several genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of PTSD have been carried
out with the aim of identifying causative genes, but reliable findings
have not yet emerged (Logue et al., 2015).

Other predisposing factors The individual factors that increase
vulnerability to the development of PTSD have been summarized by Ahmed
(2007). They include the following: â

personal history of mood and anxiety disorder

â

previous history of trauma

â

female gender

â

neuroticism

â

lower intelligence

â

lack of social support.

Neurobiological correlates Research to date on the neurobiology of PTSD
has focused on monoamine neurotransmitters and the
hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal (HPA) axis, both of which are involved
in mediating defensive responses to stressful events. In addition, brain
imaging studies have implicated changes in the hippocampus, a brain
region that is important in memory formation, and the amygdala, which
plays a role in non-conscious emotional processing (see Box 7.5). These
findings suggest that hippocampal dysfunction prevents adequate memory
processing, while increased activity in noradrenergic innervation of the
amygdala increases arousal and facilitates the automatic encoding and
partial recall of traumatic memories. Functional imaging studies in PTSD
suggest overactivity of the amygdala in the context of decreased
regulatory control of the amygdala and other limbic regions by the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex.

Psychological factors Fear conditioning Some patients with PTSD
experience vivid memories of the traumatic events in response to sensory
cues, such as smells and sounds related to the stressful situation. This
finding suggests that classical conditioning may be involved, as well as
failure to extinguish conditioned responses.

Cognitive theories These suggest that PTSD arises when the normal
processing of emotionally charged information is overwhelmed, so that
memories persist in an unprocessed form in which they can intrude into
conscious awareness. In

145

Post-traumatic stress disorder

Box 7.5 Neurobiological abnormalities in PTSD
Hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal axis Evidence, albeit somewhat
contradictory, for low plasma cortisol levels and increased sensitivity
to dexamethasone suppression. Increased levels of
corticotropin-releasing hormone in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

resilience and decrease the risk of experiencing PTSD following trauma
(see Ahmed, 2007).

Maintaining factors As noted above, symptoms of PTSD may be maintained
in part by negative appraisals of the early symptoms. Other suggested
maintaining factors include avoidance of reminders of the traumatic
situation (which prevents deconditioning and cognitive reappraisal),
suppression of intrusive memories (which is known to make them more
likely to recur), and rumination (Ehlers et al., 2012).

Noradrenaline Increased sympathetic tone. Increased startle response.
Increased levels of 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) in CSF.
Increased anxiety response to noradrenaline challenge. Decreased levels
of neuropeptide Y at baseline and in response to noradrenaline
challenge.

Brain imaging Smaller volume of the hippocampus (which may be a
vulnerability factor), overactivity of the amygdala in response to
traumatic psychological stimuli, as well as decreased activity in
anterior cingulate cortex and prefrontal cortex. Source: data from
Murray KE, Keifer OP, Ressler KJ, Norrholm SD, Jovanovic T, Neurobiology
and treatment of PTSD, In: Charney DS, Buxbaum JD, Sklar P, Nestler EJ
(Eds), Neurobiology of Mental Illness (4th edition), Copyright (2013),
Oxford University Press.

support of this idea, patients with PTSD tend to have incomplete and
disorganized recall of the traumatic events. Individual differences in
response to the same traumatic events are explained as being because of
differences in the appraisal of the trauma and of its effects.
Similarly, differences in the appraisal of the early symptoms may
explain why these symptoms persist for longer in some individuals.
Negative interpretations of intrusive thoughts (e.g.Â 'I am going mad')
after road accidents predict the continuing presence of PTSD after 1
year. The cognitive model of PTSD has been reviewed by Ehlers et
al.Â (2012).

Psychodynamic theories These emphasize the role of emotional development
in determining individual variations in the response to severely
stressful events. The general approach is plausible, and is supported by
the fact that factors such as positive self-esteem, trust, and secure
attachment increase

Assessment This should include enquiries about the nature and duration
of symptoms, previous personality, and psychiatric history. When the
traumatic events have included head injury (e.g.Â in an assault or
transport accident), a neurological examination should be performed.
Feelings of anger and thoughts of self-harm are common in PTSD, and an
appropriate risk assessment needs to be carried out. Secondary
complications such as substance misuse may require treatment in their
own right (see Chapter 20).

Treatment By the time patients with PTSD are assessed for treatment, the
disorder may have been present for many months or even years, and
comorbidity with depression and substance misuse often complicate
management. Psychological treatments are generally preferred in the
treatment of PTSD, although pharmacotherapy has a role in patients
presenting with significant comorbid depression or where psychological
approaches are not beneficial. Where alcohol or substance use disorders
coexist with PTSD, it may be advisable to treat the substance misuse
prior to offering psychological treatment for PTSD (National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence, 2013). Psychological treatments such as
trauma-focused cognitive behaviour therapy and eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing are more effective than less specific
treatments such as stress management, supportive therapy, and
hypnotherapy (Ehlers, 2009). It should be noted that the majority of
studies for treating PTSD have been conducted following 'single-episode'
events and that those exposed to multiple traumatic events, such as
those fleeing humanitarian disasters, conflict, and prolonged sexual
abuse might need different treatments.

145

146

146

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences

Cognitive behavioural treatment Cognitive behaviour therapy is the most
appropriate treatment. This treatment has several components: â

Information about the normal response to severe stress, and the
importance of confronting situations and memories related to the
traumatic events.

â

Self-monitoring of symptoms.

â

Exposure in imagination and then in vivo to situations that are being
avoided.

â

Recall of images of the traumatic events, to integrate these with the
rest of the patient's experience. When first recalled these images are
often fragmentary and are not clearly related in time to the other
contents of memory.

â

Cognitive restructuring through the discussion of evidence for and
against the appraisals and assumptions.

â

Anger management for people who still feel angry about the traumatic
events and their causes.

A meta-analysis of psychotherapy studies of PTSD suggests that cognitive
behavioural treatments have a therapeutic effect size of around 1.6 when
compared with waitlist control, and around 1.0 when compared with
relaxation and supportive therapies. An effect size of 1.0 corresponds
to an improvement of one standard deviation on the relevant symptomatic
measure, and effect sizes of this nature indicate a large treatment
effect (see Chapter 6). At the end of psychological treatment, around
50% of patients no longer meet the criteria for PTSD, although many are
still symptomatic to some degree. Although these results are
encouraging, further work is required to show that similar benefit can
be obtained in everyday clinical settings (Gerger et al., 2014). Eye
movement desensitization and reprocessing was designed for the treatment
of PTSD (see Chapter 24). Treatment trials using this technique in
subjects with PTSD have shown similar effect sizes to those obtained
with cognitive behaviour therapy, but the evidence base

is not as large. Some have questioned whether the eye movements
associated with this treatment add any specific therapeutic value to the
element of exposure. Narrative exposure therapy (NET) is a more recently
developed treatment that aims to enhance autobiographical memory
processing of the trauma by embedding it in a chronological life
narrative developed collaboratively by patient and therapist. NET was
developed originally for those suffering from PTSD following multiple
traumatic events and was first trialled in refugee camps in low-income
settings. It is a treatment that has been successfully delivered by lay
therapists and it has been adapted for use in children (KIDNET). It is
being increasingly used in high-income settings as well as low- and
middle-income countries, and has a growing evidencebase. For a review
see Robjant and Fazel, (2010).

Medication Anxiolytic drugs such as benzodiazepines should be avoided in
patients with established PTSD, because prolonged use may lead to
dependence. A number of antidepressant drugs have shown efficacy in
clinical trials, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs),
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOIs). There are also more preliminary data supporting the efficacy of
mirtazapine, and augmentation with atypical antipsychotic drugs such as
olanzapine may have a place in treatmentresistant patients, particularly
those with marked sleep disturbance. The anticonvulsant drug topiramate
also appears effective but on the basis of a fewer number of studies
(National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2013). Meta-analyses
reviewed by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2013)
indicate that, in patients with PTSD, structured psychotherapies
generally have higher effect sizes than drug treatment, and medication
should not therefore be a first-line approach unless the patient
expresses a preference for it or psychotherapy is not available or is
ineffective (Box 7.6).

Response to special kinds of severe stress Rape and physical assault
Victims of rape or other sexual or physical assault experience acute
reactions to stress, PTSD, anxiety and depressive disorders, and
psychosexual dysfunction. In one

survey of 4000 women in Australia, just over a quarter reported exposure
to one or more events of 'genderbased violence' (rape and sexual
assault, intimate partner violence, or stalking). Following the trauma
around 25% experienced PTSD, but rates for mood and anxiety

174

Response to special kinds of severe stress

Box 7.6 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
guidance for the management of PTSD and related traumatic syndromes 1.
The routine use of a brief screening instrument for PTSD at 1 month post
incident should be considered for all people who have been involved in a
major disaster. 2. Where symptoms are mild and have been present for
less than 4 weeks after the trauma, watchful waiting---as a way of
managing the difficulties presented by individual sufferers---should be
routinely considered by healthcare professionals. A follow-up contact
should be arranged within 1 month. 3. Trauma-focused cognitive
behavioural therapy should be considered for those with severe
posttraumatic symptoms during the first month after the traumatic event.
All PTSD sufferers should be offered a course of trauma-focused
psychological treatment. These treatments are usually given individually
on an outpatient basis. 4. Drug treatments for PTSD should not be used
as a routine first-line treatment in preference to a trauma-focused
psychological therapy. 5. Drug treatments such as paroxetine,
mirtazapine, amitriptyline, and phenelzine (the latter supervised by
specialists) should be considered for the treatment of PTSD where a
sufferer expresses a preference not to engage in a trauma-focused
psychological treatment, or such treatment has proved ineffective.
Source: data from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Copyright (2013), National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence.

disorders were even higher (34% and 38%, respectively). Substance use
disorder was also common (29%) (Rees et al., 2014). As well as
experiencing symptoms of PTSD, victims of rape and assault often feel
humiliated, ashamed, and remain vulnerable to further attack. They lose
confidence and self-esteem, question why they were chosen as victims,
and blame themselves for putting themselves in unnecessary danger. To
these problems are added issues of betrayal and secrecy when the

assault is carried out by a family member or a friend. The victim may
experience problems in trusting, persistent anger and irritability, and
excessive dependence. These problems were first described among women
victims of rape, but similar difficulties have been described among male
victims of sexual assault (Peterson et al., 2011). Problems are more
likely to persist when there has been an actual or perceived threat to
life, previous psychological and social problems, past victimization,
particularly abuse in childhood, past psychiatric illness or substance
abuse, or a lack of social support (Adshead and Ferris, 2007).

Treatment Social support is important in providing opportunities for the
victim to talk over the problem and to regain self-esteem. Specific
treatment for trauma-related symptoms is similar to that for other kinds
of PTSD, including prolonged exposure by reliving the events in
imagination, with additional emphasis on overcoming feelings of
vulnerability and self-blame (Vickerman and Margolin, 2009).

Combatants 'Shell shock', 'battle fatigue', and 'war neurosis' were
terms used during the First World War to describe psychological
reactions to battle among British and American servicemen. Most of the
reactions appear to resemble cases now diagnosed as PTSD; others seem to
have resembled panic disorder or depressive disorders. Cases with panic
attacks and concerns about the heart, now diagnosed as panic disorder,
were known then as Da Costa's syndrome or disorderly action of the
heart. Army psychiatrists were few in number, and were unable to deal
with the many cases. Moreover, their experience of mental hospital work
with severely ill patients did not equip them to treat these reactions
to battle. Therefore patients with shell shock were treated mainly by
neurologists or psychologists. W. H. Rivers, William Brown, and William
McDougall were British psychologists who treated shell shock during the
First World War, and used this experience to write influential books on
medical psychology in the years after the war.

Treatment At first, shell shock was treated with the methods in use at
the time for neurasthenia, namely evacuation from the combat zone, rest,
isolation, massage, and diet, but

147

148

148

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences these methods had a low
success rate. Hypnosis achieved some dramatic cures, but was not
generally effective. Medical psychologists tried psychotherapeutic
methods advocated by Freud, including the recall of stressful events to
remove repression and the expression of associated emotion. Later, there
was an increasing emphasis on early treatment, keeping the soldier with
his colleagues at the front with the explicit aim of rapid return to
action ('the soldier's interest and the army's interest are the same').
This approach has been termed 'forward psychiatry' (Jones and Wessely,
2003). Psychotherapy was combined with military drill to maintain
general fitness and morale. This combined treatment led to improved
results. It became apparent that chronicity increased dramatically if
soldiers were evacuated from the theatre of war. These general
principles of early treatment and maintenance of fitness and morale were
widely adopted in the Second World War and in subsequent conflicts.
Abreaction with anxiolytic drugs was used extensively in the Second
World War. 'Forward psychiatry', with its emphasis on treatment in the
combat zone together with an expectation of an early return to frontline
duty, is now the approach adopted by most armies in the acute management
of 'battle shock', although drug-induced abreaction is no longer
employed. It has been claimed that, with this approach, about 70% of
soldiers can be returned to duty. However, Jones and Wessely (2003) have
cautioned that the proportion of soldiers treated in this way who are
able to return to active combat may be much lower, and whether 'forward
treatment' decreases the risk of subsequent trauma-related disorders is
questionable.

Problems of refugees and victims of torture Refugees and other forced
migrants may have experienced a wide range of traumatic events, either
in their countries of origin, in their journey to a place of potential
refuge, and then in settling in a new location. The potential exposure
to traumatic events can including the following: â

The impact of armed conflict directly on them and on their families and
communities, usually through violence.

â

Loss by death or separation of relatives and friends.

â

Loss of home and possessions.

â

Physical injury (including brain injury) either from the actions of war
or from assault, rape, or torture, and the witnessing of violence to
others.

â

Experience of refugee camps or immigration detention facilities and
threats by immigration authorities of being returned to their countries
of origin.

Those involved may develop any of the reactions to stressful events,
especially PTSD, depressive and anxiety disorders, and substance misuse.
These conditions have been identified in refugees from many cultures,
although the presenting complaints may differ somewhat in people from
different cultures, with more emphasis on physical than on psychological
symptoms among people from non-western countries. However, it is
important to remember that stressors related to a refugee's current
situation can be just as difficult to deal with as those that led to
flight in the first place (see Box 7.7). In a systematic review, Fazel
et al.Â (2005) estimated that, of refugees re-settled in western
countries, about 10% met the diagnostic criteria for PTSD, 5% had major
depression, and 4% had generalized anxiety disorder. In many individuals
these disorders coexisted.

Treatment Treatment should combine physical and psychiatric care. The
latter should be introduced carefully, since it may be resisted as
stigmatizing, not only by the refugee but also by humanitarian workers.
Special care is needed to establish a trusting relationship. Practical
help is often an essential preliminary to engagement. Many refugees have
problems related to separation, bereavement, loss of material
possessions, and immigration status, so it is important not to focus
narrowly on PTSD. Generally psychological treatments based on cognitive
behaviour therapy approaches seem most beneficial for the treatment of
PTSD and associated anxiety and depression in refugees (Nickerson et
al., 2011). In victims of torture it is helpful, if the patient agrees,
to document the episodes of torture that they have experienced. As well
as providing valuable information for purposes of advocacy and legal
proceedings, the documentation can be developed into testimonial
therapy, in which patients form a narrative of their experience which
can be delivered to others, including their household (Duffy and Kelly,
2015). Health beliefs and understanding of the 'normal' psychological
response to stress may well differ between a health worker from one
culture and a forced migrant

149

Adjustment disorders

Box 7.7 Some stressful issues faced by refugees Causes War Human rights
abuses Persecution on grounds of politics, religion, gender, or
ethnicity Refugee camps and immigration detention centres Illegal
methods of transportation and border crossings, often in the hands of
people traffickers

Resultant losses Country Culture Family Profession Language Friends
Possessions Plans for the future

Issues in country of asylum Psychological and practical adjustment
Uncertain future Traumatic life events Social exclusion and poverty
Racism and bullying Stereotyping by host country Immigration policies
Immigration detention centres Unknown cultural traditions Reproduced
from Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 8(4), Tribe R, Mental Health of
Refugees and Asylum Seekers, pp.Â 240--7, Copyright (2002), with
permission from Royal College of Psychiatrists.

from another. Prior to psychological treatment, or where its use does
not seem suitable, provision of language classes, informal support, and
acquisition of computer skills can be very beneficial (Duffy and Kelly,
2015). In refugee children and adolescents, psychological interventions
have been delivered in community, school, and camp settings with
variable effects. The stongest positive effects are for group or
individual exposurebased therapies, including trauma-focused cognitive
behaviour therapy and narrative exposure therapy (Tyrer and Fazel,
2014). Care is needed when working through interpreters, especially if
these interpreters come from the same cultural group and occasionally
from the group representing the 'other side' of the conflict. There are
advantages and disadvantages in using family members as interpreters,
but it is important to ensure that some therapeutic time is made
available with a non-family, non-acquaintance performing the
interpretation as the refugee is unlikely to speak of what they regard
as shameful experiences in front of family members, community elders, or
others they might perceive as likely to speak to people they know. This
point is especially important in situations in which women may have
experienced sexual assaults, for these may bring shame on the whole
family. Ideally, such problems should be dealt with by a female mental
health professional who understands the patient's language and culture,
but this may be difficult to arrange. If conducting exposure-based
therapy, it is best to try and arrange for all the sessions to be
conducted with the same interpreter, who might themselves need emotional
support (especially if they have also come from an area of armed
conflict). For further information about the psychiatric problems of
refugees and victims of torture, see Duffy and Kelly (2015).

Adjustment disorders This term refers to the psychological reactions
that arise in relation to adapting to new circumstances. Such
circumstances include divorce and separation, a major change of work and
abode (e.g.Â transition from school to university, or migration), and the
birth of a handicapped child. Bereavement, the onset of a terminal
illness, and sexual abuse are associated with special kinds of
adjustment, which are discussed below.

Clinical features The symptoms of an adjustment disorder include
anxiety, worry, poor concentration, depression, and irritability,
together with physical symptoms caused by autonomic arousal, such as
palpitations and tremor. There may be outbursts of dramatic or
aggressive behaviour, single or repeated episodes of deliberate
self-harm, or the misuse

149

150

150

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences of alcohol or drugs. The
onset is more gradual than that of an acute reaction to stress, and the
course is more prolonged. Social or occupational function is impaired.
The impairment in social or occupational function, as well as the
intensity of distress, is what distinguishes adjustment disorder from
normal adaptive reactions. Stressful life events may precipitate
depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, and other psychiatric disorders. For
this reason, the diagnosis of adjustment disorder is not made when
diagnostic criteria for another psychiatric disorder are met. In
practice, therefore, the diagnosis is usually made by excluding an
anxiety or depressive disorder. A further requirement for diagnosis is
that the disorder starts soon after the change of circumstances. Both
ICD-10 and DSM-5 require that the disorder starts within 3 months, and
ICD-10 indicates that it usually starts within 1 month. An essential
point is that the reaction is understandably related to, and in
proportion to, the stressful experience when account is taken of the
patient's previous experiences and personality. Once the stressor or its
consequences are removed, the symptoms resolve within 6 months.

Diagnostic conventions As explained previously under 'Classification of
reactions to stressful events', in ICD-10 adjustment disorders are
divided into depressive reactions, mixed anxiety and depressive
reactions, reactions with disturbance of other emotions, and reactions
with disturbed conduct with or without emotional disturbance. DSM-5
lists six types of adjustment disorder (see Table 7.1).

Epidemiology The prevalence of adjustment disorder in the community has
been little studied. A community study in older people found that the
prevalence of adjustment disorders was about 2% (Maercker et al., 2008).
It is presumed that in certain settings, such as the general hospital
and primary care, prevalence rates are increased. For example, in
studies of general hospital inpatients referred for psychiatric
consultation, rates of adjustment disorder ranged from 11.5% to 21.5%
(Strain et al., 2009). High rates are also seen in people who make
suicide attempts (see page 623).

Aetiology Stressful circumstances are the necessary cause of an
adjustment disorder, but individual vulnerability

is also important, because not all people who are exposed to the same
stressful circumstances develop an adjustment disorder. The nature of
this vulnerability is unknown; it seems to vary from one person to
another, and may relate in part to previous life experiences.

Prognosis Clinical experience suggests that most adjustment disorders
last for several months, and a few persist for years if the stressor or
its consequences cannot be removed. In a review of the literature,
Strain et al.Â (2009) concluded that, while the prognosis for adjustment
disorder in adults is usually good, the majority of adolescents with
adjustment disorder develop psychiatric disorders in adult life.
Persistence of adjustment disorder should lead to a review of diagnosis
in case symptomatology for a formal anxiety or depressive disorder has
developed. As noted above, adjustment disorders can be associated with
suicidal ideation and behaviour. Therefore clinical assessments should
include careful questioning about risk.

Treatment Treatment is designed to help the patient to resolve the
stressful problems if this is possible, and to aid the natural processes
of adjustment. The latter is done by reducing denial and avoidance of
the stressful events, encouraging problem-solving, and discouraging
maladaptive coping responses. Anxiety can usually be reduced by
encouraging the patient to talk about the problems and to express their
feelings. Occasionally, an anxiolytic or hypnotic drug is needed for a
few days. Problem-solving counselling (see Chapter 24) encourages the
patient to seek solutions to stressful problems, and to consider the
advantages and disadvantages of various kinds of action. The patient is
then helped to select and implement a course of action to solve the
problem. If this action succeeds, another problem is considered. If the
first attempt fails, another approach to the original problem is tried.
If problems cannot be resolved, the patient is encouraged to come to
terms with them. Maina et al.Â (2005) reported that, in patients with
adjustment disorder, both brief dynamic and supportive psychotherapy
were more effective than a waiting-list control. For a review of
adjustment disorder, see Casey (2009).

15

Special kinds of adjustment

Special kinds of adjustment Adjustment to physical illness and handicap
Appraisal of illness Adjustment to illness cannot be understood simply
in terms of the facts about the disease and its objective consequences.
Adjustment depends on the patient's beliefs about their disorder and its
effects on their life---in other words, on their appraisal of their
illness. This appraisal may be similar to that of the professionals who
are treating them, or it may be very different because it is based on
false information or on emotions rather than on facts, or influenced by
cultural beliefs. The appraisal may be reinforced by members of the
family who share the patient's views, or it may be contradicted by them,
thus adding to the patient's distress. Two terms are much used in the
discussions of adjustment to illness and handicap---illness behaviour
and the sick role. These terms will be considered next.

Illness behaviour Mechanic (1978) suggested the term illness behaviour
to describe behaviour associated with adjustment to physical or mental
disorder, whether adaptive or not. Illness behaviour includes consulting
doctors, taking medicines, seeking help from relatives and friends, and
giving up inappropriate activities. These behaviours are adaptive in the
early stages of illness, but may become maladaptive if they persist into
the stage of convalescence when the patient should be becoming
independent. Illness behaviour results from the person's conviction that
he is ill rather than from the objective presence of disease, and it may
develop when no disease is present. Illness behaviour without disease is
an important problem in general practice and, once firmly established,
it is difficult to treat. The concept of illness behaviour overlaps with
that of the sick role (described below), but the two are described
separately because they have different origins.

The sick role Society bestows a special role on people who are ill.Â The
sociologist Talcott Parsons (1951) called this the sick role, which is
made up of two privileges and two duties: â

exemption from certain social responsibilities

â

the right to expect help and care from others

â

the obligation to seek and cooperate with treatment

â

the expectation of a desire to recover.

While the person is ill, the sick role is adaptive. If they continue in
the sick role after the illness is over, recovery is delayed as they
continue to avoid responsibilities and depend on others instead of
becoming independent.

Adjustment to the onset of physical illness When a person becomes
physically ill, they may feel anxious, depressed, or angry. Usually this
emotional reaction is transient, subsiding as the patient comes to terms
with the new situation. As in other adjustment reactions, denial or
minimization can protect the patient against overwhelming anxiety when
the diagnosis is first known. Although helpful in this way, denial can
be maladaptive---in the early stage of illness it may lead to delay in
seeking help, and at a later stage it may lead to poor compliance with
treatment. Other coping strategies can be divided into emotion-reducing
and problemsolving groups. Coping strategies that reduce emotion are
often appropriate in the early stages of illness, but should give way to
problem-solving coping. Coping may fail when demands are very great or
when coping resources are limited either in the long term, or as a
temporary result of disease of, or trauma to, the brain.

Physical illness as a direct cause of psychiatric symptoms As well as
acting as a stressor, physical illness may induce psychiatric symptoms
directly. Anxiety, depression, fatigue, weakness, weight loss, or
abnormal behaviour may all be caused directly by physical disorders;
common examples are listed in Chapter 22 Box 22.3). Similarly, sexual
function may be impaired by physical illness or its treatment (Chapter
13). Any of these symptoms may be the reason for referral, and
psychiatrists should always be alert for the possibility of undetected
physical illness in their patients.

Psychiatric symptoms due to treatments for physical illness Some drugs
that are used in the treatment of physical illness may affect mood,
behaviour, and consciousness. The drugs most likely to have these
effects are listed in Chapter 22, Table 22.3).

151

152

152

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences

Help for people who are adjusting to physical illness Most people adjust
well to physical illness, but when adjustment is slow and incomplete,
psychological treatment may be needed. This treatment need not be
complicated, and can usually be provided effectively by the general
practitioner or the hospital doctors or nurses who are managing the
physical illness. Generally, the psychiatrist has a role in treating
only the more severe problems or in supporting the medical and nursing
staff. The first step is to identify patients who are adjusting badly
(i.e.Â failing to cope). This is generally done by the professional staff
who are managing the physical illness. They can do this most easily by
looking out for patients who are progressing less well than would be
expected on the basis of the severity of the disease. Mood disorders are
a common cause of slow progress, but may be dismissed as normal
responses to the problems of the illness. Screening questionnaires can
be used to detect mood disorders among these patients, but the results
should be checked at least by a brief interview, which should be
conducted, if possible, in surroundings in which their replies will not
be overheard. Generally, one or more members of the family should be
interviewed to obtain information about the patient's previous
adjustment to problems and illness, and to discover how the family views
the illness. Some patients require medication, but for many counselling
(see Chapter 24) is more appropriate. Counselling requires a trusting
relationship with the patient, and this in turn requires adequate time
for the interviews. Counselling begins with an explanation of the nature
of the illness and its treatment. The patient is then helped to accept
the implication of the diagnosis, to adjust to the illness, and to give
up any maladaptive behaviours, such as excessive dependence on others or
denial of the need for treatment. Graded activities, motivational
interviewing, and anger management may be useful in some cases. More
structured psychological treatment in the form of cognitive behaviour
therapy may also be useful (Halford and Brown, 2009). If the reaction to
physical illness is an anxiety or depressive condition, treatment
appropriate to that disorder should be given (see Chapters 8 and 9). A
large randomized trial of cancer patients with depression showed that,
compared to treatment as usual, a collaborative intervention by cancer
nurses, psychiatrists, and primary care physicians substantially
improved depressive symptomatology as well as diminishing pain and
fatigue over the following 6 months (Sharpe et al., 2014).

Adjustment to terminal illness Among patients referred to palliative
care services symptoms of anxiety and depression are common.
Particularly in the final days of life, cognitive impairment and
delirium can complicate management. Determinants of emotional reactions
include the patient's personality, and the amount and quality of support
from family, friends, and carers. Understandably, emotional reactions
are more common among young dying patients than among the elderly.
Surveys indicate that loss of independence and dignity and the
management of pain are major concerns (Clarke and Seymour, 2010).

Anxiety Anxiety may be provoked by the prospect of severe pain,
disfigurement, or incontinence, by fear of death, and by concerns about
the future of the patient's family. Families and carers sometimes try to
spare the patient anxiety by concealing the truth about the condition.
Since most patients become aware of the diagnosis, attempts at
concealment only serve to increase their fear of possible consequences
of the disease, such as pain or incontinence.

Depression Depression may be provoked by the prospect of separation from
family and friends and the loss of valued activities. Changes in
physical appearance caused by the illness, the effects of surgery, and
the debilitating effects of radiotherapy are other causes of low mood.

Guilt and anger Some patients experience guilt because they believe that
they are making excessive demands on relatives or friends. Patients with
religious beliefs may believe that illness is a punishment for previous
wrongdoing; conversely, anger may be felt about the unjustness of
impending death; this anger may be displaced on to doctors, nurses, and
relatives, making care more difficult (see below).

Symptoms induced directly by illness or its treatment Psychological
symptoms may also be induced by the disease or by its treatment, and
these may add to the patient's distress. There is a particularly strong
association between dyspnoea and anxiety, and drugs may cause or add to
delirium. The more frequent associations between disease and
psychological symptoms are summarized in Box 22.3. The associations
between drug

153

Special kinds of adjustment treatment and psychological symptoms are
summarized in Table 22.3.

Treatment In the UK about 60% of deaths occur in hospitals and care
homes, and less than 10% in specialist hospice care (Galappathie and
Khan, 2016). Dying patients are usually helped to adjust by the staff
who are managing the physical illness. Psychiatrists are called upon
only when there are special problems (see below) or to assist with staff
support and training.

The aims of treatment Surveys have shown that patients believe the
following factors are important in achieving a 'good death': â

managing symptoms

â

avoiding prolongation of dying

â

achieving a sense of control

â

relieving burdens placed on the family

â

the strengthening of relationships.

Advance directives can help achieve these aims by preparing for the end
of life and communicating future wishes; this might be particularly
helpful if there is subsequent loss of capacity (Detering et al., 2010).
Kubler-Ross (1969) formulated an influential model which described five
phases of psychological adjustment to death. The phases do not
necessarily occur in the same sequence, and some of them may not occur
at all, but they are a useful guide for professionals who are helping
dying patients. They can be summarized as follows: â

denial and isolation

â

anger

â

partial acceptance ('bargaining for time')

â

depression

â

acceptance.

This model has been criticized as being rather mechanistic and failing
to capture the complex and unique life experience that each patient and
their family bring to the imminent prospect of death. A qualitative
study of Danish hospice patients found that patients faced imminent
death with sorrow for the separation to come from family and close
friends, and concern for how loved ones would fare without them.
However, they did not suffer undue anxiety and continued to take
significant interest in the daily life of the hospice (Moestrup and
Hansen, 2015).

Reducing symptoms Adequate control of pain and breathlessness and the
reduction of confusion due to delirium are particularly important.
Anxiety and depression may diminish as pain and breathlessness are
controlled. The causes of delirium are listed in Box 14.1. Among dying
patients, important remediable causes are dehydration, the side effects
of drugs, secondary infection, cardiac or respiratory failure, and
hypercalcaemia.

Helping the patient to adjust It is essential to establish a good
relationship with the patient so that they can talk about their problems
and ask questions. The nature of the illness should be explained
honestly and in simple language. Sometimes doctors are apprehensive that
such an explanation will increase the patient's distress. Although
excessive detail given unsympathetically can have this effect, it is
seldom difficult to decide how much to say about diagnosis and
prognosis, provided that patients are allowed to lead the discussion,
express their worries, and say what they want to know. If patients ask
about the prognosis, they should be told the truth; evasive answers
undermine trust in the carers. If a patient does not seem to wish to
know the full extent of their problems, it is usually better to save
this information until later. At an appropriate stage the patient should
be told what can be done to make their remaining time as comfortable as
possible. While the whole account should be truthful, the amount that is
disclosed on a single occasion should be judged by the patient's
reactions and by their questions. If necessary, the doctor should be
prepared to return for further discussion when the patient is ready to
continue. It is important to bear in mind that most dying patients
become aware of their prognosis whether or not they are told directly,
because they infer the truth from the behaviour of those who are caring
for them. They notice when answers to questions are evasive and when
people avoid talking to them. Patients who are anxious, angry, or
despairing need to be able to express these feelings and to discuss the
ideas that induce them.

Informing the staff All of the staff should be made aware of the
information that has been given to the patient, otherwise conflicting
advice and opinions may be offered. If all those involved know what has
been said, they will feel more at ease when talking to the patient.
Otherwise they will draw back from the patient, isolating them, and
thereby increasing their difficulty in adjusting.

153

154

154

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences

Informing and supporting the relatives

Management of depressive disorders

Relatives need to know what has been said to the patient so that they
will feel less ill at ease when talking to them. They may need as much
help as the patient. They may become anxious and depressed, and they may
respond with guilt, anger, or denial. Such reactions make it difficult
for them to communicate helpfully with the patient or the staff.
Relatives need information, and opportunities to talk about their
feelings and to prepare for the impending bereavement, otherwise the
patient and their family may become increasingly distant and alienated.
Patients might also need specific advice as to how to explain their
illness to their children, as sensitively informing children of parental
illness is usually to be encouraged.

Depressive disorders may be caused by symptoms such as pain or
breathlessness, and all such symptoms should be treated appropriately.
Any drugs that can cause depression (see Table 22.3) should be reviewed
and, if possible, given at a lower dose or replaced. Some symptoms of
depressive disorder are difficult to evaluate in patients with advanced
cancer, as weight loss, anorexia, insomnia, loss of interest, and
fatigue may be caused by the physical illness. Early-morning wakening,
extreme hopelessness, and self-blame are more reliable guides to
diagnosis. Suicidal ideation should be assessed carefully. If
counselling and improved medical management do not improve the low mood,
antidepressant drugs should be prescribed with careful supervision. The
starting dose should be small, and medication should be changed if
necessary to find a compound that is well tolerated.

Special services In many hospitals, specialist nurses work with the
family doctor and with the hospital staff who are caring for dying
patients. These nurses are trained in the psychological as well as
physical care of the dying. Such care is increasingly provided in
hospices, where it is possible to provide close attention to the details
of care that improve quality of life for the dying person. These
hospices care for patients when home care is impractical, and provide
periods of respite care to relieve those who are caring for the patient
at home.

Referral to a psychiatrist Referral to a psychiatrist is appropriate
when psychiatric symptoms or behaviour disturbance are severe. The
referrals are concerned with the assessment and management of: â

Depressed patients, to determine the cause and whether the patient
requires medication or more structured psychotherapy.

Liaison with medical and nursing staff Liaison with medical and nursing
staff is important. Often these staff can provide treatment when the
psychiatrist has formulated a plan. For further information about
end-of-life care, see Galappathie and Khan (2016) and Box 7.8.

Grief and adjustment to bereavement Terminology Although the words
'bereavement', 'mourning', and 'grief' are sometimes used
interchangeably, they have separate meanings which incorporate
distinctions that are useful in psychiatry. â

Bereavement is the loss through death of a loved person.

â

Uncommunicative patients who will not talk about the illness.

â

Grief is the involuntary emotional and behavioural response to
bereavement.

â

Uncooperative patients who do not accept the social restrictions imposed
by the illness, will not make appropriate plans, or will not take the
necessary decisions.

â

â

Longstanding problems that are made worse by the illness and that are
related to personality or family conflicts.

Mourning is the voluntary expression of behaviours and rituals that are
socially sanctioned responses to bereavement. These behaviours and
rituals differ between societies and between religious groups both in
their form and in their duration.

â

Other symptoms: although anxiety and delirium are common, these problems
are more often dealt with appropriately by medical staff than referred
to a psychiatrist; the exception is delirium with paranoid symptoms.

The systems of classification do not make these distinctions in
consistent ways. In ICD-10, bereavement is coded appropriately as
Z63.4---that is, as one of the 'factors influencing health status and
contact with health services'. In DSM-5, however, while bereavement
itself is not coded, 'persistent complex bereavement' (a severe grief
reaction that has persisted for at least 12 months) is listed

15

Special kinds of adjustment

Box 7.8 Priorities for care of the dying person 1. The possibility that
a person may die within the next few days or hours is recognized and
communicated clearly, decisions made and actions taken in accordance
with the person's needs and wishes, and these are regularly reviewed and
decisions revised accordingly. 2. Sensitive communication takes place
between staff and the dying person, and those identified as important to
them. 3. The dying person, and those identified as important to them,
are involved in decisions about treatment and care to the extent that
the dying person wants. 4. The needs of families and others identified
as important to dying person are actively explored, respected, and met
as far as possible. 5. An individual plan of care, which includes food
and drink, symptom control, and psychological, social, and spiritual
support, is agreed, coordinated and delivered with compassion. Source:
data from Leadership Alliance for the Care of Dying People, Copyright
(2014).

under 'Conditions for further study'---thus the term is used to denote
the response to bereavement, rather than the event itself. ICD-10 codes
grief under adjustment disorders, but uses the term 'grief reaction'.
Mourning, which is a form of social behaviour, is not a disorder and,
appropriately, is not listed in the index to either classification. In
this chapter, the term bereavement reaction is used to denote all
responses to bereavement, both normal and abnormal. Normal reactions are
referred to as grief, while abnormal reactions include abnormal grief
(also referred to as pathological or complex grief), depressive
disorders, and adjustment disorders.

Grief Grief is a continuous process, but for clarity can be described as
having three stages (see Box 7.9). The first stage lasts from a few
hours to several days. There is denial, which is manifested as a lack of
emotional response ('numbness'), often with a feeling of unreality, and
incomplete acceptance that the death has taken place. The bereaved
person may be restless, as if searching for the dead person.

Box 7.9 Normal grief reaction Stage 1: hours to days Denial, disbelief
'Numbness'

Stage 2: weeks to 6 months Sadness, weeping, waves of grief Somatic
symptoms of anxiety Restlessness Poor sleep Diminished appetite Guilt,
blame of others Experience of a presence Illusions, vivid imagery
Hallucinations of the dead person's voice Preoccupation with memories of
the deceased Social withdrawal

Stage 3: weeks to months Experiences of grief diminish Social activities
resumed Memories of good times Symptoms may recur at anniversaries.

The second stage usually lasts from a few weeks to about 6 months, but
may be much longer. There may be extreme sadness, weeping, loneliness,
and often overwhelming waves of yearning for the dead person. Anxiety is
common; the bereaved person is anxious and restless, sleeps poorly,
lacks appetite, and may experience panic attacks. Many bereaved people
feel guilt that they failed to do enough for the deceased. Some feel
anger and project their feelings of guilt, blaming doctors or others for
failing to provide optimal care for the person who has died. Many
bereaved individuals have a vivid experience of being in the presence of
the dead person, and about one in ten experience brief hallucinations.
The bereaved individual is preoccupied with memories of the dead person,
sometimes in the form of intrusive images. Withdrawal from social
relationships is frequent, and complaints of physical symptoms are
common. In the third stage, these symptoms subside and everyday
activities are resumed. The bereaved person gradually comes to terms
with the loss and recalls the good times shared with the deceased in the
past. Often there

155

156

156

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences is a temporary return of
symptoms on the anniversary of the death. Although these stages are a
useful guideline, individual responses vary, and no one feature is
universal.

Abnormal grief Grief is considered to be abnormal if it is delayed or
inhibited, or unusually intense and prolonged, when it is referred to as
complicated or pathological. The usual criterion for delay is that the
first stage of grief has not occurred by 2 weeks after the death. The
criterion for abnormal duration is that the response lasts for more than
6 months. However, many people grieve for longer than this and judgement
needs to be used as to whether feelings of grief are continuing to
resolve albeit at a slow rate. In all forms of abnormal grief,
persistent avoidance of situations and of other reminders of death are
common. Depression in the course of a grief reaction. Depressive
symptoms are a frequent component of normal grief, and around 30% of
bereaved people meet the criteria for a depressive disorder at some time
during their grieving. Most of these depressive disorders resolve within
6 months, but about 20% persist for longer. It might be argued that, if
about one-third of bereaved people meet the criteria for depressive
disorder at some time, the threshold has been set too low. However,
people who meet the criteria for a depressive disorder are more likely
to have poor social adjustment, to visit doctors frequently, and to use
alcohol. Also, they can respond to medications and psychotherapies
employed in depression (Shear et al., 2011). Therefore it is of
practical value to use the criterion and to record the additional
diagnosis of a depressive disorder in these cases. If there is doubt
whether depressive disorder should be recorded, particular attention
should be paid to symptoms of retardation, global loss of self-esteem,
and guilt (the latter clearly of greater intensity than the common
regrets about omissions of care during the terminal illness), because
these features are seldom present in uncomplicated grief. It is also
important to assess whether suicidal feelings are present. In
complicated grief, suicidal thinking usually concerns a wish to be
united with the person who has died, whereas in depression the wish to
be dead is associated with a pervasive sense of hopelessness (Shear et
al., 2011). Complicated grief. Complicated grief occurs in about 7% of
those bereaved (Simon, 2013). People with complicated grief have an
intense and prolonged reaction to bereavement. This can include strong
yearnings for the person who has died, together with the thought that
life now lacks all purpose and meaning. There is

disbelief and anger about the death, and reminders of the loss are
avoided or, conversely, persistently sought out to the detriment of
other activities and relationships. Complicated grief is also associated
with sleep disturbance, increased substance use, and impairment in work
and social functioning (Shear et al., 2011). Many of these features are
captured in the DSM-5 category of persistent complex bereavement,
although here the necessary duration of grief since the bereavement is
12 rather than 6 months.

Causes of abnormal grief Abnormal grief is generally thought to be more
likely to occur when: â

The death was sudden and unexpected.

â

The bereaved person had a very close, or dependent, or ambivalent
relationship with the deceased.

â

The survivor is insecure, or has difficulty in expressing their
feelings, or has suffered a previous psychiatric disorder.

â

The survivor has to care for dependent children and so cannot show their
grief easily.

Morbidity after bereavement Several studies (reviewed by Stroebe et al.,
2007) have shown an increased rate of mortality among bereaved spouses
and other close relatives, with the greatest increase being in the first
6 months after bereavement. Most studies report increased rates of death
from heart disease, and some have reported increased rates of death from
cancer, liver cirrhosis, suicide, and accidents. The reasons for these
associations are uncertain, and are likely to be different for different
conditions.

Management of grief Grief is a normal response, and most people pass
through it with the help of family, friends, spiritual advisers, and the
rituals of mourning. In some western societies, many people may not have
links with a religion, the rituals of mourning may be attenuated, and
family may not be close at hand. For these and other reasons, family
doctors have an important part to play in helping the bereaved.
Psychiatrists may be asked to help people with abnormal grief. Although
bereaved people have some problems in common, they also have problems
that are individual. For example, a young widow with small children will
have many difficulties that are not shared by an elderly widow whose
adult children can support her. A mother who is grieving for a stillborn
child will have special problems (see page 157). When planning
management it

175

Special kinds of adjustment is important to take into account the
individual circumstances of the patient, as well as the general
guidelines outlined below.

Counselling When counselling is appropriate, it is similar to
counselling for other kinds of adjustment reaction. The bereaved person
needs to talk about the loss, to express feelings of sadness, guilt, or
anger, and to understand the normal course of grieving. It is helpful to
forewarn a bereaved person about unusual experiences such as feeling as
if the dead person is present, illusions, and hallucinations, otherwise
these experiences may be alarming. Help may be needed to: â

accept that the loss is real

â

work through the stages of grief

â

adjust to life without the deceased.

The bereaved person may need help to progress from the first stage of
denial of loss to the acceptance of reality. Viewing the dead body and
putting away the dead person's belongings help this transition, and a
bereaved person should be encouraged to perform these actions. Practical
problems may need to be discussed, including funeral arrangements and
financial difficulties. A young widow may need help with caring for
young children, and in supporting them without inhibiting her own grief
excessively. As time passes, the bereaved person should be encouraged to
resume social contacts, to talk to other people about the loss, to
remember happy and fulfilling experiences that were shared with the
deceased, and to consider positive activities that the latter would have
wanted survivors to undertake. For further information about grief
counselling, see Clark (2004). Parents who are grieving for a stillborn
child need special help. Previous practice has been to advise physical
contact with the stillborn baby, and this is something that many parents
understandably desire. However, there is growing evidence that holding
the body of the baby is associated with greater risk of adverse
psychological outcomes, so current advice is that parents should not
view or hold the body unless they particularly wish to do so (Turton et
al., 2009). Stillbirth increases the risk of subsequent relationship
breakdown; lack of support by the partner at the time of the stillbirth
and having held the stillborn infant increase this risk.

Medication Drug treatment cannot remove the distress of normal grief,
but it may be needed in specific circumstances. In the first stage of
grief, a hypnotic or anxiolytic drug may be needed for a few days to
restore sleep or to relieve

any severe anxiety. In the second stage, antidepressant drugs may be
beneficial if the criteria for depressive disorder are met, although
such usage has not been widely evaluated in this special group.
Antidepressant medication may also sometimes be helpful in the treatment
of complicated grief but is best used in conjunction with a structured
psychotherapy (see below; Simon, 2013).

Support groups Support groups have been developed to help recently
bereaved people, particularly young widows and widowers. One such
organization in the UK is known as Cruse. By sharing their experience
with others who have dealt successfully with bereavement, recently
bereaved people can share their grief, obtain practical advice, and
discuss ways of coping (Clark, 2004).

Psychotherapy It is not practicable, nor is there evidence that it is
helpful, to provide structured psychotherapies for most bereaved
individuals. For abnormal grief, dynamic psychotherapy has a clear
rationale and approach, but its effectiveness has not been formally
evaluated. However, complicated grief treatment (CGT), which combines
aspects of cognitive behavioural therapy and interpersonal therapy, has
been reported to be effective in the management of abnormal grief
(Simon, 2013). CGT emphasizes the development of a narrative about the
loss, which includes the bereavement itself as well as the positive and
negative aspects of life with the deceased. Psychoeducation about grief
and its complications is supplemented with exposure to aspects of the
bereavement that are being avoided. Cognitive restructuring to
re-evaluate maladaptive thinking, for example, that grieving is the only
way of honouring the deceased is also employed. Some of the techniques
of CGT can be applied by non-specialists; for example, discussion of the
bereavement and the previous relationship with the deceased as well as
advice for the bereaved person not to avoid events such as family
reunions which will bring about reminders of the person and the loss
(Simon, 2013).

Long-term adjustment to sexual abuse in childhood When sexually abused,
children may experience anxiety, depression, and PTSD. These effects
usually subside during childhood, but people who have been abused in
childhood are more vulnerable than others to psychiatric disorder in
adult life. Furthermore, sexual abuse in childhood may be followed by
persistent low self-esteem

157

158

158

Chapter 7 Reactions to stressful experiences and psychosexual
difficulties, whether or not a psychiatric disorder develops. Very
occasionally, adults who were previously unaware that they had been
sexually abused in childhood suddenly recall the abuse in a vivid and
disturbing way. Sometimes this recall occurs spontaneously, often when
the person has encountered a reminder of the events. It may also occur
during counselling or psychotherapy, at a time when childhood
experiences are being discussed. Some of these recollections may be
confirmed by other evidence, but many are vigorously denied by the
alleged abuser, who is often one of the parents. It has been suggested
that many of these unconfirmed reports of abuse are not accurate
memories, and that some have been induced by questions, suggestions, or
interpretations from the therapists. This phenomenon has been termed
false memory syndrome (Brewin, 2009).

Recovered memory and false memory Many victims of sexual abuse, and of
other severe stressful events, have partial amnesia for the most
stressful parts of the experience, even though they have suffered no
head injury that could lead to post-traumatic amnesia. Indeed, partial
amnesia is part of the clinical picture of PTSD. However, complete
amnesia is less frequent and, in the view of many psychiatrists,
complete amnesia for repeated stressful events followed by their recall
is improbable, especially when there is no supporting evidence for the
events from another source. This doubt is increased by evidence that
'memories' of single nonabusive childhood events can be implanted by
suggestion in about 25% of subjects (Wright et al., 2006). Evidence for
the proposition that true memories can be inaccessible for many years
and then be recovered comes mainly from clinical reports. These reports
suggest that around 25--50% of people who report childhood sexual abuse
describe long periods during which they did not remember the abuse.
Furthermore, clinical studies have shown that around 20--60% of people
who report childhood sexual abuse state that there were periods during
their life when they could not remember that the abuse had taken place.
In addition, some people have recovered memories of abuse prior to
engaging in therapy, so the effect of suggestion could not have been an
influence in these cases. In the absence of conclusive evidence about
the status of memories that are recovered during counselling or
psychotherapy, the clinician carrying out these procedures should: â

take special care not to suggest memories of sexual abuse

â

consider most carefully apparent recovered memories that arise for the
first time in therapy before concluding that they are true memories of
actual events.

The state of the current scientific evidence indicates that
practitioners should keep an open mind about the possibility and likely
frequency of recovered memories of sexual abuse and, of course, of other
kinds of traumatic experience. For a review see Brewin (2009).

Epidemiology Adults who report having experienced sexual abuse in
childhood have higher rates of psychiatric disorder in adult life. It is
not clear what proportion of children who were sexually abused in
childhood go on to develop these disorders in adult life, but some
appear to make a good adjustment. An important factor in this kind of
resilience is the experience of at least some good quality relationships
through childhood and adolescence (Collishaw et al., 2007). In a
prospective study in Australia of over 2750 sexually abused children
(80% female) followed for up to 40 years, Cutajar et al.Â (2010) found
that 24% of the abused group subsequently had contact with mental health
services, compared with 8% of controls. Relative to controls, victims of
abuse had higher rates of several adult psychiatric disorders, notably
PTSD, substance use disorders, and personality disorders; however, they
were also at increased risk of mood and anxiety disorders, and
psychosis. More severe sexual abuse and an older age of occurrence were
significant predictors of adult psychiatric disorder. Chen et al.Â (2014)
studied over 6000 Han Chinese women with recurrent major depression and
a similar number of unaffected controls. They found that any form of
reported childhood sexual abuse produced a fourfold risk in the
likelihood of experiencing recurrent depression, and the risk increased
with the severity of the abuse. Abuse was also associated with
suicidality, as well as feelings of guilt and worthlessness.

Aetiology Childhood sexual abuse may be a direct cause of vulnerability
to adult psychiatric disorder or it may be a marker of some other
factor, such as disturbed relationships within the family, which is the
real cause of the excess psychiatric disorder in adult life. It has
become apparent, for example, that sexual abuse frequently coexists and
is therefore highly correlated with other kinds of childhood adversity,
such as other forms of maltreatment (physical abuse, emotional abuse,
and neglect), parental loss (death and other kinds separation such as
divorce),

159

Further reading and parental maladjustment (violence, criminality,
substance abuse, and parental mental illness) (Green et al., 2010). Thus
studies assessing a single form of childhood adversity on the risk of
adult psychiatric disorder may overestimate the impact of that
particular kind of adversity. More recent studies have employed measures
of a range of childhood adversities followed by multivariate modelling
to estimate the relative importance of different kinds of adversity and
how far their effects on the risk of developing subsequent psychiatric
disorders are additive rather than shared. McLaughlin et al.Â (2012)
studied a population of over 6000 adolescents in the United States and
found that over half (58%) had experienced at least one kind of
childhood adversity. Over half of these subjects (59%) experienced
multiple forms of adversity. The most common childhood adversities were
parental divorce (28%), criminality (26%), economic adversity (16%), and
mental illness (15%). The reported rate of sexual abuse was 4%.
Childhood adversity strongly increased the risk of developing childhood
and adolescent psychiatric disorder, and the greatest effects were seen
for the combination of childhood maltreatment and parental
maladjustment. The effects of the various individual adversities on the
risk of psychiatric disorders were not additive. However, childhood
sexual abuse was one of the strongest individual risk factors for future
mental illness. A similar finding was observed in a population survey of
over 9000 adults (Green et al., 2010). In these studies different kinds
of childhood adversity increase the risk of psychiatric disorder rather
generally; that is, particular forms of adversity do not seem to
predispose to specific psychiatric disorders. Also, it is still possible
that childhood adversity is not strictly causal in the development of
subsequent psychiatric illness, perhaps being a risk marker of another
causal mechanism; for example, genetic influences on both the risk of
parental maladjustment and psychiatric illness in offspring (McLaughlin
et al., 2012).

Treatment The late effects of childhood sexual abuse have been treated
with counselling, dynamic psychotherapy, cognitive therapy, and group
treatments. The various methods have several common features. â

The general aim is to help the patient to understand the earlier
experiences and the effects of these on their life to improve present
adjustment.

â

The therapeutic relationship is used to help the patient to feel
trusted, understood, and respected, and to increase their self-esteem.

â

The patient is allowed to set the pace at which they talk about the
experience of being abused, otherwise they may be overwhelmed by an
extreme emotional response to the memories of abuse, and withdraw from
treatment.

â

Present problems of adjustment are identified, especially any avoidance
of problems and difficulties in expressing anger. Help is given to
overcome these difficulties.

â

Some patients need help with psychosexual problems.

The main difference between the dynamic and cognitive behavioural
approaches is the greater emphasis given in the former to understanding
the effects of the trauma on self-esteem and emotional expression, and
the greater emphasis given in the latter to more precise specification
of the ways in which current patterns of thinking affect present
behaviour. In a meta-analysis of 44 studies, Taylor and Harvey (2010)
found that many different psychological treatments, ranging from group
analytic therapy to individual cognitive behaviour therapy, produced
moderate benefits on a range of symptomatology in adults who had
suffered sexual abuse in childhood. Generally the largest effect size
was seen with cognitive behaviour therapy treatment, particularly for
symptoms related to PTSD.

Further reading Beck JG, Sloan DM (2012) The Oxford Handbook of
Traumatic Stress Disorders. OUP, Oxford. (A comprehensive overview of
traumatic stress disorders, ranging from diagnosis and aetiology to
assessment and management.) National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2005). Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD): the management
of PTSD in adults and children in primary and secondary care. Clinical

Guideline 26. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
London. (A periodically updated comprehensive review, available at
http://www.nice.org.uk.) Parkes CM (2010). Bereavement. Penguin Books,
London. (A comprehensive account of grief, written for the layman, but
containing useful information for the professional.)

159

160

61

CHAPTER 8

Anxiety and obsessive--compulsive disorders Terminology and
classification 161

Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder 183

Anxiety disorders 161

Transcultural variations in anxiety disorder 184

Generalized anxiety disorder 163

Obsessive--compulsive disorder 184

Phobic anxiety disorders 170

Obsessive--compulsive-related disorders 190

Panic disorder 173

Terminology and classification The symptom of anxiety is found in many
disorders. In the anxiety disorders, it is the most severe and prominent
symptom, and it is also prominent in the obsessional disorders, although
these are characterized by their striking obsessional symptoms. In both
ICD-10

and DSM-5 (unlike in DSM-IV), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is
classified separately from anxiety disorder. However, for convenience,
both types of disorder are covered in this chapter.

Anxiety disorders Anxiety disorders are abnormal states in which the
most striking features are mental and physical symptoms of anxiety,
occurring in the absence of organic brain disease or another psychiatric
disorder. The symptoms of anxiety are described in Chapter 1, and are
listed for convenience in Box 8.1. Although all of the symptoms can
occur in any of the anxiety disorders, there is a characteristic pattern
in each disorder, which will be described later. The disorders share
many features of their clinical picture and aetiology, but there are
also differences: â

In generalized anxiety disorders, anxiety is continuous, although it may
fluctuate in intensity.

â

In phobic anxiety disorders, anxiety is intermittent, arising in
particular circumstances.

â

In panic disorder, anxiety is intermittent, but its occurrence is
unrelated to any particular circumstances.

These differences (and some exceptions to these initial generalizations)
will be explained further when the various types of anxiety disorders
are described.

The development of ideas about anxiety disorders Anxiety has long been
recognized as a prominent symptom of many psychiatric disorders. Anxiety
and

162

162

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders

Box 8.1 Symptoms of anxiety Psychological arousal Fearful anticipation
Irritability Sensitivity to noise Restlessness Poor concentration
Worrying thoughts

Autonomic arousal Gastrointestinal â Dry mouth â Difficulty in
swallowing â Epigastric discomfort â Excessive wind â Frequent or loose
motions Respiratory â Constriction in the chest â Difficulty inhaling
Cardiovascular â Palpitations â Discomfort in the chest â Awareness of
missed beats Genitourinary â Frequent or urgent micturition â Failure of
erection â Menstrual discomfort

Muscle tension Tremor Headache Aching muscles

Hyperventilation Dizziness Tingling in the extremities Feeling of
breathlessness

Sleep disturbance Insomnia Night terror

depression often occur together and, until the last part of the
nineteenth century, anxiety disorders were not classified separately
from other mood disorders. It was Freud, in 1895, who first suggested
that cases with mainly anxiety symptoms should be recognized as a
separate entity under the name 'anxiety neurosis'.

Freud's original anxiety neurosis included patients with phobias and
panic attacks, but subsequently he divided it into two groups. The first
group, which retained the name anxiety neurosis, included cases with
mainly psychological symptoms of anxiety. The second group, which Freud
called anxiety hysteria, included cases with mainly physical symptoms of
anxiety and with phobias. Thus anxiety hysteria included the cases we
now diagnose as agoraphobia. Freud originally proposed that the causes
of anxiety neurosis and anxiety hysteria were related to sexual
conflicts, although he later accepted a rather wider range of causes. By
the 1930s, most psychiatrists considered that a very wide range of
stressful problems could cause anxiety neurosis. Phobic disorders have
been recognized since antiquity, but the first systematic medical study
of these conditions was probably that of Le Camus in the eighteenth
century. The early nineteenth-century classifications assigned phobias
to the group of monomanias, which were disorders of thinking rather than
of emotion. However, when Westphal first described agoraphobia in 1872,
he emphasized the importance of anxiety in the condition. Later, in
1895, Freud divided phobias into two groups---common phobias, in which
there was an exaggerated fear of something that is commonly feared
(e.g.Â darkness or high places), and specific phobias, in which there was
fear of situations not feared by healthy people (e.g.Â open spaces). As
will be explained later, the term specific phobia now has a rather
different meaning. In the 1960s, the different responses of certain
phobias to behavioural methods suggested a grouping into simple phobias,
social phobia, and agoraphobia, and these groups were also found to
differ in their age of onset. (Simple phobias generally begin in
childhood, social phobia in adolescence, and agoraphobia in early adult
life.) At about the same time, it was observed that, when phobias were
accompanied by marked panic attacks, they responded poorly to behaviour
therapy and better to imipramine (Klein, 1964). These cases were
subsequently classified separately as panic disorder. This advance led
to the present scheme of classification into generalized anxiety
disorder (GAD), phobic anxiety disorder (simple, social, and
agoraphobic), and panic disorder. The relationship between OCDs and
anxiety disorders has been and remains uncertain. Freud initially
thought that phobias and obsessions were closely related. He later
proposed that anxiety is the central problem in both conditions and that
their characteristic symptoms (phobias and obsessions) resulted from
different kinds of defence mechanisms against anxiety. Others considered
that obsessional disorders were a separate group of neuroses of
uncertain aetiology.

163

Generalized anxiety disorder As explained above, the two major
diagnostic systems no longer classify OCD with anxiety disorders--- in
DSM-5, OCDs are classified together with other
'obsessive--compulsive-related disorders', which include 'body
dysmorphic disorder', 'hoarding disorder', 'trichotillomania', and
'excoriation (skin picking) disorder'. In ICD-10, OCDs have a separate
place in the classification and are not grouped with any other
conditions.

The classification of anxiety disorders

â

In ICD-10, anxiety disorders are divided into two named subgroups: (a)
phobic anxiety disorder (F40); and (b) other anxiety disorder (F41),
which includes panic disorder and GAD.

â

ICD-10 contains a category of mixed anxiety-- depressive disorder, but
DSM-5 does not.

The epidemiology of the various anxiety disorders is considered under
each condition. The 12-month prevalence rates from a meta-analysis of 85
European studies are shown in Table 8.2 to illustrate the relative
frequency of the different disorders in population studies.

The classification of anxiety disorders in ICD-10 and DSM-5 is shown in
Table 8.1. Although the two are broadly similar, there are two important
differences:

Table 8.1 Classification of anxiety disorders ICD-10

DSM-5

Anxiety disorders

Anxiety disorders\*

Phobic anxiety disorder Agoraphobia

Agoraphobia

Without panic disorder With panic disorder

Table 8.2 Twelve-month prevalence rates of anxiety disorders and
obsessive--compulsive disorder in population studies in the European
Union Diagnosis (DSM-IV)

12-month Median (%) prevalence range (%)

Specific phobia

3.1--11.1

4.9

Social phobia

0.6--7.9

2.0

Social phobia

Social phobia

Panic disorder\*

0.6--3.1

1.2

Specific phobia

Specific phobia

Generalized anxiety disorder

0.2--4.3

2.0

Agoraphobiaâ 

0.1--3.1

1.2

Obsessive-- compulsive disorder

0.1--2.3

0.7

Other anxiety disorders Panic disorder

Panic disorder

Generalized anxiety disorder

Generalized anxiety disorder

Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder

--

- The order of presentation has been altered to facilitate comparison of
  the schemes. Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and
  behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic
  guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic
  and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright
  (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

Reproduced from Eur Neuropsychopharmacol., 21(9), Wittchen H U, Jacobi
F, Rehm J, Gustavsson A, Svensson M, JÃ¶nsson B, Olesen J et al, The size
and burden of mental disorders and other disorders of the brain in
Europe 2010, pp.Â 655--679, Copyright (2011), with permission from
Elsevier. \* With and without agoraphobia. â  Without panic disorder.

Generalized anxiety disorder Clinical picture The symptoms of GAD (see
Box 8.2) are persistent and are not restricted to, or markedly increased
in, any particular set of circumstances (in contrast to phobic

anxiety disorders). All of the symptoms of anxiety (see Box 8.1) can
occur in GAD, but there is a characteristic pattern, which consists of
the following features:

163

164

164

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders â

Worry and apprehension that are more prolonged than in healthy people.
The worries are widespread and are not focused on a specific issue as
they are in panic disorder (i.e.Â on having a panic attack), social
phobia (i.e. on being embarrassed), or OCD (i.e.Â on contamination). The
person feels that these widespread worries are difficult to control.

â

Psychological arousal, which may be manifested as irritability, poor
concentration, and/or sensitivity to noise. Some patients complain of
poor memory, but this is because of poor concentration. If true memory
impairment is found, a careful search should be made for a cause other
than anxiety.

â

Autonomic overactivity, which is most often experienced as sweating,
palpitations, dry mouth, epigastric discomfort, and dizziness. However,
patients may complain of any of the symptoms listed in Box 8.1. Some
patients ask for help with any of these symptoms without mentioning
spontaneously the psychological symptoms of anxiety.

â

Muscle tension, which may be experienced as restlessness, trembling,
inability to relax, headache (usually bilateral and frontal or
occipital), and aching of the shoulders and back.

â

Hyperventilation, which may lead to dizziness, tingling in the
extremities and, paradoxically, a feeling of shortness of breath.

â

Sleep disturbances, which include difficulty in falling asleep and
persistent worrying thoughts. Sleep is often intermittent, unrefreshing,
and accompanied by unpleasant dreams. Some patients have night terrors
and wake suddenly feeling extremely anxious. Early-morning waking is not
a feature of GAD, and its presence strongly suggests a depressive
disorder.

â

Other features, which include tiredness, depressive symptoms,
obsessional symptoms, and depersonalization. These symptoms are never
the most prominent feature of GAD. If they are prominent, another
diagnosis should be considered (see the section on Differential
diagnosis below).

Clinical signs The face appears strained, the brow is furrowed, and the
posture is tense. The person is restless and may tremble. The skin is
pale, and sweating is common, especially from the hands, feet, and
axillae. Being close to tears, which may at first suggest depression,
reflects the generally apprehensive state.

Box 8.2 Symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder Worry and apprehension
Muscle tension *Autonomic overactivity* Psychological arousal *Sleep
disturbance* Other features â Depression â Obsessions â
Depersonalization \* See Box 8.1.

Diagnostic conventions There is no clear dividing line between GAD and
normal anxiety. They differ both in the extent of the symptoms and in
their duration. The diagnostic criteria for both extent and duration are
arbitrary, and they differ in several ways between DSM-5 and ICD-10.
With regard to extent, both DSM-5 and the research version of ICD-10
require the presence of a minimum number of symptoms from a list.
However, the ICD-10 list contains 22 physical symptoms of anxiety,
whereas there are only six such symptoms in the DSM-5 list. Furthermore,
in DSM-5 but not in ICD-10, worry is a key symptom. DSM-5 requires that
the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or problems in
functioning in daily life. With regard to duration, in DSM-5 and the
research version of ICD-10, symptoms must have been present for 6
months. However, the ICD-10 criteria for clinical practice are more
flexible---symptoms should have been present on 'most days for at least
several weeks at a time, and usually several months'.

Comorbidity of anxiety symptoms Anxiety and depression The two
classifications differ in their approach to cases that present with
significant symptoms of both depressive disorder and generalized anxiety
without meeting the full criteria for either condition considered
separately. ICD-10 has a separate category for these cases, namely mixed
anxiety and depressive disorder. These conditions are discussed further
below (see page 183) and in Chapter 9. It is also important to note that
depressive symptoms are

165

Generalized anxiety disorder commonly also present in diagnosed anxiety
disorders, and that some patients with GAD also suffer from comorbid
major depression (Baldwin et al., 2014).

Generalized anxiety disorder and other anxiety disorders ICD-10 and
DSM-5 differ in the guidance that they give about the circumstances in
which two diagnoses should be made. â

In ICD-10, GAD is not diagnosed if the symptoms fulfil the diagnostic
criteria for phobic anxiety disorder, panic disorder, or OCD.

â

In DSM-5, the emphasis that is placed on the worrying ideas in GAD makes
it possible to diagnose GAD when those ideas are present even in the
presence of symptoms of one of the other three anxiety diagnoses. When
this convention is followed, comorbidity between GAD and other anxiety
disorders is frequent (social phobia in 23% of cases of GAD, simple
phobia in 21%, and panic disorder in 11%) (Tyrer and Baldwin, 2006).

Differential diagnosis GAD has to be distinguished not only from other
psychiatric disorders but also from certain physical conditions. Anxiety
symptoms can occur in nearly all psychiatric disorders, but there are
some in which particular diagnostic difficulties arise.

Depressive disorder Anxiety is a common symptom in depressive disorder,
and GAD often includes some depressive symptoms. The usual convention is
that the diagnosis is decided on the basis of the severity of two kinds
of symptom and the order in which they appeared. Information on these
two points should be obtained, if possible, from a relative or other
informant as well as from the patient. Whichever type of symptoms
appeared first and is more severe is considered primary. An important
diagnostic error is to misdiagnose the agitated type of severe
depressive disorder as GAD. This mistake will seldom be made if anxious
patients are asked routinely about symptoms of a depressive disorder,
including depressive thinking and, when appropriate, suicidal ideas.
Depressive disorders are often worst in the morning, and anxiety that is
worst at this time suggests a depressive disorder. As noted above, in
some patients a depressive disorder and GAD coexist and both diagnoses
can be made.

Schizophrenia People with schizophrenia sometimes complain of anxiety
before the other symptoms are recognized. The

chance of misdiagnosis can be reduced by asking anxious patients
routinely what they think caused their symptoms. Schizophrenic patients
may give an unusual reply, which leads to the discovery of previously
unexpressed delusional ideas.

Dementia Anxiety may be the first abnormality to be complained of by a
person developing dementia. When this happens, the clinician may not
detect an associated impairment of memory, or may dismiss it as the
result of poor concentration. Therefore memory should be assessed in
middle-aged or older patients who present with anxiety.

Substance misuse Some people take drugs or alcohol to relieve anxiety.
Patients who are dependent on drugs or alcohol sometimes believe that
the symptoms of drug withdrawal are those of anxiety, and take
anxiolytic or other drugs to control them. The clinician should be alert
to this possibility, particularly when anxiety is severe on waking in
the morning, which is the time when alcohol and drug withdrawal symptoms
tend to occur. (Anxiety that is worst in the morning also suggests
depressive disorder; see above.)

Physical illness Some physical illnesses have symptoms that can be
mistaken for those of an anxiety disorder. This possibility should be
considered in all cases, but especially when there is no obvious
psychological cause of anxiety, or there is no history of past anxiety.
The following conditions are particularly important: â

In thyrotoxicosis, the patient may be irritable and restless, with
tremor and tachycardia. Physical examination may reveal characteristic
signs of thyrotoxicosis, such as an enlarged thyroid, atrial
fibrillation, and exophthalmos. If there is any doubt, thyroid function
tests should be arranged.

â

Phaeochromocytoma and hypoglycaemia usually cause episodic symptoms, and
are therefore more likely to mimic a phobic disorder or panic disorder.
However, they should also be considered as a differential diagnosis of
GAD. If there is any doubt, appropriate physical examination and
laboratory tests should be carried out.

Anxiety secondary to the symptoms of physical illness Sometimes the
first complaint of a physically ill person is anxiety caused by worry
that certain physical symptoms portend a serious illness. If the
physical symptoms

165

16

166

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders are non-specific,
they may be mistakenly attributed to anxiety. Furthermore, some patients
do not mention all of the physical symptoms unless questioned. This is
particularly likely when the patient has a special reason to fear
serious illness---for example, if a relative or friend died of cancer
after developing similar symptoms. It is good practice to ask anxious
patients with physical symptoms whether they know anyone who has had
similar symptoms.

Generalized anxiety disorder that is mistaken for physical illness When
this happens, extensive investigations may be carried out, which
increase the patient's anxiety. Although physical illness should be
considered in every case, it is also important to remember the diversity
of the anxiety symptoms. Palpitations, headache, frequency of
micturition, and abdominal discomfort can all be the primary complaint
of an anxious patient. Correct diagnosis requires systematic enquiries
about other symptoms of GAD, and about the order in which the various
symptoms appeared.

Epidemiology Estimates of incidence and prevalence vary according to the
diagnostic criteria used in the survey, and whether a clinical
significance criterion is used. The Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey
found a 12-month prevalence of 4.4% for GAD in England (McManus et al.,
2009), and a similar figure has been reported in US surveys, with rather
lower prevalence figures in European countries (around 2%; Wittchen et
al., 2011). Rates in women are about twice as high as those in men. GAD
is associated with several indices of social disadvantage, including
lower household income and unemployment, as well as divorce and
separation (McManus et al., 2009). Rates of anxiety, as well as
expressions of anxiety, vary across development, and the anxiety
disorders are the most common child mental disorders, as discussed in
Chapter 16.

Aetiology In general terms, GAD appears to be caused by stressors acting
on a personality that is predisposed to anxiety by a combination of
genetic factors and environmental influences in childhood. However,
evidence for the nature and importance of these causes is incomplete.

Stressful events Clinical observations indicate that GADs often begin in
relation to stressful events, and some become chronic when stressful
problems persist. A study by Kendler et al.

(2003) showed that stressful life events characterized by loss increased
       the risk of both depression and GAD. However, life events
       characterized by 'danger' (where the full import of the event was
       yet to be realized) were more common in those who subsequently
       developed GAD.

Genetic causes Early twin studies, such as that by Slater and Shields
(1969), showed a higher concordance for anxiety disorder between
monozygotic than dizygotic pairs, which suggests that the familial
association has a genetic cause. However, the genes involved in the
transmission of GAD appear to increase susceptibility to other anxiety
conditions, such as panic disorder and agoraphobia, as well as to major
depression. Overall, the findings suggest that genes play a significant
although moderate role in the aetiology of GAD, but that the genes
involved predispose to a range of anxiety and depressive disorders,
rather than GAD specifically (Shimada-Sugimoto et al., 2015).

Early experiences Accounts given by anxious patients of their experience
in childhood suggest that early adverse experience is a cause of GAD.
These accounts have given rise to objective studies and to
psychoanalytic theories. Sociological studies. Brown and Harris (1993)
studied the relationship between adverse experience in childhood and
anxiety disorder in adult life in 404 working-class women living in an
inner city. Adverse early experience was assessed from patients'
accounts of parental indifference and of physical or sexual abuse. Women
who reported early adversity had increased rates of GAD (and also of
agoraphobia and depressive disorder, but not of simple phobia).
Parenting styles characterized by overprotection and lack of emotional
warmth may also be a risk factor for GAD, as well as for other anxiety
and depressive disorders in offspring. Psychoanalytic theories.
Psychoanalytical theory proposes that anxiety arises from intrapsychic
conflict when the ego is overwhelmed by excitation from any of the
following three sources: â

the outside world (realistic anxiety);

â

the instinctual levels of the id, including love, anger, and sex
(neurotic anxiety);

â

the superego (moral anxiety).

According to this theory, in GAD, anxiety is experienced directly
unmodified by the defence mechanisms that are thought to be the basis of
phobias or obsessions. The theory proposes that in GADs the ego is
readily overwhelmed because it has been weakened by a development
failure in childhood. Normally, children overcome

176

Generalized anxiety disorder this anxiety through secure relationships
with loving parents. However, if they do not achieve this security, as
adults they will be vulnerable to anxiety when experiencing separation
or potentially threatening events. Thus both psychoanalytic ideas and
objective studies suggest that good parenting can protect against
anxiety by giving the child a secure emotional base from which to
explore an uncertain world.

Cognitive behavioural theories Conditioning theories propose that GAD
arises when there is an inherited predisposition to excessive
responsiveness of the autonomic nervous system, together with
generalization of the responses through conditioning of anxiety to
previously neutral stimuli. This theory has not been supported by a body
of objective data. Cognitive theory. Particular coping and cognitive
styles may also predispose individuals to the development of GAD,
although it is not always easy to distinguish predisposition from the
abnormal cognitions that are seen in the illness itself. As noted above,
it seems likely that people who lack a sense of control of events and of
personal effectiveness, perhaps because of early life experiences, are
more prone to anxiety disorders. Such individuals may also demonstrate
trait-like cognitive biases in the form of increased attention to
potentially threatening stimuli, overestimation of environmental threat,
and enhanced memory of threatening material. This has been referred to
as the looming cognitive style, which appears to be a general
psychological vulnerability factor for a number of anxiety disorders
(Reardon and Nathan, 2007). More recent cognitive formulations have
focused on the process of worry itself. It has been proposed that people
who are predisposed to GAD use worry as a positive coping strategy for
dealing with potential threats, whereby the individual cannot relax
until they have examined all of the possible dangers and identified ways
of dealing with them. However, this can lead to 'worry about worry',
when a person comes to believe, for example, that worrying in this way,
although necessary for them, is also uncontrollable and harmful. This
'metacognitive belief' may form a transition between excessive but
normal worrying, and GAD (Wells, 2013).

Personality Personality traits. Anxiety symptoms are associated with
neuroticism, and twin studies have shown an overlap between the genetic
factors related to neuroticism and those related to GAD (Hettema et al.,
2004). Personality disorder. GAD occurs in people with anxious--avoidant
personality disorders, but also in individuals with other personality
disorders.

Neurobiological mechanisms The neurobiological mechanisms involved in
GAD are presumably those that mediate normal anxiety. The mechanisms are
complex, involving several brain systems and several neurotransmitters.
Studies in animals have indicated a key role for the amygdala, which
receives sensory information both directly from the thalamus and from a
longer pathway involving the somatosensory cortex and anterior cingulate
cortex. Cortical involvement in anxiety is important because it
indicates a role for cognitive processes in its expression. The
hippocampus is also believed to have an important role in the regulation
of anxiety, because it relates fearful memories to relevant present
contexts. Breakdown of this mechanism could lead to an
overgeneralization of fear in response to nonthreatening stimuli (Cain
et al., 2013). Animal experimental studies have led to an understanding
of the regulation of anxiety in the brain by neurotransmitters and
neuromodulators. Noradrenergic neurons that originate in the locus
coeruleus increase arousal and anxiety, whereas 5-HT neurons that arise
in the raphe nuclei appear to have complex effects, and serve both to
signal the presence of anxiety-producing stimuli in the environment and
also to restrain the associated behavioural responses.
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, which are widely distributed
in the brain, are inhibitory and reduce anxiety, as do the associated
benzodiazepine-binding sites. There is probably also an important role
for corticotropin-releasing hormone, which increases anxiety-related
behaviours and is found in high concentration in the amygdala. However,
although pharmacological manipulation of 5-HT and GABA mechanisms can be
helpful in the treatment of generalized anxiety, there is no firm
evidence that changes in these neurotransmitters are fundamentally
involved in the pathophysiology of the disorder (Garner et al., 2009).
Functional imaging of the brain during the presentation of aversive
stimuli (e.g.Â fearful faces) has shown inconsistent changes in amygdala
reactivity in patients with GAD. There is more reliable evidence of
altered activity in cortical regulatory regions such as the
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and altered connectivity between this
region and the amygdala. This picture is probably best explained by
attempts to regulate excessive emotional responses, and perhaps
represents the neural expression of the tendency of patients with GAD to
use worry as an emotional coping strategy (Goodkind et al., 2013).

Prognosis One of the DSM-5 criteria for GAD is that the symptoms should
have been present for 6 months. One of

167

168

168

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders the reasons for
this cut-off is that anxiety disorders that last for longer than 6
months have a poor prognosis. Thus most clinical studies suggest that
GAD is typically a chronic condition with low rates of remission over
the short and medium term. Evaluation of the prognosis is complicated by
the frequent comorbidity with other anxiety disorders and depression,
which worsen the long-term outcome and accompanying burden of
disability. In the Harvard--Brown Anxiety Research Program, which
recruited patients from Boston hospitals, the mean age of onset of GAD
was 21 years, although many patients had been unwell since their teenage
years. The average duration of illness in this group was about 20 years
and, despite treatment, the outcome over the next 3 years was relatively
poor, with only one in four patients showing symptomatic remission from
GAD (Yonkers et al., 1996). However, the participants in the above study
were recruited from hospital services, and may not be representative of
GAD in community settings. In a naturalistic study in the UK, Tyrer and
colleagues (2004a) followed up patients with anxiety and depression
identified in primary care and found that, 12 years later, 40% of those
initially diagnosed with GAD had recovered, in the sense that they no
longer met the criteria for any DSM-III psychiatric disorder. The
remaining participants continued to be symptomatic, but in only 3% was
GAD still the principal diagnosis. In the vast majority of patients,
conditions such as dysthymia, major depression, and agoraphobia were now
more prominent. This study confirms the chronic and fluctuating
symptomatic course of GAD in many clinically identified patients.

Treatment Self-help and psychoeducation A variety of forms of self-help
have been studied in patients with anxiety disorders, including GAD.
Such approaches typically include written and electronic materials with
information about the disorder, and practical exercises to carry out
based on the principles of cognitive behaviour therapy. Typically
self-help has minimal therapist input, but it is also possible for
selfhelp for anxiety disorders to be guided by a trained practitioner
(guided self-help). Another form of educational treatment takes place in
group form, so-called group psychoeducation, where one therapist works
with up to a dozen clients in about six weekly sessions of interactive
learning and shared experience. The evidence for the benefit of these
forms of treatment is limited and the

effects, although superior to no treatment, appear to be modest.
However, these approaches are useful as part of an initial stepped-care
approach (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2010).

Relaxation training If practised regularly, relaxation appears to be
able to reduce anxiety in less severe cases. However, many patients with
such disorders do not practise the relaxation exercises regularly.
Motivation may be improved if the training takes place in a group, and
some people engage more with treatment when relaxation is taught as part
of a programme of yoga exercises. A structured therapy, known as applied
relaxation, does appear to be effective in lowering anxiety over 12--15
sessions guided by a trained therapist (Hoyer et al., 2009). A critical
element of this treatment is the application of learned relaxation
skills to anxiety-provoking situations.

Cognitive behaviour therapy This treatment combines relaxation with
cognitive procedures designed to help patients to control worrying
thoughts. The method is described In Chapter 24. Compared with treatment
as usual, cognitive behaviour therapy produces quite substantial
benefits in terms of symptom resolution, with relatively few dropouts.
However, the outcome obtained with cognitive therapy does not appear to
differ from that obtained with other kinds of psychological
interventions, such as applied relaxation and non-directive counselling,
and there are few data on longer-term outcomes (Cuijpers et al., 2014a).

Medication Anxiolytic drugs are described in Chapter 25. Here we are
concerned with some specific points about their use in GADs. Medication
can be used to bring symptoms under control quickly while the effects of
psychological treatment are awaited. It can also be used when
psychological treatment has failed. However, medication is often
prescribed too readily and for too long. Before prescribing, it is
appropriate to recall that, even though GAD is said to have a poor
prognosis, in short-term studies of medication, pill placebo treatment
in the context of the clinical care provided by a controlled trial is
beneficial for a significant proportion of patients. For example, in a
12-week, placebo-controlled trial of escitalopram and paroxetine, just
over 40% of patients responded to placebo, and around 30% reached
remission (Baldwin et al., 2006).

169

Generalized anxiety disorder Short-term treatment. One of the
longer-acting benzodiazepines, such as diazepam, is appropriate for the
short-term treatment of GADs---for example, diazepam in a dose ranging
from 5 mg twice-daily in mild cases to 10 mg three times daily in the
most severe cases. Anxiolytic drugs should seldom be prescribed for more
than 3 weeks, because of the risk of dependence when they are given for
longer. Buspirone is similarly effective for short-term management of
GAD and is less likely to cause dependency, but has a slower onset of
action. Betaadrenergic antagonists are sometimes used to control anxiety
associated with sympathetic stimulation. However, they are more often
used for performance anxiety than for GAD. If one of these drugs is
used, care should be taken to observe the contraindications to
treatment, and the advice given in Chapter 25 and in the manufacturer's
literature. Long-term treatment. Because GAD often requires lengthy
treatment, for which benzodiazepines are unsuitable (see above), and is
often comorbid with depression and other anxiety disorders, treatment
guidelines usually recommend selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) as the initial choice (National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence, 2010). Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs) such as duloxetine and venlafaxine are also
effective, but are somewhat less well tolerated than SSRIs. The
anticonvulsant pregabalin is also licensed for the treatment of GAD in
the UK. It has a different side effect profile to SSRIs and SNRIs, and
might therefore be useful in patients who cannot tolerate the latter
agents. Where patients with GAD respond to medication, the risk of
relapse is substantially reduced if treatment is maintained for at least
6 months, and probably longer. For a review of the pharmacological
treatment of GAD, see Baldwin et al.Â (2014).

Management In primary care, many patients are seen in the early stage of
an anxiety disorder before a formal diagnosis of GAD can be made. In
these circumstances, simple steps such as education and self-help can be
tried first. If anxiety is severe, a short course of a benzodiazepine
can bring rapid relief. Psychiatrists are more likely to encounter
established cases. The steps in the management of such patients can be
summarized as follows: â

What patients need to know. It can be explained to patients that GAD is
a common mental health problem where worries become excessive and out of
control. This can make it hard to carry out usual

occupational and social activities. People with generalized anxiety can
also experience symptoms of tension and exhaustion and can feel
physically very unwell. There are many effective psychological and drug
treatments available and discussion with a health care practitioner will
assist in finding the best approach for them. It might be helpful for a
partner or member of the family to be given an explanation of the
symptoms the patient is experiencing and how they can best help. â

Check the diagnosis and comorbidity, especially depressive disorder,
substance abuse, or a physical cause such as thyrotoxicosis. If any of
these are present, treat them appropriately.

â

Evaluate psychosocial maintaining factors such as persistent social
problems, relationship conflict, and concerns that physical symptoms of
anxiety are evidence of serious physical disease.

â

Explain the evaluation and proposed treatment, especially the origins of
any physical symptoms of anxiety. Discuss the way in which the patient
might describe the condition to employers, friends, and family. Selfhelp
books reinforce the explanation and describe simple cognitive
behavioural techniques that people can use on their own or as part of a
wider plan of treatment.

Box 8.3 Stepped-care approach *for generalized anxiety disorder 1.
Identification and assessment: education about GAD and treatment
options; active monitoring. 2. Low-intensity psychological
interventions: pure selfhelp and guided self-help, group
psychoeducation. 3. Choice of a high-intensity psychological
intervention (cognitive behaviour therapy or applied relaxation) or a
drug treatment. 4. Specialist treatment (complex drug and psychological
regimens): input from multiagency teams, crisis services, or day
hospitals.* Initiate treatment at Step 3 if the patient presents with
more severe symptomatology and/or significant functional impairment.
Source: data from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults, Copyright
(2010), National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.

169

170

170

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders â

â

Offer structured psychological treatments, such as cognitive behaviour
therapy or applied relaxation. For patients who do not respond to these
initial approaches or who have significant functional disability,
benefit can be obtained by using a structured treatment such as
cognitive behaviour therapy administered by a trained therapist.
Consider the use of medication. A short course of benzodiazepines may be
prescribed to reduce high levels of anxiety initially, but should seldom
be given for more than about 3 weeks. Where psychological treatment is
not available or has failed, medication---usually

with an SSRI initially---is appropriate. The main uses and side effects
of medication should be discussed, as when using the same drugs in the
treatment of depression (see Chapter 25). â

Discuss the plan with the patient, the general practitioner, and the
community team and allocate tasks and responsibility appropriately.
Plans should recognize that GAD is often a long-term problem.

A guideline from the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2010) describes a stepped-care approach to the treatment of
GAD (see Box 8.3).

Phobic anxiety disorders Phobic anxiety disorders have the same core
symptoms as GAD, but these symptoms occur only in specific
circumstances. In some phobic disorders these circumstances are few and
the patient is free from anxiety for most of the time. In other phobic
disorders many circumstances provoke anxiety, and consequently anxiety
is more frequent, but even so there are some situations in which no
anxiety is experienced. Two other features characterize phobic
disorders. First, the person avoids circumstances that provoke anxiety
and, secondly, they experience anticipatory anxiety when there is the
prospect of encountering these circumstances. The circumstances that
provoke anxiety can be grouped into situations (e.g.Â crowded places),
'objects' (a term that includes living things such as spiders), and
natural phenomena (e.g.Â thunder). For clinical purposes, three principal
phobic syndromes are recognized---specific phobia, social phobia, and
agoraphobia. These syndromes will be described next.

Classification of phobic disorders In ICD-10 and DSM-5, phobic disorders
are divided into specific phobia, social phobia, and agoraphobia. In
ICD-10, agoraphobia can be diagnosed either as 'with panic disorder' or
'without panic disorder' under 'phobic anxiety disorders' while 'panic
disorder' is listed separately under 'other anxiety disorders'. In DSM-5
panic disorder and agoraphobia are coded as two separate diagnoses. A
patient who meets criteria for both panic disorder and agoraphobia has
both diagnoses assigned.

Specific phobia Clinical picture A person with a specific phobia is
inappropriately anxious in the presence of a particular object or
situation. In the presence of that object or situation, the person
experiences the symptoms of anxiety listed in Box 8.1. Anticipatory
anxiety is common, and the person usually seeks to escape from and avoid
the feared situation. Specific phobias can be characterized further by
adding the name of the stimulus (e.g.Â spider phobia). In the past it was
common to use terms such as arachnophobia (instead of spider phobia) or
acrophobia (instead of phobia of heights), but this practice adds
nothing of value to the use of the simpler names. In DSM-5, five general
types of specific phobia are recognized, which are concerned with: â

animals

â

aspects of the natural environment

â

blood, injection, medical care, and injury

â

situations (for example, aeroplanes, lifts, enclosed spaces).

â

other provoking agents (for example, fears of choking or vomiting).

The following specific phobias merit brief separate consideration.

Phobia of dental treatment Around 5% of adults have a fear of dental
treatment. These fears can become so severe that all dental treatment is
avoided and serious caries develops. A metaanalysis of 38 studies of
behavioural treatment found

17

Phobic anxiety disorders a significant reduction in fear, with, on
average, 77% of treated individuals attending for dental treatment 4
years after the treatment (Kvale et al., 2004).

Phobia of flying Anxiety during aeroplane travel is common. A few people
experience such intense anxiety that they are unable to travel in an
aeroplane, and some seek treatment. This fear also occurs occasionally
among pilots who have had an accident while flying. Desensitization
treatment (see Chapter 24) is provided by some airlines, and selfhelp
books are available. Virtual reality programmes have been used to
replace actual and imagined exposure. Good results have been reported,
but it is unclear whether the treatment needs to be supplemented with
other psychological measures, such as psychoeducation (Da Costa et al.,
2008).

Phobia of blood and injury In this phobia, the sight of blood or of an
injury results in anxiety. However, the accompanying autonomic response
differs from that in other phobic disorders. The initial tachycardia is
followed by a vasovagal response, with bradycardia, pallor, dizziness,
nausea, and sometimes fainting. It has been reported that individuals
who have this kind of phobia are prone to develop neurally mediated
syncope even without the specific blood injury stimulus. Treatment
consists of exposure in vivo together with the use of muscular tension
to help to prevent syncope (Ayala et al., 2009).

Phobia of choking People with this kind of phobia are intensely
concerned that they will choke when attempting to swallow. They have an
exaggerated gag reflex and feel intensely anxious when they attempt to
swallow. The onset is either in childhood, or after choking on food in
adulthood. Some of these individuals also fear dental treatment, while
others avoid eating in public. Treatment consists of desensitization.

Phobia of illness People with this phobia experience repeated fearful
thoughts that they might have cancer, venereal disease, or some other
serious illness. Unlike people with delusions, people with phobias of
illness recognize that these thoughts are irrational, at least when the
thoughts are not present. Moreover, they do not resist the thoughts in
the way that obsessional thoughts are resisted. Such individuals may
avoid hospitals, but the thoughts are not otherwise specific to
situations. If the person is convinced that they have the disease, the
condition is classified as hypochondriasis (see Chapter 22). If the
thoughts

are recognized as irrational and are resisted, the condition is
classified as OCD.

Epidemiology Among adults, the lifetime prevalence of specific phobias
has been estimated, using DSM-IV criteria, to be around 7% in men and
17% in women (Kessler et al., 2005a). The age of onset of most specific
phobias is in childhood. The onset of phobias of animals occurs at an
average age of 7 years, blood phobia at around 8 years, and most
situational phobias develop in the early twenties (Ãst et al., 2001).

Aetiology Persistence of childhood fears Most specific phobias in
adulthood are a continuation of childhood phobias. Specific phobias are
common in childhood (see Chapter 16). By the early teenage years most of
these childhood fears will have been lost, but a few persist into adult
life. Why they persist is not certain, except that the most severe
phobias are likely to last the longest.

Genetic factors In one study, 31% of first-degree relatives of people
with specific phobia also had the condition (Fyer et al., 1995). Genetic
vulnerability may involve differences in the strength of fear
conditioning, which has a heritability of around 40% (Hettema et al.,
2003). A study of over 1400 female twins indicated that phobias
(specific phobias, social phobia, and agoraphobia) were highly comorbid,
with heritabilities ranging from 40% to 60%. The study suggested two
main genetic liability factors, one of which underpinned the risk of
developing specific phobias while the other increased the risk of social
phobia and agoraphobia but also weakly increased the risk of specific
phobias (Czajkowski et al., 2011).

Psychoanalytical theories These theories suggest that phobias are not
related to the obvious external stimulus, but to an internal source of
anxiety. The internal source is excluded from consciousness by
repression and attached to the external object by displacement. This
theory is not supported by objective evidence.

Conditioning and cognitive theories Conditioning theory suggests that
specific phobias arise through association learning. A minority of
specific phobias appear to begin in this way in adulthood, in relation
to a highly stressful experience. For example, a phobia of horses may
begin after a dangerous encounter with

171

172

172

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders a bolting horse.
Some specific phobias may be acquired by observational learning, as the
child observes another person's fear responses and learns to fear the
same stimuli. Cognitive factors are also involved in the maintenance of
the fear, especially fearful anticipation of and selective attention to
the phobic stimuli.

Prepared learning This term refers to an innate predisposition to
develop persistent fear responses to certain stimuli. Some young
primates seem to be prepared to develop fears of snakes, but it is not
certain whether the same process accounts for some of the specific
phobias of human children.

Neural mechanisms Functional imaging studies have revealed hyperactivity
of the amygdala upon presentation of the feared stimulus, which appears
to diminish with successful treatment. Anticipation of a phobic stimulus
activates the anterior cingulate cortex and the insular cortex.
Generally, imaging studies indicate that specific phobias are
characterized by increased activation in the regions linked to emotional
appraisal and fear (amygdala, insula, anterior cingulate), with a
concomitant failure to recruit prefrontal regions such as ventromedial
prefrontal cortex, that regulate limbic brain regions (Goodkind et al.,
2013).

Differential diagnosis Diagnosis is seldom difficult. The possibility of
an underlying depressive disorder should always be kept in mind, since
some patients seek help for longstanding specific phobias when a
depressive disorder makes them less able to tolerate their phobic
symptoms. Obsessional disorders sometimes present with fear and
avoidance of certain objects (e.g.Â knives). In such cases a systematic
history and mental state examination will reveal the associated
obsessional thoughts (e.g.Â thoughts of harming a person with a knife).

Prognosis The prognosis of specific phobia in adulthood has not been
studied systematically. Clinical experience suggests that specific
phobias that originate in childhood continue for many years, whereas
those that start after stressful events in adulthood have a better
prognosis.

Treatment The main treatment is the exposure form of behaviour therapy
(see Chapter 24). With this treatment, the phobia is usually reduced
considerably in intensity and so is the

social disability. However, it is unusual for the phobia to be lost
altogether. The outcome depends importantly on repeated and prolonged
exposure, and up to 25% of phobic patients decline exposure-based
therapies. Some patients seek help soon before an important engagement
that will be made difficult by the phobia. When this happens, a few
doses of a benzodiazepine may be prescribed to relieve phobic anxiety
until a treatment can be arranged. Exposure usually takes place over
several 1-hour sessions, but it can be carried out in a single very long
and intensive session lasting for several hours. Virtualreality exposure
may also be of benefit (Da Costa et al., 2008). In a meta-analysis of 33
studies, Wolitzky-Taylor et al.Â (2008) found that exposure-based
treatments were superior to other kinds of therapy; for example,
relaxation therapy. Exposure treatment in vivo outperformed other kinds
of exposure therapy in the short term but not at follow-up. Exposure
therapy seemed equally effective across the range of different specific
phobias. A significant weakness of most studies was a failure to include
dropouts from therapy in the analysis of results. Although
pharmacotherapy has not been regarded as useful in the treatment of
specific phobias, there is some evidence that D-cycloserine, a partial
agonist at the glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, may be
helpful in augmenting the effectiveness of exposure treatment of phobias
(Rodrigues et al., 2014). In animals, D-cycloserine facilitates fear
extinction, and it is possible that a similar mechanism may be involved
when D-cycloserine is combined with behaviour therapy in humans.

Social phobia Clinical picture In this disorder, inappropriate anxiety
is experienced in social situations, in which the person feels observed
by others and could be criticized by them. Socially phobic people
attempt to avoid such situations. If they cannot avoid them, they try
not to engage in them fully---for example, they avoid making
conversation, or they sit in the place where they are least conspicuous.
Even the prospect of encountering the situation may cause considerable
anxiety, which is often misconstrued as shyness. Social phobia can be
distinguished from shyness by the levels of personal distress and
associated social and occupational impairment (Stein and Stein, 2008).

173

Phobic anxiety disorders The situations in which social phobia occurs
include restaurants, canteens, dinner parties, seminars, board meetings,
and other places where the person feels observed by other people. Some
patients become anxious in a wide range of social situations
(generalized social phobia), whereas others are anxious only in specific
situations, such as public speaking, writing in front of others, or
playing a musical instrument in public. In DSM-5 'performance only'
social phobia, anxiety is restricted to speaking or performing in
public. (In DSM5 the term 'social anxiety disorder' is preferred to
'social phobia'.) People with social phobia may experience any of the
anxiety symptoms listed in Box 8.2, but complaints of blushing and
trembling are particularly frequent. Socially phobic people are often
preoccupied with the idea of being observed critically, although they
are aware that this idea is groundless. The cognitions centre around a
fear of being evaluated critically by others. These cognitions are
described in more detail in the section on aetiology below. Other
problems. Some patients take alcohol to relieve the symptoms of anxiety,
and alcohol misuse is more common in social phobia than in other
phobias. Social phobia is also a predictor of alcohol misuse. Comorbid
depressive disorders as well as other anxiety disorders are also common
(Kessler et al., 2005b). Onset and development. The condition usually
begins in the early teenage years. The first episode occurs in

a public place, usually without an apparent reason. Subsequently,
anxiety is felt in similar places, and the episodes become progressively
more severe with increasing avoidance.

Diagnostic conventions Table 8.3 shows, in summary form, the criteria
for the diagnosis of social phobia in ICD-10 and DSM-5. The requirements
are similar (although the original wordings differ more than the
paraphrased versions in the table). In ICD-10 there is greater emphasis
on symptoms of anxiety---two general symptoms of anxiety, and one of
three symptoms associated with social phobia. DSM5 has an additional
criterion that symptoms must have been persistent, lasting for at least
6 months.

Differential diagnosis Agoraphobia and panic disorder The symptom of
social phobia can occur in either of these disorders, in which case both
diagnoses can be made, although it is generally more useful for the
clinician to decide which syndrome should be given priority.

Generalized anxiety disorder and depressive disorder Social phobia has
to be distinguished from the former by establishing the situations in
which anxiety occurs, and from the latter from the history and mental
state examination.

Table 8.3 Abbreviated diagnostic criteria for social phobia in ICD-10
and DSM-5\* ICD-10

DSM-5

Marked fear or avoidance of being the focus of attention or of behaving
in an embarrassing or humiliating way---manifested in social situation

Marked fear or avoidance of situations in which the person is exposed to
unfamiliar people or to scrutiny, with fear of behaving in an
embarrassing or humiliating way

Two symptoms of anxiety in the feared situations, Social situations
almost always provoke anxiety or are avoided plus at least one from
blushing/shaking, fear of vomiting, and fear or urgency of micturition
or defecation Significant emotional distress, recognized as excessive or
unreasonable

The fear is out of proportion to any actual threat posed by the social
circumstances Interferes with functioning, or causes marked distress

Symptoms restricted to or predominate in feared situations or their
contemplation

---

Not secondary to another disorder

Not secondary to another disorder Duration at least 6 months

- To facilitate comparison between the two sets of criteria, the wording
  has been paraphrased and the order of some items has been changed.
  Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
  disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
  (1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
  of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American
  Psychiatric Association.

173

174

174

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders

Schizophrenia

Aetiology

Some patients with schizophrenia avoid social situations because they
have persecutory delusions. However, when they are in the feared
situation, people with social phobia may feel convinced by their ideas
that they are being observed, when they are away from the situation they
know that these ideas are false.

Genetic factors

Body dysmorphic disorder People with this disorder may avoid social
situations, but the diagnosis is usually clear from the patient's
account of the problem.

Avoidant personality disorder Social phobia has to be distinguished from
a personality characterized by lifelong shyness and lack of
self-confidence. In principle, social phobia has a recognizable onset
and a shorter history, but in practice the distinction may be difficult
to make, as social phobia usually begins in adolescence and the exact
onset may be difficult to recall. Many people have disorders that meet
the criteria for both diagnoses (Blackmore et al., 2009).

Inadequate social skills This is a primary lack of social skills, with
secondary anxiety. It is not a phobic disorder, but a type of behaviour
that occurs in personality disorders, in schizophrenia, and among people
of low intelligence. Its features include hesitant, dull, and inaudible
diction, inappropriate use of facial expression and gesture, and failure
to look at other people during conversation.

Genetic factors are suggested by the finding that social phobia is more
common among the relatives of people with social phobia than in the
general population, and the risk is greatest in first-degree relatives
(about a fourfold increase in incidence), decreasing as the degree of
relatedness diminishes. The concordance rate of social phobia in
monozygotic twins (around 24%) is higher than that seen in dizygotic
twins (around 15%) and heritability has been estimated to be around 55%,
with shared (familial) environment making relatively little
contribution. Avoidant personality disorder also appears more common in
families of people affected by social phobia, suggesting that the two
conditions may well have a shared genetic aetiology (Isomura et al.,
2015).

Conditioning Most social phobias begin with a sudden episode of anxiety
in circumstances similar to those which become the stimulus for the
phobia, and it is possible that the subsequent development of phobic
symptoms occurs partly through conditioning.

Cognitive factors The principal cognitive factor in the aetiology of
social phobia is an undue concern that other people will be critical of
the person in social situations (often referred to as a fear of negative
evaluation). This concern is accompanied by several other ways of
thinking, including: â

excessively high standards for social performance

Normal shyness

â

negative beliefs about the self (e.g.Â 'I'm boring')

Some people who have none of the above disorders are shy and feel ill at
ease in company. As noted above, the diagnostic criteria for social
phobia set a level of severity that is intended to exclude these
individuals (Stein and Stein, 2008).

â

excessive monitoring of one's own performance in social situations

â

intrusive negative images of the self as supposedly seen by others.

Epidemiology The National Comorbidity Survey Replication reported a
lifetime prevalence rate of social phobia in the community of around
12%. The rate is therefore not much lower than that of specific phobia.
Social phobias are about equally frequent among the men and women who
seek treatment, but in community surveys they are reported rather more
frequently by women (Kessler et al., 2005a, b). As noted above, social
phobia is associated with depression and alcoholism.

People with social phobia often adopt safety behaviours (see Chapter
14), such as avoiding eye contact, which make it harder for them to
interact normally. For a review of the cognitive model of social phobia,
see Moscovitch (2009).

Neural mechanisms Functional neuroimaging studies have found that
patients with social phobia have increased amygdala responses to
presentation of faces with expressions of negative affect. The
anticipation of public speaking in individuals with social phobia
produced activation

175

Phobic anxiety disorders in limbic and associated regions, including the
amygdala, hippocampus, and insula, while activation of cortical
regulatory areas such as the prefrontal cortex was diminished. The
insula is thought to represent interoceptive cues, and increased insula
activity in patients with social phobia may underpin the preoccupation
of patients with bodily autonomic changes; for example, flushing and
sweating (Goodkind et al., 2013). Apart from the increased activation in
the insula, the pattern of changes in social phobia is similar to that
seen in simple phobias.

Course and prognosis Social phobia has an early onset, usually in
childhood or adolescence, and can persist over many years, sometimes
even into old age. Only about 50% of people with the disorder seek
treatment, usually after many years of symptoms (Pilling et al., 2013).

Treatment Psychological treatment Cognitive behaviour therapy is the
psychological treatment of choice for social phobia (for a description
of this treatment, see Chapter 24). The original cognitive procedures
were based on those used successfully to treat agoraphobia and panic
disorder and, when added to exposure, did not greatly increase the
benefit. A modified form of cognitive behaviour therapy appears to be
more effective. This modified treatment is based on the particular
cognitive abnormalities that are found in social phobia (see the section
on Aetiology above), coupled with measures to reduce safety behaviours,
and using video or audio feedback. Cognitive behaviour therapy can be
given in a group format, but this may not be as effective as individual
treatment (Pilling et al., 2013). Dynamic psychotherapy. There is
limited evidence that dynamic psychotherapy given weekly over 6 months
can improve symptoms of social phobia relative to a waitlist control
(Pilling et al., 2013). Clinical experience suggests that this treatment
may help patients whose social phobia is associated with pre-existing
problems in personal relationships. However, there have been no
controlled trials to test this possibility.

Drug treatment SSRIs. Treatment guidelines generally recommend SSRIs as
the first choice of pharmacological treatment in the management of
social phobia. All of the SSRIs, as well as venlafaxine (an SNRI), have
been shown to be effective, although the data for fluoxetine are
slightly less consistent. With any of these drugs, the onset of action
may

take up to 6 weeks. Medication is usually continued for at least 6
months, and often for longer, because the risk of relapse is high if
medication is discontinued after an acute response (Baldwin et al.,
2014). When medication is reduced, this should be done slowly. Other
drugs. The monoamine oxidase inhibitor, phenelzine, is more effective in
the treatment of social phobia than placebo. Moclobemide, the reversible
inhibitor of monoamine oxidase, can also be prescribed, but reported
response rates vary, and in some studies the drug was not more
beneficial than placebo. Benzodiazepines are effective and can be used
for short-term relief of symptoms, but should not be prescribed for long
because of the risk of dependency (see Chapter 25). The main use of
benzodiazepines is to help patients to cope with essential social
commitments while waiting for another treatment to take effect.
Beta-adrenergic blockers such as propranolol may achieve short-term
control of tremor and palpitations, which can be the most handicapping
symptoms of specific social phobias, such as performance anxiety among
musicians. It is doubtful whether betaadrenergic blockers are more
generally effective in social phobia (Baldwin et al., 2014). There are
also positive controlled trials of the antidepressant mirtazapine and
the anticonvulsants pregabalin and gabapentin. For a review of the
pharmacological treatment of social phobia, see Baldwin et al.Â (2014).

Management What patients need to know Patients need to understand that,
although constitutional factors may play a part, the extent and severity
of their social anxiety are a result of adopting maladaptive ways of
thinking and behaving when they are socially anxious. These patterns of
thinking and behaviour can be reversed either with psychological
treatment or with medication. Self-help books can inform patients and
help them to use simple cognitive behavioural approaches while awaiting
further help. It is important not to misuse alcohol or other substances
to deal with the anxiety produced by social situations

The choice of treatment Guidelines from the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence recommend individual cognitive behaviour
therapy specifically developed for the treatment of social phobia as
first-line treatment. If cognitive behaviour therapy is declined, a
further psychological treatment should be offered; for example, an
approach based on cognitive behaviour therapy principles applied using

175

176

176

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders supported
self-help. Psychodynamic psychotherapy treatment may be used as a
third-line psychological option.

Medication Medication should be reserved for patients who decline
psychological treatment or where psychological treatment is ineffective
or only partly effective. If medication is to be used, SSRI treatment
with either escitalopram or sertraline is recommended, with venlafaxine
being offered if SSRIs are not effective. Phenelzine or moclobemide can
be employed as third-line drug choices (see Pilling et al., 2013).

Agoraphobia Clinical features Agoraphobic patients are anxious when they
are away from home, in crowds, or in situations that they cannot leave
easily. They avoid these situations, feel anxious when anticipating
them, and experience other symptoms. Each of these features will now be
considered in turn.

Anxiety The anxiety symptoms that are experienced by agoraphobic
patients in the phobic situations are similar to those of other anxiety
disorders (see Box 8.1), although two features are particularly
important: â

panic attacks, whether in response to environmental stimuli or arising
spontaneously

â

anxious cognitions about fainting and loss of control.

Situations Many situations provoke anxiety and avoidance. They seem at
first to have little in common, but there are three common themes,
namely distance from home, crowding, and confinement. The situations
include buses and trains, shops and supermarkets, and places that cannot
be left suddenly without attracting attention, such as the hairdresser's
chair or a seat in the middle row of a theatre or cinema. As the
condition progresses, the individual increasingly avoids these
situations until in severe cases they may be more or less confined to
their home. Apparent variations in this pattern are usually due to
factors that reduce symptoms for a while. For example, most patients are
less anxious when accompanied by a trusted companion, and some are
helped by the presence of a child or pet dog. Such variability in
anxiety may suggest erroneously that when symptoms are severe they are
being exaggerated.

Anticipatory anxiety This is common. In severe cases anticipatory
anxiety appears hours before the person enters the feared situation,
adding to their distress and sometimes suggesting that the anxiety is
generalized rather than phobic.

Other symptoms Depressive symptoms are common. Sometimes these are a
consequence of the limitations to normal life caused by anxiety and
avoidance, while in other cases they seem to be part of the disorder, as
in other anxiety disorders. Depersonalization can also be severe.

Onset and course The onset and course of agoraphobia differ in several
ways from those of other phobic disorders. Age of onset. In most cases
the onset occurs in the early or mid-twenties, with a further period of
high onset in the mid-thirties. In both cases this is later than the
average ages of onset of simple phobias (childhood) and social phobias
(mostly the teenage years). Circumstances of onset. Typically the first
episode occurs while the person is waiting for public transport or
shopping in a crowded store. Suddenly they become extremely anxious
without knowing why, feel faint, and experience palpitations. They rush
away from the place and go home or to hospital, where they recover
rapidly. When they enter the same or similar surroundings, they become
anxious again and make another hurried escape. However, not all patients
describe such an onset starting from an unexplained panic attack. It is
unusual to discover any serious immediate stress that could account for
the first panic attack, although some patients describe a background of
serious problems (e.g.Â worry about a sick child), and in a few cases the
symptoms begin soon after a physical illness or childbirth. Subsequent
course. The sequence of anxiety and avoidance recurs during the
subsequent weeks and months, with panic attacks experienced in a growing
number of places, and an increasing habit of avoidance develops.
However, sometimes avoidance can occur without the development of panic
attacks. Effect on the family. As the condition progresses, agoraphobic
patients become increasingly dependent on their partner and relatives
for help with activities, such as shopping, that provoke anxiety. The
consequent demands on the partner often lead to relationship
difficulties. Alternatively, the partner may become over-involved in
supporting the patient, and difficulties in relinquishing this role may
complicate efforts at treatment.

17

Phobic anxiety disorders

Diagnostic conventions Most, but not all, patients with agoraphobia have
panic attacks, which may be situational or spontaneous, and many of
these individuals meet the criteria for panic disorder as well as for
agoraphobia. In ICD-10, conditions that meet both sets of criteria are
diagnosed as agoraphobia (which is coded as with or without panic
disorder. In this situation in DSM-5 both diagnoses of agoraphobia and
panic disorder are given. Another difference is that the ICD-10 criteria
require definitive anxiety symptoms (see Table 8.4). Whether agoraphobia
should be seen as an independent disorder, separate from panic disorder,
is disputed (Wittchen et al., 2010). The criteria for the diagnosis of
panic disorder in DSM-5 are discussed later in the chapter (see page
180).

In these cases, the history of development of the disorder will usually
point to the correct diagnosis.

Panic disorder Agoraphobia often includes panic attacks and patients may
meet criteria for both disorders, as discussed above.

Depressive disorder Agoraphobic symptoms can occur in a depressive
disorder, and many agoraphobic patients have depressive symptoms.
Enquiry about the order in which the symptoms developed will usually
point to the correct diagnosis. Sometimes a depressive disorder develops
in a person with longstanding agoraphobia, and it is important to
identify such cases and treat the depressive disorder (see below).

Differential diagnosis

Paranoid disorders

Social phobia

Occasionally a patient with paranoid delusions (arising in the early
stages of schizophrenia or in a delusional disorder) avoids going out
and meeting people in shops and other places. The true diagnosis is
usually revealed by a thorough mental state examination, which generally
uncovers delusions of persecution or of reference.

Some patients with agoraphobia feel anxious in social situations, and
some people with social phobia avoid crowded buses and shops, where they
feel under scrutiny. Detailed enquiry into the current pattern of
avoidance and also the order in which the two sets of symptoms developed
will usually decide the diagnosis.

Generalized anxiety disorder When the agoraphobia is severe, anxiety may
develop in so many situations that the condition resembles GAD.

Epidemiology A recent community investigation in Europe, using strict
DSM-IV criteria, estimated a lifetime prevalence of agoraphobia without
panic of 0.6%. However, minor

Table 8.4 Abbreviated diagnostic criteria for agoraphobia in ICD-10 and
agoraphobia without panic in DSM-5\* ICD-10

DSM-5

Marked, consistent fear in or avoidance in at least two of the following
situations---crowds, public places, travelling alone, and travel away
from home

Marked fear or anxiety about two or more of five specific situations,
namely: public transport; open spaces; enclosed places; in a crowd; away
from home, by oneself

Significant distress caused by the avoidance, or the anxiety, recognized
as excessive or unreasonable

These situations are avoided, or endured with distress because of
thoughts that escape might be impossible, or that help would not be
available in the event of incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms Being
in the situations nearly always provokes anxiety

At least one symptom of autonomic arousal plus one other anxiety symptom
in the feared situations

The anxiety is disproportionate to any actual danger the situation may
pose

Symptoms restricted to, or predominate in, the feared situations or
contemplation thereof

The fear, anxiety or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting six
months or more. The fear, anxiety or avoidance causes clinically
significant distress or functional impairment

Not the result of another disorder, or of cultural beliefs

Not accounted for by another disorder

- The criteria have been abbreviated and paraphrased, and the order has
  been changed to facilitate comparison of the two systems. Source: data
  from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders:
  clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992),
  World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
  Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
  Association.

177

178

178

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders variations in the
diagnostic criteria increased the incidence to 3.4% (Wittchen et al.,
2010). In the United States a population study of over 9000 participants
using DSM-IV criteria estimated the lifetime risk of agoraphobia to be
2.6% while the risk for panic disorder (with and without agoraphobia)
was 5.2% (Kessler et al., 2012). The risk in women for both disorders
was two to three times higher than that in men. In clinical samples,
agoraphobia without panic appears to be rare, but in the community it
may well be more frequent.

Aetiology Theories of the aetiology of agoraphobia have to explain both
the initial anxiety attack and its spread and recurrence. These two
problems will now be considered in turn.

Theories of onset Agoraphobia begins with anxiety in a public place---
generally, but not always, as a panic attack. There are three
explanations for the initial anxiety. â

â

â

The cognitive hypothesis proposes that the anxiety attack develops
because the person is unreasonably afraid of some aspect of the
situation or of certain physical symptoms that are experienced in the
situation (see the section on Panic disorder, below). Although such
fears are expressed by people with established agoraphobia, it is not
known whether they were present before the onset. The biological theory
proposes that the initial anxiety attack results from chance
environmental stimuli acting on an individual who is constitutionally
predisposed to over-respond with anxiety. There is some evidence for a
genetic component to this predisposition, in that relatives of probands
with agoraphobia are at increased risk of experiencing an anxiety
disorder themselves. There has been disagreement as to whether the
liability to agoraphobia and panic might be transmitted separately. For
example, a large family study found that parental agoraphobia without
panic did not increase the risk of panic attacks or panic disorder in
offspring. On the other hand, offspring of parents with panic disorder
experienced an increased risk of panic disorder and panic with
agoraphobia but not agoraphobia alone. This suggests that, while
agoraphobia can occur as a consequence of panic disorder, agoraphobia
without panic may be genetically transmitted as a separate condition
(Knappe et al., 2012). The psychoanalytic theory essentially proposes
that the initial anxiety is caused by unconscious mental conflicts
related to unacceptable sexual or aggressive

impulses, which are triggered indirectly by the original situation.
Although this theory has been widely held in the past, it has not been
supported by independent evidence.

Theories of spread and maintenance Learning theories. Conditioning could
account for the association of anxiety with increasing numbers of
situations, and avoidance learning could account for the subsequent
avoidance of these situations. Although this explanation is plausible
and is consistent with observations of learning in animals, there is no
direct evidence to support it. Personality. Agoraphobic patients are
often described as dependent, and prone to avoiding rather than
confronting problems. This dependency could have arisen from
overprotection in childhood, which is reported more often by agoraphobic
individuals than by controls. However, despite such retrospective
reports, it is not certain that the dependency was present before the
onset of the agoraphobia. Family influences. Agoraphobia could be
maintained by family problems, and clinical observation suggests that
symptoms are sometimes prolonged by overprotective attitudes of other
family members, but this feature is not found in all cases.

Prognosis Although short-lived cases may be seen in general practice,
agoraphobia that has lasted for 1 year generally remains for the next 5
years, and usually the illness runs a chronic course. Episodes of
depression are common in the course of chronic agoraphobia, and clinical
experience suggests that people are more likely to seek help during
these episodes (Wittchen et al., 2010).

Treatment Much of the available treatment has been developed for panic
disorder and for panic disorder with agoraphobia probably because, as
noted above, patients with agoraphobia without panic are not common in
clinical samples. There has been little systematic investigation of
treatment for agoraphobia without panic (Baldwin et al., 2014).

Psychological treatment Exposure treatment was the first of the
behavioural treatments for agoraphobia. It was shown to be effective,
but more so when combined with anxiety management (see Chapter 24).
Cognitive behaviour therapy for panic and agoraphobia is described in
Chapter 24. Clinical trials (reviewed

179

Phobic anxiety disorders under panic disorder) indicate that, in the
short term, cognitive therapy is about as effective as medication, and
that in the long term it is probably more effective.

Medication The drug treatment of agoraphobia resembles that for panic,
except that medication is usually combined with repeated practice in
re-entering situations that are feared and avoided. This exposure may
account for some of the observed change. Most studies of drug treatment
include both agoraphobic and panic disorder patients, and it is
difficult to separate the treatment response of the two disorders. The
following account should be read in conjunction with the subsequent
discussion of medication for panic disorder. Anxiolytic drugs.
Benzodiazepines may be used for a specific, short-term purpose such as
helping a patient to undertake an important engagement before other
treatment has taken effect. Anxiolytic drugs should not be prescribed
for more than a few weeks because of the risk of dependence. Indeed,
guidelines issued by the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2010) for panic disorder and agoraphobia suggest that
benzodiazepines should not be used at all, because they may worsen the
long-term outcome of the condition. However, in some countries, although
seldom in the UK, the highpotency benzodiazepine, alprazolam, is used to
treat agoraphobia with frequent panic attacks. Some authorities believe
that short-term benzodiazepine treatment does have a role in panic
disorder---for example, while the patient is being established on more
suitable drug treatment. However, it is possible that benzodiazepines
could impair the response to psychological treatments (National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2010). Antidepressant
drugs. As well as the obvious use to treat a concurrent depressive
disorder, antidepressant drugs have a therapeutic effect in agoraphobic
patients who are not depressed but who have frequent panic attacks.
Imipramine was one of the first agents to be used in this way, but
similar effects have been reported with clomipramine. The treatment
regime is the same as that described for panic disorder. In addition,
several SSRIs and venlafaxine have been shown to be effective in panic
disorder with and without agoraphobia (Baldwin et al., 2014). SSRIs are
generally recommended as the most suitable first-line treatment because
of their safety and tolerability relative to tricyclic antidepressants
(National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2010). As with
other drug treatments for anxiety, maintaining the medication for
several months after a clinical response has been obtained significantly
lowers relapse rates.

Management What patients need to know Patients with agoraphobia and
those around them usually have difficulty in understanding the nature of
agoraphobia, and may think of it as the result of lack of determination
to overcome normal anxiety. A two-stage explanation, starting with the
panic attacks, is generally helpful. Panic attacks can be likened to
false alarms occurring in an oversensitive intruder-alarm system. They
can occur in most people under stressful circumstances. The excessive
sensitivity can be explained in terms of constitution or chronic stress,
whichever fits the patient's history. Avoidance can be explained in
terms of conditioning, with examples such as anxiety after falling from
a bicycle or following a car accident. Partners, friends, and relatives
can usually understand the principles of behaviour therapy, but may be
unsympathetic to drug treatment and puzzled when antidepressants are
prescribed for anxiety. In response the patient can say that the
medication is to reduce the sensitivity of the 'alarm system', and
explain that some antidepressant drugs can do this. Patients also need
to know that medication is only likely to be effective if accompanied by
determined and persistent efforts to overcome avoidance. The therapist
should explain how to do this, but must emphasize that the result will
depend on the patient's own efforts. Selfhelp books are a useful source
of information about the disorder and about the ways in which people
with agoraphobia can help themselves.

Behavioural management In early cases, the patient should be strongly
encouraged to return to the situations that they are avoiding. The
treatment of choice for established cases is probably a combination of
exposure to phobic situations with cognitive therapy for panic attacks.
If there is a waiting list for cognitive therapy, the referring
clinicians should supervise exposure treatment. Several self-help
manuals have been published which reduce the time that therapists need
to spend in doing this.

Medication Medication can be offered as a first treatment, especially
when panic attacks are frequent and/or severe. However, it needs to be
accompanied by repeated exposure to previously feared and avoided
situations. In the UK, the medication is usually an antidepressant,
generally an SSRI. Any medication that has proved beneficial should be
discontinued only gradually. Patients who have relapsed after drug
treatment can be offered behaviour therapy, although no

179

180

180

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders controlled trials
have been carried out specifically with such individuals. Most patients
improve, but few of them lose the symptoms completely following

treatment. Relapse is common, and patients should be encouraged to seek
further help at an early stage should relapse occur.

Panic disorder Although the diagnosis of panic disorder did not appear
in the nomenclature until 1980, similar cases have been described under
a variety of names for more than a century. The central feature is the
occurrence of panic attacks. These are sudden attacks of anxiety in
which physical symptoms predominate, and they are accompanied by fear of
a serious medical consequence such as a heart attack. In the past, these
symptoms have been variously referred to as irritable heart, Da Costa's
syndrome, neurocirculatory asthenia, disorderly action of the heart, and
effort syndrome. These early terms assumed that patients were correct in
fearing a disorder of cardiac function. Some later authors suggested
psychological causes, but it was not until the Second World War (when
interest in the condition revived) that the cardiologist, Paul Wood
(1907--1962) showed convincingly that the condition was a form of
anxiety disorder. From then until 1980, patients with panic attacks were
classified as having either generalized or phobic anxiety disorders. In
1980, the authors of DSM-III introduced the new diagnostic category,
panic disorder, which included patients whose panic attacks occurred
with or without generalized anxiety, but excluded those whose panic
attacks appeared in the course of agoraphobia. In DSM-IV, all patients
with frequent panic attacks were classified as having panic disorder,
whether or not they had agoraphobia. In DSM-5 agoraphobia and panic
disorder are diagnosed separately and patients who have both conditions
receive both diagnoses. Panic disorder is included in ICD-10, but when
patients have concomitant agoraphobia they are diagnosed as suffering
from agoraphobia with panic disorder.

Clinical features The symptoms of a panic attack are listed in Box 8.4.
Not every patient has all of these symptoms during the panic attack and,
for a diagnosis of panic disorder, DSM5 requires the presence of only
four or more symptoms. The important features of panic attacks are that:
â

anxiety builds up quickly

â

the symptoms are severe

â

the person fears a catastrophic outcome.

Some people with panic disorder hyperventilate, and this adds to their
symptoms. Hyperventilation is breathing in a rapid and shallow way that
leads to a fall in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the blood. The
resulting hypocapnia may cause the symptoms listed in Box 8.5. The last
symptom in the list, the feeling of breathlessness, is paradoxical, as
the person is breathing excessively. It is important because it leads to
a further increase in breathing, which worsens the condition.
Hyperventilation should always be borne in mind as a cause of
unexplained bodily symptoms. The diagnosis can usually be made by
watching the pattern of breathing when the symptoms are present.

Diagnostic criteria In DSM-5 the diagnosis of panic disorder is made
when: (1) panic attacks occur recurrently (at least twice) and
unexpectedly (i.e.Â not in response to an identified phobic stimulus);
and (2) at least one attack has been followed by 4 weeks or more of
persistent fear of another attack and worry about its implications
(e.g.Â having a heart attack), and/or a significant maladaptive change in
behaviour (for example, avoiding exercise or public transport). The
research criteria in ICD-10 are similar, except that those concerned
with course are rather less

Box 8.4 Symptoms of a panic attack Sudden onset of: Palpitations Choking
sensations Chest pain Dizziness and faintness Depersonalization
Derealization Fear of dying, losing control, or going mad Source: data
from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders:
clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World
Health Organization.

18

Panic disorder

Box 8.5 Symptoms caused by hyperventilation Dizziness Tinnitus Headache
Feeling of weakness Faintness Numbness Tingling in the hands, feet, and
face Carpopedal spasms Precordial discomfort Feeling of breathlessness

precise; the attacks must have been recurrent and not consistently
associated with a phobic situation or object, or with marked exertion or
exposure to dangerous or life-threatening situations.

Differential diagnosis Panic attacks occur in GADs, phobic anxiety
disorders (most often agoraphobia), depressive disorders, and acute
organic disorder. Two of the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria help to
distinguish these secondary attacks from panic disorder---first, the
presence in panic disorder of a persistent marked concern about having
further attacks, and secondly, worry about the potentially catastrophic
consequences of the attacks.

Epidemiology The National Comorbidity Survey Replication found a
12-month prevalence rate of DSM-IV panic disorder of 2.7% and a lifetime
risk of 4.7% (Kessler et al., 2005a, b). These figures include panic
disorder with agoraphobia, which accounts for about 50% of the cases in
the general population. In Europe the 12-month prevalence of panic
disorder was somewhat less, around 1.2%. In most studies, the prevalence
in women is about twice that in men. Patients with panic disorder have
increased rates of other anxiety disorders, major depression, and
alcohol misuse.

Aetiology Genetics Panic disorder is familial, with about a fivefold
increase in risk in first-degree relatives (Perez et al., 2013). Rates
in monozygotic twins are higher than those

in dizygotic twins, indicating that the family aggregation is likely to
be at least partly owing to genetic factors, with a heritability of
about 40% (Bienvenu et al., 2011). As noted above, offspring of patients
with panic disorder have an increased risk of panic disorders
themselves, both with and without agoraphobia. However, their risk of
agoraphobia without panic is not increased (Knappe et al., 2012).
Numerous linkage and candidate gene studies have been conducted in panic
disorder, and some tentative loci have been identified. One that has
been replicated involves the gene for catechol-O-methyltransferase
(COMT; see Box 5.5), but its effects may depend on ethnicity. It is
likely that genes involved in panic disorder affect multiple biological
pathways, with differences between populations (Howe et al., 2016).

Biochemistry Chemical agents, notably sodium lactate and the
noradrenaline Î±2-adrenoceptor antagonist, yohimbine, but also flumazenil
(a benzodiazepine-receptor antagonist), and a 5-HT receptor agonist,
m-chlorophenylpiperazine, can induce panic attacks more readily in
patients with panic disorder than in healthy individuals (Ballenger et
al., 2009). The multitude of chemical agents that provoke panic attacks
in panic disorder patients make it difficult to identify a single causal
mechanism, and the abnormal responses could reflect altered
psychological attribution, as described below. However, changes in 5-HT,
noradrenaline, and GABA-ergic mechanisms have been suggested. There is
most evidence for changes in GABA, with lowered cortical GABA levels
measured by magnetic resonance spectroscopy, as well as diminished
benzodiazepine-receptor binding in the parietotemporal regions in
unmedicated patients with panic disorder (Hasler et al., 2008). Positron
emission tomography (PET) studies also suggest a lowering of cortical
5-HT1A receptor binding in patients with panic disorder, similar to that
found in depression (Nash et al., 2008). However, this could be
attributable to the high comorbidity between panic disorder and
depression.

Neural mechanisms Animal experimental studies suggest that the neural
circuitry of fear and particularly escape behaviour (which panic attacks
resemble to some extent) involves the amygdala, periaqueductal grey,
hippocampus, hypothalamus, and brainstem nuclei, including the locus
coeruleus, the origin of noradrenaline cell bodies. The ventromedial
prefrontal cortex plays a regulatory inhibitory role. Structural imaging
studies in panic disorder

181

182

182

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders have reported
altered volumes of amygdala and cingulate cortex, but the findings are
not consistent. Functional imaging studies have described abnormalities
both in baseline perfusion and during panic provocation in various
elements of this fear-related neural circuitry, but the findings have
been variable. The best evidence for changes is in the insula,
underlining the important role for interoceptive processes in the
pathophysiology of panic disorder (Goodkind et al., 2013).

Treatment Apart from supportive measures and help with any causative
life problems, treatment is with medication or cognitive therapy. A
number of different kinds of medication can be used.

Benzodiazepines

The cognitive hypothesis is based on the observation that fears about
serious physical or mental illness are more frequent among patients who
experience panic attacks than among anxious patients who do not have
panic attacks. It is proposed that there is a spiral of anxiety in panic
disorder, as the physical symptoms of anxiety activate fears of illness
and thereby generate more anxiety. 'Safety behaviours' prevent
disconfirmation of these fears (Helbig-Lang et al., 2014). These
observations have led to an effective cognitive treatment for panic
disorder.

When given in high doses, benzodiazepines control panic attacks. In
these doses, most benzodiazepines cause sedation, but alprazolam, a
high-potency compound, is an exception. For this reason it has been used
to treat panic disorder, and its effectiveness over placebo has been
demonstrated in many controlled trials (see Ballenger, 2009). At the end
of treatment, alprazolam should be reduced very gradually to avoid
withdrawal symptoms, because even when it is reduced over 30 days, about
one-third of patients report significant withdrawal symptoms. This
treatment was developed in the USA and has not been widely adopted in
the UK, where benzodiazepines are not recommended for the treatment of
panic disorder (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
2010).

Hyperventilation as a cause

Antidepressants

A subsidiary hypothesis proposes that hyperventilation is a cause of
panic disorder. Although there is no doubt that voluntary overbreathing
can produce a panic attack, it has not been shown that panic disorder is
caused by involuntary hyperventilation.

Imipramine was the first antidepressant to be shown to be effective for
the treatment of panic disorder, and other tricyclic antidepressants,
including clomipramine and lofepramine, are superior to placebo in
controlled trials. SSRIs are also beneficial in the treatment of panic
disorder, as is the SNRI, venlafaxine, and the selective noradrenaline
re-uptake inhibitor, reboxetine (Baldwin et al., 2014). The initial
effect of antidepressants in patients with panic disorder is often to
produce an unpleasant feeling of apprehension, sleeplessness, and
palpitations. For this reason the initial dose should be small (e.g.Â 5
mg of citalopram), increasing gradually each week until an effective
dose is reached. Where patients respond to medication, maintaining
treatment for at least 6 months helps to prevent relapse (Baldwin et
al., 2014).

Cognitive theories

Course and prognosis Follow-up studies have generally included patients
with panic attacks and agoraphobia as well as patients with panic
disorder alone. Earlier studies that used categories such as 'effort
syndrome' found that most patients still had symptoms 20 years later,
although most had a good social outcome. More recent studies of patients
diagnosed with panic disorder also reveal a lengthy course, with
fluctuating anxiety and depression. About 30% of patients remit without
subsequent relapse, and a similar proportion show useful improvement,
although with persistent symptomatology (Ballenger et al., 2009). The
prognosis of panic disorder without agoraphobia is somewhat better, and
results from controlled trials suggests effective treatment can improve
the prognosis of both panic disorder and panic disorder with
agoraphobia. Mortality rates from unnatural causes and, among men, from
cardiovascular disorders are higher than average, and may be linked to
changes in the regulation of the sympathetic nervous system (Davies et
al., 2010).

Cognitive therapy Cognitive therapy reduces the fears of the physical
effects of anxiety, which are thought to provoke and maintain the panic
attacks. Common fears of this kind are that palpitations indicate an
impending heart attack, or that dizziness indicates impending loss of
consciousness. In treatment, the physical symptoms that the patient
fears are induced by hyperventilation or exercise. The therapist points
out the sequence of physical symptoms that leads to fear, and explains
that a similar sequence occurs

183

Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder in the early stages of a panic
attack. The therapist goes on to question the patient's belief in the
feared outcome. The procedure is described further in Chapter 24.
Controlled studies have shown that cognitive therapy is as effective as
antidepressant medication in the treatment of panic disorder (Cuijpers
et al., 2013). Combined treatment with medication and psychotherapy may
result in a better response in the acute phase than either treatment
modality given alone, but whether this persists in the longer term is
uncertain (Cuijpers et al., 2014b).

Management What patients need to know Patients need to be able to
explain the disorder to relatives and friends, and the explanation
outlined in relation to agoraphobia (see above) is usually appropriate.
Patients also need to understand how particular ways of thinking and
behaviours increase and prolong the disorder (see the section on
cognitive therapy, above). Selfhelp books based on cognitive behaviour
principles are available and can be helpful.

Choice of treatment As cognitive therapy and medication have similar
effects on symptoms, the choice of treatment depends on the patient's
preference, the availability of cognitive therapy, and considerations of
cost and long-term benefit (cognitive therapy is more costly, but
probably has more lasting effects). If medication is chosen, one of the
SSRIs are preferred to tricyclics because they have fewer side effects.
Alprazolam has been used in some countries, but is not recommended in
the UK (see above). Information about the main effects and side effects
should be the same as that given when the same medication is given for
other reasons, including the delayed onset of action, and the need to
withdraw medication gradually (see Chapter 25). If there is no
improvement after about 12 weeks, the treatment can be changed to an
antidepressant of a different class, or cognitive therapy can be
started. If cognitive therapy has not been effective, medication can be
tried. If, as often happens, panic disorder is accompanied by some
degree of agoraphobic avoidance, exposure treatment should be added to
the medication.

Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder As explained at the beginning of
this chapter, anxiety and depressive symptoms often occur together. The
overlap is greatest when the symptoms are mild, and least when they are
severe enough for a diagnosis of psychiatric disorder. The Adult
Psychiatric Morbidity Survey in England found that mixed anxiety and
depression was the most common psychiatric syndrome in the community,
with about 9% of adults fulfilling the symptomatic criteria in the week
before interview (McManus et al., 2009). Rates were higher in women, and
in households with low disposable income.

â

Aetiology There are a number of reasons why anxiety and depression may
occur together. â

They may have the same predisposing causes. Brown and Harris (1993)
found that childhood adversity is associated with both anxiety and
depressive disorders in adulthood. There is evidence that depression and
GAD may have common genetic mechanisms (Hettema, 2008).

â

Some stressful events combine elements of loss and danger. The former
tend to be associated with depression and the latter with anxiety.

â

Persistent anxiety leading to secondary depression. Follow-up studies
have shown that onset of depression among people with persistent anxiety
is more common than onset of anxiety among people with persistent
depression.

Diagnostic conventions When the anxiety and depressive symptoms are not
severe enough to meet the diagnostic criteria for a specific depressive
or anxiety disorder, the condition is sometimes referred to as a minor
affective disorder (see Chapter 9) or as cothymia. Other diagnostic
terms include the following: â

Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder---this category is included in
ICD-10 but not in the classification of DSM-5.

Adjustment disorder---this is diagnosed when minor anxiety and
depressive symptoms are related to a change in life circumstances.

183

184

184

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders The prognosis of
mixed anxiety and depressive disorders appears to be worse than that of
a specific anxiety disorder (Tyrer et al., 2004a).

Treatment In community settings, only a minority of individuals with
mixed anxiety and depression receives formal treatment. Antidepressant
medication is most commonly

used, but controlled trials for this indication are lacking. Counselling
and brief forms of cognitive behaviour therapy are also employed. A
meta-analysis has suggested that both of these forms of psychotherapy
have modest beneficial effects, but that the degree of improvement
resulting from cognitive behaviour therapy in mixed anxiety and
depression is substantially less than in pure anxiety disorders (Cape et
al., 2010).

Transcultural variations in anxiety disorder Anxiety disorders are
universal but their prevalence and presentation show important cultural
differences (Agorastos et al., 2012). In several cultures the presenting
symptoms of anxiety disorder are more often somatic than psychological.
Sometimes this difference parallels the different words used to describe
anxiety in the corresponding languages. Thus there is no word for
anxiety in some African, Oriental, and Native American languages, and
instead a phrase denoting bodily function is used. For example, in
Yoruba, an African language, the phrase is 'the heart is not at rest'.
In addition, several conditions have been described that may be
transcultural variants of anxiety disorders, although their exact
relationship to these disorders is uncertain. It does appear that in
non-western cultures anxiety is experienced more somatically. Koro: this
can occur among men from India, South China, and Japan, and has
similarities to panic disorder. Cantonese people call it suk-yeong,
which means 'shrinking of the penis'. There are episodes of acute
anxiety, lasting from 30 minutes to 1 or 2 days, during which the person
complains of palpitations, sweating, pericardial discomfort, and
trembling. At the same time he is convinced that the penis will retract
into the abdomen, and that when this process is complete he will die.
Most

episodes occur at night, sometimes after sexual activity. To prevent the
feared outcome, the patient may tie the penis to an object, or ask
another person to hold the organ. This belief parallels the conviction
held by patients during a panic attack that the heart is damaged and
that they will die. Epidemics of koro have been described among people
who are experiencing anxiety because of social stressors (Tseng, 2006).
Variants of social phobia have been described in the east, originally
among people in Japan, where it is known as taijin-kyofu-sho or 'phobia
of interpersonal relations'. There is intense anxiety in social
situations and an intense conviction, bordering on the delusional, that
the person is being thought of unfavourably by others. Other symptoms
include fears of producing body odours, dysmorphophobia, and aversion to
eye contact (Agorastos et al., 2012). Tseng (2006) pointed out that,
although earlier research in this area tended to focus on 'exotic'
presentations of disorder in unfamiliar cultures, all psychiatric
syndromes are culturally influenced. Therefore a knowledge of how social
context alters the presentation of psychological distress is relevant to
all cultures, particularly in a historical period when cultures in many
countries are becoming increasingly diverse.

Obsessive--compulsive disorder The concise description of OCD, contained
in ICD-9, is still valuable: The outstanding symptom is a feeling of
subjective compulsion---which must be resisted---to carry out some
action, to dwell on an idea, to recall an experience, or ruminate on an
abstract topic. Unwanted thoughts, which include the insistency of words
or ideas, ruminations or trains of

thought, are perceived by the patient to be inappropriate or
nonsensical. The obsessional urge or idea is recognized as alien to the
personality but as coming from within the self. Obsessional actions may
be quasi ritual performances designed to relieve anxiety, e.g.Â washing
the hands to deal with contamination. Attempts to dispel the unwelcome
thoughts or urges may lead to a severe inner struggle, with intense
anxiety.

185

Obsessive--compulsive disorder

Clinical picture OCD is characterized by obsessional thinking,
compulsive behaviour, and varying degrees of anxiety, depression, and
depersonalization. Obsessional and compulsive symptoms are listed in Box
8.6. They were described in Chapter 1, but the reader may find it
helpful to be reminded of the main features. Obsessional thoughts are
words, ideas, and beliefs that are recognized by patients as their own,
and that intrude forcibly into the mind. They are usually unpleasant,
and attempts are made to exclude them. It is the combination of an inner
sense of compulsion and of efforts at resistance that characterizes
obsessional symptoms, but the effort at resistance is the more variable
of the two. Obsessional thoughts may take the form of single words,
phrases, or rhymes, are usually unpleasant or shocking to the person,
and may be obscene or blasphemous. Obsessional images are vividly
imagined scenes, often of a violent or disgusting kind (e.g.Â involving
sexual practices that the person finds abhorrent). Obsessional
ruminations are internal debates in which arguments for and against even
the simplest everyday actions are reviewed endlessly. Some obsessional
doubts concern actions that may not have been completed adequately
(e.g.Â turning off a gas tap or securing a door), while other doubts
concern actions that might have harmed other people (e.g.Â that driving a
car past a cyclist might have caused him to fall off his bicycle).
Sometimes doubts are related to religious convictions or observances
('scruples')---a phenomenon well known to those who hear confession.
Obsessional impulses are urges to perform acts, usually of a violent or
embarrassing kind (e.g.Â leaping in front of a car, injuring a child, or
shouting blasphemies at a religious ceremony). Obsessional rituals
include both mental activities (e.g.Â counting repeatedly in a special
way, or repeating a certain form of words) and repeated but senseless
behaviours (e.g.Â washing the hands 20 or more times a day). Some rituals
have an understandable connection with the obsessional thoughts that
precede them (e.g. repeated hand washing following thoughts about
contamination). Other rituals have no such connection (e.g. arranging
objects in a particular way). The person may feel compelled to repeat
such actions a certain number of times, and if this sequence is
interrupted it has to be repeated from the beginning. People who use
rituals are usually aware that these are illogical, and usually try to
hide them. Some people fear that their symptoms are

Box 8.6 Principal features of obsessive--compulsive disorder Obsessional
symptoms Thoughts Ruminations Impulses 'Phobias' Compulsive rituals
Abnormal slowness Anxiety Depression Depersonalization

a sign of incipient madness, and are greatly helped by reassurance that
this is not so. Obsessional slowness. Although obsessional thoughts and
rituals lead to slow performance, a few obsessional patients are
afflicted by extreme slowness that is out of proportion to other
symptoms. Obsessional phobias. Obsessional thoughts and compulsive
rituals may worsen in certain situations---for example, obsessional
thoughts about harming other people may increase in a kitchen or other
place where knives are kept. The person may avoid such situations
because they cause distress, just as people with phobic disorders avoid
specific situations. Because of this resemblance, the condition is
called an obsessional phobia. Anxiety. This is a prominent component of
OCDs. Some rituals are followed by a lessening of anxiety, while others
are followed by increased anxiety. Depression. Obsessional patients are
often depressed. In some patients, depression is an understandable
reaction to the obsessional symptoms; in others, depression appears to
vary independently. Depersonalization. Some obsessional patients
complain of depersonalization. The relationship between this distressing
symptom and the other features of the disorder is unclear. Relationship
to obsessional personality. Obsessional personality (obsessive
compulsive personality disorder in DSM-5) is described in Chapter 15.
There is no simple, one-to-one relationship between OCD and this kind of
personality. Although obsessional personality is overrepresented among
people who develop OCD, about one-third of obsessional patients have
other types of personality (as noted in a classic paper by Lewis, 1936).

185

186

186

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders Furthermore,
people with obsessional personality are more likely to develop
depressive disorders than OCDs.

Diagnostic criteria In DSM-5 the diagnosis of OCD requires the presence
of either obsessions or compulsions or both. In addition, the obsessions
and/or compulsions are required to be timeconsuming (e.g.Â taking more
than 1 hour daily) and/or to cause clinically significant distress
and/or impairment in social or occupational function. It is also
necessary that the obsessive--compulsive symptoms are not attributable
to the effects of a substance or another medical condition, and that the
disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental
disorder. In DSM-5, it also possible to specify the degree of insight
that a patient possesses, ranging from 'good or fair' to 'absent' or
'delusional'. Under these diagnostic criteria, therefore, it is not
necessary for the patient with OCD to believe that their obsessions and
compulsions are unfounded or nonsensical. ICD-10 also recognizes that
OCD can present with obsessions or compulsions or both. For a definite
diagnosis, the obsessional symptoms or compulsive acts must be present
on most days for at least 2 successive weeks and be a source of distress
and/or interference with usual activities. As well as the thoughts or
impulses being recognized as the person's own, there must be at least
one thought or act that is resisted unsuccessfully. ICD-10 notes that
compulsive acts, while they may relieve tension, are not in themselves
intrinsically pleasurable. This distinguishes compulsions from acts that
are associated with immediate gratification such as those associated
with addictions. ICD-10 also classifies OCD as predominantly taking the
form of obsessional thoughts and ruminations, or predominantly
compulsive acts or mixed obsessional thoughts and acts when both are
equally prominent. This distinction may be useful because behaviour
therapy, for example, is more effective for the treatment of compulsions
than it is for disorders characterized chiefly by obsessional thoughts.

Differential diagnosis OCD must be distinguished from other disorders in
which obsessional symptoms occur.

Anxiety disorders The distinction from GAD, panic disorder, or phobic
disorder is seldom difficult provided that a careful history is taken
and the mental state is examined thoroughly.

Depressive disorder The course of OCD is often punctuated by periods of
depression in which the obsessional symptoms increase. When this happens
the depressive disorder may be overlooked. Furthermore, obsessional
symptoms sometimes occur in the course of a primary depressive disorder
and may disappear when the depression is successfully treated.

Schizophrenia Occasionally, the symptoms of OCD may resemble delusions
because the content of the obsessional thoughts is peculiar, or the
rituals are exceptionally odd, and resistance is weak. The disorder can
then be mistaken for a delusional disorder or schizophrenia. In such
cases, the correct diagnosis can be made following thorough
history-taking and a careful search for other symptoms of psychosis.
Obsessive--compulsive symptoms are not uncommon in schizophrenia, and
may require separate treatment (Zohar et al., 2009).

Organic disorders Obsessional symptoms are occasionally found in organic
cerebral disorders. They were observed most strikingly in chronic cases
of encephalitis lethargica following the epidemic in the 1920s (see page
388).

Childhood-onset disorders In children, obsessive--compulsive symptoms
are frequently comorbid with developmental disorders such as Gilles de
la Tourette syndrome and autism (see page 462).

Epidemiology In the USA, Narrow et al.Â (2002) found a total 1-year
prevalence of OCD of 2.1%, and the 1-year prevalence of OCD not comorbid
with another anxiety disorder was 1.2%. In the more recent National
Comorbidity Survey Replication, Ruscio et al.Â (2010) found a lifetime
risk of 2.1%, and noted high rates of comorbidity, not only with other
anxiety disorders but also with mood disorders, impulse control
disorders, and substance misuse. Obsessive--compulsive symptomatology
that did not meet the full criteria for DSM-IV was reported by 25% of
those surveyed, with checking and hoarding being the most common
behaviours. Estimates of the femaleto-male ratio of lifetime prevalence
in the population range from 1.2 (in Puerto Rico) to 3.8 (in New
Zealand). However, in clinic populations the ratio is closer to 1 (Zohar
et al., 2009).

178

Obsessive--compulsive disorder

Aetiology Healthy individuals experience occasional intrusive thoughts,
some of which are concerned with sexual, aggressive, and other themes
similar to those of obsessional patients. It is the frequency,
intensity, and, above all, the persistence of obsessional phenomena that
have to be explained.

Genetics In the small number of twin studies that have been conducted,
the concordance rate was greater in monozygotic than in dizygotic pairs,
indicating that at least part of the familial loading is genetic.
Familial studies have reached a similar conclusion, and indicate that
the risk of OCD in first-degree relatives is increased approximately
fourfold compared with control rates (Perez et al., 2013). Molecular
genetic studies have found a number of associations between OCD and
various genes, including those coding for the glutamate and serotonin
transporters, the 5-HT2A receptor, and the gene for brain-derived
neurotropic factor. Apart from the glutamate transporter gene (SLC1A1),
most of these have not been consistently replicated and current
genome-wide association studies have not reported findings of
genome-wide significance, perhaps owing to sample size limitations
(Mattheisen et al., 2015).

Evidence of a brain disorder Two kinds of evidence suggest a disorder of
brain function in OCD---first, associations with conditions that have
known effects on brain function, and secondly, evidence from brain
imaging. Associations with other brain disorders. As noted above,
obsessional symptoms were recorded frequently among patients affected by
encephalitis lethargica after the Spanish 'flu pandemic of 1918--1919.
Also, Gilles de la Tourette included obsessional symptoms in his
original description of the disorder that now bears his name (de la
Tourette, 1885), and more recent studies have confirmed this observation
(Zohar et al., 2009). In childhood, 70% of cases of Sydenham's chorea,
which affects the caudate nucleus, are reported to have obsessive--
compulsive symptoms. The condition, which is referred to as PANDAS
(paediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with
streptococcal infection), is considered further in Chapter 16. In
addition, the development of OCD in some children has been linked to
group A streptococcal infections, although the findings are inconsistent
and other infections as well as metabolic disturbances in children can
produce neuropsychiatric symptoms, including obsessions and compulsions
(Singer et al., 2012).

Brain imaging studies. Structural imaging in patients with OCD has
revealed rather variable changes, but the most consistent are an
increase in grey matter volume in the striatum and decrease in
orbitofrontal, dorsomedial, and anterior cingulate cortex. Functional
imaging studies also reveal abnormalities in these brain regions both at
rest and during psychological challenge paradigms that activate
obsessive--compulsive symptomatology. In this situation, patients
demonstrate increased activity in orbitofrontal cortex, caudate,
anterior cingulate cortex, and thalamus (Ahmari and Simpson, 2013).
These findings have led to suggestions that the symptoms of OCD are
related to dysfunction in the well-described corticostriatal-thalamic
loops, which together support key neuropsychological domains such as
affective and reward processing, working memory and executive function,
and motor and response inhibition (Milad and Rauch, 2012). In this
respect, compulsive behaviour has been linked more specifically to
projections from orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) to the medial striatum
(caudate nucleus) (Fineberg et al., 2014).

Abnormal serotonergic function The finding that obsessive--compulsive
symptoms respond to drugs that increase 5-HT function suggests that 5-HT
mechanisms might be abnormal in OCD. The full effect of 5-HT uptake
inhibitors on obsessive-- compulsive symptoms takes several weeks, so
the late effects are likely to be most relevant. However, these late
effects are complex, and it is not known which of them are important. In
any case, the response of obsessive-- compulsive symptoms to drugs that
affect 5-HT function does not prove that 5-HT function is abnormal in
OCD. The situation might resemble that of parkinsonism, in which
anticholinergic drugs control symptoms by acting on the normal
cholinergic systems of patients whose disorder is caused by abnormal
dopaminergic function. Attempts to assess 5-HT function in OCD have used
both neuroendocrine tests and measures of serotonin transporters and
serotonin receptors using PET and single photon emission tomography
(SPET). The results of these studies have not been consistent. Other
studies have examined the effect on obsessive--compulsive symptoms of
challenges with agents that have effects specific to particular kinds of
5-HT receptors. Some studies have implicated 5-HT1D and 5-HT2C subtypes,
but again the results are contradictory (Ahmari and Simpson, 2013).

Psychoanalytical theories Although not supported by evidence, these
theories are summarized here because of their historical importance.

187

18

188

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders Freud originally
suggested that obsessional symptoms result from unconscious impulses of
an aggressive or sexual nature. These impulses could potentially cause
extreme anxiety, but anxiety is reduced by the action of the defence
mechanisms of repression and reaction formation. This idea reflects the
aggressive and sexual fantasies of many obsessional patients, and their
restraints on their own aggressive and sexual impulses. Freud also
proposed that obsessional symptoms occur when there is a regression to
the anal stage of development as a way of avoiding impulses related to
the subsequent genital and Oedipal stages. This idea reflects
obsessional patients' frequent concerns with excretory functions and
contamination.

Neuropsychological function In psychological terms 'compulsivity'
describes a tendency to perform repetitive acts in a habitual or
stereotyped manner to prevent perceived negative consequences.
Compulsivity has been contrasted with impulsivity, which is seen as a
failure to inhibit inappropriate behaviours that are driven by reward
and gratification. A tendency to compulsive responding can be detected
by neuropsychological tasks that require an altered response once a
'habit' has been established by previous learning. Consistent with this,
patients with OCD perform less well on tasks of 'set-shifting' and
'reversal learning' than controls, and a similar abnormality has been
detected in first-degree relatives of OCD patients. This suggests that,
in people with OCD and those at risk of OCD, actions may be mediated by
a relative preponderance of habit learning over goal-directed learning.
This might underpin the development of compulsive behaviours. It is also
worth noting that although compulsivity and impulsivity are often
regarded as opposite behaviours, they can coexist. An anatomical basis
for this is that, like compulsivity, impulsivity is thought to arise
from dysfunction in cortico-striatal-thalamic loops, in the case of
impulsivity in pathways involving the ventral striatum, anterior
cingulate cortex, and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. There is
therefore significant scope for interaction between the circuits
regulating impulsive and compulsive behaviour. Indeed,
neuropsychological tasks suggest that patients with OCD and their
first-degree relatives manifest significant difficulties in impulse
control; for example, by failing to inhibit incorrect responses in tasks
assessing motor performance. Thus part of the symptomatology of OCD may
arise from failure to inhibit inappropriate responses as well as a
compulsion to carry them out. For a review, see Fineberg et al.Â (2014).

Cognitive theory This theory starts with the premise that it is not the
occurrence of intrusive thoughts that has to be explained (as these are
experienced at times even by healthy people; see above), but rather the
obsessional patient's inability to control them and see them in
perspective. For example, people with obsessional disorder often respond
to such thoughts as if they were personally responsible for their
possible consequences (e.g.Â for harm to another person). It is suggested
that this feeling of responsibility leads to excessive attempts to ward
off the thoughts and their supposed consequences by adopting compulsive
behaviours and avoidance, and seeking repeated reassurance. Although the
theory is unproven, it directs attention to aspects of the disorder
other than the obvious obsessions and compulsions (see Box 8.7). For a
review of the cognitive approach to OCD, see Veale (2007).

Prognosis About two-thirds of cases improve to some extent by the end of
1 year. Of the cases that last for more than a year, some run a
fluctuating course, but others are

Box 8.7 Some key cognitive processes in obsessive--compulsive
disorder 1. Thought--action fusion. Magical thinking---for example, the
belief that if one thinks of harming others one is likely to act on the
thought or might have done so in the past. 2. Responsibility. An
inflated sense of responsibility for preventing harm to others; the
belief that one has power that is pivotal to bringing about or
preventing crucial negative outcomes. 3. Compulsions and safety-seeking
behaviours. Compulsions---whether behavioural or mental--- are
reinforcing because they reduce anxiety temporarily. They strengthen the
belief that, had the compulsion not been carried out, discomfort would
have increased and harm might have occurred. 4. Overestimation of the
likelihood that harm will occur. 5. Intolerance of uncertainty and
ambiguity. 6. The need for control. Source: data from Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 13(6), Veale D, Cognitive behavioural therapy for
obsessive compulsive disorder, pp.Â 438--46, Copyright (2007), The Royal
College of Psychiatrists.

189

Obsessive--compulsive disorder chronic. The prognosis is better when
there has been a precipitating event, social and occupational adjustment
is good, and the symptoms are episodic. The prognosis is worse when
there is a personality disorder, and onset is in childhood. Male gender,
tic-related forms of OCD, and overvalued ideas about the obsessions also
predict a poor prognosis (Zohar et al., 2009). Marcks et al.Â (2011)
studied over 100 patients with OCD, who were recruited to a research
programme and followed up for 15 years. Most received treatment with
medication and psychotherapy at some point in their course and all had
at least one comorbid anxiety disorder. Remission was defined as being
essentially free of symptoms for a period of at least 8 weeks. Remission
rates in the first year of illness were low (16%), but gradually
increased during follow-up to just over 40% at 15 years. The presence of
comorbid major depression diminished the chance of recovery.

Treatment Medication Clomipramine. The use of clomipramine will be
described first because of its historical importance in the development
of pharmacological treatment for OCD. However, it is not now used as a
first-line agent. Clomipramine is a tricyclic antidepressant with potent
5-HT-uptakeblocking effects. It is more effective than placebo in
reducing the obsessional symptoms of patients with OCD (Clomipramine
Collaborative Study Group, 1991). Most patients tolerate the treatment,
but typical tricyclic side effects are common. and at high doses a few
patients develop seizures. A clinically useful effect may not be reached
until after about 6 weeks of treatment, and further improvement may take
another 6--12 weeks. Many patients relapse during the first few weeks
after the drug is stopped, but the relapse rate is reduced if
clomipramine is combined with exposure, and if drug treatment is
maintained. Other tricyclic antidepressants that are less potent
5-HT-uptake blockers do not have this therapeutic effect in OCD
(National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2005a).
Selective serotonin uptake inhibitors. SSRIs are effective in reducing
obsessional symptoms, and it seems unlikely that there are clinically
important differences between them, although individual patients may
respond better to one SSRI than another. There is some evidence that
higher doses are somewhat more efficacious (Bloch et al., 2010).
Overall, SSRIs appear to have similar efficacy to clomipramine. However,
clomipramine treatment is associated with more dropouts from treatment
(National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2005a).

Since only about 50% of the treated patients improve substantially,
attempts have been made to improve the response rate by adding a second
drug to the SSRI. The only approach with a consistent, though rather
limited therapeutic, effect involves the addition of an antipsychotic
agent, usually at a low dose. Beneficial effects have been seen with
both typical and atypical antipsychotic drugs, but the latter are
usually better tolerated. A meta-analysis suggested that significant,
albeit modest, benefit was most likely with the addition of low doses of
risperidone and aripiprazole (Veale et al., 2014). As with clomipramine,
relapse is common during the first few weeks after an SSRI has been
stopped, and longer-term maintenance treatment is advisable. Anxiolytic
drugs. These drugs give some short-term symptomatic relief but should
not be prescribed continuously for more than 2--4 weeks at a time.

Cognitive behaviour therapy Exposure and response prevention.
Obsessional rituals usually improve with a combination of response
prevention and exposure to any environmental cues that increase the
symptoms. About two-thirds of patients with moderately severe rituals
can be expected to improve substantially, although not completely (Zohar
et al., 2009). When rituals respond to this treatment, the accompanying
obsessional thoughts usually improve as well. The results seem to be at
least comparable with those of treatment with clomipramine and SSRIs
(National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2005a).
Behavioural treatment is less effective for obsessional thoughts that
occur without rituals. The technique of thought-stopping has been used
for many years, but there is no good evidence that it has a specific
effect. Cognitive approaches to obsessions may well be more successful
(see below). Cognitive therapy. This therapy seeks to reduce the
patient's attempts to suppress and avoid obsessional thoughts, as such
attempts have been shown to increase, rather than decrease, the
frequency of these thoughts. The patient is helped to record the
frequency of obsessional thoughts to compare the effects of suppression
and distraction. As suppression and avoidance appear to be driven by the
conviction that to think something is to make it happen, attempts are
made to weaken this conviction by reviewing the evidence for and against
it. These techniques may be combined with exposure to audio-recorded
repetition of the thoughts, and discussion of any other cognitive
distortions along the general lines of cognitive therapy (see Chapter 24
and Shafran et al., 2013). Cognitive therapy by itself may not be as

189

190

190

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders effective as
behaviour therapy, but incorporating elements of cognitive approaches
into behaviour therapy may enhance the effects of the latter treatment
(Ponniah et al., 2013). Current treatments generally incorporate
elements of both approaches (National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence, 2005a).

Dynamic psychotherapy Exploratory and interpretative psychotherapy
seldom helps obsessional patients. Indeed, some are made worse because
these procedures encourage painful and unproductive rumination about the
subjects discussed during treatment.

Neurosurgery and deep brain stimulation The immediate result of
neurosurgery for severe OCD is often a striking reduction in tension and
distress. However, the long-term effects are uncertain, as no
prospective controlled trial has been carried out. Hay et al. (1993)
reported a 10-year follow-up of 26 obsessive-- compulsive patients
treated with orbitomedial or cingulate lesions, or both. Of the 18
patients who were interviewed, eight had a second operation, two died as
a result of suicide, and about one-third of the survivors improved. A
similar rate of improvement was found in a survey by Dougherty et
al.Â (2002). The frequency of second operations and the modest
improvement rates indicate the limitations of this treatment. For a
review, see Christmas et al.Â (2004). Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has
also been employed to treat intractable OCD. However, current worldwide
experience is still limited. For an account of the use of DBS in
intractable OCD, see Chapter 25.

Management In treatment, it is important to remember that some cases of
OCD run a fluctuating course, with long periods of remission. Also,
depressive disorder frequently accompanies OCD, and in such cases
effective treatment of the depressive disorder often leads to
improvement in the obsessional symptoms. For this reason, a thorough
search for depressive disorder should be made in every patient who
presents with OCD.

What patients need to know Treatment should begin with an explanation of
the symptoms, and, if necessary, with reassurance that these symptoms
are not an early sign of insanity (a common concern of obsessional
patients). If the patient agrees, their partner or another close
relative can be involved in educational sessions about the nature and
treatment of the disorder. Patients and family members are often helped
by reading a book on OCD. Obsessional patients may attempt to involve
other family members in their rituals. If this happens, the relatives
should be helped to find ways of resisting such requests in a way that
is firm and appropriately sympathetic. In particular, they need to
understand that repeated reassurances about obsessional ruminations do
not help.

Choice of treatment As noted above, medication controls the symptoms of
OCD in many cases, but when it is stopped many patients relapse.
Exposure with response prevention seems to produce better long-term
results, but it is difficult to achieve response prevention when
symptoms are severe, and a significant number of patients are unable to
tolerate the technique (Veal and Roberts, 2014). For this reason,
medication and response prevention should often be combined if the
patient finds this acceptable. If there is a waiting list for behaviour
therapy, medication can be started first. First-line medication should
generally be an SSRI, and, if this is not effective, a switch to a
second SSRI may be considered. If this is unsuccessful, a trial of
clomipramine or augmentation with an antipsychotic drug may be
considered. Cognitive behaviour therapy should be tried if not used
previously. Because patients with OCD may fare better on higher doses of
antidepressant medication, it is worth exploring the full recommended
dose range if tolerance permits this. If patients respond to medication,
long-term maintenance treatment may be needed. For an account of the
management OCD, see Veale and Roberts (2014).

Obsessive--compulsive-related disorders We have already seen that in
DSM-5 a number of disorders are grouped with OCD, including body
dysmorphic disorder, hoarding disorder, and trichotillomania. These

conditions are listed with OCD principally because all display prominent
compulsive features. Here we briefly outline the clinical features,
diagnosis, epidemiology,

19

Obsessive--compulsive-related disorders and management of hoarding
disorder and trichotillomania. Body dysmorphic disorder is discussed in
Chapter 22.

Hoarding disorder Clinical features Historically, pathological hoarding
has been recognized for well over a century, when it became associated
with the psychoanalytical concept of 'anal personality'. Subsequently,
hoarding behaviour was seen as characteristic of obsessive--compulsive
personality disorder and, more recently, in DSM-IV, as a symptom of OCD.
However, in DSM-5, hoarding is now recognized as a disorder in its own
right. Hoarding is a persistent phenomenon typically arising in a
middle-aged or elderly person, which is driven by emotional difficulties
in parting with or discarding possessions, no matter what their actual
value. While normal individuals may collect items in an assiduous way,
this collection is systematic and purposeful and does not interfere with
the conduct of the individual's life. In hoarding disorder the clutter
of material fills up and congests living areas to the extent that their
intended use, for example as a kitchen or bedroom, becomes impossible.
The most commonly hoarded items are newspapers, magazines, clothing, and
paperwork. Some patients also hoard animals in insanitary and unsuitable
ways. A form of hoarding in older people that is associated with extreme
self-neglect and domestic squalor has been called Diogenes syndrome or
senile squalor syndrome (see page 555). It is important to note that the
latter may be associated with dementia (Pertusa et al., 2010). Despite
the interference of the hoarding behaviour with everyday life and the
attendant distress this can cause, affected individuals do not resist
the urge to hoard, but feel anxious, upset, or angry if an attempt is
made to reduce the accumulated clutter. Unlike OCD, thoughts about
hoarding are not experienced as intrusive or repetitive or distressing,
and the hoarding behaviour is not seen as senseless or inappropriate.
Hoarding remains one of the criteria for obsessive compulsive
personality disorder in DSM-5; however, hoarding has a low correlation
with the other symptoms of obsessive-- compulsive personality, and many
patients who hoard do not have other features of personality disorder
(Mataix-Cols et al., 2010).

Diagnosis In DSM-5 the diagnosis of 'hoarding disorder' requires that
patients show a longstanding problem with getting

rid of worthless items and marked distress at the prospect of parting
with them. The result is an accumulation of clutter that takes over
living areas and makes them impossible to use for their intended
purposes, and which eventually can render the home unhygienic and
unsafe. When a person meets the diagnosis for both hoarding disorder and
obsessive--compulsive personality, both diagnoses should be recorded.

Epidemiology A moderate degree of hoarding appears common in the general
population, so estimates of the population frequency of pathological
hoarding vary according to the diagnostic criteria used. A lifetime
prevalence between 2% and 4% is probable, and pathological hoarding
appears to be familial with a strong genetic component (Pertusa et al.,
2010). From a survey of over 700 participants in a personality disorder
survey, Samuels et al. (2008) estimated that hoarding increased with
age, correlated inversely with household income, and was twice as great
in men than in women. There was an association with alcohol dependence
but not OCD.

Management Management of patients with hoarding disorder is usually
difficult because, in the view of most patients, their hoarding is a not
problem. However, improvements in hoarding behaviour compared to
waitlist control have been shown with cognitive behaviour therapy given
along the same lines as that for OCD. Forms of cognitive behaviour
therapy have been developed specifically for hoarding disorder, but
whether they confer additional benefit is unresolved (Williams and
Viscusi, 2016). There have also been investigations of pharmacotherapy
in pathological hoarding, with SSRIs and venlafaxine showing benefit.
However, most of the published studies were open label, and randomized
controlled trials are needed (Brakoulias et al., 2015).

Trichotillomania Clinical features The key feature of trichotillomania
is recurrent hair pulling, which results in hair loss. The hair loss is
usually visible but in some patients is less apparent because single
hairs are pulled from widely distributed sites, or because make-up or a
wig is employed. Trichotillomania can involve any site on the body where
hair grows, but most often affects the scalp, eyebrows, or eyelashes.
Hair pulling can occur in brief episodes throughout the day or in more
sustained periods of several hours. Prior to hair

191

192

192

Chapter 8 Anxiety and obsessive---compulsive disorders pulling, often
during a time when the impulse to pull is being resisted, there are
increasing feelings of tension, while the act of hair pulling itself is
associated with a sense of pleasure or relief. Extracted hair can be
chewed and swallowed, thereby causing hair balls in the stomach
(trichobezoars) with a risk of bowel obstruction. Trichotillomania can
have an onset in childhood, where there is often less evidence of
tension prior to hair pulling. However, it can also begin in adolescence
and adulthood. The disorder is more common in women and the course may
be episodic or chronic. In clinical samples, trichotillomania is often
comorbid with mood and anxiety disorders, as well as impulse control
disorders such as substance misuse. Individuals with trichotillomania
frequently exhibit other repetitive behaviours involving the body, such
as lip chewing or skin picking.

impulses to pull out hairs. ICD-10 also notes that hair pulling is
generally preceded by increasing tension and accompanied by relief or
gratification.

Epidemiology The prevalence of trichotillomania defined by current
diagnostic criteria remains to be clarified, but around 1--2% of college
students report problematic hair pulling. Family studies indicate that
trichotillomania is associated with increased rates of
obsessive--compulsive and grooming disorders (trichotillomania, nail
biting and skin picking) amongst first-degree relatives. Conversely,
first-degree relatives of patients with OCD have higher rates of
grooming disorders. These findings suggest some shared genetic diathesis
between OCD and trichotillomania (McElroy and Keck, 2009).

Diagnosis

Management

The DSM-5 diagnosis for trichotillomania requires that the patient
repeatedly pulls their hair, despite repeated attempts to stop doing so,
and that this hair loss causes distress and/or significant impairment in
occupational or social functioning. It is also necessary that the hair
loss not caused by another medical condition or mental disorder.
Diagnosis in ICD-10 is similar, although in this classification,
trichotillomania is grouped with impulse control disorders such as
pathological gambling and pyromania. ICD-10 describes trichotillomania
as noticeable hair loss owing to a recurrent failure to resist

Psychological therapies are currently the best validated management for
trichotillomania. There are positive studies with behavioural treatment
employing habit reversal, and in one study cognitive behaviour therapy
proved more effective than clomipramine and placebo. However, when
behaviour therapy has been compared to a psychological control procedure
such as progressive muscular relaxation it has not been clearly
superior. Fluoxetine has not proved reliably beneficial, but good
responses to treatment have been reported with clomipramine and the
glutathione precursor, N-acetylcysteine (Slikboer et al., 2016).

Further reading Baldwin DS et al.Â (2014) Evidence-based pharmacological
treatment of anxiety disorders, traumatic stress disorder and
obsessive-compulsive disorder: A revision of the 2005 guidelines from
the British Association for Psychopharmacology. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 28, 403--39. (A comprehensive updated review of the
pharmacological treatment of anxiety disorders and obsessive--compulsive
disorder.) Gelder MG et al.Â (eds) (2009). Section 4.7: Anxiety disorders
(generalized anxiety disorders; social and specific phobias; and panic
disorder and agoraphobia), and Section 4.8: Obsessional disorders. The
New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2005a).
Obsessive--Compulsive Disorder: Core interventions in the treatment of
obsessive--compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder. Clinical
Guideline 31. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
London. (A periodically updated comprehensive review, available at
http://www.nice.org .uk.) National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2010). Anxiety: Management of anxiety (panic disorder, with
and without agoraphobia, and generalized anxiety disorder) in adults in
primary, secondary and community care. Clinical Guideline 22. National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, London. (A periodically
updated comprehensive review, available at http://www.nice.org.uk.)

931

CHAPTER 9

Depression Introduction 193

The aetiology of depression 204

Clinical features 193

Course and prognosis of depression 216

Transcultural factors 198

The acute treatment of depression 218

Classification of depression 199

The longer-term treatment of depression 222

Differential diagnosis of depressive disorders 203

The assessment of depressive disorders 224

The epidemiology of depressive disorders 203

The management of depressive disorders 225

Introduction The next two chapters describe depressive disorders and
bipolar disorder. These conditions are also called mood disorders
because one of their main features is abnormality of mood. Nowadays the
term is usually restricted to disorders in which this mood is depression
or elation, but in the past some authors have included states of anxiety
as well. In this book, anxiety disorders are described in Chapter 8.
Mood disorders have in the past been referred to as 'affective
disorders', a term that is still used fairly widely.

Depressive disorders It is part of normal experience to feel unhappy
during times of adversity. The symptom of depressed mood is a component
of many psychiatric syndromes, and is also

commonly found in certain physical diseases (e.g.Â in infections such as
viral hepatitis, and some neurological disorders). In this chapter we
are concerned neither with normal feelings of unhappiness nor with
depressed mood as a symptom of other disorders, but with the syndromes
known as depressive disorders. The central features of these syndromes
are: â

depressed mood

â

negative thinking

â

lack of enjoyment

â

reduced energy

â

slowness.

Of these, depressed mood is usually, but not invariably, the most
prominent symptom.

Clinical features Depressive syndromes The clinical presentations of
depressive states are varied, and they can be subdivided in a number of
different

ways. In the following account, disorders are grouped by their severity.
The account begins with a description of the clinical features of an
episode of severe depression, together with certain important clinical
variants that

194

194

Chapter 9 Depression can influence the presentation of depressive
disorders. Finally, the special features of the less severe depressive
disorders are outlined. What constitutes an 'episode' of clinical
depression is inevitably a somewhat arbitrary concept. The symptoms
listed for the diagnosis of 'depressive episode' in the ICD-10
classification and the various levels of severity are shown in Box 9.1.
Similar symptoms (five or more) are required for the diagnosis of 'major
depressive episode' in DSM-5 except that the symptomatology in DSM-5
includes psychomotor agitation or retardation. DSM-5 also specifically
requires that the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.

Severe depressive episode In a severe episode of depression, the central
features are low mood, lack of enjoyment (anhedonia), negative thinking,

Box 9.1 Symptoms needed to meet the criteria for 'depressive episode' in
ICD-10 A Depressed mood Loss of interest and enjoyment â Reduced energy
and decreased activity â â

B Reduced concentration Reduced self-esteem and confidence â Ideas of
guilt and unworthiness â Pessimistic thoughts â Ideas of self-harm â
Disturbed sleep â Diminished appetite Mild depressive episode: at least
two of A and at least two of B Moderate depressive episode: at least two
of A and at least three of B Severe depressive episode: all three of A
and at least four of B Severity of symptoms and degree of functional
impairment also guide classification

and reduced energy, all of which lead to decreased social and
occupational functioning.

Appearance The patient's appearance is characteristic. Dress and
grooming may be neglected. The facial features are characterized by a
turning downward of the corners of the mouth, and by vertical furrowing
of the centre of the brow. The rate of blinking may be reduced. The
shoulders are bent and the head is inclined forward so that the
direction of gaze is downward. Gestures and movements are reduced. It is
important to note that some patients maintain a smiling exterior despite
deep feelings of depression.

Mood The mood of the patient is one of misery. This mood does not
improve substantially in circumstances where ordinary feelings of
sadness would be alleviated---for example, in pleasant company or after
hearing good news. The low mood is, in this sense, pervasive. Moreover,
the mood is often experienced as different from ordinary sadness.
Patients sometimes speak of a black cloud pervading all mental
activities. Some patients can conceal this mood change from other
people, at least for short periods. Some try to hide their low mood
during clinical interviews, which makes it more difficult for the doctor
to detect. The mood is often worse first thing in the morning when the
patient wakes, improving as the day wears on. This is called diurnal
variation of mood.

Depressive cognitions Negative thoughts ('depressive cognitions') are
important symptoms that can be divided into three groups:

â â

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization.

â

worthlessness

â

pessimism

â

guilt.

In feeling worthless, patients think that they are failing in what they
do and that other people see them as a failure; they no longer feel
confident, and discount any success as a chance happening for which they
can take no credit. Pessimistic thoughts concern future prospects.
Patients expect the worst. They foresee failure in work, the ruin of
finances, misfortune for family, and an inevitable deterioration in
health. These ideas of hopelessness are often accompanied by the thought
that life is no longer worth living and that death would come as a
welcome release. These gloomy preoccupations may progress to thoughts
of, and plans for, suicide. It is important to ask about these ideas in
every case (the assessment of suicidal risk is considered further in
Chapter 21).

195

Clinical features Feelings of guilt often take the form of unreasonable
self-blame about minor matters---for example, patients may feel guilty
about past trivial acts of dishonesty or letting someone down. Usually
these events have not been in patients' thoughts for years, but when
they become depressed they flood back into their memory, accompanied by
intense feelings. Preoccupations of this kind strongly suggest
depressive disorder. Some patients have similar feelings of guilt but do
not attach them to any particular event. Other memories are focused on
unhappy events; patients remember occasions when they were sad, when
they failed, or when their fortunes were at a low ebb. These gloomy
memories become increasingly frequent as the depression deepens.
Patients blame themselves for their misery and incapacity, and attribute
it to personal failing and moral weakness (a view not uncommonly held by
the wider public).

Goal-directed behaviour Lack of interest and enjoyment (also known as
anhedonia) is frequent, although it is not always complained of
spontaneously. Patients show no enthusiasm for activities and hobbies
that they would normally enjoy. They feel no zest for living and no
pleasure in everyday things. They often withdraw from social encounters.
Reduced energy is characteristic (although depression is sometimes
associated with a degree of physical restlessness that can mislead the
observer). Patients feel lethargic, find everything an effort, and leave
tasks unfinished. For example, a normally house-proud person may leave
the beds unmade and dirty plates on the table. Work outside the home
becomes increasingly difficult and academic achievement declines.
Understandably, many patients attribute this lack of energy to physical
illness. Anhedonia is an important symptom because it is an important
way of distinguishing depression of at least moderate severity from
milder disorders. It is also a key symptom of melancholic depression
(see 'Classification by symptomatic picture' below).

Psychomotor changes Psychomotor retardation is frequent (although, as
described later, some patients are agitated rather than slowed down).
The retarded patient walks and acts slowly. Slowing of thought is
reflected in their speech; there is a significant delay before questions
are answered, and pauses in conversation may be unusually prolonged.
Agitation is a state of restlessness that is experienced by the patient
as inability to relax, and is seen by an observer as restless activity.
When it is mild, patients are seen to be plucking at their fingers and
making restless

movements of their legs; when it is severe, they cannot sit for long,
and instead pace up and down. Anxiety is frequent, although not
invariably present, in severe depression. (As described later, it is
common in less severe depressive disorders.) Another common symptom is
irritability, which is the tendency to respond with undue annoyance to
minor demands and frustrations, and can be a core presenting feature in
adolescents in particular.

Biological symptoms There is an important group of symptoms that is
often described as 'biological' (also referred to as 'melancholic',
'somatic', or 'vegetative'). These symptoms include sleep disturbance,
diurnal variation in mood, loss of appetite, loss of weight,
constipation, loss of libido, and, among women, amenorrhoea. They are
very common in depressive disorders of more severe degree (but less
usual in mild depressive disorders). Some of these symptoms require
further comment. Sleep disturbance in depressive disorders is of several
kinds. The most characteristic type is early-morning waking, but delay
in falling asleep and waking during the night also occur. Early-morning
waking occurs 2 or 3 hours before the patient's usual time of waking. He
does not fall asleep again, but lies awake feeling unrefreshed and often
restless and agitated. He thinks about the coming day with pessimism,
broods about past failures, and ponders gloomily about the future. It is
this combination of early waking and depressive thinking that is
important in diagnosis. It should be noted that some depressed patients
sleep excessively rather than waking early, but they still report waking
unrefreshed. Weight loss in depressive disorders often seems to be
greater than can be accounted for merely by the patient's reported lack
of appetite. In some patients the disturbances of eating and weight are
towards excess---that is, they eat more than usual and gain weight.
Usually eating brings temporary relief of their distressing feelings.
Complaints about physical symptoms are common in depressive disorders.
They take many forms, but complaints of constipation, fatigue, and
aching discomfort anywhere in the body are particularly common.
Complaints about any pre-existing physical disorder usually increase,
and hypochondriacal preoccupations are common.

Other features Several other psychiatric symptoms may occur as part of a
depressive disorder, and occasionally one of them dominates the clinical
picture. They include depersonalization, obsessional symptoms, panic
attacks, and,

195

196

196

Chapter 9 Depression more rarely, dissociative symptoms such as fugue or
loss of function of a limb. Complaints of poor memory are also common;
depressed patients commonly show deficits on a wide range of
neuropsychological tasks, but impairments in the retrieval and
recognition of recently learned material are particularly prominent.
Sometimes the impairment of memory in a depressed patient is so severe
that the clinical presentation resembles that of dementia. This
presentation, which is particularly common in the elderly, is sometimes
called depressive pseudodementia (Chapter 14).

Psychotic depression As depressive disorders become increasingly severe,
all of the features described above occur with greater intensity. There
is complete loss of function in social and occupational spheres.
Inattention to basic hygiene and nutrition may give rise to concern
about the patient's wellbeing. Psychomotor retardation may make
interviewing difficult or impossible. In addition, there may be
delusions and hallucinations, in which case the disorder is referred to
as psychotic depression (depressive psychosis is a synonym). As with
other psychotic states, insight is impaired and patients (usually of
blameless character) regard themselves as wicked and being justly
punished for their misdeeds. The delusions of severe depressive
disorders are concerned with the same themes as the non-delusional
thinking of moderate depressive disorders. Therefore they are termed
mood-congruent. These themes are worthlessness, guilt, ill health, and,
more rarely, poverty. Such delusions have been described in Chapter 1,
but a few examples may be helpful at this point. Patients with a
delusion of guilt may believe that some dishonest act, such as a minor
concealment when filling in a tax return, will be discovered and that
they will be punished severely and humiliated. They are likely to
believe that such punishment is deserved. Patients with hypochondriacal
delusions may be convinced that they have cancer or venereal disease,
while patients with a delusion of impoverishment may wrongly believe
that they have lost all of their money in a business venture.
Persecutory delusions also occur. Patients may believe that other people
are discussing them in a derogatory way or are about to take revenge on
them. When persecutory delusions are part of a depressive syndrome,
typically patients accept the supposed persecution as something that
they have brought upon themselves. In their view, they are ultimately to
blame. This can be a useful diagnostic feature for distinguishing severe
depression from non-affective psychosis (see Chapter 11). Some depressed
patients experience delusions and

hallucinations that are not clearly related to themes of depression
(i.e.Â they are 'mood-incongruent'). Their presence appears to worsen the
prognosis of the illness. Particularly severe depressive delusions are
found in Cotard's syndrome, which was described by the French
psychiatrist, Jules Cotard, in 1882. The characteristic feature is an
extreme kind of nihilistic delusion. For example, some patients may
complain that their bowels have been destroyed, so they will never be
able to pass faeces again. Others may assert that they are penniless and
have no prospect of ever having any money again. Still others may be
convinced that their whole family has ceased to exist and that they
themselves are dead. Although the extreme nature of these symptoms is
striking, such cases do not appear to differ in important ways from
other severe depressive disorders.

Other clinical variants of depressive disorders Agitated depression This
term is applied to depressive disorders in which agitation is prominent.
As already noted, agitation occurs in many severe depressive disorders,
but in agitated depression it is particularly severe. Agitated
depression is seen more commonly among middle-aged and elderly patients
than among younger individuals.

Retarded depression This name is sometimes applied to depressive
disorders in which psychomotor retardation is especially prominent.
There is no evidence that they represent a separate syndrome, although
the presence of prominent retardation is said to predict a good response
to electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). If the term is used, it should be in
a purely descriptive sense. In its most severe form, retarded depression
merges with depressive stupor.

Depressive stupor In severe depressive disorder, slowing of movement and
poverty of speech may become so extreme that the patient is motionless
and mute. Such depressive stupor is rarely seen now that active
treatment is available. Therefore the description by Kraepelin (1921,
p.Â 80) is of particular interest: The patients lie mute in bed, give no
answer of any sort, at most withdraw themselves timidly from approaches,
but often do not defend themselves from pinprick. . . . . They sit
helpless before their food; perhaps, however, they let themselves be
spoon-fed without making any difficulty.

Kraepelin commented that recall of the events that took place during
stupor was sometimes impaired when

179

Clinical features the patient recovered. Nowadays, the general view is
that, on recovery, patients are able to recall nearly all of the events
that took place during the period of stupor. It is possible that in some
of Kraepelin's cases there was clouding of consciousness (possibly
related to inadequate fluid intake, which is common in these patients).
Patients in states of depressive stupor may exhibit catatonic motor
disturbances (see Chapter 1).

Atypical depression The term atypical depression is generally applied to
disorders of moderate clinical severity. The precise meaning of the term
has varied over the years, but currently it is applied to disorders
characterized by: â

variably depressed mood with mood reactivity to positive events

â

overeating and oversleeping

â

extreme fatigue and heaviness in the limbs (leaden paralysis)

â

pronounced anxiety.

Many patients with these clinical symptoms have a lifelong tendency to
react in an exaggerated way to perceived or real rejection (rejection
sensitivity), although this character trait can be exacerbated by the
presence of a depressive disorder. Patients with atypical depression
also have an earlier onset of illness and a more chronic course. The
importance of recognizing atypical depression is that, because of their
interpersonal sensitivity, patients with this disorder can be hard to
manage and may be regarded as having 'difficult' personalities rather
than depressive disorder. Traditionally, atypical depression was
associated with a poor response to tricyclic antidepressant treatment
but had a better outcome with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).
However, there is little evidence that the diagnosis of atypical
depression predicts response to modern antidepressant drug treatment
(see Arnow et al., 2015).

Mixed depression Mixed affective states have long been recognized in
bipolar patients (see Chapter 10), where depressive symptoms are not
infrequently detected in patients in whom the main presentation is
mania. However, it is possible for patients with major depression to
exhibit symptoms that might be seen in mania but do not reach the
threshold for diagnosis of bipolar disorder. DSM-5 has a specifier for
major depressive episode 'with mixed features'. The most common symptoms
in mixed depression are irritable mood, mood lability, distractibility,
agitation, and impulsivity (Perugi et al., 2015). Not surprisingly, such
symptoms are more common in depressed patients

with a family history of bipolar disorder, and depressed patients with
mixed features are more likely themselves to develop bipolar disorder in
the future.

Mild depressive states It might be expected that mild depressive
disorders would present with symptoms similar to those of the depressive
disorders described above, but with less intensity. To some extent this
is the case, but in mild depressive disorders there are frequently
additional symptoms that are less prominent in severe disorders. These
symptoms have been characterized in the past as 'neurotic', and they
include anxiety, phobias, obsessional symptoms, and, less often,
dissociative symptoms. In terms of classification, both DSM-5 and ICD-10
have categories of mild depression where criteria for a depressive
episode are met but the depressive symptoms are fewer and less severe
(see Box 9.1). Apart from the 'neurotic' symptoms that are found in some
cases, mild depressive disorders are characterized by the expected
symptoms of low mood, lack of energy and interest, and irritability.
There is sleep disturbance, but not the early-morning waking that is so
characteristic of more severe depressive disorders. Instead, there is
more often difficulty in falling asleep, and periods of waking during
the night, usually followed by a period of sleep at the end of the
night. 'Biological' features (poor appetite, weight loss, and low
libido) are not usually found. Although mood may vary during the day, it
is usually worse in the evening than in the morning. The patient may not
appear obviously dejected, or slowed in their movement. Delusions and
hallucinations are not present. In their mildest forms, these cases
merge into the minor mood disorders considered below. As described
later, they pose considerable problems of classification. Many of these
mild depressive disorders are brief, starting at a time of personal
misfortune and subsiding when fortunes have changed or a new level of
adjustment has been achieved. However, some cases persist for months or
years, causing considerable suffering, even though the symptoms do not
increase. These chronic depressive states have been termed dysthymia,
which is characterized in ICD-10 as the persistence over a number of
years of depressive symptoms that are not severe enough to meet criteria
for a depressive episode. However, it is not uncommon in such patients
for periods of more severe depression to supervene, in which case the
diagnosis of depressive episode is made. DSM-5 has a similar category,
called 'Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia)', which requires
fewer symptoms than those needed to diagnose 'Major Depressive Disorder'
but stipulates that

197

198

198

Chapter 9 Depression the symptoms must have persisted for at least 2
years. In DSM-5, this category also includes patients who meet full
criteria for 'Major Depression' that has persisted for more than 2
years.

Minor anxiety--depressive disorders We have already seen that anxiety
and depressive symptoms often occur together. Indeed, earlier writers
considered that anxiety and depressive disorders could not be separated
clearly even in patients who had been admitted to hospital with severe
disorders. Although most psychiatrists now accept that the distinction
can usually be made among the more severe forms that present in
psychiatric practice, the distinction is less easy to make in the milder
forms that present in primary care.

Classification As psychiatrists have worked increasingly with general
practitioners, the importance of minor anxiety-- depressive disorders
has been recognized, but without any agreement about classification.
ICD-10 includes a category of 'mixed anxiety and depressive disorder',
which can be applied when neither anxiety symptoms nor depressive
symptoms are severe enough to meet the criteria for an anxiety disorder
or a depressive disorder, and when the symptoms do not have the close
association with stressful events or significant life changes that is
required for a diagnosis of acute stress reaction or adjustment
disorder. According to ICD-10, patients with this presentation are seen
frequently in primary care, and there are many others in the general
population who are not seen by doctors. In ICD-10 this diagnosis appears
among the anxiety disorders, although some psychiatrists consider that
the condition is more closely related to the mood disorders, a view that
is reflected in the alternative term, minor affective disorder. In
DSM-5, no comparable diagnosis appears in the classification, although
there is a category, 'Unspecified Depressive Disorder', for depressive
symptoms that

cause distress or impairment in social and occupational functioning
without meeting criteria for any specific depressive disorder. Although
little is known about these conditions or about their relationship to
other disorders, patients commonly present to primary care doctors with
this group of symptoms. A suitable category is needed even if it is not
possible to write strict criteria for diagnosis.

Clinical picture One of the best descriptions of minor
anxiety--depressive disorder is that given by Goldberg et al.Â (1976),
who studied 88 patients from a general practice in Philadelphia. The
most frequent symptoms were: â

fatigue

â

anxiety

â

depression

â

irritability

â

poor concentration

â

insomnia

â

somatic symptoms and bodily preoccupation.

A similar range of symptoms was found in the Adult Psychiatric Morbidity
in England survey (McManus et al., 2009), which surveyed the frequency
of 'neurotic' symptomatology in a community sample. Patients with minor
anxiety--depressive disorders commonly present to medical practitioners
with prominent somatic symptoms. The reason for this is uncertain; some
symptoms are autonomic features of anxiety, and it is possible that
patients expect somatic complaints to be viewed more sympathetically
than emotional problems. Another point of clinical relevance is that
minor affective disorders can be prolonged and in some cases may cause
quite disabling difficulties in personal and occupational function. Thus
the term 'minor' may not capture the serious consequences of the
disorder for an individual. In some patients minor affective disorders
may represent a residual form of a major mood disturbance (Angst, 2009).

Transcultural factors There are cultural variations in the clinical
presentation of depressive states, but in most countries depression
appears to be underdiagnosed, particularly in primary care. In fact,
sadness, joylessness, anxiety, and lack of energy are common symptoms of
depression in most

cultures. While somatic presentations of depression are undoubtedly
found in all societies, they are apparently more frequent and prominent
in non-western cultures, including in some immigrant groups in western
societies. An important factor leading to somatization

19

Classification of depression of depression appears to be the extent to
which different cultures stigmatize mental illness (Bagayogo et al.,
2013). It is necessary, however, to distinguish between somatization
(see Chapter 22) and somatic metaphors for a painful emotional state.
For example, Punjabi women living in London have been found to use
expressions

such as 'weight on my heart' and 'feelings of heat' to express emotional
suffering, the presence of which they were well aware. Particular
cultures have their own ways of dealing with painful emotions produced,
for example, by loss, and the diagnosis of depression should take this
into account by placing suitable emphasis on issues such as degree of
distress and level of disability.

Classification of depression There is no general agreement about the
best method of classifying depressive disorders. A number of approaches
have been tried, based on the following: â

presumed aetiology

â

symptomatic picture

â

course.

Classification by presumed aetiology Historically, depressive disorders
were sometimes classified into two kinds---those in which the symptoms
were caused by factors within the individual, and were independent of
outside factors (endogenous depression), and those in which the symptoms
were a response to external stressors (reactive depression). However, it
has been recognized for many years that this distinction is
unsatisfactory. For example, Lewis (1934) wrote: every illness is a
product of two factors---of the environment working on the
organism---whether the constitutional factor is the determining
influence or the environmental one . . . is never a question to be dealt
with as either/or.

As noted in Chapter 5, when considering the aetiology of individual
cases of depression, the relative contributions of a variety of
aetiological factors must be considered. Neither ICD-10 nor DSM-5
contains categories of reactive or endogenous depression.

Classification by symptomatic picture Melancholic depression It is well
recognized that episodes of depression vary in symptomatic profile both
within and between subjects. In the section on clinical description it
was noted that some depressive conditions are characterized by

'biological' symptoms, such as loss of appetite, psychomotor changes,
weight loss, constipation, reduced libido, amenorrhoea, and
early-morning waking. These symptoms have sometimes been termed
melancholic, and they have been used to delineate a specific subgroup of
depressive disorders, namely major depression with melancholia in DSM-5,
or depressive episode with somatic symptoms in ICD-10 (see Box 9.2). The
difficulty with this classification is that most patients have
melancholic symptoms of some kind, although a careful search may be
required to reveal them. Therefore the number of symptoms that are
needed to fulfil the criterion

Box 9.2 Clinical features of depression with 'somatic' or 'melancholic'
features Loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities Lack of
emotional reactivity to normally pleasurable surroundings and events â
Early-morning waking (2 hours or more before usual time) â Depression
worse in the morning â Psychomotor agitation or retardation â Marked
loss of appetite â Weight loss (5% or more of body weight in last month)
â Marked loss of libido (ICD-10 only) â Distinct quality of depressed
mood (DSM-5 only) â Excessive guilt (DSM-5 only) â â

At least four of these symptoms are required to make a diagnosis of
depression 'with somatic features' (ICD-10) or major depression 'with
melancholic features' (DSM-5). DSM-5 also specifically requires either
'loss of interest etc' or 'lack of emotional reactivity etc', to be
present.

199

20

200

Chapter 9 Depression for depression with melancholia is somewhat
arbitrary. Despite this caveat, it is generally agreed that clear-cut
melancholic depression is associated with the following clinical
correlates (see Parker et al., 2015): â

more severe symptomatology

â

family history of depression

â

poor response to placebo medication

â

possibly better response to tricyclic antidepressants than selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)

â

more evidence of neurobiological abnormalities (e.g. decreased latency
to rapid eye movement sleep, cortisol hypersecretion).

It is still not clear whether melancholic depression is a distinct
subtype or whether it represents a point on a continuum of severity of
depression, towards the more severe end. Kendler (1997) attempted to
answer this question using a population sample of twins. He found
evidence that melancholic depression did represent a valid subtype in
that it identified a group of individuals with a particularly high
familial risk of depression. However, the diagnosis of melancholia
indicated the presence of a quantitatively more severe form of
depression, rather than a distinct aetiological subtype.

Psychotic depression As noted above, severe depression can also be
manifested with psychotic features (although in depressive psychosis the
features of melancholia are almost invariably present as well). The
presence of psychotic features indicates that treatment with
antidepressant medication alone is unlikely to be successful, and that
combination with antipsychotic drugs is usually needed (Cowen and
Anderson, 2015).

Non-melancholic depression In this classification by symptom profile,
the remaining forms of major depression ('non-melancholic' depression)
include several different kinds of clinical disorder---for example, mild
depressive episodes and atypical depression. These depressions are more
likely to have a relative prominence of features, such as anxiety,
hostility, phobias, and obsessional symptoms. In the past, because of
these symptoms, non-melancholic depressions were sometimes called
'neurotic depression', but this term does not appear in current
diagnostic classifications. As noted above, atypical depression has
particular clinical characteristics and in DSM-5 atypical depression,
like melancholic depression, can be a specifier for a major depressive
episode.

Classification by course Unipolar and bipolar disorders Mood disorders
are characteristically recurrent, and Kraepelin was guided by the course
of illness when he brought mania and depression together as a single
entity. He found that the course was essentially the same whether the
original disorder was manic or depressive, and so he put the two
together in a single category of manic--depressive psychosis. This view
was widely accepted until 1962, when Leonhard and colleagues suggested a
division into three groups: â

Patients who had had a depressive disorder only (unipolar depression).

â

Those who had had mania only (unipolar mania).

â

Those who had had both depressive disorder and mania (bipolar).

Nowadays, it is the usual practice not to use the term 'unipolar mania',
but to include all cases of mania in the bipolar group on the grounds
that nearly all patients who have mania eventually experience a
depressive disorder (see Chapter 10).

Seasonal affective disorder Some patients repeatedly develop a
depressive disorder at the same time of year, usually the autumn or
winter. In some cases the timing reflects extra demands placed on the
person at a particular season of the year, either in work or in other
aspects of their life. In other cases there is no such cause, and it has
been suggested that seasonal affective disorder is related in some way
to the changes in the seasons (e.g.Â to the number of hours of daylight).
Although these seasonal affective disorders are characterized mainly by
the time at which they occur, some symptoms are said to occur more often
than in other mood disorders. These symptoms include: â

hypersomnia

â

increased appetite, with craving for carbohydrate

â

an afternoon slump in energy levels.

The most common pattern is onset in autumn or winter, and recovery in
spring or summer. This condition is also called 'winter depression'.
Some patients show evidence of hypomania or mania in the summer, which
suggests that they have a seasonal bipolar illness. This pattern has led
to the suggestion that shortening of daylight hours is important in the
pathophysiology

201

Classification of depression of winter depression, and treatment methods
include exposure to bright artificial light during hours of darkness.
DSM-5 has a specifier of 'seasonal pattern', which can be applied to
recurrent major depression with an established seasonal onset. The use
of bright light treatment is reviewed in Chapter 25.

Recurrent brief depression Some individuals experience recurrent
depressive episodes of short duration, typically 2--7 days, that are not
of sufficient duration to meet the criteria for major depression or
depressive episode. These episodes recur with some frequency, about once
a month on average. There is no apparent link with the menstrual cycle
in female sufferers. Although the depressive episodes are short, they
are as severe as the more enduring depressive disorders, and can be
associated with suicidal behaviour. Thus recurrent brief depression is
associated with much personal distress and social and occupational
impairment. Individuals with recurrent brief depression often receive
treatment with antidepressant medication, but its value is questionable
(see Baldwin and Sinclair, 2015).

Classification in DSM and ICD The main categories in the sections on
depressive disorders in DSM-5 and ICD-10 are shown in Table 9.1 and Box
9.3. Broad similarities are evident, together with some differences. The
first similarity is that both systems contain categories for single
episodes of mood disorder as well as categories for recurrent episodes.
The second is that both recognize milder but persistent depressive
states (dysthymia) although, as noted above, in DSM-5 dysthymia has been
subsumed into the category of 'Persistent Depressive Disorder', which
also includes 'Chronic Major Depression'. In DSM-5, mood disorders that
are judged to be secondary to a medical condition are included as a
subcategory of mood disorders, whereas in ICD-10 these conditions are
classified as mood disorders under 'Organic Mental Disorders'. Both
ICD-10 and DSM-5 classify depressive episodes on the basis of severity
and whether or not psychotic features are present. It is also possible
to specify whether the depressive episode has melancholic (DSM5) or
somatic (ICD-10) features. In DSM-5, an episode of major depression with
appropriate clinical symptomatology (see above) can be specified as
atypical depression. In ICD-10, atypical depression is classified
separately under 'Other depressive episodes.' Both ICD10 and DSM-5 allow
the diagnosis of recurrent brief

Table 9.1 Classification of depressive disorders ICD-10

DSM-5

Depressive episode

Major depressive episode

Mild

Mild

Moderate

Moderate

Severe

Severe

Severe with psychosis

with psychotic features

Other depressive episodes Atypical depression Recurrent depressive
disorder

Major depressive disorder

Currently mild

Recurrent

Currently moderate Currently severe Currently severe with psychosis In
remission Persistent mood disorders Persistent depressive disorder
Dysthymia Other mood disorders

Other specified depressive disorder

Recurrent brief

Recurrent brief depression

Depression Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and
behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines,
Copyright (1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American
Psychiatric Association.

depression, but under slightly different headings (see Table 9.2). DSM-5
has some additional clinical specifiers which may have implications for
treatment and prognosis (Table 9.3).

Classification and description in everyday practice Although neither
DSM-5 nor ICD-10 is entirely satisfactory, it seems unlikely that
further rearrangement of descriptive categories would be an improvement.
A solution will only be achieved when we have a better understanding of
aetiology. Meanwhile, either ICD-10

201

20

202

Chapter 9 Depression

Table 9.3 The aetiology of mood disorders

Box 9.3 Additional specifiers for depressive disorders in DSM-5 With
anxious distress â With mixed features â With melancholic features â
With psychotic features â With catatonia â With peripartum onset

Area of investigation

Relevant studies

Genetic

Genetic epidemiology

â

Source: data from Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

Molecular genetics Personality

Temperament Cognitive style

Early environment

Parental deprivation Childhood adversity and abuse

Social environment

Life events Chronic difficulties

Table 9.2 A systematic scheme for the clinical description of depressive
episodes

Psychological

Cognitive Biological

The episode Severity

Mild, moderate, or severe

Special features

With melancholic symptoms With atypical symptoms With prominent anxiety
With psychotic symptoms

Psychodynamic

Monoamines Hypothalamic--pituitary-- adrenal axis Neuropsychology and
brain imaging Neuropathology Neurogenesis, neurotropins, synaptic
plasticity

With agitation With retardation or stupor The course

Single or recurrent episodes

Aetiological factors

Organic Family history of mood disorder Personal history of mood
disorder Childhood experiences Personality Social support Life events

or DSM-5 should be used for statistical recording. For most clinical
purposes, it is better to describe disorders systematically than to
classify them. This can be done for every case by referring to the
severity, the distinguishing symptomatic features, and the course of the
disorder (Table 9.2), together with an evaluation of the relative
importance of known aetiological factors (see Table 9.3).

203

The epidemiology of depressive disorders

Differential diagnosis of depressive disorders Depressive disorders have
to be distinguished from the following: â

normal sadness

â

adjustment disorder

â

anxiety disorders

â

schizophrenia

â

organic brain syndromes.

As already explained, the distinction from normal sadness is made on the
basis of the presence of other symptoms of the syndrome of depressive
disorder. Depressive disorders also have rates of comorbidity with a
wide range of other disorders---for example, anxiety disorders, eating
disorders, substance misuse, and personality disorder. In all of these
cases it is important to recognize and treat the depressive disorder.
Adjustment disorders following a stressor (see page 149) often present
with depressed mood, together with tearfulness and feelings of
hopelessness. However, the full diagnostic criteria for major depression
are not met.

Anxiety disorders Mild depressive disorders are sometimes difficult to
distinguish from anxiety disorders. Accurate diagnosis depends on
assessment of the relative severity of anxiety and depressive symptoms,
and on the order in which they appeared. Similar problems arise when
there are prominent phobic or obsessional symptoms, or when there are
dissociative symptoms, with or without histrionic behaviour. In all of
these cases, the clinician may fail to identify the depressive symptoms
and so prescribe the wrong treatment.

Schizophrenia The distinction from schizophrenia depends on a careful
search for the characteristic features of this condition (see Chapter
11). Difficult diagnostic problems may arise when the patient has
depressive psychosis, but here again the distinction can usually be made
on the basis of a careful examination of the mental state, and of the
order in which the symptoms appeared. Information about the past
psychiatric history may also be useful. Particular difficulties also
arise when symptoms characteristic of depressive disorder and of
schizophrenia are found in equal measure in the same patient; these
so-called schizoaffective disorders are discussed in Chapter 11

Dementia and other organic conditions In middle and late life,
depressive disorders are sometimes difficult to distinguish from
dementia, because some patients with depressive symptoms complain of
considerable difficulty in remembering. In fact, patients with severe
depression can perform very badly on tests of cognitive function, and
distinction between the two conditions purely in terms of the nature of
the cognitive impairment may not be possible. Here the presence of
depressive symptoms is the key to diagnosis, which should be confirmed
with improvement of the memory disorder as normal mood is restored.
Numerous other general medical conditions can present with depressive
features (see Chapter 22). The key to diagnosis is a careful history and
physical examination, supplemented by special investigations where
appropriate.

The epidemiology of depressive disorders It is difficult to determine
the prevalence of depressive disorder, partly because different
investigators have used different diagnostic definitions. More modern
investigations have used structured diagnostic interviews linked to
standardized diagnostic criteria, including the Diagnostic Interview
Schedule (DIS) and the Composite International Diagnostic Interview
(CIDI) (see Chapter 3).

Major depression Defining the boundaries of depressive episodes in
community surveys presents a number of difficulties. However, if the DSM
criteria for major depression are applied, recent surveys in
industrialized countries suggest that:

203

204

204

Chapter 9 Depression â

The 12-month prevalence of major depression in the community is around
2--5%.

â

The lifetime rates in different studies vary considerably (in the range
4--30%) and the true figure probably lies in the range 10--20%.

â

The mean age of onset is about 27 years.

â

Rates of major depression are about twice as high in women as in men,
across different cultures.

â

There may be increased rates of depression in people born since 1945.

â

Rates of depression are higher in the unemployed and divorced.

â

Major depression has a high comorbidity with other disorders,
particularly anxiety disorders and substance misuse.

The reasons for higher rates of major depression among women are
uncertain. This increase starts to become apparent at puberty, and could
be due in part to a greater readiness of women to admit to having
depressive symptoms. However, such selective reporting is unlikely to be
the whole explanation. It is possible that some depressed men misuse
alcohol and are diagnosed as suffering from alcohol-related disorders
rather than depression, with the consequence that the true number of
major depressive disorders is underestimated (Branney and White, 2008).
Again, misdiagnosis of this kind is unlikely to account for the whole of
the difference. Furthermore, in many societies women are subject to
various kinds of social disadvantage and, for example, are more likely
than men to experience sexual abuse and domestic violence. Factors of
this sort are also likely to be implicated in their increased risk of
depression. It is also important to note that the preponderance of
depression in women emerges at puberty and seems more linked to changes
in sex hormone levels than chronological age. This suggests a role of
certain hormones in sensitizing the brain to the effects of stress
(Thapar, 2012).

Although it used to be thought that the risk of depressive disorders
increased with age, recent surveys suggest that major depression is most
prevalent in the 18--44-year age group. A number of studies have
suggested that people born since 1945 in industrialized countries have
both a higher lifetime risk of major depression and an earlier age of
onset. These studies have mainly been retrospective, and it is possible
that the apparent increased rate of major depression in young people is
due to the fact that older people forget (or are less willing to reveal)
that they have been depressed. For a review of the epidemiology of mood
disorders, see Joyce (2009).

Dysthymia and recurrent brief depression The lifetime risk for dysthymia
is around 4% (Alonso et al., 2004). Rates of dysthymia are higher in
women and in the divorced. There is less epidemiological information
about recurrent brief depression, but in the Zurich prospective study
the 12-month prevalence for recurrent brief depression was about 2.6%,
very similar to the rate found for dysthmia (2.3%) (Pezawas et al.,
2003).

Minor anxiety--depressive disorders Estimates of the frequency of minor
anxiety--depressive disorders show wide variations because the different
studies have not defined cases in the same way. However, these are
probably the most prevalent psychiatric disorders in the community. For
example, in the Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey in England, McManus
et al.Â (2009) found that mixed anxiety and depression was the most
common mental disorder in the community, with a 1-week prevalence of 9%.

The aetiology of depression There have been many different approaches to
the aetiology of depression. There is substantial knowledge about the
genetic epidemiology of depression and how certain childhood experiences
can lay down a predisposition to depressive disorders in adulthood.
There is also a good understanding of the role of current life
difficulties and stresses in provoking depression in

predisposed individuals. There is much less knowledge about the
mechanisms involved in the translation of these predisposing and
provoking factors into clinical symptomatology. When trying to elucidate
these mechanisms (which, of course, have important implications for
treatment), investigators have employed two main conceptual

205

The aetiology of depression approaches, which can be broadly termed
psychological and biological. It is likely, of course, that these
approaches represent different levels of enquiry that will eventually
inform each other. The aetiology section in the current chapter is
structured so as to illustrate to the reader the many ways in which
research into the causation of psychiatric disorder can be approached
(see Box 9.4). It may therefore be helpful for this section to be read
in conjunction with Chapter 5.

Genetic causes Family and twin studies It is well recognized that
depression tends to run in families, and the risk of depression in a
first-degree relative of a proband is increased about threefold.
Environmental influences are also important in the aetiology of
depression, but the effect of environment is mainly mediated through
effects specific to the individual rather than through shared family
experiences (Sullivan et al., 2000). Relatives of patients with unipolar
depression do not have increased rates of bipolar disorder or
schizoaffective disorder. Twin studies confirm that the aggregation of
depressive disorders in families is in part due to genetic factors, with
the concordance rate being higher in monozygotic twins (about 45%) than
in dizygotic twins (about 20%). The heritability of major depression has
been estimated at 37%, which is considerably less than that of bipolar
disorder or schizophrenia (Bienvenu et al., 2011). However, it is
possible that certain types of study design (for example, clinical
ascertainment of all twin pairs) might yield higher heritability
estimates (Cohen-Woods et al., 2013). Twin studies have also suggested
that susceptibility to major depression and generalized anxiety disorder
involves similar genes but different environmental risk factors (Hettema
et al., 2005).

Mode of inheritance The familial segregation of depression does not fit
a simple Mendelian pattern. The female preponderance of depression is
well established, and it is possible that genetic factors play a
somewhat greater aetiological role in women. However, the data are
inconsistent, and meta-analyses reveal rather similar heritability
estimates for men and women (Lau and Eley, 2010). Overall, it seems
likely that the genetic liability to depression results from the
combined action of multiple genes of modest, or small,
effect---so-called polygenic inheritance---in a context of
gene--enviroment interaction. Although many important environmental

Box 9.4 Multifactorial origin of mood disorders An important genetic
contribution to mood disorder is made by multiple genes of small
individual effect. This genetic contribution may be expressed directly
through modification of relevant cortical circuitry, or indirectly
through effects on personality and psychological coping mechanisms. â
Adverse early life experiences also shape personality and limit
subsequent attachment behaviour and ability to access social support. In
addition, adverse early experience may affect development of the
hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal (HPA) axis and neurobiological
responses to stress in adulthood. â Depressive disorders are often
triggered by current life events, particularly in people who lack social
support. The impact of life events is modified by early life experience,
personality, and genetic inheritance. The interaction of these factors
determines the resilience or vulnerability of an individual to a life
event, and the subsequent risk of clinical mood disturbance. â The
neurobiology of episodes of depression is associated with changes in the
activity of monoamine neurons and the HPA axis, which together modify
the activity of the neural circuitry involved in emotional regulation.
At a cellular level this may involve a loss of synaptic plasticity and
dendrite formation. Some structural and functional brain abnormalities
in mood disorder suggest persistent biological vulnerability, probably
produced by genetic inheritance or early developmental factors.

â

contributions to depression have been identified (see below), the level
at which they interact with genetic predisposition remains unclear.

Molecular genetics The monoamine theory of depression suggests that
allelic variation in genes coding for monoamine synthesis or metabolism
or specific receptors may contribute to the risk of mood disorders.
There have been numerous association studies of such candidate genes,
although the results have not been compelling because of the difficulty
of replication. The gene coding for the serotonin transporter has a
number of allelic variants, one of which, in the promotor region,
influences the

205

206

206

Chapter 9 Depression expression of transporter sites. The evidence
implicating this polymorphism in major depression in population studies
is inconsistent. However, in an influential study, Caspi et al.Â (2003)
found evidence which suggested that people carrying a particular allele
for the serotonin transporter were more likely to experience a
subsequent episode of major depression when exposed to childhood
adversity. The robustness of this particular gene--environment
interaction has proved controversial (Fergusson et al., 2012). It is now
possible to conduct genome-wide association studies (GWAS), which do not
rely on hypothesized candidate genes. Such studies face statistical
difficulties with regard to the issue of multiple testing, but results
from large investigations are becoming available. In contrast to results
from GWAS studies in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, GWAS studies in
depression have not thus far reported any convincingly replicated loci.
CohenWoods et al.Â (2013) suggest that reasons for this include
insufficient sample sizes and the genetic heterogeneity of depression,
as well as statistical problems with multiple comparisons. A recent
whole genome sequencing study aimed to address the issue of
heterogeneity by studying a large sample of Han Chinese women who
suffered from severe recurrent depression. Two replicated genetic
markers were identified, one of which, near the SIRT1 gene, may be
linked to mitochondrial function (CONVERGE Consortium, 2015).

Personality Certain kinds of personality could be associated with
predisposition to mood disorder. For example, it is a common clinical
observation that patients with depression often seem to have high levels
of premorbid anxiety. Aspects of personality could be associated with
depression in a number of ways. 1. What is recognized as a personality
characteristic may in fact represent a milder form of the illness. For
example, while dysthymia is now regarded as a mood disorder, previously
people with such symptoms might have been classified as having a
'depressive personality'. 2. Some personality features might influence
the way in which people respond to adverse circumstances, and thus make
depressive disorders more likely. For example, a cognitive style that is
characterized by sociotropy (a strong need for approval) is associated
with increased risk of depression after adverse life events (Mazure and
Maciejewski, 2003).

3.  Certain kinds of personality development and depressive disorder may
    share common genes. For example, neuroticism, as measured by the
    Eysenck Personality Questionnaire, predisposes to major depression,
    but twin studies suggest that neuroticism and major depression have
    genes in common (Fanous and Kendler, 2004). Overall, current
    findings suggest that part of the genetic risk of depression takes
    the form of inheritance of particular character traits and cognitive
    styles, which predispose to psychiatric illness in the presence of
    specific kinds of life stresses (Rihmer et al., 2010).

Early environment Parental deprivation Psychoanalysts have suggested
that childhood deprivation of maternal affection through separation or
loss predisposes to depressive disorders in adult life. Overall,
however, epidemiological studies do not suggest that loss of a parent by
death in childhood increases the risk of depressive disorder in
adulthood. By contrast, there is more support for the proposal that
depressive disorder in later life is associated with parental
separation, particularly divorce. The key factor here appears to be not
so much the loss itself as the discord and diminished care that result
from it. Indeed, family discord and lack of adequate care predispose to
depression even in families where separation does not occur (Brown,
2009).

Relationships with parents It is clear that gross disruption of
parent--child relationships, as occurs, for example, in physical and
sexual abuse, is a risk factor for several kinds of adult psychiatric
disorder, including major depression. It is less certain whether more
subtle differences in parental style may also predispose to depression.
One problem is the difficulty of determining retrospectively what kind
of relationship a patient may have had with their parents in childhood.
The patient's recollection of the relationship may be distorted by many
factors, including the depressive disorder itself. However, it appears
that both non-caring and overprotective parenting styles are associated
with nonmelancholic depression in adulthood (Parker and HadziPavlovic,
1992). Mothers with postnatal depression may manifest a rearing style
that is characterized by neglect and emotional indifference. This could
lead to longerterm deleterious effects on self-esteem and attachment
style in the child, thus increasing the risk of depression in the
subsequent generation (Ramchandani et al., 2009).

270

The aetiology of depression

Precipitating factors Recent life events It is an everyday clinical
observation that depressive disorders often follow stressful events.
However, several other possibilities must be discounted before it can be
concluded that stressful events cause the depressive disorders that
succeed them. First, the association might be coincidental. Secondly,
the association might be non-specific---there might be as many stressful
events in the weeks preceding other kinds of illness. Thirdly, the
association might be spurious---the patient might have regarded the
events as stressful only in retrospect when seeking an explanation for
his illness, or he might have experienced them as stressful only because
he was already depressed at the time. Finally, the depression itself
might have caused the life event. Research workers have tried to
overcome each of these methodological difficulties. The first two
problems--- whether the events are coincidental, and whether any
association is non-specific---require the use of control groups suitably
chosen from the general population and from people with other illnesses.
The third problem--- whether the association is spurious---requires two
other approaches. The first approach is to separate events that are
undoubtedly independent of illness (e.g.Â losing a job because a whole
factory closes) from events that may have been secondary to the illness
(e.g.Â losing a job when no one else is dismissed). The second approach
is to assign a rating to each event according to the consensus view of
healthy people about its stressful qualities. Methodologically reliable
research has shown that: â

There is a sixfold excess of adverse life events in the months before
the onset of depressive disorder.

â

An excess of similar events also precedes suicide attempts, and the
onset of anxiety disorders and schizophrenia.

â

In general, 'loss' events are associated with depression and 'threat'
events are associated with anxiety.

â

Life events are important antecedents of all forms of depression, but
appear to be relatively less important in established melancholic-type
disorders and where there is a strong family history of depression.

Events that lead to feelings of entrapment and humiliation may be
particularly relevant to the onset of depression, including peer
victimization through bullying. In contrast, remission from depression
is often associated with 'fresh-start' life events (e.g.Â establishing a
new relationship or starting an educational course; Brown, 2009). It is
also important to note that genetic factors may be

involved in individual liability to experience life events. Thus certain
individuals seem to be more prone to select risky environments, and
genetic factors also play a role in how life events are perceived by a
particular individual, perhaps through the personality mechanisms
discussed above. In general, the importance of life events in the onset
of a depressive episode decreases as the number of episodes increases.
This suggests that, once a depressive disorder is clearly established,
depressive episodes can occur in the absence of major environmental
precipitants. This relationship is much less clear where there is a
strong family history of depression, raising the possibility that one of
the mechanisms by which a family history increases the risk of
depression is by diminishing the need for a major environmental stressor
during the first few episodes of the illness (Kendler et al., 2001).

Vulnerability factors and life difficulties It is a common clinical
impression that the events immediately preceding a depressive disorder
act as the 'last straw' for a person who has been subjected to a long
period of adverse circumstances, such as an unhappy marriage, problems
at work, or unsatisfactory housing. In general, there is good evidence
that poor social support, measured as lack of intimacy or social
integration, is associated with an increased risk of depression (Brown,
2009). The mechanism of this association is unclear, and is open to
different interpretations. First, it may be that a lack of opportunities
to confide makes people more vulnerable. Secondly, it may indicate that
depressed people have a distorted perception of the degree of intimacy
that they achieved before becoming depressed. Thirdly, some other
factor, presumably an abnormality in personality, may result in
difficulty in confiding in others, and thus lead to vulnerability to
depression.

The effects of physical illness All medical illnesses and their
treatment can act as nonspecific stressors, which may lead to mood
disorders in predisposed individuals. However, sometimes certain medical
conditions are believed to play a more direct role in causing the mood
disorder (e.g.Â brain disease, certain infections, including HIV, and
endocrine disorders). The resulting mood disorders are known as organic
mood disorders (for a further discussion of this subject, see Chapter
14). Inevitably, the above distinction is arbitrary. For example, major
depression occurs in about 50% of patients with Cushing's disease. Since
not all patients with Cushing's disease suffer from depressive disorder,
it follows that variables other than raised plasma cortisol levels are
involved. However, organic mood disorders

207

208

208

Chapter 9 Depression can give clues to aetiology. For example,
depressive disorders in patients with Cushing's disease remit after
cortisol levels are restored to normal, a finding that led to the
proposal that increased cortisol levels may play a pathophysiological
role in depression more generally (see hypothalamo-pituitray-adrenal
axisbelow). It is also worth noting here that the puerperium, although
not an illness, is associated with an increased risk of mood disorders
(see Chapter 22).

Psychological approaches to aetiology These theories are concerned with
the psychological mechanisms by which recent and remote life experiences
can lead to depressive disorders. Much of the literature on this subject
fails to distinguish adequately between the symptom of depression and
the syndrome of depressive disorder. The main approaches to the problem
are derived from the ideas of psychoanalysis (see Box 9.5) and cognitive
behavioural theories.

Cognitive theories Depressed patients characteristically have recurrent
and intrusive negative thoughts ('automatic thoughts'). Beck (1967)
proposed that these depressive cognitions reveal negative views of the
self, the world, and the future (the depressed patient usually reviews
the past in a similar vein). These automatic thoughts appear to persist
because of illogical ways of thinking, which Beck called cognitive
distortions. These include: â

Arbitrary inference (drawing a conclusion when there is no evidence for
it and even some evidence against it).

â

Selective abstraction (focusing on a detail and ignoring more important
features of a situation).

â

Overgeneralization (drawing a general conclusion on the basis of a
single incident).

â

Personalization (relating external events to oneself in an unwarranted
way).

Although most psychiatrists regarded these cognitions as secondary to a
primary disturbance of mood, Beck suggested that another set of
cognitions precede depression and predispose to it. These cognitions are
dysfunctional beliefs or schemas such as 'No-one really likes me'.
Schemas of this sort are established early in life, usually through
childhood adversity, and affect the way in which a person responds to
stress and adversity. Such schemas can become activated by 'matching'
life experiences. For example, a failure in a relationship is more
likely to provoke depression in a person who holds

Box 9.5 Psychoanalytical theory In his seminal paper 'Mourning and
melancholia', Freud drew attention to the resemblance between the
phenomena of mourning and symptoms of depressive disorders, and
suggested that their causes might be similar (Freud, 1917). â Freud
suggested that, just as mourning results from loss by death, so
melancholia results from loss of other kinds. Since it was apparent that
not every depressed patient had suffered an actual loss, it was
necessary to postulate a loss of 'some abstraction' or internal
representation, or, in Freud's terms, the loss of an 'object'. â Freud
pointed out that depressed patients often appear to be critical of
themselves, and he proposed that this self-accusation was really a
disguised accusation of someone else for whom the patient 'felt
affection'. In other words, depression was thought to occur when
feelings of love and hostility were present at the same time
(ambivalence). When a loved 'object' is lost, the patient feels despair;
at the same time, any hostile feelings attached to this 'object' are
redirected against the patient himself or herself as self-reproach. â
Freud's ideas were developed by Melanie Klein (1882--1960), who believed
that weaning (loss of the breast) represents a major symbolic loss for
the infant, who then feels remorse and guilt about the disappearance of
this 'good object'. In normal development this 'depressive anxiety'
leads to attempts at reparation and concern for others. Failure to
negotiate this process can result in depressive reactions in the face of
future losses. â John Bowlby (1907--1990) showed that the rearing
abilities of the main caregiver play an important role in giving the
infant a secure emotional 'attachment', which is of critical importance
in the development of satisfactory interpersonal relationships. Insecure
attachments can increase the risk of various kinds of adult
psychopathology, including depression. â

For a review of the psychoanalytical model of depression and its
application to treatment, see Taylor (2008).

the dysfunctional belief described above (Clark and Beck, 2010) (Figure
9.1). In fact, more recent investigations suggest that abnormalities in
information processing, such as negative

209

The aetiology of depression (Early) experience

Formation of dysfunctional assumptions

Critical incident(s)

Assumptions activated

Negative automatic thoughts

Symptoms of depression Behavioural

Somatic Cognitive

Motivational Affective

Figure 9.1 Cognitive model of how latent dysfunctional assumptions (laid
down by early experience) are activated by critical incidents, leading
to a vicious cycle of negative thinking and depressed mood. Reproduced
from Hawton K, Salkovskis PM, Kirk J, Clark DM, Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy for Psychiatric Problems: A Practical Guide, Copyright (1989),
with permission from Oxford University Press.

biases in facial expression recognition, can be demonstrated in both
recovered depressed patients and those at high risk of depression prior
to the development of illness (Victor et al., 2010). Therefore it is
possible that longstanding subtle negative biases in information
processing may predispose to the development of depression, particularly
in the context of psychosocial stress and adverse life events.

Neurobiological approaches to aetiology Whatever their aetiology, the
clinical manifestations of depressive disorders must presumably
ultimately be mediated through changes in brain neurochemistry and the
circuitry involved in emotional regulation. Biochemical investigations
in depressed patients have focused on the monoamine neurotransmitters
because monoamine pathways appear to play an important role in the
actions of effective antidepressant drugs (see

below). Of course, the actions of antidepressant drugs may not reverse
the cause of depression, but may merely change the expression of
symptoms. However, another reason for studying monoamines is that they
play an important role in mediating adaptive responses to stressful
events, and depressive disorders can be viewed as a failure of these
adaptive responses. Monoamine pathways, particularly those involving
noradrenaline and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), innervate cortical and
subcortical brain regions thought to be involved in mood regulation.
Recent studies have used structural and functional imaging techniques to
elicit changes in the neural circuitry that underpins the expression of
clinical affective symptomatology. In hand with this has come the
realization that mood disorders, despite their fluctuating and remitting
clinical course, are associated with distinct and persistent
neuropathological changes in relevant brain regions. Some of these
changes are likely to be developmental in origin; this could encompass
either genetic inheritance or the consequences of adverse childhood
experiences. There is currently much ongoing research effort in both
animal and human studies to assess how traumatic experiences in
development might affect the subsequent maturation of the
hypothalamic--pituitary-- adrenal (HPA) axis and thereby influence
responses to environmental stress. A final point worth considering is
that the prognosis of mood disorders worsens as the number of episodes
increases. Although this phenomenon may simply represent an association
between severity and poor prognosis, it is also possible that acute
episodes of mood disturbance themselves produce neurobiological effects
that worsen the subsequent prognosis (a phenomenon that is sometimes
known as 'scarring').

The monoamine hypothesis This hypothesis suggests that depressive
disorder is due to an abnormality in a monoamine neurotransmitter system
at one or more sites in the brain. In its early form, the hypothesis
suggested a changed provision of the monoamine; more recent elaborations
postulate alterations in receptors as well as in the concentrations or
the turnover of the amines. Three monoamine transmitters have been
implicated---serotonin (5-HT), noradrenaline, and dopamine. The latter
two neurotransmitters are called catecholamines. The hypothesis has been
tested by observing three kinds of phenomenon: â

The biochemistry of neurotransmitters in patients with mood disorders.

209

210

210

Chapter 9 Depression â

The effects of selective drugs on measurable indices of the function of
monoamine systems---so-called 'challenge tests'.

â

The pharmacological properties shared by antidepressant drugs.

The pharmacological effects of antidepressant drugs are considered in
Chapter 25. The present chapter will consider the evidence for
abnormalities in monoamine neurotransmitters in untreated depressed
patients (see Box 9.6).

5-HT function Plasma trypytophan. The synthesis of 5-HT in the brain
depends on the availability of its precursor amino acid, l -tryptophan.
Plasma tryptophan levels are decreased in untreated depressed patients,
particularly in those with melancholic depression. Studies in healthy
subjects have shown that weight loss through dieting can lower plasma
tryptophan levels, and this factor appears to explain some, but not all,
of the reduction in plasma tryptophan concentration that is seen in
depression. Decreases in plasma tryptophan levels may contribute to the
impairments that are seen in brain 5-HT function in depressed patients,
but are probably not an important causal factor (Cowen, 2015). Studies
of cerebrospinal fluid. Indirect evidence about 5-HT function in the
brains of depressed patients has been sought by examining cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF).

Box 9.6 Evidence for abnormalities in monoamine activity in depression
5-HT Decreased plasma tryptophan Blunted 5-HT neuroendocrine responses â
Decreased brain 5-HT receptor binding (PET) 1A â Decreased brain 5-HT
reuptake sites (SPET and PET) â Clinical relapse after tryptophan
depletion â â

Noradrenaline Blunted noradrenaline-mediated growth hormone release â
Clinical relapse after Î±-methyl-para-tyrosine (AMPT) â

Dopamine Decreased homovanillic acid (HVA) levels in cerebrospinal fluid
â Clinical relapse after AMPT â

Numerous studies have been carried out, but overall the data do not
suggest that drug-free patients with major depression have a consistent
reduction in CSF concentrations of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA),
the main metabolite of 5-HT formed in the brain. However, there is more
consistent evidence that depressed patients who have made impulsive and
more dangerous suicide attempts have low CSF 5-HIAA levels. This finding
is not restricted to patients with depression. It has also been reported
in, for example, patients with schizophrenia and personality disorder
who have a history of aggressive behaviour directed towards themselves
or other people. It has been proposed that low levels of CSF 5-HIAA,
although not related specifically to depression, may be associated with
a tendency of individuals to respond in an impulsive and hostile way to
life difficulties (Moberg et al., 2011). Studies of post-mortem brain.
Measurements of 5-HT and 5-HIAA have been made in the brains of
depressed patients who have died, usually by suicide. Although this is a
more direct test of the monoamine hypothesis, the results are difficult
to interpret for two reasons. First, the observed changes may have taken
place after death. Secondly, the changes may have been caused before
death, but by factors other than the depressive disorder (e.g.Â by
anoxia, or by drugs used in treatment or taken to commit suicide).
Overall there is little consistent evidence that depressed patients
dying from natural causes or suicide have lowered brain concentrations
of 5-HT or 5-HIAA. Other studies have adopted techniques such as
receptor autoradiography and mRNA expression. Such studies have
suggested that suicide victims have increased expression of 5-HT2A
receptors and decreases in serotonin transporters (5-HT reuptake sites)
in the prefrontal cortex. However, the data are not consistent
(Stockmeier, 2003). Neurochemical brain imaging studies. Recent
developments in brain imaging with selective labelled ligands have
enabled the assessment of certain brain 5-HT receptor subtypes in vivo.
There is evidence of a widespread modest decrease in 5-HT1A-receptor
binding throughout the cortical and subcortical regions (Meyer, 2013).
There also appear to be reductions in the number of brainstem and limbic
region 5-HT reuptake sites in depressed individuals (Kambeitz and Howes,
2015). Neuroendocrine tests. The functional activity of 5-HT systems in
the brain has been assessed by giving a substance that stimulates 5-HT
function, and by measuring an endocrine response that is controlled by
5-HT pathways, usually the release of prolactin, growth hormone, or
cortisol. Neuroendocrine challenge tests have the advantage that they
measure an aspect of brain 5-HT

21

The aetiology of depression function. However, the 5-HT synapses that
are involved presumably reside in the hypothalamus, which means that
important changes in 5-HT pathways in other brain regions could be
missed. A number of drugs have been used to increase brain 5-HT function
for the purposes of neuroendocrine challenge. Studies in unmedicated
depressed patients have shown consistent evidence that 5-HT-mediated
endocrine responses are blunted in depressed patients. A number of these
abnormalities persist into clinical recovery, which suggests that there
is persistent dysfunction of some aspects of 5-HT neurotransmission in
those at risk of depression (Cowen, 2015). Tryptophan depletion.
Although the findings outlined above provide strong evidence that
aspects of brain 5HT neurotransmission are abnormal in depression, they
do not reveal whether these changes are central to pathophysiology or
might instead represent some form of epiphenomenon. To assess this, it
is necessary to study the psychological consequences of lowering brain
5-HT function in healthy subjects and those at risk of mood disorder. As
mentioned above, the synthesis of brain 5-HT is dependent on the
availability in the brain of its amino acid precursor, l-tryptophan. It
is possible to produce a transient lowering of plasma tryptophan and
brain 5-HT function over a few hours by administering a mixture of amino
acids that lacks tryptophan. This procedure is called tryptophan
depletion. Tryptophan depletion in subjects with no personal or family
history of mood disorder has little measurable effect on mood, and does
not produce significant clinical depressive symptomatology. By contrast,
unmedicated euthymic patients with a personal history of mood disorder
undergo a rapid but temporary depressive relapse when exposed to
tryptophan depletion. People with a strong family history of depression
but no previous illness show some lowering of mood after tryptophan
depletion, but these changes are relatively mild and not of clinical
severity. The following conclusions can be drawn. â

Low brain 5-HT function is not sufficient to cause depression, because
tryptophan depletion fails to alter mood in those who are not vulnerable
to mood disorder.

â

Low brain 5-HT function appears to interact with other vulnerability
factors to cause depressive symptoms.

The nature of these other vulnerability factors remains conjectural. It
is possible that the 5-HT pathways of vulnerable individuals react
abnormally to

precursor deficit. Alternatively, there may be pre-existing deficits in
the central mood-regulating circuitry that are 'revealed' in the
presence of low brain 5-HT states. For a review of tryptophan depletion
studies in depression, see Ruhe et al.Â (2007).

Noradrenaline function Metabolism and receptors. There is no consistent
evidence that brain or CSF concentrations of noradrenaline or its major
metabolite, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-phenylethylene glycol (MHPG), are
altered in depressed patients (Anand and Charney, 2000). As with 5-HT
receptors, noradrenaline receptors in the brain can be divided into a
number of subclasses. There is some evidence that depressed patients who
die from suicide have increased expression of Î±2-adrenoceptor binding in
some brain regions (Escriba et al., 2004). Neuroendocrine tests.
Increasing brain noradrenaline function elevates plasma concentrations
of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), cortisol, and growth hormone.
There is fairly consistent evidence that the growth hormone response to
both the noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor desipramine and the
noradrenaline-receptor agonist clonidine is blunted in patients with
melancholic depression. Clonidine acts directly on postsynaptic
Î±2-adrenoceptors in the hypothalamus to increase plasma growth hormone,
and therefore the blunted response in depressed patients suggests a
decreased responsivity of hypothalamic postsynaptic Î±2-adrenoceptors.
Clearly this finding appears to be inconsistent with the increased
expression of Î±2-adrenoceptors in cortical regions noted above.
Catecholamine depletion. It is possible to lower the synthesis of
catecholamines by inhibiting the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase, which
catalyses the conversion of the amino acid tyrosine to l-DOPA, a
precursor of both noradrenaline and dopamine. The drug that is used to
achieve this effect is Î±-methyl-para-tyrosine (AMPT). In healthy
subjects, AMPT produces sedation but not significant depressive
symptoms. However, as with tryptophan depletion, when administered to
recovered depressed patients off drug treatment it causes a striking
clinical relapse in depressive symptomatology (Ruhe et al., 2007). This
could be mediated by diminished function of either dopamine or
noradrenaline, or by combined inhibition of both of these
neurotransmitters. These findings suggest that subjects at risk of mood
disorder are vulnerable to decreases in both 5-HT and catecholamine
neurotransmission. This is consistent with the clinical evidence that
drugs that act selectively on noradrenaline or 5-HT pathways are
effective antidepressant treatments.

211

21

212

Chapter 9 Depression

Dopamine function

Amino acid neurotransmitters

The function of dopamine in depression has been less well studied than
that of 5-HT or noradrenaline, but there are a number of reasons for
believing that dopamine neurons may be involved in the pathophysiology
of the depressed state.

Developments in magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) have facilitated
measurement of the amino acid neurotransmitters gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) and glutamate in the brain in patients with mood disorders.
Overall, there is evidence for decreased levels of glutamate in the
anterior brain regions in depressed patients (Arnone et al., 2015).
Brain levels of GABA are also lowered in depression, although for
technical reasons much of this work involves measurement in the
occipital cortex. GABA concentrations may also be lower in patients with
panic disorder, consistent with the known role of GABA in anxiety
(Sanacora, 2010). There is growing interest in the role of glutamate in
mood disorders, partly because drugs with glutamatergic properties might
be helpful in treatment. For example, the NMDA-receptor antagonist
ketamine can produce rapid and striking, albeit transient, relief of
symptomatology in patients with treatment-refractory depression (McGirr
et al., 2015).

â

Dopamine neurons in the mesolimbic system play a key role in incentive
behaviour and reward. These processes are disrupted in depression,
particularly melancholic states.

â

Antidepressant treatments in animals increase the expression of dopamine
receptors in the part of the mesolimbic system called the nucleus
accumbens.

There is some evidence that suggests that dopamine function may be
abnormal in depression. For example, CSF levels of the dopamine
metabolite homovanillic acid (HVA) are consistently low in depressed
patients, and some brain imaging studies in depressed patients have
found increased binding of dopamine D2/D3 receptors in striatal regions.
However, this may be restricted to patients with psychomotor
retardation. There is also limited evidence for regional reductions in
the density of dopamine D1 receptors (Meyer, 2013). These findings,
taken together with the effect of AMPT in causing relapse in recovered
depressed patients, suggest that impaired dopamine function may play a
role in the manifestation of the depressive syndrome and in the effects
of antidepressant drug treatment.

Role of monoamines in depression There is now good evidence that
unmedicated depressed patients have abnormalities in various aspects of
monoamine function. However, these abnormalities vary in extent from one
case to another, and the changes are not large and are not sufficiently
sensitive to be diagnostic. Some abnormalities may also persist into
clinical recovery, suggesting that they are related to vulnerability to
illness rather than the acute depressive state. The most convincing
studies that show a key role for monoamines in the pathophysiology of
depression are the 5-HT and catecholamine depletion paradigms. This is
because lowering of 5-HT and noradrenaline and dopamine function is
sufficient to cause clinical depression in those at risk by virtue of a
previous illness. It is unclear what neurobiological changes produce
this psychological vulnerability to monoamine depletion, but it seems
likely that they are at least in part consequences of previous episodes
of illness and perhaps their treatment.

Endocrine abnormalities Abnormalities in endocrine function may be
important in aetiology for two reasons. â

Some disorders of endocrine function are followed by mood disorders more
often than would be expected by chance, suggesting a causative
relationship.

â

Endocrine abnormalities found in depressive disorder indicate that there
may be a disorder of the hypothalamic centres that control the endocrine
system.

Endocrine pathology and depression About 50% of patients with Cushing's
syndrome suffer from major depression, which usually remits when the
cortisol hypersecretion is corrected. Depression also occurs in
Addison's disease, hypothyroidism, and hyperparathyroidism. Endocrine
changes may account for depressive disorders that occur premenstrually,
during the menopause, and after childbirth. These clinical associations
are discussed further in Chapter 22.

Hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal axis Much research effort has been
concerned with abnormalities in the control of cortisol in depressive
disorders. In about 50% of patients whose depressive disorder is at
least moderately severe, plasma cortisol secretion is increased
throughout the 24-hour cycle. This increase in cortisol secretion is
associated with enlargement of the adrenal gland and increased cortisol
response to corticotropin (ACTH) challenge.

213

The aetiology of depression When studying depressed patients, use has
been made of the dexamethasone suppression test, which suppresses
cortisol levels via inhibition of ACTH release at pituitary level. About
50% of depressed inpatients do not show the normal suppression of
cortisol secretion induced by administering 1 mg of the synthetic
corticosteroid dexamethasone, an agent which suppresses ACTH via
interaction with specific glucocorticoid receptors. Dexamethasone
non-suppression is more common in depressed patients with melancholia,
but it has not been reliably linked with any more specific
psychopathological feature. However, abnormalities in the dexamethasone
suppression test are not confined to mood disorders; they have also been
reported in mania, chronic schizophrenia, and dementia. This lack of
diagnostic specificity diminished early hopes that dexamethasone
non-suppression could be used as a diagnostic marker of melancholic
depression. The diminished responsivity to dexamethasone that is seen in
depressed patients led to the glucocorticoidreceptor hypothesis of
depression, whereby dysfunction of the HPA axis and the resulting
depressive syndrome are linked to genetic or acquired defects of
glucocorticoid receptors. This has coincided with findings from animal
experimental studies that different classes of antidepressant medication
increase expression of glucocorticoid receptors. Therefore one
therapeutic mechanism of antidepressant drug action may be to normalize
excessive HPA axis activity via increased ability of the glucocorticoid
receptors to provide feedback regulation (Gold, 2015). In general, HPA
axis changes in depressed patients have been regarded as state
abnormalities---that is, they remit when the patient recovers. However,
there is some evidence that changes in HPA axis function may persist in
recovered depressed subjects. This suggests that some vulnerable
individuals may have fairly enduring abnormalities in HPA axis
regulation (Cowen, 2015). In experimental animal studies, early adverse
experiences produce longstanding changes in HPA axis regulation,
indicating a possible neurobiological mechanism whereby childhood trauma
could be translated into increased vulnerability to mood disorder.
Recent studies have confirmed that adults who were abused as children
have altered HPA responses to stress (Juruena et al., 2015)
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and depression. In addition to its
effects on cortisol secretion, CRH may play a more direct role in the
aetiology of depression. It is well established that CRH has a
neurotransmitter role in limbic regions of the brain, where it is
involved in regulating biochemical and behavioural responses to stress.
Administration of CRH to animals produces changes

in neuroendocrine regulation, sleep, and appetite that parallel those
found in depressed patients. Furthermore, CRH levels may be increased in
the CSF of depressed patients. Therefore it is possible that
hypersecretion of CRH could be involved in the pathophysiology of the
depressed state, and non-peptide antagonists of CRH receptors may have
value as antidepressant agents. For a review of this subject, see Gold
(2015).

Thyroid function Circulating plasma levels of free thyroxine appear to
be normal in depressed patients, but levels of free triiodothyronine may
be decreased. About 25% of depressed patients have a blunted
thyrotropin-stimulating hormone (TSH) response to intravenous
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). This abnormality is not specific to
depression, as it is also found in alcoholism and panic disorder. Like
CRH, TRH has a role in brain neurotransmission and is found in brain
neurons colocalized with classical monoamine neurotransmitters such as
5-HT. Therefore it is possible that the abnormalities in thyroid
function that are found in depressed patients may be associated with
changes in central TRH regulation (Bunevicius and Prange, 2010).

Depression and the immune system There is growing evidence that patients
with depression manifest a variety of disturbances of immune function.
Earlier studies found decreases in the cellular immune responses of
lymphocytes in depressed patients, but more recent research has produced
evidence of immune activation, with increases in particular in the
release of certain proinflammatory cytokines (see Box 9.7). Cytokines
are known to provoke HPA axis activity, and therefore changes in immune
regulation may play a role in HPA axis dysfunction in depression. It is
also possible that the changes seen in immune activity are secondary to
other depressive features (e.g. lowered food intake and diminished
self-care). However, the fact that medical administration of some
cytokines (e.g.Â interferon and tumour necrosis factor) can cause
significant depressive symptoms suggests that, in some situations,
changes in immune function may have a more direct role in provoking mood
disorders. Current formulations propose that cytokines can induce
expression of the tryptophan-metabolizing enzyme indoleamine 2,
3-dioxygenase. This lowers tryptophan levels, which could put vulnerable
individuals at risk of depression. Peripheral markers of inflammation
have also been linked to treatment resistance in depressed patients
(Nanni et al., 2012). For a review of inflammation and depression, see
Hodes et al.Â (2015).

213

214

214

Chapter 9 Depression â

Box 9.7 Immune changes in depression Lowered proliferative responses of
lymphocytes to mitogens â Lowered natural killer cell activity â
Increases in positive acute phase proteins â Increases in inflammatory
cytokine levels (e.g.Â IL-6 and TNFÎ±) â Induction of indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase â

Sleep changes in depression Disturbed sleep is characteristic of
depression. Recordings of the sleep EEG (polysomnogram) have shown a
number of abnormalities in sleep architecture in patients with major
depression, including the following: â

impaired sleep continuity and duration

â

decreased deep sleep (stages 3 and 4)

â

decreased latency to the onset of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep

â

an increase in the proportion of REM sleep in the early part of the
night.

Decreased REM sleep latency is of interest in relation to aetiology
because there is some evidence that it may persist in recovered
depressed patients and indicate a vulnerability to relapse. A further
link between REM sleep and depression is that many (but not all)
effective antidepressant drugs decrease REM sleep time and the latency
to its onset. In addition, both total sleep deprivation and selective
REM sleep deprivation can produce a temporary alleviation of mood in
depressed patients. For a review, see Steiger and Kimura (2010).

Brain imaging in mood disorder Structural brain imaging Changes in brain
volume. Computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) studies have found a number of abnormalities in patients with
depression, particularly in those with more severe and chronic disorder
(Arnone et al., 2012). The most consistent findings are: â

Enlarged lateral ventricles (predominantly in elderly subjects with
late-onset depression).

â

Decreased hippocampal volume.

â

Decreased volume of basal ganglia structures.

Decreased grey matter volume in the anterior brain areas, including
frontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, and cingulate cortex.

The origin of these structural abnormalities is unclear, but might be
related to the cellular neuropathological abnormalities that have been
described in depression, such as loss of interneurons and glial cells in
anterior brain regions (see Falkai and Bogerts, 2009). The neurotrophic
hypothesis of depression suggests that stress (perhaps aided by cortisol
hypersecretion) can lead to atrophy and death of neurons and
downregulation of adult neurogenesis, particularly in the hippocampus
(Duman, 2009). Conceivably processes of this kind could lead to the kind
of structural deficits that are listed above. In elderly subjects with
late-onset depression, structural brain changes may be attributable to
cardiovascular disease. White matter hyperintensities. Hyperintense MRI
signals can be detected in a number of regions in both normal ageing
subjects and older patients with major depression. The usual sites are
in the deep white matter and periventricular white matter. In major
depression, increased deep white matter hyperintensities are associated
with the following: â

Late onset of depressive disorder.

â

Greater illness severity and poorer treatment response.

â

Apathy, psychomotor slowness, and retardation.

â

The presence of vascular risk factors.

It has been proposed that major depression with these clinical and
radiological features is likely to be caused by vascular disease, which
presumably impairs functioning in the pathways involved in mood
regulation (Aizenstein et al., 2011).

Cerebral blood flow and metabolism Cerebral blood flow can be measured
in a number of ways---for example, with single-photon emission
tomography (SPET), positron emission tomography (PET), or functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). PET can also be used to measure
cerebral metabolism. Cerebral blood flow and metabolism are normally
highly correlated. Numerous studies have examined both cerebral
metabolism and blood flow in groups of depressed patients. The findings
have often been contradictory, and there are many methodological
factors, such as patient selection, drug status, and imaging techniques.
However, there is a growing consensus that the abnormalities in
functional brain imaging in depression support a circuitry model in
which mood disorders are

215

The aetiology of depression associated with abnormal interactions
between several brain regions, rather than a major abnormality in a
single structure. The circuitry that is implicated involves regions of
the medial prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala,
ventral striatum, thalamus, and hypothalamus (Price and Drevets, 2012).
Some tentative correlations between these brain regions and clinical
depressive features are listed in Box 9.8. More recent studies have used
'resting state fMRI' (see Chapter 5) to examine activity in different
brain circuits in depression. The default mode network becomes active at
rest, for example, during 'mind-wandering', and shows decreased activity
during specific tasks. Some studies have shown that, in depressed
patients, the default mode network remains active even during task-based
activity, and this has been proposed to correlate with depressive
ruminative thinking and impaired performance on cognitive tasks (Kaiser
et al., 2015).

Neuropsychological changes in mood disorder Patients with acute
depression and mania show poor performance on several measures of
neuropsychological

Box 9.8 Some neuropsychological correlates of altered cerebral perfusion
and metabolism in depressed patients Dorsolateral and dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex â

Cognitive dysfunction (particularly executive dysfunction). Impaired
voluntary regulation of emotion

Medial prefrontal cortex â

Abnormal emotional processing

Anterior cingulate â â

Impaired attentional processes Altered emotional salience

Amygdala â

Abnormal emotional processing

Ventral striatum â

Impaired incentive behaviour

â Psychomotor disturbances

function. Impairment is typically seen over a wide range of
neuropsychological domains, including attention, learning, memory, and
executive function. There is disagreement as to whether these defects
are best regarded as global and diffuse, or whether there may be some
selectivity with regard to the changes that are seen. However, some
authors have suggested that deficits in executive function may be
particularly prominent, which would be consistent with the abnormalities
seen in prefrontal perfusion in imaging studies. Most of the cognitive
impairments resolve as the mood disorder remits, but a growing
literature attests to the persistence of cognitive defects, albeit less
striking, in euthymic patients with recurrent depression (Clark et al.,
2009). Such deficits are particularly apparent in elderly patients, in
whom they have been found to correlate with decreases in hippocampal
volume. As noted above, depression is clinically associated with
negative biases in the processing of emotional information. Behavioural
studies have shown that such biases affect attention to emotional
stimuli as well as emotional perception, memory and appraisal. There is
growing understanding of the neural circuitry that underpins emotional
processing, in particular the way that limbic brain regions interact
with regulatory cortical areas. In patients with depression, functional
imaging studies have shown that presentation of negative emotional
stimuli (e.g.Â fearful faces) is associated with overactivity of limbic
regions, whereas there is a decrease in activity in the prefrontal
regulatory areas. These changes are reversed by antidepressant
medication, but are still apparent in recovered patients who have been
withdrawn from medication. This suggests that exaggerated limbic
processing of aversive material may be a trait marker of vulnerability
to depression (Victor et al., 2010).

Conclusions The predisposition to develop depressive disorders has an
important genetic contribution. The levels at which genetic factors
operate are not entirely clear. They could act via effects on the
regulation of neural responses to emotion, or through more remote
factors such as temperament and the psychological response to stressful
life events. Adverse early experiences such as parental conflict, or
abuse of various kinds, may play a part in shaping features of
personality which in turn determine whether, in adulthood, individuals
are able to access emotional support to help to buffer the stressful
effects of social adversity. In addition, early life experiences could
programme the HPA axis to respond to stress in a

215

216

216

Chapter 9 Depression way that might predispose to the development of
mood disorder. The precipitating causes of mood disorders are stressful
life events and certain kinds of physical illness. Some progress has
been made in discovering the types of event that provoke depression, and
in quantifying their stressful qualities. Such studies show that loss
can be an important precipitant, but not the only one. The effects of
particular events may be modified by a number of background factors that
may make a person more vulnerable---for example, being bullied or
socially isolated. As noted in the preceding paragraph, the impact of
potentially stressful events also depends on early life experience,
personality factors, and probably genetic inheritance. Two kinds of
pathophysiological mechanism have been proposed to explain how
precipitating events lead to the phenomena observed in depressive
disorders. The first mechanism is psychological and the second is
neurobiological. The two sets of mechanism are not mutually exclusive
and, as the neural basis of emotional processing becomes better
understood, the two approaches are converging in a way that promises a
richer understanding of pathophysiology. In particular it seems that
abnormalities in the neural processing of emotion can account for the
emotional biases that are characteristic of depression, and can probably
account for much of the subjective symptomatology. The relevant brain
regions receive a strong innervation from monoamine neurons, and
manipulation of 5-HT and noradrenaline neurotransmission is capable of
altering emotional processing at both a behavioural level and a neural
level (Harmer et al., 2009). This might account for the role of
monoamine changes in the pathophysiology of depression, and the ability
of monoamine manipulation to produce symptomatic relief in some
depressed patients.

Using sophisticated statistical techniques it is possible to derive
quantitative estimates of the roles of different risk factors in the
development of depressive disorders. For example, from a prospective
study of 1942 female twin pairs, Kendler et al.Â (2002) calculated that
about 50% of the susceptibility to an episode of major depression is
attributable to the following factors (in order of relative importance):
â

recent stressful life events and difficulties

â

adolescent risk factors (neuroticism, early-onset anxiety, and conduct
disorder)

â

genetic risk

â

past history of major depression.

The same study found that adverse childhood experiences also played a
significant role in the risk of subsequent depression, but this was
expressed indirectly through an increased risk of life events and
difficulties and diminished social support. Interestingly, some of the
impact of genetic factors was mediated through an increased risk of
early adverse experiences. This suggests that part of the genetic risk
associated with depression is expressed though greater likelihood of
exposure to an adverse family environment. This in turn could be linked
to temperamental factors in both parents and children. Taken together,
the findings of recent studies show that major depression is a disorder
with important genetic, environmental, and interpersonal determinants.
These factors do not interact in a simple additive manner, but modify
each other in both direct and indirect ways. Although this formulation
precludes the use of simple models to explain the aetiology of major
depression, it does correspond more closely with clinical experience. In
addition, it suggests that a number of different kinds of intervention
could be useful for decreasing the liability of individuals to develop
depression.

Course and prognosis of depression Major depression When considering
course and prognosis of major depression it should be remembered that
any sample of patients with unipolar depression will contain a
proportion of patients who in fact have a bipolar disorder which has not
yet declared itself (since mania or hypomania have not yet occurred). It
has been estimated that about 10% of patients who present with a
depressive disorder will eventually

have a manic illness. Such patients are more likely to have a family
history of mania or to show brief, mild manic mood swings during
antidepressant treatment. â

The age of onset of major depression varies widely and can occur at any
point in the lifespan. About half of all cases occur before the age of
21. The relative contribution of different aetiological factors probably
varies between early- and late-onset cases.

271

Course and prognosis of depression â

The average length of a depressive episode is about 6 months, but around
25% of patients have episodes that last for more than 1 year, and around
10--20% develop a chronic unremitting course.

â

About 80% of patients with major depression will experience further
episodes (i.e.Â have recurrent major depression).

â

Over a 25-year follow-up, patients with recurrent major depression
experience on average about four further episodes.

â

The interval between episodes becomes progressively shorter.

â

About 50% of depressed patients do not achieve complete symptom
remission between episodes, and experience continuing subsyndromal
depressive symptomatology of fluctuating severity.

â

The longer-term prognosis of recurrent major depression is modest. For
example, only about 25% of patients with recurrent depression achieve a
period of 5 years of clinical stability with good social and
occupational performance.

Dysthymia Dysthymia is by definition a chronic disorder that lasts for
many years. Despite this, about 50% of outpatients may be expected to
show a clinical recovery over a 5year follow-up. Over the lifespan, some
patients with dysthymia develop major depression (so-called double
depression), while some patients who originally present with major
depression subside into dysthymia. The development of mania is rare.

Minor depressive disorders Minor depressive conditions are depressive
disorders that do not meet threshold criteria for major depression, even
of mild severity ('Unspecified Depressive Disorder' in DSM-5). These
conditions show a recurrence rate similar to that of major depression.
Patients who meet the criteria for minor depression at one point in
followup may then subsequently be diagnosed as suffering from major
depression, and vice versa. Thus, in a similar manner to dysthymia,
minor depression is likely to be a risk factor for major depression, and
may also be a residual state following remission of major depression.
Overall, the longitudinal data suggest that major and minor depression
and dysthymia are not distinct conditions, but represent part of a
spectrum of depressive disorders (Angst, 2009).

Mortality of depressive disorders Mortality is significantly increased
in patients with depression, largely, although not exclusively, due to
suicide. The standardized mortality ratio in mood disorders is about
twice that found in the general population. Apart from suicide, excess
deaths are due to accidents, cardiovascular disease, and comorbid
substance misuse. There is now compelling evidence that depressive
disorders increase the risk of general medical conditions such as
diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Possible common pathophysiological
mechanisms include inflammation and increased cortisol secretion
(Nemeroff and Goldschmidt-Clermont, 2012). Epidemiological studies
suggest that treatment lowers the mortality in patients with depression
(Angst et al., 2013). Rates of suicide in patients with depression are
at least 15 times higher than those in the general population, and tend
to be higher in unipolar than in bipolar disorder (Angst, 2009).
Longer-term follow-up of patients with depression has yielded differing
rates of lifetime risk of suicide. In those with severe illnesses who
have been treated as inpatients, the risk may be as high as 15%.
However, in community samples the risk is lower. The proportion of
patients with mood disorders who die by suicide decreases as the period
of follow-up increases, presumably because mortality from natural causes
becomes more significant. However, it is also possible that the risk of
suicide is highest during the early stages of the illness.

Prognostic factors The best predictor of the future course is the
history of previous episodes. Not surprisingly, the risk of recurrence
is much higher in individuals with a history of several previous
episodes. Other factors that predict a higher risk of future episodes
include the following: â

incomplete symptomatic remission

â

early age of onset

â

poor social support

â

poor physical health

â

comorbid substance misuse

â

comorbid personality disorder.

The various risk factors, particularly previous pattern of recurrence
and the extent of current remission, have important implications for the
use of longer-term

217

218

218

Chapter 9 Depression maintenance treatments (see below). In many
patients, depressive disorders are best conceptualized as chronic

relapsing conditions that require an integrated longterm treatment
approach.

The acute treatment of depression This section is concerned with the
efficacy of various forms of treatment in the acute management of
depression. Details of treatment with drugs and ECT are provided in
Chapter 25, which should be consulted before reading this section.
Advice on the selection of treatments and the day-to-day care of
patients is given in the section on management (see 'The management of
depressive disorders'below).

Antidepressant drugs Antidepressant drugs are effective in the acute
treatment of major depression. The largest effects relative to placebo
are seen in patients with major depression whose symptoms are of at
least moderate severity. Shortterm response rates in controlled trials
are about 50% for patients on active treatment, and about 30% for those
on placebo; the number needed to treat (NNT) is between 5 and 7 (Cleare
et al., 2015). In terms of efficacy there is little to choose between
the various antidepressants, although some are better than others in
certain defined situations. Similar clinical response rates are seen in
dysthymia, where again several classes of antidepressant drugs,
including tricyclic antidepressants and SSRIs, have shown therapeutic
efficacy. A meta-analysis by Levkovitz et al.Â (2011) showed a response
rate in patients receiving active treatment of 52%, compared with 29% in
those on placebo (NNT = 5). Antidepressants do not appear to be more
effective than placebo in the treatment of minor depression (Barbui and
Cipriani, 2011).

Tricyclic antidepressants Tricyclic antidepressants have been
extensively compared with placebo in both inpatients and outpatients
with major depression. In all but the most severely depressed patients,
tricyclic antidepressants are clearly more effective than placebo
(Morris and Beck, 1974). There is little evidence that tricyclic
antidepressant drugs differ from one another in clinical efficacy, but
they do differ in terms of their side effect profile (see Chapter 25).
Lofepramine is relatively safe in overdose. Among the other classes of
antidepressant drug, none

is more effective than the tricyclics, although individual patients may
show a preferential response to other compounds (see below). Tricyclics
are probably not effective treatments for adolescents with depression
(for the drug treatment of depression in young people, see Chapter 16).

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and serotonin and noradrenaline
reuptake inhibitors SSRIs have undergone extensive trials both against
placebo and against comparator antidepressants. There is good evidence
that they are as effective as tricyclic antidepressants in the broad
range of depressed patients, although they may be less effective in
hospitalized depressed patients. Venlafaxine, a serotonin and
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), also appears to be slightly
more effective than SSRIs in patients with more severe depressive
states. SSRIs are more effective than tricyclic antidepressants (with
the exception of clomipramine) where depression occurs in association
with obsessive--compulsive disorder (Cleare et al., 2015). Duloxetine is
another SNRI, but current evidence does not suggest that it is more
effective than SSRIs. A network meta-analysis suggested that
escitalopram and sertraline are the most effective of the SSRIs, but
whether these differences are of clinical relevance has been disputed
(Gartlehner et al., 2008; Cipriani et al., 2009).

Tolerance of SSRIs relative to tricyclics In short-term clinical trials,
compared with tricyclic antidepressants, SSRIs are associated with lower
dropout rates due to side effects, but the differences are modest
(relative risk of dropout due to side effects = 0.73, NNT = 33).
However, the differences in favour of SSRIs increase in routine clinical
situations, particularly when the duration of treatment exceeds a few
weeks. Clearly, their relative safety in overdose gives SSRIs an
advantage in certain clinical situations; however, venlafaxine is less
safe in overdose than SSRIs. The relative toxicity of duloxetine in
overdose has not been clarified, but fatalities have been reported after
consumption of as little as 1000 mg.

219

The acute treatment of depression

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors The efficacy of MAOIs in the treatment of
major depression (particularly with melancholic features) has been a
matter of controversy. However, placebocontrolled trials have shown that
MAOIs are effective antidepressants and of equal therapeutic activity to
tricyclic antidepressants for moderate to severe depressive disorders.
MAOIs are liable to cause dangerous reactions with other drugs and some
foods, and for this reason they are not recommended as first-line
antidepressant drugs. However, controlled trials have shown that MAOIs
can be effective in depressed patients who have not responded to
tricyclic antidepressants and SSRIs. The reversible type-A MAOI
moclobemide has the advantage of not requiring adherence to a
low-tyramine diet. However, it can still produce hazardous interactions
with other drugs (see Chapter 25). Controlled trials have shown that
moclobemide is more effective than placebo in the treatment of
uncomplicated major depression. However, it is doubtful whether
moclobemide at standard doses is as effective as conventional MAOIs for
patients with resistant depression (Cowen and Anderson, 2015).

Other antidepressants A variety of other antidepressant drugs are now
available (see Chapter 25 and Table 9.4), all of which have established
efficacy relative to placebo. The main differences between the various
preparations are in side effect profile. Apart from reboxetine,
anticholinergic-type

side effects are uncommon. Trazodone and mirtazapine are sedating. All
of these agents are safer than tricyclic antidepressants in overdose.
Agomelatine may have a different mechanism of action, involving the
activation of melatonin receptors (Whiting and Cowen, 2013).

Lithium Lithium as a sole treatment This section is concerned only with
lithium as a treatment for depressive disorders. Placebo-controlled
trials suggest that lithium may have some antidepressant efficacy in
bipolar depression, but its effects in unipolar depression as a sole
treatment are not established (Goodwin et al., 2016).

Lithium in combination with antidepressants Despite its limited utility
as a sole drug treatment for depression, lithium can produce useful
therapeutic effects when added to antidepressant medication in
treatment-resistant patients (lithium augmentation). In a meta-analysis,
Nelson et al.Â (2014) found that about 40% of depressed patients
responded to lithium augmentation of their antidepressant regimen,
compared with about 15% of patients who were given placebo (NNT = 5).
Although some studies have reported a rapid amelioration of the
depressed state within as little as 48 hours after the addition of
lithium, the more usual pattern of response is a gradual resolution of
symptoms over 2--3

Table 9.4 Clinical characteristics of some antidepressant drugs
Anticholinergic

Sedation

Weight gain

Sexual dysfunction

Toxicity in overdose

Amitriptyline

+++

+++

+++

- 

+++

Lofepramine

- 

0

0

- 

0

SSRIs

0

0

- 

+++

0\*

Venlafaxine

0

0

- 

+++

++

Duloxetine

0

0

- 

+++

?

Trazodone

0

+++

- 

0

- 

Reboxetine

- 

0

0

- 

0

Mirtazapine

0

+++

+++

0

0

Agomelatine

0

- 

0

0

?

0, none; +, mild; ++, moderate; +++, marked. \* Citalopram and
escitalopram may be somewhat more toxic than other SSRIs because of an
effect to prolong the QTc interval.

219

20

220

Chapter 9 Depression weeks. The effects of lithium augmentation in
depression do not appear to be restricted to any specific class of
antidepressants.

Anticonvulsants Anticonvulsants such as carbamazepine, valproate, and
lamotrigine are useful in the management of bipolar disorder, and in
these circumstances can prevent episodes of major depression. Whether
these agents also have acute antidepressant efficacy in unipolar
depression is unclear. Lamotrigine has been shown to have antidepressant
effects in placebo-controlled trials in bipolar depressed patients,
particularly those with higher levels of symptomatology, but whether
this therapeutic property extends to unipolar depression is currently
uncertain (Barbee et al., 2011).

Atypical antipsychotic drugs Antipsychotic drugs are often combined with
antidepressant drugs in the treatment of patients with depressive
psychosis, and there is also evidence that atypical antipsychotic
agents, used at relatively low dose, can be of benefit when combined
with antidepressants in non-psychotically depressed patients who have
failed to respond to antidepressant treatment alone. In a meta-analysis
of trials involving 3500 patients, Spielmans and colleagues (2013) found
that, relative to placebo, the addition of drugs such as aripiprazole,
quetiapine, and risperidone to ineffective SSRI treatment was
significantly more likely to result in clinical remission (NNT = 9).
Olanzapine addition was also of benefit, but the effect was less (NNT =
19).

Electroconvulsive therapy This treatment is described in Chapter 25,
where its unwanted effects are also considered. The present section is
concerned with evidence about the therapeutic effects of ECT for
patients with depressive disorders.

Comparison with simulated ECT Six double-blind controlled trials have
compared the efficacy of ECT and simulated ECT (anaesthesia with
electrode application but no passage of current) in patients with major
depression. Five of these studies found ECT to be more effective than
the simulation. In the study that did not find the full procedure to be
more effective, unilateral low-dose ECT was used, a procedure that is
considered on other grounds to be relatively ineffective.

The overall response rate is about 70% for ECT and 40% for simulated
treatment (NNT = 3--4) (UK ECT Review Group, 2003; see also Chapter 25).

Comparison with other treatments Several studies have compared depressed
inpatients receiving ECT with those receiving antidepressant drugs. In a
total of nine comparisons with tricyclic antidepressants, ECT was
therapeutically more effective in six studies and equally effective in
the remaining three. In five comparisons with MAOIs, ECT was superior in
each trial and worked more quickly. These data suggest that, in severely
depressed inpatients, ECT is probably superior to antidepressant drug
treatment, at least in the short term (UK ECT Review Group, 2003; see
also Box 25.14.

Indications for ECT Clinicians generally agree that the therapeutic
effects of ECT are greatest in severe depressive disorders, especially
those in which there is marked weight loss, earlymorning waking,
retardation, and delusions. From the trials comparing full ECT with
simulated ECT, it appears that delusions and (to a lesser extent)
retardation are the features that distinguish patients who respond to
full ECT from those who respond to placebo (UK ECT Review Group, 2003).
Other studies have established that patients with depressive psychosis
respond better to ECT than to tricyclic antidepressants or antipsychotic
drugs given alone. However, combined treatment with antidepressants and
antipsychotic drugs may be about as effective as ECT, although no direct
comparisons have been made. Another point of practical importance is
that ECT may often prove effective in depressed patients who have not
responded to full trials of medication, whether or not psychotic
features are present. However, in such patients relapse rates are high
(Heijnen et al., 2010).

Psychological treatment All depressed patients, whatever other treatment
they may be receiving, require psychotherapy in a general sense, which
provides education, reassurance, and encouragement. These measures
('clinical management') can provide some symptomatic relief, and can
also increase the likelihood that pessimistic patients will adhere to
specific treatments. Education and reassurance should also be given to
the patient's partner, other close family members, and other people
involved in their care.

21

The acute treatment of depression The psychological treatments used for
depressive disorders can be divided into the following categories: â

supportive psychotherapy

â

cognitive behaviour therapy

â

interpersonal psychotherapy

â

behavioural activation

â

marital therapy

â

dynamic psychotherapy.

These psychotherapies can be employed as alternatives to antidepressant
medication, or as adjuncts. Psychotherapies have been less well
evaluated than antidepressant medication in major depression; the use of
'waitlist' controls or 'treatment as usual' may inflate apparent
efficacy of treatment (Cleare et al., 2015). In general, specific
psychotherapies are somewhat more effective than treatment as usual in
the management of mild to moderate depression, particularly in primary
care. In this setting, however, structured treatments such as cognitive
behaviour therapy do not appear to be superior to other structured
therapies such as interpersonal therapy. This suggests that factors
common to all psychological treatments are likely to be important in
mediating the therapeutic effect (see Chapter 24). In randomized trials,
structured psychotherapies usually perform as well as drug treatment in
moderately depressed patients (National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence, 2009a).

Supportive psychotherapy and problem-solving

cognitive behaviour therapy in acute major depression, which have been
reviewed (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2009a).
Current conclusions can be summarized as follows: â

There is strong evidence that cognitive behaviour therapy is superior to
a waiting list control in relieving depressive symptomatology.

â

Cognitive behaviour therapy is not generally superior to other
structured psychological treatments, such as behavioural activation and
interpersonal therapy.

â

Cognitive behaviour therapy is as effective as pharmacological treatment
in moderately depressed outpatients.

â

Combined cognitive behaviour therapy and pharmacological treatment is
better than pharmacological treatment alone.

The opinion of many clinicians is that cognitive behaviour therapy is
not effective as a sole treatment for patients with severe depression,
but this view does not have clear support from trial evidence (Driessen
et al., 2010). Issues such as what is meant by 'severity' in different
settings, as well as the problem of generalizing from randomized trials
to everyday practice, are likely to be implicated in this controversy.
In addition, therapist expertise may be a critical factor in the
delivery of effective cognitive behaviour therapy.

Behavioural activation

Supportive psychotherapy goes beyond clinical management in focusing on
the identification and resolution of current life difficulties, and in
using the patient's strengths and available coping resources. A
development of this approach is problem-solving, in which the therapist
and the patient identify the main problems of concern and devise
feasible step-by-step ways of tackling them. Randomized trials suggest
that problem-solving treatment is better than treatment as usual in
moderately depressed patients in primary care. Its efficacy relative to
drug treatment and other psychotherapies is unclear (National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2009a).

Behavioural activation uses the principles of operant conditioning by
tracking the links between actions and emotional outcomes. The goal of
therapy is to assist patients, through scheduled activity, to engage in
behaviours that will lead to a positive effect on mood (see Chapter 24).
Unlike cognitive behaviour therapy, it is claimed that therapist
training in behavioural activation techniques is simple and quickly
accomplished. A recent meta-analysis of 26 randomized trials of
behavioural activation in depression showed that the technique was
superior to control procedures (the majority of which were waitlist
control). However, follow-up duration was often short (Ekers et al.,
2014).

Cognitive behaviour therapy

Interpersonal psychotherapy

For depressive disorder, the essential aim of cognitive behaviour
therapy is to help the patient to modify their ways of thinking and
acting in relation to life situations and depressive symptoms (for
further information, see page 694). There have been numerous studies of

Interpersonal therapy is a systematic and standardized treatment
approach to personal relationships and life problems (see page 687). It
has been less studied than cognitive behaviour therapy in depression,
but seems to be as effective. The National Institute for Health and

221

2

222

Chapter 9 Depression Clinical Excellence (2009a) concluded that, in
depressed patients, interpersonal therapy: â

Is more effective than placebo with clinical management and GP treatment
as usual.

â

Is as effective as antidepressant medication.

â

Is more effective when combined with antidepressants than when given
alone. However, it is not clear whether the combination of interpersonal
therapy and antidepressants is better than antidepressants alone for the
treatment of acute depression.

Couple therapy Couple therapy can be offered to depressed patients for
whom interactions with a partner appear to have contributed to causing
or maintaining the depressive disorder. The aim of the intervention is
to understand the nature of these interactions and modify them so that
the relationship becomes more mutually supportive. There are few
randomized trials available, but the limited evidence suggests that
couple therapy is significantly more effective than a waiting list
control and as effective as cognitive behaviour therapy. There are
insufficient data to indicate how couple therapy compares with
antidepressant medication (National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence, 2009a). In practice, antidepressant treatment and couple
therapy are often used together, but the combination has not been well
evaluated.

Dynamic psychotherapy Dynamic psychotherapy has a different aim from the
treatments described so far, in that it aims to resolve underlying
developmental conflicts and attendant life difficulties that are
believed to be causing or maintaining the depressive disorder. While it
has been suggested that dynamic psychotherapy may be less effective than
cognitive behaviour therapy or antidepressant medication (National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2009a), more recent
meta-analyses have shown equivalent benefit in depressed patients for
short-term psychodynamic therapy compared to other psychotherapies
(Driessen et al., 2015). Therapist training and patient selection are
likely to play an important role in the efficacy of psychodynamic
therapy in depression.

Other treatments Sleep deprivation Several studies suggest that, in some
depressive disorders, rapid short-term changes in mood can be brought
about by keeping patients awake overnight. The alleviation of depressed
mood after total sleep deprivation is nearly always temporary; it
disappears after the next night's sleep or even during a daytime nap
after the night of sleep deprivation. Although the antidepressant effect
of sleep deprivation is of great theoretical interest, its brevity makes
it unpractical. However, there are reports that sleep deprivation can be
used to hasten the onset of effect of antidepressant drugs, and also
that some pharmacological manipulations can prolong the effect of sleep
deprivation (Hemmeter et al., 2010).

Bright light treatment Over 50% of patients with recurrent winter
depression respond to bright light treatment (about 10,000 lux).
Treatment is usually given for an hour or two in the morning, but the
timing of light treatment is not always critical, and evening light or
even midday exposure can be effective. The duration of exposure usually
needs to be 1--2 hours. Designing placebo-controlled trials of bright
light for winter depression presents problems, because most patients are
aware before treatment that bright light is believed to be the important
therapeutic ingredient. Within this limitation, most studies have found
that dim light is less effective than bright light. The usual onset of
the antidepressant effect of bright light is within 2--5 days, but
longer periods of treatment appear to be needed in some patients.
Patients with 'atypical' depressive features such as overeating and
oversleeping appear to respond best. To avoid relapse, light treatment
usually needs to be maintained until the usual time of natural
remission, in the early spring (see page 769). Some studies have shown
that bright light treatment may also be effective in non-seasonal
depression---for example, in elderly people with depression, where
circadian rhythm disturbances may be involved in pathophysiology
(Lieverse et al., 2011). However, the durability of such an effect has
not been established.

The longer-term treatment of depression Follow-up studies have shown
that mood disorders often recur and that, if left untreated, they have a
rather

poor long-term prognosis. For this reason there is now increasing
emphasis on long-term management.

23

The longer-term treatment of depression

Prevention of relapse and recurrence Strictly speaking, the term relapse
refers to the worsening of symptoms after an initial improvement during
the treatment of a single episode of mood disorder, whereas recurrence
refers to a new episode after a period of complete recovery. Treatment
to prevent relapse should be called continuation treatment, and
treatment to prevent recurrence should be called prophylactic or
maintenance treatment. In practice, however, it is not always easy to
maintain the distinction between these two kinds of treatment, because a
therapy may be given initially to prevent relapse, and may then be used
to prevent recurrence.

Drug treatment of unipolar depression Continuation treatment It is now
well established that stopping antidepressants soon after a treatment
response has been obtained is associated with a high risk of relapse.
About one-third of patients who are withdrawn from medication will
relapse during the next year, with the majority of the relapses
occurring in the first 6 months. Placebo-controlled studies of the role
of continuation therapy have reached the following conclusions (Cleare
et al., 2015): â

Continuing antidepressant treatment for 6 months past the point of
remission halves the relapse rate.

â

Treatment should be at the originally effective dose of medication if
possible.

â

In patients who are at low risk of further episodes, continuation of
antidepressant treatment for longer than 6 months confers little extra
benefit except in the elderly, where continuation therapy for 12 months
is more appropriate.

Maintenance treatment Controlled studies involving patients with
recurrent depression (usually defined as at least three episodes over
the past 5 years) have shown that maintenance antidepressant treatment
can substantially reduce relapse rates. For example, in a 3-year study
of 128 patients, Frank et al. (1990) found a relapse rate of 22% in
patients taking imipramine, compared with 78% in patients treated with
placebo. The effects of longer-term maintenance treatment were confirmed
in a systematic review (Geddes et al., 2003) where, over a period of
1--2 years of continued antidepressant treatment, the relapse rate was
lowered from 41% on placebo to 18% on active medication (see Figure
9.2). Maintaining the dose of medication at

the level that was required to achieve remission appears most effective
in prophylaxis if tolerability permits. Lithium carbonate has also been
used in the prevention of recurrent unipolar depression but, while some
patients show a clear response, the overall evidence for its efficacy is
less robust than for the prevention of bipolar disorder. However, where
a therapeutic response to lithium augmentation has been achieved,
maintaining lithium together with the antidepressant appears worthwhile
(Cleare et al., 2015).

Psychotherapy Cognitive therapy As noted above, there is some evidence
that cognitive therapy given during an acute phase of depression leads
to a more sustained improvement in depressive symptomatology and lessens
the risk of subsequent relapse compared to antidepressant drug treatment
(National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2009a). There is
also growing interest in the use of continuation and maintenance
treatment with cognitive therapy, particularly in patients who have
residual depressive symptomatology and are therefore at increased risk
of relapse. There is good evidence that cognitive behavioural therapy
continued (or started) after remission prevents relapse, perhaps to a
greater extent than maintenance medication (Bockting et al., 2015).
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) integrates cognitive
behaviour therapy with meditation techniques designed to lower stress by
facilitating acceptance and self-compassion. There is evidence that MBCT
lowers the risk of relapse in patients with recurrent depression and is
as effective as maintenance antidepressant treatment in this respect
(Brockting et al., 2015; Kuyken et al., 2015). However, reliable
identification of the specific elements of treatment and patient
characteristics that may be linked to therapeutic response has proved
difficult (Williams et al., 2014).

Interpersonal therapy Combining interpersonal therapy with medication in
the treatment of the acute episode appears to decrease relapse rates
over the following 12 months (Bockting et al., 2015). The effect of
continuation treatment with combined interpersonal therapy and
medication has also been studied in older depressed patients. A benefit
of the combined treatment over medication alone was seen with
nortriptyline but not with paroxetine (Reynolds et al., 2006). These
findings suggest that, in

223

24

224

Chapter 9 Depression

Number of trials NARI

2

MAOI

4

TCA

15

SSRI

10

Other

1

Total

99% or

32

Events/patients Antidepressant events Allocated Placebo Log rank
(Variance antidepressant adjusted O--E of O--E) 169/912 (19%) 13/61
(21%) 113/449 (25%) 156/1034 (15%) 14/71 (20%)

313/889 (35%) 57/66 (86%) 248/432 (57%) 385/1046 (37%) 28/72 (39%)

--57.5

(60.7)

--15.7

(6.0)

--70.7

(50.5)

--94.9

(80.7)

--6.9

(7.5)

465/ 2527 (18%)

1031/ 2505 (41%)

--245.7

(205.4)

Odds ratio (95% CI) Antidepressant : placebo

Reduction (SE)

70% (4) 2P\<0.00001

95% conï¬dence intervals

Heterogeneity between ï¬ve categorles: x =18.6; P = 0.001.

0

0.5 1.0 Antidepressant better

1.5 2.0 Antidepressant worse

Treatment effect 2P \< 0.00001.

Figure 9.2 Meta-analysis of rates of depressive relapse in patients
randomly allocated to receive continuation treatment for on average
about 1 year with antidepressant medication or placebo. Reprinted from
The Lancet, 361(9358), John R Geddes, Stuart M Carney, Christina Davies,
Toshiaki A Furukawa, David J Kupfer, Ellen Frank, and Guy M Goodwin,
Relapse prevention with antidepressant drug treatment in depressive
disorders: a systematic review, pp.Â 653-661, Copyright (2003), with
permission from Elsevier.

terms of recurrence prevention, the benefit of combined interpersonal
therapy treatment over medication alone is equivocal. However, in
patients who achieve

remission from depression with interpersonal therapy as a sole
treatment, continuation therapy does seem to be helpful in preventing
recurrence (Clear et al., 2015).

The assessment of depressive disorders The aims of the various steps of
assessment are as follows: â

To decide whether the diagnosis is depressive disorder.

â

To judge the severity of the disorder, including the risk of suicide.

â

To form an opinion about the causes.

â

To assess the patient's social resources.

â

To gauge the effect of the disorder on other people.

Diagnosis depends on thorough history-taking and examination of the
physical and mental state, and has been discussed earlier in this
chapter. Particular care should be taken not to overlook a depressive
disorder in patients who do not complain spontaneously of being
depressed ('masked depression'). It is equally important not to diagnose
a depressive disorder simply on the grounds of prominent depressive
symptoms, as the latter could be part of another disorder, such as a
general medical condition. It should also be remembered

that certain drugs---both legal and illegal---can induce depression
(Chapter 20). The history of previous mood disturbance is important in
assessment. Some patients will have had recurrent episodes of mood
disorder. A history of these episodes often provides clues to the
probable course of the current disorder and its response to treatment.
It is particularly important to ask about possible previous episodes of
mania and hypomania, even if these were mild and short-lived. If there
is a history of mania, the mood disorder is bipolar. Interviews with
relatives and close friends may help to establish whether such episodes
have occurred. The severity of the disorder is judged from the symptoms.
Considerable severity is indicated by 'biological' symptoms,
hallucinations, and delusions, particularly the latter two. It is also
important to assess how the depressive disorder has reduced the
patient's capacity to work or to engage in family life and social
activities. In this assessment, the duration and course of the condition

25

The management of depressive disorders should be taken into account as
well as the severity of the present symptoms. Not only does the length
of the history affect the prognosis, but it also gives an indication of
the patient's capacity to tolerate further distress. A long-continued
disorder, even if not severe, can bring the patient to the point of
desperation. The risk of suicide must be judged in every case (the
methods of assessment are described in Chapter 21). Aetiology is
assessed next, with reference to precipitating, predisposing, and
maintaining factors. No attempt need be made to allocate the syndrome to
an exclusively 'endogenous' or 'reactive' category. Instead, the
importance of all relevant risk factors should be evaluated in every
case. Provoking causes may be psychological and social (the 'life
events' discussed earlier in this chapter), or they may be physical
illness and its treatment. In assessing such cases, it is good practice
to enquire routinely about the patient's work, finances, family life,
social activities, general living conditions, and physical health.
Problems in these areas may be recent and acute, or may take the form of
chronic background difficulties such as prolonged marital conflict,
problems with children, and financial hardship.

The patient's social resources are considered next. Enquiries should
cover family, friends, and work. A loving family can help to support
patients through a period of depressive disorder by providing company,
encouraging them when they have lost confidence, and guiding them into
suitable activities. For some patients, work is a valuable social
resource, providing distraction and comradeship. For others it is a
source of stress. A careful assessment is needed in each case. The
effects of the disorder on other people must be considered carefully.
The most obvious problems arise when a severely depressed patient is the
mother of young children who depend on her. This clinical observation
has been confirmed in objective studies, which have demonstrated that
depressive disorder in either parent is associated with emotional
disorder in the children (Ramchandani et al., 2009). It is important to
consider whether the patient could endanger other people by remaining at
work (e.g.Â as a bus driver). If there are depressive delusions, it is
necessary to consider what would happen if the patient were to act on
them. For example, severely depressed parents may harm their children
because they believe them to be doomed to suffer if they remain alive.

The management of depressive disorders This section starts by
considering the management of patients with a depressive disorder of
moderate or greater severity. The first question concerns the level of
care and supervision that may be required. The answer depends on the
severity of the disorder and the quality of the patient's social
resources. When judging severity, particular attention should be paid to
the risk of suicide (or any risk to the life or welfare of family
members, particularly dependent children) and to any failure to eat or
drink that might endanger the patient's life. Provided that these risks
are absent, most patients with a supportive family can be treated at
home, even if they are severely depressed. Patients who live alone, or
whose families cannot care for them during the day, may need intensive
community treatment or day-patient care. Inpatient treatment can be
considered for patients who are not improving with these measures, or
where safety issues raise particular concern. Involvement of the family
wherever possible is also likely to improve the outcome (see Box 9.9).
The next question is whether the patient should continue to work. If the
disorder is of moderate severity, work can provide a valuable
distraction from depressive

thoughts, and be a source of companionship. If the disorder is more
severe, retardation, poor concentration, and lack of drive are likely to
impair performance at work, and such failure may add to the patient's
feelings of hopelessness. In severe disorders, there may be dangers to
other people if patients remain at their jobs. The need for
antidepressant drug treatment should be considered next. This treatment
is indicated for most patients with a major depressive syndrome of at
least moderate severity, and particularly those with melancholic
symptoms. Other indications include a family history or personal history
of depression, particularly if there has been a clear response to drug
treatment. Dysthymia is also an indication for antidepressant
medication, but the role of antidepressants in milder depressive
conditions is not established. However, where a patient with a clear
history of major depression develops symptoms of mild depression,
antidepressant medication can be considered. Guidelines for a
stepped-care approach to the management of depression have been
developed by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
(2009a) (see Box 9.10).

225

26

226

Chapter 9 Depression

Box 9.9 What patients and families want to know Particularly for
patients with a first episode of moderate to severe depression,
questions such as the following are important: 1. What is wrong with me?
2. Can I recover? 3. What treatment do I need? 4. What can I do to
improve the situation? 5. Can my family be helped? The answers to these
questions require a good knowledge of patients and their circumstances.
Patients will understand and appreciate that a careful practitioner will
need to gather information before giving definitive answers to important
questions. However, some general advice is given below. â Depression is
as a medical condition and not any fault of the individual concerned.
Feelings of guilt are common and are seen as part of the condition. â
The prognosis for individual episodes of depression is good, although
people with depression are naturally pessimistic about the future. â
Treatment consists of a comprehensive package with psychological support
and medication if indicated. The treatment plan will be developed as a
collaborative exercise between the patient and the clinical team, and
the patient's rights and choices will be respected. â Part of the
treatment plan will involve a full discussion about the most appropriate
level of occupational and social activity for the current circumstances.
This will be reviewed frequently to allow adjustment to the patient's
changing clinical state. â It is very useful for the family to be fully
involved in discussions about the nature of depression and the treatment
plan, as their support can be invaluable. Conversely, critical comments
can be demoralizing for depressed people. One of the aims of family
involvement is to help to improve mutual communication and support.

Choice and use of antidepressant drug Several kinds of antidepressant
drug treatment are available, and the choice should be made in
collaboration

Box 9.10 Guidelines for the management of depression 1. Patients with
short-lived mild depression who may recover quickly without treatment
should be offered an early review ('active monitoring'). 2.
Antidepressants are not recommended for the treatment of mild
depression. 3. Patients with persistent mild depression should be
recommended a guided self-help programme based on cognitive behaviour
therapy. Group cognitive behaviour therapy is an alternative. An
exercise programme and sleep hygiene can also be recommended. 4. For
patients with persistent mild depressive symptoms that do not respond to
these measures, consider drug treatment with an SSRI or a
higherintensity psychological treatment (cognitive behaviour therapy,
behavioural activation, interpersonal therapy, or couple therapy). 5.
Patients who present with moderate or severe depression should be
treated with a combination of antidepressant medication and a
high-intensity psychological intervention. 6. Patients who respond to
antidepressant medication should continue treatment for at least 6
months. Patients at high risk of relapse should be advised to continue
antidepressant treatment for 2 years. 7. Consider cognitive behaviour
therapy for patients who have relapsed despite antidepressant treatment,
or mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for patients who are well but who
have experienced three or more previous episodes of depression. Source:
data from the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
(2009a).

with the patient, with particular consideration of the likely side
effects. These are fully described in Chapter 25. â

SSRIs are the usual first choice, unless the patient considers that they
have done well previously with a different agent. It is also important
to be aware of medical contraindications to SSRI drugs, including, for
example, concomitant treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
which can increase the risk of bleeding. Lofepramine, a tricyclic
antidepressant that is relatively safe in overdose, is another

27

The management of depressive disorders non-sedating compound with a
different side effect profile (see Table 9.4). â

Mirtazapine may be considered if the patient needs concomitant sedation
or if there are relative contraindications to the use of SSRIs (for
example, concomitant treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs.

â

Tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline are rarely used now as
first choice agents, even for patients with severe depression.

The dosage of these drugs, the precautions to be observed when using
them, and the instructions to be given to patients are described in
Chapter 25. Here it is necessary only to emphasize again the importance
of explaining to the patient that, although side effects will appear
quickly, the therapeutic effect is likely to be delayed for 2 weeks,
with maximum improvement occurring over 6--12 weeks. During this time
the patient should be seen regularly to provide suitable clinical
management; those with more severe disorders may need to be seen every
few days, and other patients once a week. It is important to make sure
that the drugs are taken in the prescribed dose. The patient should be
warned about the effects of taking alcohol. They should be advised about
driving, particularly that they should not drive while experiencing
sedative side effects or any other effects that might impair their
performance in an emergency.

The use of ECT ECT will very rarely be part of the first-line treatment
of depression, and in such circumstances will usually be considered only
for patients who have already been admitted to hospital. The only
indication for ECT as a first measure is the need to bring about
improvement as rapidly as possible. In practice this applies to two main
groups of patients: â

Those who refuse to drink enough fluid to maintain an adequate output of
urine (including the rare cases of depressive stupor).

â

Those who present a highly dangerous suicidal risk.

Occasionally, ECT is indicated for a patient who is suffering such
extreme distress that the most rapid form of treatment is deemed
justifiable. Such cases are rare. It should be remembered that, with the
exception of patients who are unresponsive to antidepressant drugs, the
effects of ECT differ from those of antidepressant drugs in terms of
greater rapidity of action, rather than the final therapeutic result. In
patients with depressive

psychosis, ECT is considerably more effective than an antidepressant
given alone, but probably about the same therapeutic effect can be
achieved, albeit more slowly, if a combination of an antidepressant drug
and an antipsychotic drug is used.

Activity The need for suitable activity should be considered for every
patient. Depressed patients give up activities and withdraw from other
people. As a result they become deprived of social stimulation and
rewarding experiences, and their original feelings of depression are
increased. It is important to make sure that the patient is occupied
adequately, although they should not be pushed into activities in which
they are likely to fail because of slowness or poor concentration. Thus
there is a fairly narrow range of activity that is appropriate for the
individual depressed patient, and the range changes as the illness runs
its course. If the patient remains at home, it is important to discuss
with the relatives how much they should be encouraged to do each day.
For inpatients, this question should be decided by the clinical team.

Psychotherapy The appropriate kind of psychological treatment should
also be decided in each case. As noted earlier, all depressed patients
require support, encouragement, and a thorough explanation that they are
suffering from illness and not moral failure. Similar counselling of
partners and other family members is often useful. The use of one of the
more specific psychological treatments discussed earlier should also be
considered. These treatments can be used as the sole therapy for
patients with mild to moderate depression without melancholic features,
particularly if the patient prefers not to take drug therapy (National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2009a). The kind of
psychological treatment that is used depends largely on the availability
of a suitably trained therapist and the preference of the patient,
although the more structured therapies (such as interpersonal therapy
and cognitive behaviour therapy) have a greater evidence base with
regard to the treatment of moderate to severe depression. The
therapeutic response to antidepressant drugs is usually faster than that
to psychotherapy. Current recommendations are that in patients with
moderate to severe depression it is helpful to add cognitive behaviour
therapy to antidepressant medication (National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence,

227

28

228

Chapter 9 Depression 2009a). In practical terms, some time is usually
needed to arrange cognitive behaviour therapy, and in any event some
initial improvement produced by antidepressant medication may enable the
patient to make more use of psychological treatment. It is also
important to tackle any psychosocial problems that are making an
important contribution to the depression. In particular, couple therapy
can be a helpful addition in depressed patients where problems with a
partner are playing a role in maintaining the disorder. If the
depressive disorder is severe, too much discussion of problems at an
early stage is likely to increase the patient's feelings of
hopelessness. Therapy directed toward self-examination is particularly
likely to make the disorder worse. During intervals between acute
episodes, such therapy may be offered to patients who have recurrent
depressive disorders that are largely caused by their ways of reacting
to life events.

Failure to respond to initial treatment If a depressive disorder does
not respond within a reasonable time to a chosen combination of
antidepressant drugs, graded activity, and psychological treatment, the
plan should be reviewed. The first step is to check again that the
patient has been taking medication as prescribed. If not, the reasons
for this should be sought. The patient may be convinced that no
treatment can help, or may find the side effects unpleasant. The
diagnosis should also be reviewed carefully, and a check made that
important stressful life events or continuing difficulties have not been
overlooked. If this enquiry is unrevealing, antidepressants should be
continued at an increased dose if possible. In general, SSRIs do not
have clear dose--response relationships, although some patients respond
to higher doses, particularly if a partial response has been observed at
a standard dose. If it becomes clear that the patient is not improving,
a number of further steps can be taken (see Box 9.11). There is not a
fixed order in which treatments should be offered. Prescribing decisions
should be made in collaboration with the individual patient, taking into
account factors such as specific symptomatology, how far the condition
may have shown a partial response, and the side effect profile of the
various treatment options.

Change in antidepressant drug treatment If a patient does not respond to
one antidepressant, the first step is usually to stop the first
medication and try

Box 9.11 Some pharmacological treatments for resistant depression
Increase antidepressant to the maximum dose, if tolerance permits; if
the patient has depressive psychosis, add an antipsychotic drug; try a
different class of antidepressant drug, including venlafaxine and
tricyclic antidepressants â Try an antidepressant combination (e.g.Â an
SSRI or venlafaxine with mirtazapine) â Add an atypical antipsychotic
drug to an SSRI or venlafaxine â Add lithium to antidepressant drug
treatment â MAOIs (can be usefully combined with lithium) â ECT â

another. Most published studies of this approach have studied patients
in an open sequential way; clearly this cannot control for the placebo
effect or the possibility of spontaneous remission. Overall, however,
there is reasonable evidence that switching to a second antidepressant
can produce benefit in about 50% of patients who are unresponsive to an
initial medication trial (Cleare et al., 2015). If a patient has not
responded to one kind of antidepressant, it would seem sensible to
switch to an antidepressant that has a different pharmacological
profile. However, it must be acknowledged that open studies have shown
equally good response rates when patients who failed to respond to one
SSRI were switched to another. A meta-analysis of randomized studies
suggested that switching from an SSRI to a different class of drug
(mirtazapine, venlafaxine or bupropion) was marginally better in terms
of remission rate (SSRI, 23.5% versus non-SSRI, 28%; NNT = 22) than
switching to a second SSRI, but this advantage is of doubtful clinical
significance (Papakostas et al., 2008). Switching from a drug with
serotonergic properties to another serotonergic compound should be
carried out cautiously because of the risk of serotonin toxicity. In
practice this means that the first compound should be fully withdrawn if
at all possible, and the second one started at a half-dose or less. In
the case of fluoxetine, because of its long duration of action, at least
1 week should elapse before starting a second serotonergic agent.
However, when switching between agents with different pharmacological
properties (e.g.Â from citalopram to mirtazapine or reboxetine),
cross-tapering can be employed. Detailed

29

The management of depressive disorders instructions are provided by the
Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines (Taylor et al., 2015). Both
amitriptyline and venlafaxine appear to be slightly more effective than
SSRIs in patients with severe depression; these drugs are therefore
worth trying at some point in the management of patients who are
unresponsive to initial medication trials (Cowen and Anderson, 2015).
Similar comments apply to the use of conventional MAOIs, which have a
clearly beneficial effect in some patients with resistant depression
(Nolen et al., 1988). However, the drug and food restrictions associated
with MAOIs mean that it is unusual to use them early in drug-resistant
depression unless a patient has responded well to them in the past.

Combination treatment with antidepressants Combination strategies aim to
supplement the antidepressant effect of an ineffective or partially
effective medication with another antidepressant agent. This approach
can therefore be considered an augmentation strategy, although if the
patient's condition remits it may be unclear whether the response is due
to the combined effect of the two antidepressants or to the second agent
acting alone. The pharmacological rationale of combination treatment is
the use of two agents to produce a broader spectrum of activity on
monoamine pathways than either agent could produce alone. In practice
this means that SSRIs or venlafaxine are usually combined with
noradrenergic-promoting agents such as bupropion or mirtazapine (which
increases noradrenaline function through blockade of auto-inhibitory
Î±2-adrenoceptors). The evidence for any of these strategies is limited,
although they are endorsed in case series and expert reviews.
Combination of a tricyclic antidepressant with SSRIs must be approached
with caution because of the risk of elevation of tricyclic levels (see
Chapter 25).

Augmentation of antidepressant drug treatment When switching
antidepressant preparations, one problem is that withdrawal of the first
compound may not be straightforward. Patients may have gained some small
benefit from the treatment (e.g.Â improved sleep or reduced tension), and
this benefit may be lost. Also, if the first medication is stopped
quickly, withdrawal symptoms may result (see Chapter 25). However, if
the dose is reduced gradually, the changeover in medication may be
protracted and may not be easily tolerated by a depressed and despairing
patient. For this reason, in patients who are unresponsive or partly
responsive to first-line medication it may be

more appropriate to add a second compound to the
antidepressant---so-called augmentation therapy. A disadvantage of
augmentation therapy is the increased risk of adverse effects due to
drug interaction.

Antipsychotic drugs As noted above, in patients with psychotic
depression it is usually best to prescribe a combination treatment of
antidepressant and antipsychotic medication (Wijkstra et al., 2010). In
non-psychotic resistant depression, conventional antipsychotic drugs are
of little value except, at low doses, for ameliorating agitation and
distress. However, there is good evidence that some atypical
antipsychotic drugs may have antidepressant effects when used in
combination with SSRIs in patients with nonpsychotic depression (see
above). The use of atypical antipsychotics to augment SSRIs employs
lower doses than would be used to treat schizophrenia, perhaps because
the key pharmacological mechanism probably involves 5-HT2 receptor
antagonism rather than dopamine D2 receptor blockade. Despite this,
olanzapine and quetiapine, even at low doses, can cause troublesome
sedation and weight gain, while concomitant use of risperidone also
produces some degree of weight gain together with hyperprolactinaemia.
Aripiprazole is less likely to cause metabolic side effects, but is
associated with agitation and restlessness. In randomized studies of
SSRI augmentation, the discontinuation rate due to adverse effects was
significantly greater with atypical antipsychotics than with placebo
(odds ratio, 3.9; 95% CI, 2.68--5.72; number needed to harm = 17)
(Nelson and Papakostas, 2009). This suggests that, although atypical
antipsychotic drug addition can be useful in SSRI-resistant depression,
the clinical utility of this approach may be limited by its
tolerability.

Lithium augmentation We have already seen that data from randomized
trials indicate that lithium can be effective in the treatment of
resistant depression. Provided that there are no contraindications, the
addition of lithium to antidepressant drug treatment is usually safe and
well tolerated. About 50% of depressed patients will show a useful
response over 1-- 3 weeks. Lithium can be added to any primary
antidepressant medication with good effect, although combination with
SSRIs and venlafaxine should be undertaken with caution because of the
risk of 5-HT neurotoxicity (see Chapter 25). In the latter case it is
appropriate to start lithium at a low dose (200 mg daily) and increase
by a maximum of 200 mg weekly. In augmentation treatment, the aim should
be to obtain a lithium concentration within the range used for
prophylactic purposes

229

230

230

Chapter 9 Depression (0.5--0.8 mmol/l); the lower end of the range is
appropriate for combination with serotonergic antidepressants. It has
been suggested that the combination of lithium with MAOIs or
clomipramine (sometimes supplemented with tryptophan) can be effective
in depressed patients who are otherwise refractory to treatment (Cowen
and Anderson, 2015).

Tri-iodothyronine Some open and controlled studies have suggested that
the addition of tri-iodothyronine (T3) in doses of 20-- 40 Î¼g daily to
ineffective tricyclic antidepressant treatment can bring about a useful
clinical response, even where underlying thyroid activity is normal.
However, a meta-analysis of four published randomized trials which
assessed the efficacy of T3 addition to ineffective tricyclic
antidepressant treatment was of borderline significance (Aronson et al.,
1996). The evidence for the efficacy of T3 augmentation of newer
antidepressant drugs, such as SSRIs, is inconsistent. Despite this, some
depressed patients do appear to be helped by the addition of T3, which
can start at a dose of 10 Î¼g daily and be increased to 20 Î¼g after 1
week, if tolerance is good (Cowen and Anderson, 2015). At this dose the
side effects are mild, but tremor and sweating can occur. It is prudent
not to use T3 addition in patients with evidence of cardiovascular
disease.

The use of ECT in resistant depression If severe depression persists,
ECT should be considered. ECT is often beneficial to patients who have
not responded to antidepressant drugs, and it is probably more effective
than drugs in the most severe depressions, particularly when psychotic
features are present. Whether medication resistance lowers the response
to ECT has been debated. However, a meta-analysis of observational
studies suggested that the overall response rate to ECT in patients who
failed pharmacotherapy (48%) was significantly lower than the rate in
those who did not (65%) (Heijnen et al., 2010). It is important to note
that, among patients who have not responded to full-dose antidepressant
medication, the relapse rate in the year after ECT may be as high as
50%. This may be because patients are often continued on the same
antidepressant medication to which they previously failed to respond. In
these circumstances it seems reasonable to use an antidepressant of a
different class, or lithium, for continuation treatment after ECT, but
there is currently no unequivocal evidence that this procedure lowers
the relapse rate. However, a randomized study of 200 patients found
post-ECT prophylaxis with a combination of lithium and nortriptyline to

be as effective as maintenance ECT in sustaining remission in the 6
months following a successful course of treatment. Despite this, just
over 50% of the patients in each group relapsed (Kellner et al., 2006).

Other important measures Continuing support is essential for patients
who do not respond to treatment. Lack of improvement increases the
pessimism experienced by the depressed patient. Therefore it is
important to give reassurance that depressive disorders have a good
chance of recovering eventually, whether or not treatment speeds
recovery. Meanwhile, if the patient is not too depressed, any problems
that have contributed to their depressed state should be discussed
further. Particularly in patients who have not received high intensity
psychological treatments, the place of structured psychotherapies should
be considered. A study of primary care patients who had failed to
respond adequately to antidepressant medication found that cognitive
behaviour therapy was markedly better than treatment as usual in
bringing about a therapeutic response (Wiles et al., 2013). In patients
with prolonged depression, it is particularly important to watch
carefully for suicidal intentions. For patients with severe symptoms and
particularly longstanding refractory illness, other treatment approaches
such as deep brain stimulation and neurosurgery can be considered. These
are discussed in Chapter 25.

Prevention of relapse and recurrence in depression After recovery, the
patient should be followed up for several months by the psychiatric team
or general practitioner. If the recovery appears to have been brought
about by an antidepressant drug, that drug should usually be continued
for about 6 months and then gradually withdrawn over a period of several
weeks. If residual symptoms are still present, it is safer not to
withdraw medication. At follow-up interviews, a careful watch should be
kept for signs of discontinuation reactions or relapse. It is helpful to
discuss with the patient the possible early signs of relapse, and to
develop a plan of action should any of these signs appear. If the
patient is in agreement, it is helpful to involve the relatives in this
plan.

Maintenance treatment Major depression is often recurrent, and long-term
maintenance treatment may need to be considered. The risk factors for
recurrence have been noted above. In

231

Further reading addition, the clinician will need to take into account
the following individual factors: â

the likely impact of a recurrence on the patient's life

â

the previous response to drug treatment

â

the patient's view of long-term drug treatment.

It is estimated that, among patients who have had three episodes of
major depression, the likelihood of another episode is 90%. The usual
recommendation is that maintenance drug treatment should be considered
if a patient has had two previous episodes of depression within a 5-year
period, particularly if there is a family history of recurrent major
depression, or personal and social factors predictive of recurrence
(Cleare et al., 2015). Persistent residual symptoms are also an
indication for maintenance treatment.

Choice of medication For most patients, the choice of antidepressant
will be derived from their response in the acute or continuation phase
of treatment. In this case, the same medication can be continued, if
possible at the same dose. As noted earlier, newer antidepressant drugs
are better tolerated in the longer term, and may be preferred for
maintenance treatment. If a change needs to be made because of adverse
effects (e.g.Â sexual dysfunction with SSRIs), an alternative choice
should be determined on the basis of side effect profile. Lithium can
also be effective for long-term maintenance treatment of recurrent
depression in some patients. Its adverse-effect profile and the need for
plasma monitoring mean that it will not be a first choice for most

patients, but its use should be considered if there is any history of
manic episodes, even if these have been mild and transient. In addition,
lithium will sometimes be effective in patients with recurrent
depression who do not respond to maintenance treatment with
antidepressants. Importantly, lithium does seem to lower risk of
suicidal behaviour in patients with mood disorders, an action that is
not explained completely by its ability to prevent depressive relapse
(Cleare et al., 2015).

Other measures If a depressive disorder was related to self-imposed
stressors, such as overwork or complicated social relationships, the
patient should be encouraged to change to a lifestyle that is less
likely to lead to further illness. These readjustments may be helped by
psychotherapy, which may be individual, marital, or group. As noted
above, cognitive behaviour therapy appears to be helpful in lowering the
risk of relapse, particularly in patients with residual depressive
symptomatology. There is also growing interest in the role of MBCT.
Community nurses and nurse therapists can play a valuable role in
delivering treatment of this kind. General practitioners play a key and
increasing role in the long-term monitoring of patients, and should
always be involved in treatment planning. The growing evidence for
important comorbidities between depression and general medical
conditions such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes gives added
importance to the collaboration between mental health services and
general practitioners. Annual monitoring of body weight, blood pressure,
glucose, and lipids, as is recommended for bipolar patients (see Box
10.4), is advised.

Further reading Ghaemi N (2013). On Depression: Drugs diagnosis and
despair in the modern world. The John Hopkins University Press,
Maryland. (An intriguing account of the cultural context of modern
formulations of depression and the role of psychiatry in identifying and
managing depressive conditions.)

Lewis AJ (1934). Melancholia: A clinical survey of depressive states.
Journal of Mental Science, 80, 277--378. \[Reprinted in Lewis AJ (1967).
Inquiries in Psychiatry. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London,
pp.Â 30--117\]. (This landmark study contains a detailed account of the
clinical picture of depressive disorder.)

231

23

23

CHAPTER 10

Bipolar disorder Introduction 233

Aetiology 239

Clinical features 233

Course and prognosis 241

Transcultural factors 236

Treatment of mania 242

Classification 236

Treatment of bipolar depression 244

Differential diagnosis of bipolar disorder 237

Longer-term treatment of bipolar disorder 245

Epidemiology 238

Practical management of bipolar disorder 247

Introduction In the previous chapter we considered depressive disorders
and we now turn to bipolar disorders, another group of conditions in
which depressive episodes are prominent. In bipolar disorder, however,
the course is marked by at least one episode of mania or hypomania.
Kraepelin (1921) brought mania and depression together as manic
depressive psychosis, because he believed that the longerterm clinical
course, with its tendency to recurrence of mood disturbance, was
similar, whether patients presented with mania or depression. However,
Leonhard et al.Â (1962) pointed out that bipolar disorder tends to show a
distinct familial clustering. In addition, there

are other epidemiological differences between unipolar depression and
bipolar disorder (Table 10.1). However, the differences are not great
and there must be overlap between the two groups, because a patient who
is classified as having unipolar depression at one time may have a manic
disorder subsequently. In other words, the unipolar group inevitably
contains some bipolar cases that have not yet declared themselves.
Despite this limitation, the division into unipolar and bipolar cases is
a useful classification because it has implications for treatment,
particularly that of bipolar depression.

Clinical features Mania The central features of the syndrome of mania
are elevation of mood, increased activity, and self-important ideas.

Mood When the mood is elevated, the patient appears cheerful and
optimistic, and may have a quality described

by earlier writers as 'infectious gaiety'. However, other patients are
irritable rather than euphoric, and this irritability can easily turn to
anger. The mood often varies during the day, although not with the
regular 'diurnal' rhythm that is characteristic of many severe
depressive disorders. In patients who are elated, it is not uncommon for
high spirits to be interrupted by brief episodes of depression.

234

234

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder

Table 10.1 Epidemiology of bipolar and unipolar (depressive) disorder
Bipolar disorder

Unipolar disorder

Lifetime risk

About 1%

About 15%

Sex ratio (M:F)

1:1

1:2

Lifetime risk for bipolar disorder

About 10%

About 2%

Lifetime risk for unipolar disorder

20--30%

20--30%

Average age of onset Patients with recurrence Average number of episodes

18 years 90% 10

27 years 80% 4

First-degree relatives

and their work of outstanding quality. Many patients become extravagant,
spending more than they can afford (e.g.Â on expensive cars or
jewellery). Others make reckless decisions to give up good jobs, or
embark on plans for ill-considered and risky business ventures.
Sometimes these expansive themes are accompanied by grandiose delusions.
Some patients may believe that they are religious prophets or destined
to advise statesmen about major issues. At times there are delusions of
persecution, when patients believe that people are conspiring against
them because of their special importance. Delusions of reference and
passivity feelings also occur. Schneiderian first-rank symptoms (see Box
11.3) have been reported in around 10--20% of manic patients. Neither
the delusions nor the first-rank symptoms last for long, most of them
disappearing or changing in content within a period of days.

Perceptual disturbances Appearance and behaviour The appearance of
patients often reflects their prevailing mood. Their clothing may be
brightly coloured and ill assorted. When the condition is more severe,
the patient's appearance is often untidy and dishevelled. Manic patients
are overactive. Sometimes the persistent overactivity leads to physical
exhaustion. Manic patients start many activities but leave them
unfinished as new ones attract their attention. Appetite is increased,
and food may be eaten greedily with little attention to conventional
manners. Sexual desires are increased, and sexual behaviour may be
uninhibited and quite out of character. Women may neglect precautions
against pregnancy, a point that calls for particular attention if the
patient is of childbearing age. Sleep is often reduced. Patients wake
early, feeling lively and energetic, and often get up and busy
themselves noisily, to the surprise (and sometimes annoyance) of other
people.

Speech and thought The speech of manic patients is often rapid and
copious as thoughts crowd into their minds in quick succession. When the
disorder is more severe, there is flight of ideas (see Chapter 1), with
such rapid changes that it is difficult to follow the train of thought.
However, the links are usually understandable if the speech can be
recorded and reviewed. This is in contrast to thought disorder in
schizophrenia, where changes in the flow of thought may not be
comprehensible even on reflection. Expansive ideas are common. Patients
believe that their ideas are original, their opinions important,

Hallucinations occur. These are usually consistent with the mood, taking
the form of voices speaking to the patient about their special powers
or, occasionally, of visions with a religious content.

Other features Insight is invariably impaired in more severe manic
states. Patients see no reason why their grandiose plans should be
restrained or their extravagant expenditure curtailed. They seldom think
of themselves as ill or in need of treatment. Most patients can exert
some control over their symptoms for a short time, and many do so when
the question of treatment is being assessed. For this reason it is
important to obtain a history from an informant whenever possible. Henry
Maudsley (1879, p.Â 398) expressed the problem well: Just as it is with a
person who is not too far gone in intoxication, so it is with a person
who is not too far gone in acute mania; he may on occasion pull his
scattered ideas together by an effort of will, stop his irrational
doings and for a short time talk with an appearance of calmness and
reasonableness that may well raise false hopes in inexperienced people.

Manic stupor In this unusual disorder, patients are mute and immobile.
Their facial expression suggests elation, and on recovery they describe
having experienced a rapid succession of thoughts typical of mania. The
condition is rarely seen now that active treatment is available for
mania. Therefore an earlier description by Kraepelin (1921, p.Â 106) is
of interest:

235

Clinical features The patients are usually quite inaccessible, do not
trouble themselves about their surroundings, give no answer, or at most
speak in a low voice . . . smile without recognizable cause, lie
perfectly quiet in bed or tidy about at their clothes and bedclothes,
decorate themselves in an extraordinary way, all this without any sign
of outward excitement.

Box 10.1 Clinical features of a manic episode in ICD-10 Mood is elevated
out of keeping with the individual's circumstances, varying from
carefree joviality to almost uncontrollable excitement. In some manic
episodes the mood is irritable and suspicious rather than elated â
Increased energy results in overactivity, pressure of speech, and a
decreased need for sleep â Social inhibitions are lost, attention cannot
be sustained, and there is often marked distractibility â Self-esteem is
inflated, and grandiose and overoptimistic ideas are freely expressed â
Perceptual disorders may occur; for example, the appreciation of colours
can be especially vivid and beautiful â The individual may embark on
extravagant and impracticable schemes, spend money recklessly or become
aggressive, amorous, or facetious in inappropriate circumstances â For
diagnosis, the episode should last for at least one week and should be
severe enough to disrupt ordinary work and social activities more or
less completely. The mood change should be accompanied by increased
energy and several other symptoms referred to above---particularly
pressure of speech, decreased need for sleep, grandiosity, and excessive
optimism. â

On recovery, patients can remember the events that occurred during their
period of stupor. The condition may begin from a state of manic
excitement, but at times it is a stage in the transition between
depressive stupor and mania.

Criteria for manic episode in ICD-10 and DSM-5 The symptoms that are
required to make a diagnosis of 'manic episode' in ICD-10 are listed in
Box 10.1. The criteria for manic episode in DSM-5 are very similar,
although the number of manic symptoms required for diagnosis is
specified more precisely. In DSM-5, manic symptoms that occur during
treatment with antidepressant medications and persist at a syndromal
level despite the antidepressant being stopped are regarded as meeting
criteria for a manic episode rather than being coded as a drug-induced
manic illness. ICD-10 notes that some patients with mania present with
psychotic symptoms, in which case the clinical picture described in Box
10.1 is typically more severe, with inflated self-esteem and grandiose
ideas developing into grandiose delusions. At the same time irritability
and suspiciousness may result in delusions of persecution. Sustained
physical activity and excitement may result in aggression or violence,
and neglect of eating and drinking and personal hygiene can lead to a
dangerous state of dehydration and self-neglect.

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization.

Criteria for hypomanic episode in ICD-10 and DSM-5 Hypomania refers to a
state of elevated mood that is of lesser extent than mania. The criteria
in ICD-10 and DSM-5 are similar:

impairment in social or occupational activities, or to necessitate
hospital admission. â

Psychotic features are absent.

â

There is persistent mild elevation of mood for at least several days (in
DSM-5, at least 4 days) with increased energy and activity and feelings
of wellbeing.

Other clinical presentations of bipolar disorder

â

There is increased sociability, talkativeness and overfamiliarity,
increased sexual energy, and decreased need for sleep.

Mixed mood (affective) states

â

The mood disturbance, although associated with an unequivocal change in
function, which is observable to others, is not sufficiently severe to
cause marked

Depressive and manic symptoms sometimes occur at the same time. Patients
who are overactive and overtalkative may be having profoundly depressive
thoughts. In other patients, mania and depression follow each other in a
sequence of rapid changes---for example, a

235

236

236

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder manic patient may become intensely depressed
for a few hours and then return quickly to his manic state. These
changes were mentioned in early descriptions of mania by psychiatrists
such as Wilhelm Griesinger (1817--1868), and have been re-emphasized in
recent years because they appear to predict a better response to certain
mood stabilizers, such as valproate.

Rapid cycling disorders Some bipolar disorders recur regularly, with
intervals of only days or weeks between episodes. In the nineteenth
century these regularly recurring disorders were designated folie
circulaire (circular insanity) by the French psychiatrist Jean-Pierre
Falret (1794--1870). At present, the frequent recurrence of mood
disturbance in bipolar patients is usually termed rapid cycling
disorder. These recurrent episodes may be depressive, manic, or mixed.
The main features are that recurrence is frequent (by convention at
least four distinct episodes a year), and that episodes are separated by
a period of remission or a switch to an episode of opposite polarity. A
number of clinical features of rapid cycling disorder are important in
management and prevention. â

They occur more frequently in women.

â

Concomitant hypothyroidism is common.

â

They can be triggered by antidepressant drug treatment.

The lifetime risk of rapid cycling in bipolar populations varies between
studies, but is probably in the range 15--30%. Rapid cycling may be a
temporary phenomenon, and in most patients it remits within about 2
years. For a review, see Datta and Cleare (2009).

Cyclothymia The term cyclothymia disorder refers to a persistent
instability of mood in which there are numerous periods of mild elation
or mild depression that do not meet severity criteria for either major
depression or hypomania. It is seen as a milder variant of bipolar
disorder. It is not unusual, however, for episodes of more severe mood
disorder to supervene in the course of the disorder.

Depression Depressive episodes are common in the course of bipolar
disorder and most patients with bipolar disorder present initially with
an episode of major depression. The ability to predict which patients
first presenting with depression will eventually develop bipolar illness
is currently limited, although family history of bipolar disorder can
provide a useful clue. The presence of any hypomanic or mixed
symptomatology at initial presentation has some predictive value, but
the majority of depressed patients who convert to bipolar illness do not
have hypomanic symptoms during the initial episodes of depression. Other
clinical features associated with subsequent development of bipolar
illness include early age of onset and clinical severity, particularly
the presence of psychosis (see Fiedorowicz et al., 2011). There is a
high degree of overlap between the clinical symptomatology of unipolar
and bipolar depression; however, psychomotor retardation, early morning
awakening, morning worsening, and psychotic features are reportedly more
common in patients with bipolar disorder (Mitchell et al., 2011).

Transcultural factors The rates of bipolar disorder are relatively
consistent across countries, although there is some evidence for an
increased prevalence of bipolar disorder in certain minority groups
within a country, such as with black and ethnic minority groups in the
United Kingdom. Moreover, patients from these minority groups are

more likely to present with a first episode of mania and prominent
psychotic features than a comparable white population with bipolar
disorder. The reason for this difference is not fully understood, but
social exclusion may be a factor, particularly in relation to relatively
late access to services (Kennedy et al., 2004).

Classification Both DSM-5 and ICD-10 delineate hypomania from mania on
the basis of duration of symptoms, absence of

psychotic features, and lesser degree of social and occupational
impairment (see above). A manic episode can

273

Differential diagnosis of bipolar disorder be further subdivided
according to severity and whether or not psychotic symptoms are present.
In DSM-5, the presence of a single episode of mania is sufficient to
meet the criteria for bipolar disorder. In ICD-10, however, at least two
episodes of mood disturbance (at least one of which must be hypomania or
mania) are needed for this diagnosis. DSM-5 also categorizes bipolar
disorder as follows (Table 10.2): â

Bipolar I, in which mania has occurred on at least one occasion.

â

Bipolar II, in which hypomania has occurred, but mania has not. However,
to make the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder an episode of major
depression must also have occurred.

The diagnosis of bipolar II disorder is intended to indicate the
importance of detecting mild hypomanic episodes in patients who might
otherwise be diagnosed as having recurrent major depression. The
presence of such episodes may have implications for treatment response.
There is debate about where the line should be drawn between unipolar
depression and bipolar disorder, because some patients with definite
depressive episodes appear to have features of bipolarity but do not
meet the full DSM-5 criteria for mania or hypomania. Such patients may,
for example, have elevations of mood that last for less than the
required 4 days, or that have little discernible effect on functioning.
In DSM-5, the diagnosis of 'bipolar and related disorder' can be made
for such disorders and the reasons why the full criteria fail to be met
can be either 'specified' or 'unspecified'. In clinical practice, the
term bipolar spectrum is also used for these conditions. The
pharmacological treatment of bipolar depression differs to some extent
from that given to patients with

Table 10.2 Classification of bipolar disorder ICD-10

DSM-5

Manic episode

Hypomanic episode

Hypomania

Manic episode

Mania without psychosis

Mild

Mania with psychosis

Moderate Severe Severe with psychosis

Bipolar affective disorder

Bipolar I and bipolar II disorders

Currently hypomanic

Current (or most recent episode)

Currently manic

Hypomanic

Currently depressed

Manic\*

Currently mixed

Depressed

In remission

Mixed\*

Cyclothymia

Cyclothymic disorder

- Excludes bipolar II. Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of
  mental and behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic
  guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic
  and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright
  (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

recurrent unipolar depression (see 'Treatment of bipolar depression'
below), so making the diagnostic distinction between unipolar and
bipolar depression can have important implications for management.
However, it is not clear whether depressed patients in the 'bipolar
spectrum' do better when treated as having bipolar depression rather
than unipolar depression (for a discussion, see Goodwin et al., 2016).

Differential diagnosis of bipolar disorder Mania Manic disorders have to
be distinguished from the following: â

schizophrenia;

â

organic brain disease involving the frontal lobes (including brain
tumour and HIV infection);

â

states of brief excitement induced by amphetamines and other illegal
drugs.

Schizophrenia The distinction from schizophrenia can be most difficult.
Auditory hallucinations and delusions, including some that are
characteristic of schizophrenia, such as delusions of reference, can
occur in manic disorders. However, these symptoms usually change quickly
in terms of content, and seldom outlast the phase of overactivity. When
there is a more or less equal mixture of features of the two syndromes,
the term schizoaffective is

237

238

238

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder often used. This term is discussed further
in Chapter 11. Further clues to diagnosis can often be elicited by a
careful personal and family psychiatric history.

Organic brain disorder and drug misuse An organic brain lesion should
always be considered, especially in middle-aged or older patients with
expansive behaviour and no past history of affective disorder. In the
absence of gross mood disorder, extreme social disinhibition
(e.g.Â urinating in public) strongly suggests frontal lobe pathology. In
such cases, appropriate neurological investigation is essential. In
younger adults, infection with HIV or head injury may lead to the
manifestation of mania. The distinction between mania and excited
behaviour caused by drug misuse depends on the history and on an
examination of the urine for drugs, which is needed before treatment
with psychotropic drugs is started. Drug-induced states usually subside
quickly once the patient is in hospital. However, it should be
remembered that a significant proportion of patients who have bipolar
disorder misuse alcohol and other drugs.

Bipolar disorder and recurrent depression The distinction between
bipolar disorder and recurrent unipolar depression depends on the
eliciting of symptoms of mania or hypomania in the past history.

However, distinguishing recurrent depression from bipolar II disorder
can be particularly challenging because brief periods of hypomania can
be difficult to identify or may not be remembered clearly by the
patient. Moreover, at the time of diagnosis, such symptoms may not yet
have declared themselves and it is only subsequently, with the
development of mania or hypomania, that the bipolar disorder can be
identified. Another point is that patients with bipolar II disorder will
almost invariably seek treatment for depressive episodes, tending not to
regard spells of hypomania as being illness (Phillips and Kupfer, 2013).

Bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder One of the
diagnostic features of borderline personality disorder is marked
affective instability, which may at times be difficult to distinguish
from rapid cycling bipolar disorder. A family history of bipolar
disorder may be a useful pointer. Also, shifts in mood in borderline
personality disorder can be very rapid over hours and days, which is
unusual in bipolar disorder. Classic symptoms of mania, such as
increased energy and grandiosity, are not usually present. Finally, mood
disturbances in borderline personality are usually triggered by
interpersonal issues such as the fear of loss or rejection, while in
rapid cycling bipolar disorder such psychosocial triggers are not
prominent (Paris and Black, 2015).

Epidemiology The epidemiology of bipolar disorder depends on the
diagnostic criteria used to define it. Including patients in the bipolar
spectrum increases rates of bipolar disorder at the expense of recurrent
major depression. In addition, as noted above, distinguishing bipolar
disorder from recurrent unipolar depression can be challenging.
Community surveys using ICD-10 or DSM-IV criteria for bipolar disorder
in industrialized countries have suggested that: â

The lifetime risk for bipolar disorder is in the range 0.3--1.5%.

â

The 6-month prevalence of bipolar disorder is not much less than the
lifetime prevalence, indicating the chronic nature of the disorder.

â

The prevalence in men and women is the same.

â

The mean age of onset is about 18 years in community studies.

â

Bipolar disorder is highly comorbid with other disorders, particularly
anxiety disorders and substance misuse, as well as general medical
conditions such as cardiovascular disease.

For a review of the epidemiology of bipolar disorder, see Joyce (2009).

239

Aetiology

Aetiology Overview In earlier studies of aetiology, particularly of
depression, the distinction between recurrent unipolar depression and
depression in the context of bipolar disorder was not always made. The
fact that first-degree relatives of patients with bipolar disorder have
an increased risk of recurrent unipolar depression suggests that there
is some aetiological overlap between the two conditions. Alternatively,
it may be that such relatives make up one particular subtype of the
heterogenous disorder which is currently called major depression. One of
the most striking features of bipolar disorder is its high heritability
and, accordingly, much recent work has employed molecular genetic
techniques in an attempt to implicate genetic loci relevant to
pathophysiology. In addition, advances in structural and functional
imaging have allowed a clearer description of the brain basis of bipolar
disorder and its possible distinction from recurrent unipolar
depression. However, none of the brain changes yet identified is
sufficiently reliable and distinct to be used as a diagnostic biomarker.
In addition, increasing knowledge of possible pathophysiology has not
yet led to new treatments, which continue to be developed on an
empirical basis.

Genetic causes Family and twin studies The risk of both bipolar and
unipolar mood disorders is increased in first-degree relatives of
bipolar probands. Relatives of bipolar probands also have increased
risks of schizoaffective disorder. Twin studies have shown that the
concordance rate for mood disorder in the monozygotic co-twin of a
proband with bipolar disorder is around 60%, but for dizygotic twins the
rate is only about 20%. This indicates a high heritability, which has
been estimated at around 85% (Bienvenu et al., 2011).

Mode of inheritance The familial segregation of bipolar disorder does
not fit a simple Mendelian pattern. Overall, it seems likely that the
genetic liability to the condition results largely from the combined
action of multiple genes of modest, or small, effect---so-called
polygenic inheritance. It is also possible that rare structural
chromosomal abnormalities

(copy number variants) and gene--gene interactions (epistasis)
contribute to the genetic risk. The fact that the concordance rate of
monozygotic twins for bipolar disorder is around 60% indicates that
environmental factors are also likely to be important in pathophysiology
(Craddock and Sklar, 2013).

Molecular genetics Molecular linkage studies of mood disorders have so
far not been particularly revealing, perhaps because the genes involved
are of small effect, or because of genetic heterogeneity. Positive
findings have emerged, but have often proved difficult to replicate even
in large-scale studies and meta-analyses. Similarly, association studies
of 'candidate' genes have not proved fruitful, presumably because lack
of understanding of the biology of the disorder inhibits the
identification of the most promising candidates (Craddock and Sklar,
2013). Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in large numbers of
bipolar patients have begun to find risk loci which have some robustness
to replication. For example, the Psychiatric Genome-Wide Association
Study Consortium Bipolar Disorder Working Group reported on genotype
data from over 16,000 bipolar patients and found a replicated
genome-wide significant association with CACNA1C, which encodes a
subunit of the L-type calcium channel. Overall, about 10 replicated loci
have thus far been identified (Harrison, 2016). Overall the data suggest
that, as with schizophrenia, the inherited risk of bipolar disorder is
conferred by hundreds, or even thousands, of genes of small effect.
However, some of the identified genes can be shown to cluster around
biologically meaningful processes ('pathway analysis'). For example, a
number of genes putatively involved in bipolar disorder impact on the
activity of voltage-gated calcium channels, which is of interest in view
of the possible mood-stabilizing effects of calcium channel blockers
such as verapamil (Craddock and Sklar, 2013). Another point is that many
of the genes identified in GWAS studies of bipolar disorder also appear
to be risk alleles for the development of schizophrenia. It is striking
that molecular genetic studies suggest a greater overlap in risk alleles
between bipolar disorder and schizophrenia than for bipolar disorder and
unipolar depression (Harrison, 2016). However, this may simply point to
the greater heterogeneity of the diagnostic category of major
depression.

239

240

240

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder

Environment The concordance rates for bipolar disorder in monozygotic
twins noted above show that environmental factors are likely to be
involved in the pathophysiology of bipolar illness. Most of the
environmental factors identified thus far do not seem specific for
bipolar disorder but rather confer risk of psychiatric disorder more
generally. For example, patients with bipolar disorder report higher
rates of childhood sexual abuse than healthy controls, but similar or
lower rates than other groups of psychiatric patients (Maniglio, 2013).
Childhood sexual abuse is known to be linked to the development of
psychosis generally in adulthood and in one study in bipolar patients
was associated with an increased risk of auditory hallucinations, but
not delusions (Upthegrove et al., 2015). Life events have been shown to
precipitate episodes of both depression and mania in bipolar patients,
although the effect appears more pronounced in early stages of the
illness, suggesting a possible 'kindling' effect (Kemner et al., 2015).
Negative life events can trigger episodes of both depression and mania,
although mania can also apparently be precipitated by life events
associated with goal attainment. One way that life events might lead to
illness is through effects on circadian rhythms; for example, decreasing
sleep and disrupting regular cycles of sleep and activity (Alloy et al.,
2005). The level of current social support also seems an important
factor influencing the course of bipolar disorder. As with
schizophrenia, high levels of expressed emotion in a family can worsen
affective symptomatology, and the risk of relapse is lessened by
treatment addressing this issue (Alloy et al., 2005).

Neurobiological approaches to aetiology Neurochemistry An influential
hypothesis links excessive dopamine activity to the pathophysiology of
schizophrenia (see Chapter 11). It has also been proposed that manic
states may be attributable to dopamine overactivity because drugs of
abuse, particularly those acting to increase central dopamine activity,
are associated with many of the symptoms of acute mania, such as
elevated mood, decreased need for sleep, talkativeness, and the
unguarded pursuit of rewarding behaviours. Also, drugs that block
dopamine receptors are commonly employed in the acute treatment of
mania.

Studies of dopamine metabolism and function have provided little direct
evidence for overactivity of dopamine pathways in patients with manic
illness. A study in recovered bipolar patients showed that, while they
had a greater psychological response to intravenous amphetamine, there
was no greater release of presynaptic dopamine as measured by the
technique of raclopride displacement (see Chapter 5). This suggests that
there may be a heightened responsivity to changes in dopamine
neurotransmission in patients at risk of mania, but this is unlikely to
be primarily because of changes in dopamine mechanisms. For a review of
the role of dopamine in mania, see Cousins et al.Â (2009). Many of the
drugs used in the longer-term management of bipolar disorder are
anticonvulsants, which alter brain glutamate levels. Several magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (MRS) investigations have been carried out in
bipolar patients at various stages of illness. There are suggestions
that glutamate levels might be increased in bipolar patients, which
makes an interesting point of contrast with findings in major depression
(see Chapter 9). The reliability of this finding and its possible
utility in diagnosis require further study (Gigante et al., 2012).

Endocrine abnormalities Cortisol As in major depression, disturbances of
the hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal (HPA) axis with hypersecretion of
cortisol have been reported in patients with bipolar disorder. However,
the patients studied have usually been taking medication, making
interpretation difficult. There have been suggested links between
excessive cortisol secretion in bipolar disorder and the presence of
cognitive impairment, with beneficial effects on cognition being
reported following treatment with glucocorticoid antagonists (Young,
2014). It is also well recognized that administration of exogenous
corticosteroids in the treatment of general medical conditions can give
rise to an acute manic illness.

Oestrogen and progesterone The immediate postpartum period is a time of
heightened risk for the development of acute psychotic illness in
mothers---usually presenting as a form of bipolar disorder (see Chapter
22). There has therefore been great interest in whether this might be
attributable to the abrupt fall in circulating levels of sex steroids
that occurs at this time; however, no correlation has been identified
and oestrogen treatment does not prevent postpartum psychosis (Hay,
2009).

241

Course and prognosis

Brain imaging Structural brain imaging Changes in brain volume measured
by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in bipolar disorder have been
inconsistent, and stage of illness and drug treatment, particularly the
use of lithium, appear to be important confounding factors. It seems
that in bipolar patients not taking lithium, hippocampal volumes are
lower, as in recurrent depression. However, this abnormality is reversed
in patients taking lithium. There also appears to be a reduction in
cerebral volume over the course of bipolar illness, perhaps suggesting a
degenerative process in some patients (Hallahan et al., 2011). Studies
using diffusor tension imaging (see Chapter 5) in bipolar patients have
revealed abnormalities in certain white matter tracts, perhaps
representing abnormal myelination or orientation of axons in
predominantly frontal and temporal white matter regions (Phillips and
Swartz, 2014). Similarly to patients with major depression (see Chapter
9), there is evidence that neuropathological changes occur in patients
with bipolar disorder. For example, studies in the prefrontal cortex
have reported reductions in neuronal and glial cell density, the latter
consistent with a loss of oligodendroglial cells. Again, as in major
depression, there may also be deficits in gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
interneurons (Savitz et al., 2014).

Functional imaging As in patients with unipolar depression, bipolar
depressed patients show elevated neural responses in the amygdala and
abnormally reduced activity in regulatory lateral and medial prefrontal
cortical regions in response to negative emotional cues. Unlike unipolar
depressed patients, euthymic bipolar patients show elevated amygdala
responses and decreased activity in cortical regions to positive
emotional stimuli such as happy faces. Bipolar patients also demonstrate
enhanced reactions in ventral striatal and orbitofrontal 'reward'
circuitry during tasks that engage reward processing (Phillips and
Swartz, 2014). Generally functional imaging studies show a greater range
of neural dysregulation in bipolar disorder than in unipolar depression,
with abnormalities

encompassing not only neural responses to negative emotional stimuli but
also positive stimuli, including the experience of reward.

Neuropsychological changes Cognitive deficits are present in bipolar
disorder during both acute illness and periods of euthymia. Deficits are
apparent in first-episode patients, suggesting that they may form an
integral part of the illness. In comparison to patients with
schizophrenia the deficits are relatively modest but cover a wide range
of neuropsychological domains, including executive function, verbal
memory, attention, and processing speed (Lee et al., 2015). At the
moment there is no clear evidence that cognitive deficits in bipolar
disorder increase through the course of the illness. Whether
neuropsychological deficits distinguish patients with bipolar I and
bipolar II disorder is uncertain.

Conclusions The predisposition to develop bipolar disorder has a major
genetic contribution and the relevant genes, which may number many
thousands, are starting to be identified. If such genes converge on a
number of discrete biological pathways, it will greatly aid elucidation
of aetiological mechanisms and may provide clues to new treatments. In
terms of environmental factors, adverse early experiences, particularly
abuse, may also predispose to bipolar disorder as it does to many other
psychiatric conditions. Early episodes of illness are often precipitated
by life events but these may become less important as the illness
progresses. The psychosocial environment can modify the course of
bipolar illness and there may well be an important role for factors that
disrupt sleep--wake activity. Brain imaging studies show functional
abnormalities consistent with disordered emotional regulation and reward
processes; unlike the abnormalities seen in major depression, these
changes also involve exaggerated functional responses to positive
emotional stimuli. Modest but widespread neuropsychological deficits can
be seen in bipolar disorder and these appear to extend into periods of
euthymia.

Course and prognosis From recent hospital and population-based studies,
the following general conclusions can be drawn (Angst, 2009).

Bipolar disorders â

The age of onset of bipolar disorder is typically about 21 years in
hospital studies, but earlier (about 18 years)

241

24

242

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder in community surveys. Late-onset bipolar
disorder is rare, and may be precipitated by organic brain disease. â

Bipolar disorder usually begins as depression, with the first manic
episode manifesting about 5 years later.

â

The average length of a manic episode (treated or untreated) is about 6
months.

â

At least 90% of patients with mania experience further episodes of major
mood disturbance.

â

Over a 25-year follow-up, on average bipolar patients experience about
10 further episodes of major mood disturbance.

â

The interval between episodes becomes progressively shorter with both
age and the number of episodes.

â

Over long-term follow-up, patients with bipolar disorder experience
mood-related symptomatology of varying severity for about one-third of
the time. In both bipolar I and bipolar II disorder this most commonly
takes the form of depressive symptoms.

â

Nearly all bipolar patients recover from acute episodes, but the
long-term prognosis is rather poor. For example, less than 20% of
bipolar patients achieve a period of 5 years of clinical stability with
good social and occupational performance. Patients with bipolar II
disorder have a somewhat better outcome.

Persistent cognitive deficits and mood instability predict a poorer
outcome.

Mortality of bipolar disorder Mortality is significantly increased in
patients with bipolar disorders. Over a 40-year follow-up about 8% of
men and 5% of women hospitalized for bipolar illness died by suicide
(Nordentoft et al., 2011). The high mortality in bipolar disorder is
caused not only by suicide but also general medical conditions such as
cardiovascular disease and the secondary consequences of comorbid
substance misuse, including smoking. A study of 22,00 Danish patients
with bipolar disorder found a reduction in life expectancy of about 13
years in men and 9 years in women. About two-thirds of this reduction
was accounted for by natural causes, with the remainder being due to
suicide and accidents (Kessing et al., 2015). Cardiovascular disease is
an important cause of increased mortality in bipolar patients, which
highlights the importance of attending to the medical needs of this
population. The metabolic effects of extended treatment with
psychotropic medication, particularly antipsychotic drugs, also need
careful assessment (Goodwin et al., 2016).

Treatment of mania General measures The treatment of mania presents a
formidable clinical challenge, which often tests the management skills
of the psychiatric team. Drug treatment plays a pivotal role in the
management of mania, and has the aim of reducing physical and mental
overactivity, improving features of psychosis, and preventing
deterioration in health caused by exhaustion, sleep deprivation, and
poor fluid intake. It is worth noting that before the advent of modern
drug treatment the mortality of mania in the hospital setting was over
20%; nearly 50% of these patients died from exhaustion (Derby, 1933).

Medication Typical antipsychotic drugs Several randomized controlled
trials have shown the efficacy of chlorpromazine and haloperidol in
treating mania, whether or not patients have clear psychotic features.
However, the use of typical antipsychotic drugs

has limitations. Manic patients often receive high doses, and may be
particularly susceptible to extrapyramidal side-effects. In addition,
conventional antipsychotic drugs do not protect against the depressive
downswings that can follow resolution of a manic illness.

Atypical antipsychotic drugs Because of their improved tolerability
profile, atypical antipsychotic agents are being increasingly used in
the treatment of mania. Placebo-controlled trials support the efficacy
of aripiprazole, asenapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in
patients with mania (Cipriani et al., 2011). However, it should be noted
that more severely ill patients may not be included in placebocontrolled
trials, which could limit the generalizability of these findings.

Lithium Five placebo-controlled trials have shown that lithium is
effective in the acute treatment of mania (Cipriani et al., 2011). In
the only study that compared lithium with

243

Treatment of mania both placebo and an active comparator, Bowden et al.
(1994) found a response rate of 49% for lithium, 48% for valproate, and
25% for placebo. In general, lithium is as effective as an antipsychotic
medication, but its onset of action is slower. Moreover, in highly
active states, antipsychotic medication may be preferable (Goodwin et
al., 2016). Prominent depressive symptoms and psychotic features predict
a poorer response to lithium alone, as does a rapid cycling disorder.

Carbamazepine Assessment of the efficacy of carbamazepine in acute mania
has been limited by problems with regard to study design. These include
small numbers, the use of adjunctive medications, and mixed diagnostic
groupings. However, more recent placebo-controlled trials of an
extended-release form of carbamazepine found a clinically significantly
antimanic effect (Goodwin et al., 2016). Carbamazepine induces
drug-metabolizing enzymes in the liver, which can lead to lower plasma
levels of concomitantly administered drugs.

Valproate Several randomized controlled trials have shown that valproate
possesses antimanic activity that is greater than that of placebo and
equivalent to that of lithium (Cipriani et al., 2011). Valproate may be
more effective than lithium in the subgroup of patients with prominent
dysphoric symptoms and rapid cycling. One advantage of valproate is that
it has an earlier onset of activity than other mood stabilizers. For
example, with 'valproate loading' (20 mg/kg/day) the onset of the
antimanic effect can occur as early as within 1--4 days. This is
probably because the tolerability of valproate allows rapid dose
escalation, whereas lithium and carbamazepine generally need to be
introduced more gradually.

Benzodiazepines Benzodiazepines are useful adjuncts in the treatment of
mania, because they can rapidly diminish overactivity and restore sleep.
They have been used as sole therapy in the treatment of mania, but this
carries a risk of disinhibition. Their most useful role is as an adjunct
to mood stabilizers, because the latter drugs can take several days to
become effective. Benzodiazepines can also be given in combination with
antipsychotic drugs, because this lowers the dose of antipsychotic drug
required to calm agitated and overactive patients. The benzodiazepines

that are usually employed are the high-potency agents, lorazepam and
clonazepam. Use should be on an 'as needed' basis and for as short a
time as possible, to minimize the risk of tolerance and dependence
(Goodwin et al., 2016).

Electroconvulsive therapy ECT has been widely used to treat mania,
although there have been only two prospective controlled trials in the
modern era. In one of these trials, bilateral ECT was found to be
superior to lithium (Small et al., 1988). In the other study, unilateral
and bilateral ECT were compared with a combination of lithium and
haloperidol in patients who had not responded to antipsychotic drugs
alone. The response rate of these patients to ECT (13 of 22) was greater
than that to combined drug treatment (none of five). The efficacy of
unilateral and bilateral ECT did not differ (Mukherjee et al., 1988).
Retrospective investigations have shown ECT to be effective in acute
mania, with the overall response rate being about 80%. Many of these
patients had been unresponsive to medication. ECT is also effective in
mixed affective states (Valenti et al., 2008). It is often given at
shorter intervals in the treatment of mania than in the treatment of
depression, but there is no evidence that this regimen is necessary or
that it speeds up the treatment response. It is unclear whether
bilateral electrode placement is better than unilateral placement in
manic patients.

Continuation treatment of mania It is a common clinical experience that
too rapid a reduction in doses of drug treatment can lead to the sudden
recrudescence of an apparently treated manic disorder. Since the average
length of a manic episode is about 6 months, it seems prudent to
continue some form of medication for at least this period. There are
several studies involving atypical antipsychotic drugs which show that,
compared with placebo, continuation treatment decreases the risk of
manic relapse (Goodwin et al., 2016). Patients who have been severely
ill may well be taking both a mood stabilizer and an antipsychotic
agent. Because of the adverse effects of antipsychotic drugs, it will
often be appropriate to withdraw this form of treatment slowly first.

243

24

244

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder

Treatment of bipolar depression For many years bipolar depression was
treated similarly to unipolar depression and, for a number of major
issues (for example, clinical assessment and general psychological
support), this still holds good. However, in recent years it has become
apparent that best pharmacological treatment of depression occurring in
the context of bipolar disorder can differ significantly from that
employed in unipolar depression.

Medication Antidepressant drugs Depression in the context of a bipolar
disorder can be problematic because standard antidepressant treatments
have a number of disadvantages, which include: â

a possibly lower efficacy than in unipolar depression;

â

a risk of inducing mania;

â

a risk of inducing rapid cycling.

Whether conventional antidepressant medication is efficacious in bipolar
depression has been controversial. However, more recent meta-analyses do
indicate some benefit. For example, VÃ¡zquez et al.Â (2013) identified 10
placebo-controlled trials involving over 1400 patients with bipolar
depression. Response to antidepressants was significantly greater than
that to placebo, with a number needed to treat (NNT) of about six.
However, compared to studies in unipolar depression the trials are few
in number and involve patients with bipolar I and II disorders as well
as old and newer antidepressant drugs. It may be that antidepressants
are more clinically useful in bipolar II depression than in bipolar I
(Malhi, 2015). It is generally agreed that treatment with tricyclic
antidepressants does increase the risk of manic switching in bipolar
depressed patients. However, the risk with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) seems much less and only slightly greater than that
seen with placebo. Venlafaxine is thought more likely than SSRIs to
destabilize mood (VÃ¡zquez et al., 2014).

Atypical antipsychotic drugs There is growing evidence for the short-
and longerterm efficacy of certain atypical antipsychotic drugs such as
quetiapine in the treatment of bipolar depression, and similar effects
have been reported for lurasidone (VÃ¡zquez et al., 2014). The effects of
olanzapine as a monotherapy in bipolar depression seem less than those
of quetiapine, although in combination with fluoxetine it appears at
least as effective (Table 10.3). In contrast, aripiprazole does not
appear useful in bipolar depression (VÃ¡zquez et al., 2014).

Anticonvulsants Some anticonvulsant mood stabilizers are helpful in the
treatment of bipolar depression, with positive evidence from randomized
trials for lamotrigine and valproate. Both these drugs would be expected
to be free from the risk of inducing mania or rapid cycling. A recent
large pragmatic trial found benefit at both 12 and 52 weeks for the
addition of lamotrigine to ineffective quetiapine therapy. At 12 weeks
remission in the lamotrigine group was 31% versus 16% in the placebo
group (NNT 6.6) (Geddes et al., 2016). An interesting observation, made
possible by the factorial design of the trial, was that

Table 10.3 Meta-analysis of placebo controlled trials of selected
pharmacological treatments in bipolar depression Drug

Drug:placebo 95% response Confidence ratio interval

Valproate

2.08

1.18--3.65

Olanzapine +fluoxetine

1.84

1.44--2.36

Lurasidone

1.72

1.33--2.22

Antidepressants

1.43

1.11---1.84

Lithium

Quetiapine

1.36

1.24--1.49

Lithium may have a role in the prevention of depression in bipolar
disorder (see page 244), but evidence for its effectiveness in acute
bipolar depression is limited and is based on older trials with
unsatisfactory designs. A more recent placebo-controlled study in
bipolar depression found lithium less efficacious than quetiapine and
with few positive differences from placebo (Young et al., 2010).

Lamotrigine

1.25

1.07--1.46

Olanzapine

1.25

1.08--1.44

Lithium

1.12

0.92--1.44

Aripiprazole

0.88

0.74--1.04

Reproduced from Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 20(3), VÃ¡zquez GH et
al, Pharmacological treatment of bipolar depression, pp.Â 193--201,
Copyright (2014), with permission from Royal College of Psychiatrists.

245

Longer-term treatment of bipolar disorder coadministration of folic acid
appeared to antagonize the therapeutic effect of lamotrigine.

Electroconvulsive therapy For resistant depression in bipolar patients,
ECT can be of benefit. There are few randomized studies of patients
specifically diagnosed with bipolar illness. However,

in a recent randomized trial of 73 bipolar patients with resistant
depression, ECT was more effective than algorithm-based pharmacological
treatment in producing an antidepressant response (74% versus 35%).
However, remission rates between the two treatments did not differ
(Schoeyen et al., 2014). For a review of the treatment of bipolar
depression, see VÃ¡zquez et al. (2014).

Longer-term treatment of bipolar disorder Medication Lithium There is
substantial evidence for the efficacy of lithium in the maintenance
treatment of recurrent mood disturbances in patients with bipolar
disorders. In a systematic review, Geddes et al.Â (2004) found that
lithium was significantly more effective than placebo in preventing
relapses of all mood disorders (mean relative risk, 0.65; 95% confidence
intervals \[CI\], 0.5--0.84). However, although lithium was clearly
effective in preventing manic relapse, its effect in preventing
depressive episodes was more equivocal (mean relative risk, 0.72; 95%
CI, 0.49--1.07). In general, about 50% of bipolar patients who are
treated with lithium respond well. The following are predictors of a
relatively poorer response to lithium maintenance treatment: â

rapid-cycling disorders or chronic depression;

â

mixed affective states;

â

alcohol and drug misuse;

â

mood-incongruent psychotic features.

There is also evidence that use of lithium in patients with recurrent
mood disorders is associated with a significant reduction in mortality
from suicide. This effect is most often seen in dedicated lithium
clinics, and the mechanism and specificity of the association require
further study. Nevertheless, it is clinically important that the
carefully supervised use of lithium is associated with a lowered risk of
suicidal behaviour. This effect is not necessarily shared by other mood
stabilizers (Cipriani et al., 2011).

Valproate Valproate is increasingly used in the treatment of acute
mania, and therefore evidence of its longer-term maintenance effects is
needed. Bowden et al.Â (2000)

randomized 372 patients to 1 year of maintenance treatment with
valproate, lithium, and placebo. There were no significant differences
between the three treatment groups on the primary outcome measure of
time to recurrence of any mood disorder. However, the number of patients
who left the study because of the occurrence of a severe mood episode
was significantly less among those taking valproate compared with those
on placebo. Patients who were taking valproate experienced more tremor,
alopecia, and weight gain than those on placebo. In a pragmatic study in
bipolar patients, the relapse rate on lithium (59%) was significantly
less than that with valproate (69%) over 24 months. The combination of
lithium and valproate was associated with the lowest relapse rate (54%)
(BALANCE Study Group, 2010).

Lamotrigine Two prospective placebo-controlled trials have shown that
lamotrigine has prophylactic effects in patients with bipolar illness.
Although it may have some modest benefit in the prevention of mania,
lamotrigine has a clearer prophylactic effect against depression. Its
profile of activity therefore contrasts with those of lithium and
valproate, which are more effective in preventing mania (Goodwin et al.,
2016). However, lamotrigine is not licensed for the treatment of mood
disorder in the UK.

Carbamazepine Although the number of patients studied in randomized
controlled studies is relatively few, carbamazepine appears to have
efficacy in the prophylaxis of bipolar disorder. However, it seems to be
less effective than lithium in 'classical' bipolar illness (Goodwin et
al., 2016). Therefore, carbamazepine can be considered in patients who
respond poorly to lithium, particularly those with rapid-cycling
disorders. It can be given alone or in combination with lithium.
Carbamazepine can induce hepatic metabolizing enzymes, leading to lower
levels of

245

246

246

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder coadministered drugs. Therefore it should be
used with caution in combination treatments.

Antipsychotic drugs Patients with bipolar disorder have sometimes been
maintained on typical antipsychotic drugs, usually given in addition to
mood-stabilizing agents. It is usually wise to minimize this form of
treatment where possible, because conventional antipsychotic drugs do
not protect against depression, and may be more liable to cause tardive
dyskinesia in bipolar patients. Atypical antipsychotic drugs are also
being employed in the longer-term maintenance treatment of bipolar
disorder, either as a sole treatment or as an adjunct to mood
stabilizers. There is evidence from randomized studies for the efficacy
of olanzapine and quetiapine in this respect in the prevention of both
depression and mania (Goodwin et al., 2016). However, a common design of
these studies is to continue antipsychotic treatment in patients who
have responded to short-term, open-label treatment, and to compare this
with placebo substitution. This sample, enriched for antipsychotic
treatment responders, may favour active treatment unduly, and therefore
the findings may not be generally applicable to other clinical
situations (Cipriani et al., 2010).

Psychotherapy Studies of structured psychotherapies in bipolar disorder
have usually been directed to patients outside acute episodes of mood
disturbance. In this situation, therefore, psychotherapy has the aim of
improving and sustaining recovery.

Cognitive behaviour therapy Psychotherapy has been less studied in
bipolar patients, but, theoretically, cognitive behavioural techniques
may be valuable in helping patients to accept their illness and the need
for medical treatment, as well as improving the management of
emotionally stressful situations. Some randomized studies have shown
that cognitive techniques combined with education about early signs of
relapse reduced the rates of relapse in bipolar patients. However, a
large pragmatic trial showed no benefit using this approach (Scott et
al., 2006). Overall, the benefit of cognitive behaviour therapy in the
prevention of relapse in bipolar disorder is uncertain (Geddes and
Miklowitz, 2013).

Family focused approaches The mood swings experienced by bipolar
patients, particularly mood elevation, can be very challenging

for their families; this may lead to high levels of 'expressed emotion',
which in turn worsen the clinical course. Family-based therapy aims to
improve relationships and support for the patient within the family by
utilizing psychoeducation as well as training in communication skills
and problem-solving. In two studies substantial effects of this approach
were apparent, with reductions in both hospitalizations and
symptomatology by about a third (Geddes and Miklowitz, 2013).
Interestingly, family approaches using the above techniques are also
helpful if the patient does not personally attend the sessions. However,
the practical utility of this form of therapy will depend much on family
structure and the role the patient plays in it, as well as the extent to
which the wider culture encourages disclosure of painful feelings within
the family (Geddes and Miklowitz, 2013).

Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy While mood disturbance is almost
invariably associated with sleep disruption, the converse is also the
case and it is well recognized that sleep deprivation in bipolar
patients can trigger episodes of mania. Interpersonal and social rhythm
therapy was derived from interpersonal therapy (Chapter 24) and focuses
on helping bipolar patients to maintain regular sleep-activity schedules
with careful attention to sleep hygiene. Current data suggest that
patients who are able to attain stable sleep-- wake routines do have a
better longer-term outcome (Geddes and Miklowitz, 2013).

Group psychoeducation Group psychoeducation attempts to deliver
psychotherapy in a cost-effective way by educating groups of bipolar
patients in a medical understanding of their illness and the best ways
of achieving mood stability. As with social rhythm therapy, the
importance of regular sleep--wake cycles is stressed, together with the
detection of early signs of relapse and how these should be managed.
Treatment adherence is also an important treatment goal. The approach
has been pioneered in Barcelona, where a randomized trial of 120 bipolar
patients found that psychoeducational group therapy treatment was of
benefit in reducing the average number of relapses over a 5-year
follow-up period by over 50% (Colom et al., 2009). The best results were
shown in people with fewer episodes of illness, which suggests that the
intervention should be applied as early as possible in the course of the
illness.

274

Practical management of bipolar disorder

Practical management of bipolar disorder Acute mania

Management of mania Hospital admission

Assessment In the assessment of mania, the important steps can be
summarized as follows. â

Decide the diagnosis.

â

Assess the severity of the disorder.

â

Form an opinion about the causes.

â

Assess the patient's social resources.

â

Judge the effects on other people.

Diagnosis depends on a careful history and examination. Whenever
possible, the history should be taken from relatives as well as from the
patient, because the latter may not recognize the extent of their
abnormal behaviour. Differential diagnosis has been discussed earlier in
this chapter. It is always important to remember that mildly
disinhibited behaviour can result from frontal lobe lesions
(e.g.Â tumours) as well as from mania. There should be a urine screen for
illegal substances. Severity is judged next. For this purpose it is
essential to interview an informant as well as the patient. Manic
patients may exert some self-control during an interview with a doctor,
and may then behave in a disinhibited and grandiose way immediately
afterwards. At an early stage of mania, the doctor can easily be misled
and may lose the opportunity to persuade the patient to enter hospital
before causing himself or herself long-term difficulties (e.g.Â owing to
ill-judged decisions or unjustified extravagance). Where possible, it is
important to identify any life events that may have provoked the onset
of manic illness. Some manic episodes follow physical illness, treatment
with drugs (especially steroids or antidepressants), or operations.
Sleep deprivation may trigger mania in some susceptible individuals. The
patient's resources and the effect of the illness on other people are
assessed in the ways described above for depressive disorders. Even the
most supportive family will find it extremely difficult to care for a
manic patient at home for more than a few days unless the disorder is
exceptionally mild. The patient's responsibilities with regard to the
care of dependent children, or at work, should always be considered
carefully.

The first decision is whether to admit the patient to hospital. In all
but the mildest cases, admission is nearly always advisable to protect
the patient from the consequences of their own behaviour. If the
disorder is not too severe, the patient will usually agree to enter
hospital after some persuasion. If the disorder is more severe,
compulsory admission is likely to be needed.

General clinical management Development of a therapeutic alliance with
the manic patient is an important goal of treatment, although lack of
insight into the condition and anger at involuntary detention can make
this a testing and time-consuming process. It is best to use an
understanding, yet firm, approach that minimizes confrontation. For
example, it is often possible to avoid an argument by taking advantage
of the manic patient's easy distractibility; instead of refusing
demands, it is better to delay until the patient's attention switches to
another topic that they can be encouraged to pursue. In hospital,
nursing staff play a key role in this kind of management, where they
attempt to provide manic patients with a low-stimulus and safe
environment that limits confrontations and impulsive behaviour.
Supportive, reality-orientated psychotherapy is an important element of
treatment, and may need to be extended to the patient's partner and
family, who often will have experienced great strain during the manic
episode. Educational sessions are important when the patient is more
settled. Patients may need much practical help to limit the financial,
legal, and occupational repercussions of the illness.

Medication Medication plays an important role in the acute management of
mania. However, all current drug treatments have limitations in terms of
their efficacy and tolerability. In the UK, antipsychotic drugs are
generally used as primary agents in the management of acute mania, with
mood stabilizers being reserved for longer-term prophylaxis or where the
initial response to antipsychotic drugs is unsatisfactory. A network
meta-analysis suggested that the most useful acute antimanic drugs in
terms

247

248

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder of efficacy and tolerability are
haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone (Cipriani et al.,
2011; Figure 10.1). For patients who are not already taking mood
stabilizers, the drug management can be summarized as follows: â

Begin treatment with either olanzapine, quetiapine, or risperidone (a
modest dose of haloperidol is an alternative).

â

Where necessary, use adjunctive high-potency benzodiazepines
(e.g.Â lorazepam or clonazepam) to avoid the need for high-dose
antipsychotic therapy, and to ensure satisfactory sleep.

â

Add a mood stabilizer if the response to this treatment is
unsatisfactory (use lithium for 'classical' mania, and

valproate for mania with prominent dysphoric or mixed states, or where
lithium is contraindicated). If it is decided to use a mood stabilizer
as the initial treatment, the choice lies between lithium and valproate.
Valproate is somewhat easier to use and has a faster onset of action. As
before, benzodiazepines can be used as an adjunct to reduce overactivity
and permit sleep, while antipsychotic agents can be reserved for
patients who are unresponsive to these measures. If a patient presents
with a manic episode and is already taking a mood stabilizer, the first
step is to optimize the mood stabilizer treatment in terms of dosing and
adherence. Concomitant treatment with antipsychotic drugs will then
probably be needed; addition of a second mood stabilizing drug is an
alternative (Goodwin et al., 2016). Progress of a manic episode can be
judged not only by the mental state and general behaviour, but also by

1st

HAL

RIS OLZ

3rd

QTP

ARI

LIT 5th Ranking for efï¬cacy

248

7th

CBZ

ASE ZIP

VAL

9th LAM 11th

PBO TOP

13th

GBT

13th

11th

9th 7th 5th Ranking for acceptability

3rd

1st

Figure 10.1 Antimanic drugs have been ranked for efficacy (vertical
axis) and acceptability (horizontal axis). Treatments in the green
section combine the best profile. ARI=aripiprazole; ASE=asenapine;
CBZ=carbamazepine; GBT=gabapentin; HAL=haloperidol; LAM=lamotrigine;
LIT=lithium; OLZ=olanzapine; PBO=placebo; QTP=quetiapine;
RIS=risperidone; TOP=topiramate; VAL=valproate; ZIP=ziprasidone.

249

Practical management of bipolar disorder the pattern of sleep and the
regaining of any weight lost during the illness. As progress continues,
antipsychotic drug treatment is reduced gradually. It is important not
to discontinue the drug too soon, otherwise there may be a relapse and a
return of all the original problems of management. ECT was used to treat
mania before antipsychotic drugs were introduced, but evidence about its
effectiveness is still limited (see above). It is appropriate to
consider the treatment for the unusual patients who do not respond to
drug treatment even when this is given at maximum doses. In such cases,
clinical experience suggests that a relatively short course of ECT may
often be followed by a significant reduction in symptoms sufficient to
allow treatment to be continued with drugs. ECT may also be helpful for
mixed affective states in which depressive symptoms are prominent.
Whatever treatment is adopted, a careful watch should be kept for
symptoms of depressive disorder. It should be remembered that transient
but profound depressive mood change, accompanied by depressive ideas, is
common among manic patients. The clinical picture may also change
rapidly to a sustained depressive disorder. If either change happens,
the patient may develop suicidal ideas. A sustained change to a
depressive syndrome is likely to require additional treatment unless the
disorder is mild. For National Institute of Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) recommendations on the pharmacological treatment of mania and
hypomania see Box 10.2

Continuation treatment Since the duration of an untreated manic episode
can be several months (see above), some form of continuation treatment,
as in the management of depression, is advisable for at least 6 months.
As a guide, treatment should not be withdrawn finally until the patient
has been asymptomatic for at least 8 weeks. Withdrawal of lithium should
be particularly cautious (e.g.Â by not lowering the daily dose by more
than about 100 mg each week), because sudden discontination can lead to
'rebound' mania (Goodwin et al., 2016).

Bipolar depression Assessment Depressive episodes are common in bipolar
illness and are associated with the majority of the illness burden in
both bipolar I and bipolar II disorder (Angst, 2009). Depression may
occur as the presenting feature of a new episode of bipolar illness or
immediately following

Box 10.2 NICE guidance on the pharmacological treatment of mania and
hypomania 1. If a person develops mania or hypomania and is taking an
antidepressant; a) consider stopping the antidepressant and b) offer an
antipsychotic regardless of whether the antidepressant is stopped. 2. If
a person develops mania or hypomania and is not taking an antipsychotic
or mood stabiliser, offer haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine, or
risperidone, taking into account any advance statements, the person's
preference and clinical context (including physical comorbidity,
previous response to treatment, and side effects). 3. If the first
antipsychotic is poorly tolerated at any dose (including rapid weight
gain) or ineffective at the maximum licensed dose, offer an alternative
antipsychotic from the drugs listed above taking into account any
advance statements, the person's preference and clinical context
(including physical comorbidity, previous response to treatment and side
effects). 4. If an alternative antipsychotic is not sufficiently
effective at the maximum licensed dose, consider adding lithium. If
adding lithium is ineffective, or if lithium is not suitable (for
example, because the person does not agree to routine blood monitoring),
consider adding valproate instead. 5. If the person is already taking a
mood stabiliser such as lithium or valproate consider increasing the
dose, up to the maximum therapeutic level if necessary, depending on
clinical response. If there is no improvement, consider adding
haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine or risperidone, depending on the
person's preference and previous response to treatment. Reproduced from
the National Institute for Care and Health Excellence, Copyright
(2014b).

an episode of mania. The assessment of depression should be carried out
as described in Chapter 9, with particular attention to suicidal
thinking, which may be especially prominent after a sudden switch from
mania to depression or during the course of a mixed affective state.

249

250

250

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder

Medication Current guidelines suggest that antidepressant drugs should
not be a first line choice for the treatment of bipolar depression. In
patients taking mood stabilizers such as lithium and valproate it is
important to optimize blood levels as far as tolerance permits. For
patients not receiving mood stabilizer treatment, the initial choice
lies between treatment with quetiapine or the combination of olanzapine
and fluoxetine. Both may cause problems with sedation and weight gain.
Lurasidone is an alternative if these side effects prove too problematic
(Box 10.3). Lamotrigine is an alternative as a monotherapy (and can be
added to ineffective quetiapine), but the slow dose escalation required
to minimize the risk of rash, means that the usual therapeutic dose of
around 200 mg daily will not be reached for several weeks. Lamotrigine
probably does not induce mania but may not protect against it. Where
bipolar patients with depression are already taking mood stabilizers,
the treatments outlined above

Box 10.3 NICE guidance on the pharmacological treatment of bipolar
depression 1. If a person develops moderate or severe bipolar depression
and is not taking a drug to treat their bipolar disorder, offer
fluoxetine combined with olanzapine, or quetiapine on its own, depending
on the person's preference and previous response to treatment. 2. If the
person prefers, consider either olanzapine (without fluoxetine) or
lamotrigine on its own. 3. If there is no response to fluoxetine
combined with olanzapine, or quetiapine, consider lamotrigine on its
own. 4. If a person develops moderate or severe bipolar depression and
is taking either lithium or valproate, first (if tolerance permits)
increase the mood stabiliser to within the maximum permitted by the
therapeutic range. If this is unsuccessful add one of the options
above.1 Carefully follow the guidance of the British National Formulary
when adding lamotrigine to valproate because of the likelihood of
elevated lamotrigine levels.

1

Reproduced from the National Institute for Care and Health Excellence,
Copyright (2014a).

can be added. However, where lamotrigine is initiated in a patient
taking valproate, lamotrigine dosing must be particularly cautious and
the British National Formulary consulted. Some patients with bipolar
disorder do seem to require conventional antidepressants to achieve a
therapeutic response, and short-term treatment can be justified although
it is advisable for patients with bipolar I disorder to be on
concomitant treatment with a mood stabilizer or an antimanic dose of an
atypical antipsychotic. If benefit is obtained consideration should be
given to stopping the antidepressant treatment after about 12 weeks to
lessen the risk of mood destabilization. Whether the same cautions
around antidepressant use should apply to depressed patients with
bipolar II disorder is not fully clear (Malhi, 2015). ECT can be
considered in patients whose depressive symptoms are severe and require
urgent treatment (see Chapter 9) or where sustained attempts at
pharmacotherapy have been ineffective.

Psychotherapy There are very few studies examining the role of
structured psychotherapies in acute bipolar depression. In the
circumstances, depending on the severity of the depressive disorder and
the preferences of the patient, it seems reasonable to offer a
structured psychotherapy; for example, cognitive behaviour therapy or
interpersonal therapy, that has been shown to be effective in unipolar
depression (National Institute for Care and Health Excellence, 2014).

Prevention of relapse and recurrence Medication We have already seen
that the majority of patients with bipolar disorder will experience
recurrence, suffering both depressive and manic episodes, although the
pattern in individual patients is variable. For patients who have had
two or more episodes of illness in less than 5 years, particularly where
the illnesses have proved personally disruptive or hazardous,
longer-term maintenance treatment should be considered. This will
usually involve long-term treatment with a mood stabilizer or an
atypical antipsychotic drug such as quetiapine or perhaps a combination
of both. It is worth noting that valproate taken during pregnancy is
established to be a significant cause of neurodevelopmental defect.
Therefore valproate should not be prescribed to women of childbearing
age unless

251

Practical management of bipolar disorder all other appropriate
treatments have proved ineffective or poorly tolerated. People with
bipolar disorder are often reluctant to consider long-term treatment
with medication. There are usually a number of reasons for this, and it
is necessary to spend time in discussion with patients so that their
point of view can be fully appreciated and understood. An excellent
personal account has been provided by Jamison (1997). The reasons for
reluctance to consider such treatment may include: â

Difficulties in accepting a diagnosis of a lifelong condition and the
need for maintenance treatment with medicines; issues of stigma are
usually important.

â

A belief that it should be possible to control mood without medication,
and that the use of medication for this purpose is a sign of personal
weakness.

â

A fear that medication will blunt the patient's emotional life, and
sometimes specifically that mood stabilizing drugs will decrease
feelings of joy and creativity. If the latter feelings are associated
with hypomania, it is indeed possible that they will be lessened by
medication. For some individuals this can represent a significant loss,
which needs to be balanced against the prevention of disabling episodes
of depression.

In the UK, lithium is still regarded as the first choice of mood
stabilizer, although in the USA valproate is the most popular choice
because of its better tolerability. However, the evidence for its
long-term prophylactic efficacy is less complete. In addition, there is
evidence that the supervised use of lithium is associated with a
decreased risk of suicidal behaviour in bipolar illness. The practical
aspects of using lithium to prevent further episodes are discussed in
Chapter 25. There are two aspects of maintenance that require emphasis.
First, the patient should be seen and their plasma lithium levels and
renal and thyroid function assessed at regular intervals. Secondly, some
patients stop lithium of their own accord because they fear that the
drug may have harmful long-term effects, or because it makes them feel
'flat'. The risk associated with stopping lithium suddenly is that it
may well lead to acute relapse. Therefore patients should be advised to
discontinue lithium slowly under supervision. With carefully supervised
follow-up, the likelihood of relapse can be substantially reduced by
maintenance treatment, although lesser degrees of mood change often
continue. These mood changes may require adjunctive antidepressant or
antipsychotic drug treatment. For

patients who do not show a good response to lithium, alternative mood
stabilizing drugs can be used. It is possible to use combinations of
mood stabilizers, although the risk of adverse reactions is increased.
When using combinations of mood stabilizers it is helpful to bear in
mind that lamotrigine appears to be more effective in preventing
depression than in preventing mania, while the reverse is true for
lithium and valproate. Quetiapine appears to be effective in preventing
both depression and mania, although its longer-term use is associated
with weight gain and metabolic abnormalities (Vieta et al., 2008).
Current guidelines stress the importance of regular clinical and
biochemical monitoring of the physical health of bipolar patients, as
well as monitoring of their psychological status (Box 10.4)

Psychosocial approaches Bipolar disorder is often a lifelong, disruptive
illness which carries a substantial morbidity. There are several areas
of psychosocial function where problems may arise: â

adjustment to the diagnosis, and the need for lifestyle limitations;

â

interpersonal and relationship difficulties, and occupational problems;

â

misuse of both illegal and legal substances;

â

problems relating to concordance with medication.

Box 10.4 Monitoring physical health in bipolar disorder Ensure that the
physical health check for people with bipolar disorder, performed at
least annually, includes: â weight or BMI, diet, nutritional status and
level of physical activity â cardiovascular status, including pulse and
blood pressure â metabolic status, including fasting blood glucose,
glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) and blood lipid profile â liver
function â renal and thyroid function, and calcium levels, for people
taking long-term lithium. Reproduced from the National Institute for
Care and Health Excellence, Copyright (2014a).

251

25

252

Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder Psychological treatment approaches designed
to help with these important problems employ a number of theoretical
approaches (see above). However, they have a number of features in
common which centre around education about the illness and enhancing
selfmanagement (Goodwin et al., 2016) (Box 10.5). Although there are
some useful drug therapies for bipolar illness, the effectiveness of
treatment in clinical practice can be disappointing. The use of the
psychosocial measures outlined above should enhance the overall
effectiveness of treatment plans and randomized trials of certain
approaches, such as psychoeducational programmes and family
intervention, are promising in this respect (Geddes and Miklowitz,
2013).

Box 10.5 Psychological approaches to bipolar disorder Advice about
lifestyle (regular social and sleep routines, avoidance of illegal
drugs). â Identification and avoidance of triggers for relapse
(e.g.Â sleep deprivation, substance misuse). â Identification of early
subjective signs of relapse (e.g.Â feeling driven, sleeping badly), with
contingency plans for action. â Education about the importance of
medication, and discussion of sensitivity to side effects and active
measures to reduce these. â

Further reading Jamison KR (1997). An Unquiet Mind. Picador, London. (A
superb autobiographical account of the experience of bipolar illness and
its treatment.) Kraepelin E (1921). Manic-Depressive Insanity and
Paranoia (translated by RM Barclay). Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh
\[reprinted in 1976 by Arno Press, New York\]. pp.Â 1--164. (The
classical account. Of particular interest is the description of
untreated mania, which is seldom seen today.)

Miklowitz DJ, Gitlin MJ (2014) Clinicians Guide to Bipolar Disorder.
Guilford Press, London. (Very readable account of the assessment and
practical management of bipolar disorder with excellent coverage of both
pharmacological and psychosocial approaches.)

253

CHAPTER 11

Schizophrenia Introduction 253

Neurodevelopmental model 283

Clinical features 253

Course and prognosis 284

Diagnosis and classification 259

Treatment 286

Epidemiology 267

Management 291

Aetiology 268

Discussing schizophrenia with patients

Neurobiology 279

and carers 297

Introduction Of all the major psychiatric syndromes, schizophrenia is
perhaps the most difficult to define and describe. This partly reflects
the fact that, over the past century or more, widely divergent concepts
have been held in different countries and by different people. Although
there is now a greater consensus, substantial

uncertainties remain. Indeed, schizophrenia remains the best example of
the fundamental issues with which psychiatry continues to
grapple---concepts of disease, classification, and aetiology. Here, we
start with an introduction to the major symptoms and other important
clinical features.

Clinical features They are often listed as 'four As': alogia (decreased
spontaneous speech), avolition (decreased motivation), affective
flattening (lack of emotional expressivity, but not depression) and
anhedonia. (These 'four As' are related to but distinct from Bleuler's
'four As' described in Box 11.5.)

In this section, it is assumed that the reader has read the descriptions
of symptoms and signs in Chapters 1 and 3, which include definitions of
many of the cardinal features of schizophrenia. These have classically
been divided into two groupings: â

â

Positive symptoms. These are delusions and hallucinations, the most
florid and well-known types of symptom of schizophrenia. Particular
types of delusion and hallucination (called first-rank symptoms,
discussed below) carry greater weight in the diagnosis and help
distinguish schizophrenia from other psychotic disorders. Negative
symptoms. These are called 'negative' symptoms because they reflect a
loss of normal functioning.

In recent years, other features of schizophrenia have been grouped
together in two further categories: â

Behavioural disorganization. This includes formal thought disorder
(abnormalities in the flow and sequence of thoughts; in the past this
was often considered as a positive symptom) as well as inappropriate
affect and bizarre behaviour.

254

254

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia â

Cognitive symptoms. The extent and significance of attentional and
memory impairments in schizophrenia, discussed below, has been
increasingly recognized, and hence they are now often considered as a
separate symptom category.

The predominant symptoms differ between acute schizophrenia and chronic
schizophrenia, and the further description of the clinical syndrome is
divided on this basis. Briefly, the acute syndrome is dominated by
positive symptoms, with subtypes of acute schizophrenia classically
recognized based upon the relative prominence of different positive
symptoms. Many patients recover from the acute illness, but progression
to the chronic syndrome is also common. Chronic schizophrenia is
characterized by negative symptoms; once the chronic syndrome is
established, few patients recover completely. Note, however, that the
acute versus chronic distinction is an oversimplification; all features
of schizophrenia can occur, and co-occur, at any phase of the illness.
For review of the clinical features of schizophrenia, see Arango and
Carpenter (2011). For review of negative symptoms, see Marder and
Galderisi (2017).

Acute schizophrenia In acute schizophrenia, positive symptoms
predominate, and are often florid. Behavioural disorganization,
especially formal thought disorder, is also prominent. Negative symptoms
are less common and cognitive deficits less apparent, although this is
partly because they are masked by the positive symptoms. The vignette in
Box 11.1 illustrates several common features of acute schizophrenia,
including prominent persecutory delusions, with accompanying
hallucinations, gradual social withdrawal and impaired performance at
work, and the idea that other people can read one's thoughts. In
appearance and behaviour some patients with acute schizophrenia are
entirely normal. Others seem changed, although not always in a way that
would immediately point to psychosis. They may be preoccupied with their
health, their appearance, religion, or other intense interests. Social
withdrawal often occurs--- for example, spending a long time in their
room, perhaps lying immobile on the bed. Some patients smile or laugh
without obvious reason. Some appear to be constantly perplexed, while
others are restless and noisy, or show sudden and unexpected variability
of behaviour. The speech often reflects an underlying thought disorder.
In the early stages, there is vagueness in the patient's talk that makes
it difficult to grasp the meaning. Some

Box 11.1 A vignette of acute schizophrenia A previously healthy
20-year-old student had been behaving in an odd way. At times he
appeared angry and told his friends that he was being persecuted; at
other times he was seen to be laughing to himself for no apparent
reason. For several months he had seemed increasingly preoccupied with
his own thoughts. His academic work had deteriorated. When interviewed,
he was restless, suspicious, and exhibited odd mannerisms. He described
hearing voices commenting on his actions and abusing him. He believed
that the police had conspired with his university teachers to harm his
brain and interfere with his thoughts. He also suspected that they could
read his thoughts.

patients have difficulty in dealing with abstract ideas. Other patients
become preoccupied with vague pseudoscientific or mystical ideas.
Thought disorder is reflected in the loosening of association between
expressed ideas, and may be detected in illogical thinking
(e.g.Â 'knight's move' thinking) or talking past the point (vorbeireden).
In its severest form, the structure and coherence of thinking are lost,
so that utterances are jumbled (word salad or verbigeration). Some
patients use ordinary words or phrases in unusual ways (metonyms or
paraphrases), and a few coin new words (neologisms). Disorders of the
form (or stream) of thought include pressure of thought, poverty of
thought, thought blocking, and thought withdrawal; some of these
constitute first-rank symptoms (see Boxes 11.2 and 11.3). Auditory
hallucinations are among the most frequent symptoms. They may take the
form of noises, music, single words, brief phrases, or whole
conversations. They may be unobtrusive, or so severe as to cause great
distress. Some voices seem to give commands to the patient. Some
patients hear their own thoughts apparently spoken out loud either as
they think them (Gedankenlautwerden) or immediately afterwards (echo de
la pensÃ©e), and some voices discuss the patient in the third person or
comment on his actions; these are first-rank symptoms (see Box 11.3).
Visual hallucinations are less frequent, and usually occur together with
other kinds of hallucination. Tactile, olfactory, gustatory, and somatic
hallucinations are reported by some patients. They are often interpreted
in a delusional way---for example, hallucinatory sensations in the lower

25

Clinical features

Box 11.2 Schneider's symptoms of the first rank First-rank symptoms (Box
11.3) were described by Kurt Schneider (1887--1967), not to be confused
with Carl Schneider, who categorized types of thought disorder.
First-rank symptoms were an attempt to make the diagnosis of
schizophrenia more reliable by identifying a group of symptoms
characteristic of schizophrenia and rarely found in other disorders. It
is worth noting that, unlike Bleuler's fundamental symptoms (Box 11.4),
Schneider's symptoms were not supposed to have any central
psychopathological role, merely that they were valuable in making the
diagnosis: Among the many abnormal modes of experience that occur in
schizophrenia, there are some which we put in the first rank of
importance, not because we think of them as basic disturbances, but
because they have this special value in helping us to determine the
diagnosis of schizophrenia. When any one of these modes of experience is
undeniably present and no basic somatic illness can be found, we may
make the diagnosis of schizophrenia. . . .. Symptoms of first rank
importance do not always have to be present for a diagnosis to be made.
(Schneider, 1959)

Studies have shown that first-rank symptoms are probably the most
sensitive and specific means of making a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
However, they are not always present in schizophrenia, and occur in
10--20% of people with other psychotic disorders. Moreover, in
schizophrenia they do not predict outcome. For these and other reasons,
first-rank symptoms were removed from the diagnostic criteria in DSM-5,
and are expected to be omitted from ICD-11 (Tandon et al., 2013).

abdomen are attributed to unwanted sexual interference by a persecutor.
Delusions are almost invariable in acute schizophrenia, although primary
delusions are infrequent and are difficult to identify with certainty.
Delusions may originate against a background of so-called primary
delusional mood (Wahnstimmung). Persecutory delusions are common, but
are not specific to schizophrenia, as they also characterize delusional
disorders and occur in all psychoses (see Chapter 12). Less common, but
of

greater diagnostic value, are delusions of reference and of control
(passivity), and delusions about the possession of thought. The latter
are delusions that thoughts are being inserted into or withdrawn from
one's mind, or 'broadcast' to other people. Some of these symptoms are
first-rank symptoms (Box 11.3). Insight is almost always impaired. Most
patients do not accept that their experiences result from illness, but
usually ascribe them to the malevolent actions of other people.
Orientation is usually normal, although this may be difficult to
determine if there is florid thought disorder or if the patient is too
preoccupied with their psychotic experience to attend to the
interviewer's questions. Alterations in mood are common and are of three
main kinds. First, there may be symptoms of anxiety, depression,
irritability, or euphoria. These can be clinically significant, but if
such features are sufficiently prominent and sustained, the possibility
of schizoaffective disorder or other affective psychosis should be
considered. Secondly, there may be blunting (or flattening) of
affect---that is, sustained emotional indifference or diminution of
emotional response. Thirdly, there may be incongruity of affect, in
which the expressed mood is not in keeping with the situation or with
the patient's own feelings. Finally, we emphasize the variability of the
clinical picture. Few patients experience all of the symptoms introduced
above, while others already have features of the 'chronic' syndrome at
first presentation. Moreover, the overall pattern and duration of
features are also taken into account before making a diagnosis. These
issues, together with some additional clinical features, are discussed
later in the chapter.

Box 11.3 First-rank symptoms Hearing thoughts spoken aloud Third-person
hallucinations Auditory hallucinations in the form of a 'running
commentary' Somatic (bodily, tactile) hallucinations Thought withdrawal
or insertion Thought broadcasting Delusional perception Feelings or
actions experienced as made or influenced by external agents (passivity)

255

256

256

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Chronic schizophrenia Although the positive symptoms of the acute
syndrome may persist, the chronic syndrome is characterized by the
negative symptoms of underactivity, lack of drive, social withdrawal,
and emotional apathy. The vignette in Box 11.4 illustrates several of
the negative features of what is sometimes called a 'defect state' or
deficit syndrome. The most striking feature is diminished volition---
that is, a lack of drive and initiative. Left to himself, the patient
may remain inactive for long periods, or may engage in aimless and
repeated activity. He withdraws from social encounters, and his social
behaviour may deteriorate in ways that embarrass other people. Self-care
may be poor, and the style of dress and presentation may be careful but
somewhat inappropriate. Some patients collect and hoard objects, so that
their surroundings become cluttered and dirty. Others break social
conventions by talking intimately to strangers or shouting obscenities
in public. Speech is often abnormal, showing evidence of thought
disorder of the kinds found in the acute syndrome described above.
Affect is generally blunted and, when emotion is shown, it is
incongruous or shallow. Hallucinations and delusions occur, but are by
no means universal. They tend to be held with little emotional response.
For example, patients may be convinced that they are being persecuted
but show neither fear nor anger. Various disorders of movement occur,
including stereotypies, mannerisms and other catatonic symptoms, and
dyskinesias (see below). The latter are primarily but not entirely due
to antipsychotic medication. Cognitive impairment is common, if not
universal, in chronic schizophrenia (see below), and, together with the

negative symptoms, contributes to the low level of functioning and poor
outcome that still bedevils chronic schizophrenia. However, the
cognitive deficits are rarely of sufficient magnitude to be apparent
unless detailed cognitive testing is undertaken, and this is rarely the
case in clinical practice. As with acute schizophrenia, the symptoms and
signs of the chronic illness are variable. At any stage, positive
symptoms may recur or become exacerbated; this may be in response to
life events, or to discontinuation of medication.

Subtypes of schizophrenia Schizophrenia is conventionally divided into
several subtypes, based upon the predominant clinical features,
especially during the acute phase(s) of the illness. â

Paranoid schizophrenia is the commonest form. It is characterized by
persecutory delusions, often systematized, and by persecutory auditory
hallucinations. Thought disorder and affective, catatonic, and negative
symptoms are not prominent. Personality is relatively well preserved.

â

In hebephrenic schizophrenia, also called disorganized schizophrenia,
thought disorder and affective symptoms are prominent. The mood is
variable, with behaviour often appearing silly and unpredictable.
Delusions and hallucinations are fleeting and not systematized.
Mannerisms are common. Speech is rambling and incoherent, reflecting the
thought disorder. Negative symptoms occur early, and contribute to a
poor prognosis.

â

In catatonic schizophrenia, the most striking features are motor
symptoms, as noted in Chapter 1, and changes in activity that vary
between excitement and stupor. At times the person may appear to be in a
dream-like (oneiroid) state. Formerly common, catatonic schizophrenia is
now very rare, at least in industrialized countries. Possible reasons
for this include a change in the nature of the illness, improvements in
treatment, or past misdiagnosis of organic syndromes with catatonic
symptoms. It has also been argued that catatonia is a distinct syndrome
(Fink et al., 2010) and this is reflected to a degree in DSM-5 (see Box
11.6).

â

Simple schizophrenia is characterized by the insidious development of
odd behaviour, social withdrawal, and declining performance at work.
Positive symptoms are not apparent. Given the limited utility of the
category and its history of abuse---for example, in the detention of
political dissidents in the former Soviet

Box 11.4 A vignette of chronic schizophrenia A middle-aged man lives in
a supported hostel and attends a sheltered workshop. He spends most of
his time alone. He is usually dishevelled and unshaven, and cares for
himself only when encouraged to do so by others. His social behaviour
seems odd and stilted. His speech is slow, and its content is vague and
incoherent. He shows few signs of emotion. For several years this
clinical picture has changed little except for brief periods of acute
symptoms, which are usually related to upsets in the ordered life of the
hostel.

275

Clinical features Union ('sluggish schizophrenia')---its use is now
rare, and should be avoided. â

Undifferentiated schizophrenia is the term used for cases that do not
fit readily into any of the above subtypes, or where there are equally
prominent features of more than one of them.

â

Residual schizophrenia refers to a stage of chronic schizophrenia when,
for at least a year, there have been persistent negative symptoms but no
recurrence of positive symptoms.

Despite their widespread use, research has shown that these subsyndromes
of schizophrenia are not reliable, stable over time, nor associated with
clear differences in pathophysiology nor prognosis. For these reasons,
they have been removed from DSM-5 (Tandon et al., 2013). Other
subclassifications of schizophrenia have also been proposed, intended to
reflect biologically more valid entities. Two examples are given here:
Liddle's three subsyndromes, and Crow's type I and type II
schizophrenia.

Type I and type II schizophrenia Crow (1985) described two syndromes of
schizophrenia, based upon a combination of clinical and neurobiological
factors. Type I has an acute onset, mainly positive symptoms, and
preserved social functioning during remissions; there is a good response
to antipsychotic drugs, associated with dopamine overactivity. By
contrast, type II has an insidious onset, mainly negative symptoms, and
poor outcome and response to antipsychotic drugs, without evidence of
dopamine overactivity but with structural brain changes (especially
ventricular enlargement). Subsequent research has not strongly supported
the biological subtypes and correlations predicted by the model.
However, it was important as an example of the renewed focus on the
neurobiological aspects of schizophrenia which occurred around that
time.

Other aspects of the clinical syndrome

Three clinical subsyndromes

Cognitive features

Liddle (1987) studied patients with chronic schizophrenia and, based on
clustering of symptoms, described three overlapping clinical syndromes,
which he called reality disturbance, disorganization, and psychomotor
poverty (see Table 11.1). In many respects, these are comparable to the
groupings of positive symptoms, behavioural disorganization, and
negative symptoms introduced earlier. Liddle then linked these symptom
clusters to distinct patterns of neuropsychological deficit and to
regional cerebral blood flow (Liddle et al., 1992). The most
reproducible finding is the link between psychomotor poverty, impaired
performance on frontal lobe tasks, and decreased frontal blood flow.

Despite Kraepelin's original term dementia praecox, cognitive impairment
was for many years a neglected component of schizophrenia. However,
contemporary studies have emphasized its extent and importance (Schaefer
et al., 2013). Deficits are seen across all domains of learning and
memory, with disproportionate involvement of semantic memory, working
memory, and attention. The deficits average about one standard deviation
below expected performance, and are present at the first episode; IQ is
also reduced (Mesholam-Gately and Giuliano, 2009). Executive function
and attention may be the core deficits, in that they are seen even in
patients with otherwise intact cognition. Patients also have deficits in
social cognition---the perception, storage,

Table 11.1 Cerebral and psychological correlates of three subsyndromes
of chronic schizophrenia Syndrome

Symptoms

Regional cerebral blood flow correlates

Impaired psychological performance

Reality disturbance

Delusions, hallucinations

Left medial temporal lobe, cingulate cortex

Disorders of self-monitoring

Disorganization

Formal thought disorder, inappropriate affect, bizarre behaviour

Anterior cingulate, right ventral frontal cortex, bilateral parietal
regions

Tests of selective attention

Psychomotor poverty

Flat affect, poverty of speech, decreased spontaneous movement

Underactivity of frontal cortex ('hypofrontality')

Word generation tasks, planning tests

257

258

258

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia and utilization of information about other
people and ourselves---leading to many difficulties in social
interactions and daily life (Green et al., 2015). The social cognitive
deficits include marked impairments in theory of mind (Bora and
Pantelis, 2013). The time course of neuropsychological involvement in
schizophrenia is complex. People who later develop schizophrenia already
have reduced IQ scores during childhood (Khandaker et al., 2011). The
onset of illness is associated with further cognitive impairments, which
may partially improve after resolution of the acute episode. However,
most of the cognitive deficits appear to be trait features, largely
independent of other symptom domains. Later in the illness, the risk of
overt dementia is markedly increased (Ribe et al., 2015), but the
dementia is not attributable to Alzheimer's disease or other recognized
neurodegenerative disorder. Like many other features of schizophrenia,
impaired cognitive performance is also observed in attenuated form in
unaffected first-degree relatives. Cognitive aspects of schizophrenia
are currently being emphasized for several reasons (Kahn and Keefe,
2013). First, they are a major determinant of poor functional outcome
(Green, 2006; Green et al., 2015). Second, they are now viewed as
potential targets for both drugs and psychological therapies (cognitive
remediation). Third, cognitive features are increasingly conceptualized
as being central to the disorder and as underlying the psychotic
symptoms (Cannon, 2015); for example, there is a causal and genetically
mediated relationship between low IQ and schizophrenia (Kahn and Keefe,
2013). Methods have been developed to promote and standardize cognitive
assessments in schizophrenia (e.g.Â the MATRICS Battery; Nuechterlein et
al., 2008); however, this has yet to become widespread in clinical
practice. Failure to achieve this goal, together with uncertainty about
the diagnostic specificity of the cognitive deficits, contributed to
their omission from DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, despite
their importance in the origins and outcomes of the disorder (Tandon et
al., 2013).

Depressive symptoms Depressive symptoms commonly occur in schizophrenia,
in any phase of the illness. They are also prominent features of the
prodrome (see below). About 25% of patients exhibit persistent and
significant depression, called postschizophrenic depression. Comorbid
depression in schizophrenia worsens the functional outcome.

There are several reasons why depressive symptoms may be associated with
schizophrenia. â

Depression may be an integral part of schizophrenia. This view is
supported by the observation that about 50% of patients with acute
schizophrenia experience significant depressive symptomatology, which
improves as the psychosis remits.

â

In the postpsychotic phase, depressive symptoms may be a response to
recovery of insight into the nature of the illness and the problems to
be faced. Again, this may happen at times, but it does not provide a
convincing general explanation.

â

Depression may be a side effect of medication. This is not the only
explanation, as depressive symptoms can occur in the absence of
antipsychotic drug therapy.

Depressive symptoms in schizophrenia should not be confused with
negative symptoms nor for the parkinsonian side effects of antipsychotic
medication. These distinctions are important, but can be difficult to
make. The Calgary Depression Scale for Schizophrenia can be useful in
this regard. For review, see Castle and Bosanac (2012).

Neurological signs Neurological signs are another neglected clinical
feature of schizophrenia (Chan et al., 2010). They are called 'soft
signs' because they do not localize pathology to a particular tract or
nucleus. They include abnormalities in sensory integration,
coordination, and sequencing of complex motor acts; catatonic features
and dyskinesias may also be considered under this category (Koning et
al., 2010). Neurological signs are seen in unmedicated, first-episode
patients (and are therefore at least partially separate from the effects
of antipsychotic drugs), but are more common in chronic schizophrenia.
The presence of neurological signs correlates with cognitive
dysfunction, evidence for developmental anomaly, and diffuse brain
pathology, and they are thought to be a manifestation of the
neurodevelopmental origins of schizophrenia (Liddle, 2013). A
neurological examination that focuses upon the extrapyramidal system
should be part of the routine assessment of a patient who presents with
schizophrenia.

Olfactory dysfunction Patients with schizophrenia have deficits in
olfactory function, which affect the identification of, sensitivity to,
and memory for, odours (Moberg et al., 2014). The deficits are not
attributable to medication or

259

Diagnosis and classification smoking, and are associated with cognitive
and negative symptoms.

Pain insensitivity A diminished sensitivity to pain in patients with
schizophrenia has long been noted by clinicians, and can on occasion be
extreme (Engels et al., 2014). Its cause is unknown. Proposed
explanations include thalamic lesions, and the possibility that
psychotic symptoms render the patient less concerned by, or distracted
from, the pain.

Factors that modify the clinical features The social and cultural
background of the patient affects the content of symptoms. For example,
religious delusions are less common now than they were a century ago,
and have been replaced by delusions concerned with cloning, HIV, or
terrorism. Age also seems to modify the picture. In adolescents and
young adults, the clinical features often include thought disorder, mood
disturbance, passivity phenomena, thought insertion, and withdrawal.
With increasing age, paranoid symptomatology is more common, with more
organized delusions. Intelligence also affects the clinical features,
and the psychiatrist's ability to elicit them. Patients with
intellectual disability usually present with a simple clinical picture,
sometimes referred to as pfropfschizophrenie. In contrast, highly
intelligent people develop complex delusional systems, and are also
better able to articulate, or conceal, their experiences. The amount of
social stimulation has a considerable effect. Understimulation is
thought to increase negative symptoms, whereas overstimulation
precipitates positive symptoms. Psychosocial approaches to treatment are
designed to avoid both extremes.

The prodrome of schizophrenia In recent years increasing attention has
been paid to the prodrome of schizophrenia---that is, the period of time
during which psychosis is 'brewing', when there are

identifiable symptoms but before diagnosable criteria are met, and
before the patient typically presents for help (Yung and McGorry, 1996).
The terms 'at-risk state' or 'high-risk state' are also used to describe
the prodrome. The focus on the prodrome reflects the fact that in many
patients this period may last for several months or years and, the
longer the duration of untreated psychosis, the worse the outcome
(PenttilÃ¤ et al., 2014). There are several possible explanations for
this association: â

A prolonged, insidious onset is a feature of a severe and
treatment-resistant form of schizophrenia.

â

Untreated psychosis is 'neurotoxic' and makes the illness less
responsive to treatment.

â

Illness is more severe by the time treatment is initiated and therefore
harder to treat.

â

A longer prodrome leads to greater psychosocial impairments and loss of
functioning, hampering full recovery.

These considerations have led to a rapid growth in 'early intervention',
with services designed to detect and then prevent emerging cases of
schizophrenia. These have been driven by the hope that this will improve
long-term outcome, although note that this would be unlikely if the
first of the four explanations listed above is correct. The therapeutic
and service implications are discussed later in this chapter. The
prodrome is characterized by insidious and shifting profiles of largely
non-specific symptoms, including mild psychotic-like positive and
negative symptoms, and also commonly depressive and anxiety symptoms.
Cognitive and social functioning also deteriorates. Various criteria are
available to define, assess, and rate the prodrome, including the
Comprehensive Assessment of At Risk Mental State (CAARMS). Importantly,
many people who are considered to be prodromal do not progress to overt
psychosis; typically, less than 25% do so during a 2- to 3-year
follow-up. This has important implications for treatment interventions.
Studies are attempting to identify the predictors of conversion
(Fusar-Poli et al., 2013a).

Diagnosis and classification This section is concerned mainly with the
diagnostic criteria for and classification of schizophrenia as specified
in DSM- 5 and ICD- 10. However, the

current approach--- and its problems--- can be understood better with
some knowledge of the historical perspective.

259

260

260

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Historical development of ideas about schizophrenia The development of
ideas about schizophrenia is discussed in Box 11.5. To a large extent,
they mirror the development of ideas about psychiatric illness in
general, reflecting the central position in psychiatry held by
schizophrenia during the last century. For a review, see Andreasen
(2009). In the 1960s it was noticed that there were wide divergences in
the use of the term schizophrenia, and marked differences in diagnostic
practice. This was unsurprising, given the multiple views and traditions
summarized in Box 11.5. For example, in the UK and continental Europe,
psychiatrists generally employed Schneider's first-rank symptoms (Box
11.2 and 11.3) to identify a narrowly delineated group of cases. In the

USA, however, interest in psychodynamic processes led to diagnosis on
the basis of mental mechanisms, and to the inclusion of a much wider
group of cases. First-admission rates for schizophrenia were also much
higher in the USA than in the UK. These discrepancies prompted two major
crossnational studies of diagnostic practice, discussed in Chapter 2
(see page 30), which proved highly influential not just for
schizophrenia but also for the development of diagnostic criteria and
classificatory systems, namely the US--UK Diagnostic Project (Cooper et
al., 1972) and the International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia (IPSS)
(World Health Organization, 1973). These findings led to a consensus
that agreed diagnostic criteria were required, and the development of
standardized methods by which these could be defined and identified,
culminating in the current ICD-10 and DSM-5 criteria for schizophrenia.

Box 11.5 Development of schizophrenia concepts and terminologies In the
nineteenth century, one view was that all serious mental disorders were
expressions of a single entity, which Griesinger called Einheitpsychose
(unitary psychosis). The alternative view, put forward by Morel in
France, was that mental disorders could be separated and classified.
Morel searched for specific entities, and argued for a classification
based on cause, symptoms, and outcome. In 1852 he gave the name dÃ©mence
prÃ©coce to a disorder which he described as starting in adolescence and
leading first to withdrawal, odd mannerisms, and self-neglect, and
eventually to intellectual deterioration. A few years later, Kahlbaum
(1863) described the syndrome of catatonia, and Hecker (1871) wrote an
account of a condition he called hebephrenia. Emil Kraepelin
(1856--1926) derived his ideas from studying the course and outcome of
the disorder. His observations led him to argue against the idea of a
single psychosis, and to propose a division into dementia praecox and
manic--depressive psychosis. This grouping brought together as
subclasses of dementia praecox the previously separate entities of
hebephrenia and catatonia. (His adoption of the word dementia emphasizes
the prominence he attributed to the cognitive impairments of the
disorder.) Kraepelin's description of dementia praecox appeared for the
first time in 1893, in the fourth edition of his textbook, and the
account was expanded in subsequent editions. He described the illness as
occurring in clear consciousness, and consisting of 'a series of states,
the common characteristic of which

is a peculiar destruction of the internal connections of the psychic
personality' (Kraepelin, 1919). Kraepelin originally divided dementia
praecox into three subtypes (catatonic, hebephrenic, and paranoid), and
later added a fourth subtype (simple). He separated the condition that
he named paraphrenia (Box 12.2) from dementia praecox on the grounds
that it started in middle life and seemed to be free from the changes in
emotion and volition found in dementia praecox. It is commonly held that
Kraepelin regarded dementia praecox as invariably progressing to chronic
deterioration. However, he reported that, in his series of cases, 13%
recovered completely (although some relapsed later) and 17% were
ultimately able to live and work without difficulty. Eugen Bleuler
(1857--1939) based his work on that of Kraepelin, and in his own book
wrote 'the whole idea of dementia praecox originates with Kraepelin'
(Bleuler, 1911). He also acknowledged the help of his younger colleague,
Carl Jung, in trying to apply some of Freud's ideas to dementia praecox.
Compared with Kraepelin, Bleuler was concerned less with prognosis and
more with the mechanisms of symptom formation. Bleuler proposed the name
schizophrenia to denote a 'splitting' of psychic functions, which he
considered to be of central importance. He believed in a distinction
between fundamental and accessory symptoms. Fundamental symptoms
included four features sometimes known as Bleuler's 'four As':
Associations (thought disorder), Affect (blunting, flattening, and
incongruity of affect), Ambivalence (lack

261

Diagnosis and classification

of motivation), and Autism (social withdrawal and failure of theory of
mind). It is interesting that, in Bleuler's view, some of the most
frequent and striking symptoms were accessory (secondary)---for example,
hallucinations, delusions, catatonia, and abnormal behaviours. Bleuler
was interested in the psychological study of his cases, but did not rule
out the possibility of a neuropathological cause of schizophrenia. Since
Bleuler was preoccupied more with psychopathological mechanisms than
with symptoms themselves, his approach to diagnosis was less precise
than that of Kraepelin, but remained influential in many parts of the
world even into the 1980s. In addition, Bleuler took a more optimistic
view of the outcome, but still held that one should not 'speak of cure
but of far-reaching improvement'. He also wrote: 'as yet I have never
released a schizophrenic in whom I could not still see distinct signs of
the disease, indeed there are very few in whom one would have to search
for such signs' (Bleuler, 1911). Several German psychiatrists tried to
define subgroupings within schizophrenia. Kleist, a pupil of the
neurologist Wernicke, looked for associations between brain pathology
and different subtypes of psychotic illness. He accepted Kraepelin's
main diagnostic framework, but used careful clinical observation in an
attempt to distinguish various subdivisions within schizophrenia and
other atypical disorders. His attempt to match these subtypes to
specific kinds of brain pathology was ingenious but unsuccessful.
Leonhard continued this approach of careful clinical observation, and
published a complicated classification that distinguishes schizophrenia
from the 'cycloid' psychoses---a group of non-affective psychoses of
good outcome (Leonhard, 1957). He also divided schizophrenia into two
groups. The first group is characterized by a progressive course, and is
divided into catatonias, hebephrenias, and paraphrenias. Leonhard gave
this group a name, which is often translated as systematic. The second
group, referred to as non-systematic, is divided into affect-laden
paraphrenia, schizophasia, and periodic catatonia. Affectladen
paraphrenia is characterized by paranoid delusions and the expression of
strong emotion about their content.

In schizophasia, speech is grossly disordered and difficult to
understand. Periodic catatonia is a condition with regular remissions.
During an episode, akinetic symptoms are sometimes interrupted by
hyperkinetic symptoms. Scandinavian psychiatrists were influenced by
Jaspers' distinction between process schizophrenia and reactive
psychoses. In the late 1930s, Langfeldt, using follow-up data on
patients in Oslo, proposed a distinction between true schizophrenia,
which had a poor prognosis, and schizophreniform states, which had a
good prognosis. True schizophrenia was defined narrowly and was similar
to Kraepelin's dementia praecox. Schizophreniform states were described
as often precipitated by stress and accompanied by confusional and
affective symptoms. Langfeldt's distinction between cases with good and
bad prognoses has been influential, but research has not found that his
criteria predict prognosis accurately. According to modern diagnostic
criteria, most of Langfeldt's schizophreniform states would be
classified as mood disorders. (Note also that in DSM-5 the term
schizophreniform disorder is used in a different way.) In Denmark and
Norway, cases of psychosis arising after stressful events have received
much attention. The terms reactive psychosis or psychogenic psychosis
are commonly applied to conditions that appear to be precipitated by
stress, are to some extent understandable in their symptoms, and have a
good prognosis. In current diagnostic schemes such disorders would be
classified as brief psychotic disorder or schizophreniform disorder.
Current debates about schizophrenia nomenclature and classification
centre on two issues. Firstly, whether the word schizophrenia should be
abolished, as has already occurred in Japan and South Korea. This is
advocated to reduce stigma, and in order to replace it with a term that
better fits current views about its nature and boundaries, such as
psychosis spectrum syndrome (van Os, 2016). Secondly, whether
schizophrenia (and other psychotic disorders) should be a dimensional
rather than categorical diagnosis (Linscott and van Os, 2013; see
Chapter 2). For review see Lawrie et al.Â (2016a).

In summary, a wide range of views about schizophrenia have been held
over the past century since Kraepelin and Bleuler established the
concept. With the advent of current classificatory systems, the term now
refers to a syndrome that can be diagnosed reliably, which is essential
for rational clinical practice. However, as noted in

Chapter 3, reliability is not in itself sufficient. Because the cause of
schizophrenia is still largely unknown, the syndrome remains of
uncertain validity. Until this fundamental question is answered, there
will continue to be dispute as to its most important features,
diagnostic boundaries, and internal subdivisions.

261

26

262

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Table 11.2 Classification of schizophrenia and schizophrenia-like
disorders in ICD-10 and DSM-5\* ICD-10

DSM-5

Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia

â¢ Paranoid â¢ Hebephrenic â¢ Catatonic â¢ Undifferentiated â¢ Residual â¢
Simple schizophrenia â¢ Postschizophrenic depression â¢ Other
schizophrenia â¢ Unspecified schizophrenia Schizoaffective disorder

Schizoaffective disorder

Persistent delusional disorders

Delusional disorder

â¢ Delusional disorder â¢ Other persistent delusional disorders Acute and
transient psychotic disorder

Brief psychotic disorder

â¢ Acute schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder

Schizophreniform disorder

â¢ Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder â¢ Other acute psychotic disorders
Induced delusional disorder

Other specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder

Other non-organic psychotic disorders Unspecified non-organic psychosis
Schizotypal disorder

Unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder Psychotic disorder due
to another medical condition

- The order of categories in the two systems has been changed to compare
  their features more clearly. Source: data from The ICD-10
  classification of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical
  descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health
  Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
  Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

Classification of schizophrenia in DSM-5 and ICD-10 The classification
of schizophrenia and schizophrenialike disorders in DSM-5 and ICD-10 is
outlined and compared in Table 11.2. The classifications are broadly
similar but do have some important differences.

DSM-5 In this classification, schizophrenia is defined in terms of the
symptoms, course, and impaired functioning (Box 11.6). The cardinal
acute symptoms are given in criterion A, which comprise delusions,
hallucinations, disorganized speech, disorganized or catatonic
behaviour,

263

Diagnosis and classification

Box 11.6 Simplified description of criteria for schizophrenia in DSM-5
A. Two or more of the following, each present for at least 1 month (or
less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be 1, 2 or
3: 1. Delusions 2. Hallucinations 3. Disorganized speech (e.g.Â frequent
derailment or incoherence) 4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic
behaviour 5. Negative symptoms (i.e.Â diminished emotional expression or
avolition).

B. Impaired level of functioning in one or more domain (e.g.Â work,
relationships) for a significant portion of the time since onset. If the
onset is in childhood or adolescence, there is a failure to achieve the
expected level of functioning. C. Continuous signs of the disturbance
persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period must include at least
1 month of symptoms that meet Criterion A. D. The patient does not meet
criteria for schizoaffective disorder, or a mood disorder with psychotic
features. E. The disturbance is not attributable to the psychological
effects of a substance (e.g.Â a drug of abuse, a medication) or another
medical condition. F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder,
the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if there are
prominent delusions or hallucinations present for at least 1 month, in
addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia. Source: data
from Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

and negative symptoms. At least two of these must have been present for
at least 1 month (unless treated). In addition, there must be evidence
of impaired level of functioning (criterion B), and continuous signs of
disturbance for at least 6 months (criterion C). The other criteria
address the boundaries of schizophrenia with mood disorders, organic and
substance abuse disorders, and autistic spectrum disorders.

Patients who have schizophrenia-like symptoms of less than the 1- and
6-month duration criteria are classified as suffering from
schizophreniform disorder or brief psychotic disorder. Other related
disorders include delusional disorder (see Chapter 12) and psychotic
disorders not otherwise classified (see below). After at least 1 year
has elapsed since the onset of active-phase symptoms, DSM-5 allows the
disorder to be classified by the number of acute episodes that have
occurred, and whether the patient is currently in an episode, or in
partial or full remission. The current severity for each of the category
A items can also be rated on a 5-point scale. Catatonia. As noted
earlier, DSM-5 does not divide schizophrenia into the classical subtypes
such as paranoid, hebephrenic, or catatonic. However, it does include
catatonia as a category that can be diagnosed as being comorbid with a
disorder such as schizophrenia. For review of schizophrenia in DSM-5,
see Tandon et al.Â (2013).

ICD-10 The ICD-10 criteria for schizophrenia (see Box 11.7) place more
reliance than DSM-5 on specific types of psychotic symptoms, including
first-rank symptoms. The diagnosis can be made after a duration of only
1 month, excluding prodromal symptoms, and hence can be applied to
recent onset cases which in DSM-5 would be categorized as
schizophreniform disorder. Unlike DSM5, ICD-10 subclassifies
schizophrenia into the subtypes described earlier. Certain aspects of
personality are associated with schizophrenia, clinically and
genetically. ICD-10 includes schizotypal disorder among the spectrum of
schizophrenic disorders, whereas in DSM-5 this condition is classified
as a personality disorder. Schizotypal disorder is associated with
social isolation and restriction of affect; in addition, there are
perceptual distortions, with disorders of thinking and speech and
striking eccentricity or oddness of behaviour. Similar to DSM-5, ICD-10
classifies delusional disorders separately from schizophrenia. In
addition, ICD-10 includes a group of acute and transient psychotic
disorders that have an acute onset and complete recovery within 2--3
months (see below). Note that schizophrenia-like disorders that occur in
recognized organic disorders, or secondary to substance use, are
classified separately in ICD-10, but are included in the schizophrenia
chapter of DSM-5.

263

264

264

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Box 11.7 Criteria for schizophrenia in ICD--10 The normal requirement
for a diagnosis of schizophrenia is that a minimum of one very clear
symptom (and usually two or more if less clear-cut) belonging to any one
of the groups listed as (a)--(d) below, or symptoms from at least two of
the groups referred to as (e)--(h), should have been clearly present for
most of the time during a period of 1 month or more (a) Thought echo,
thought insertion or withdrawal, and thought broadcasting (b) Delusions
of control, influence, or passivity, clearly referred to body or limb
movements or specific thoughts, actions, or sensations; delusional
perception (c) Hallucinatory voices giving a running commentary on the
patient's behaviour, or discussing the patient among themselves, or
other types of hallucinatory voices coming from some part of the body
(d) Persistent delusions of other kinds that are culturally
inappropriate and completely impossible (e) Persistent hallucinations in
any modality, when accompanied either by fleeting or half-formed
delusions without clear affective content, or by persistent overvalued
ideas, or when occurring every day for weeks or months on end (f) Breaks
or interpolations in the train of thought, resulting in incoherence or
irrelevant speech, or neologisms (g) Catatonic behaviour, such as
excitement, posturing, or waxy flexibility, negativism, mutism, and
stupor (h) 'Negative' symptoms such as marked apathy, paucity of speech,
and blunting or incongruity of emotional responses, usually resulting in
social withdrawal and lowering of social performance; it must be clear
that these are not due to depression or to neuroleptic medication (i) A
significant and consistent change in the overall quality of some aspects
of personal behaviour, manifested as loss of interest, aimlessness,
idleness, a self-absorbed attitude, and social withdrawal Source: data
from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders:
clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World
Health Organization.

Summary of key differences between DSM-5 and ICD-10 â

ICD-10 places weight on Schneider's first-rank symptoms; DSM-5
emphasizes course and functional impairment.

â

ICD-10 requires a duration of illness of 1 month; DSM-5 requires a
duration of 6 months.

â

ICD-10 recognizes traditional subtypes of schizophrenia (e.g.Â paranoid
schizophrenia); DSM-5 does not.

â

Schizotypal disorder is included in ICD-10, but is categorized as a
personality disorder in DSM-5.

Schizophrenia-like disorders Whatever definition of schizophrenia is
adopted, there will be cases that resemble schizophrenia in some
respects and yet do not meet the criteria for diagnosis. In DSM-5 and
ICD-10, these disorders can be considered within four groupings: 1.
Delusional disorders (paranoid psychoses). 2. Brief psychotic disorders.
3. Psychotic disorders accompanied by prominent affective symptoms. 4.
Psychotic disorders without all of the symptoms required for
schizophrenia. Delusional disorders are discussed in Chapter 12. The
latter three groups are discussed here.

Brief psychotic disorders DSM-5 uses the term brief psychotic disorder
to refer to a syndrome characterized by at least one of the acutephase
positive symptoms shown in Box 11.6. The disorder lasts for at least 1
day but not more than 1 month, by which time recovery has occurred,
including full return to premorbid level of functioning. The disorder
may or may not follow a stressor, but psychoses induced by the direct
physiological effects of drugs or medical illness are excluded. In
DSM-5, schizophreniform disorder is a syndrome similar to schizophrenia
(meeting criterion A) which has lasted for more than 1 month (and so
cannot be classified as brief psychotic disorder), but for less than the
6 months required for a diagnosis of schizophrenia to be made. Social
and occupational dysfunction are not required to make the diagnosis. In
ICD-10, the grouping is acute and transient psychotic disorder. These
disorders are of acute onset, and complete recovery within 2--3 months
is the rule. The disorder

265

Diagnosis and classification may or may not be precipitated by a
stressful life event. The category is then subdivided into several
overlapping and somewhat confusing subtypes. In the first two, acute
polymorphic psychotic disorders, with or without symptoms of
schizophrenia, hallucinations, delusions, and perceptual disturbance are
obvious, but change rapidly in nature and extent. There are often
accompanying changes in mood and motor behaviour. BouffÃ©e dÃ©lirante and
cycloid psychosis (see Box 11.5) are given as synonyms for these
categories. A third subtype, acute schizophrenia-like psychotic episode,
is a non-committal term for cases that meet the symptom criteria for
schizophrenia but last for less than 1 month. Residual cases that do not
fit these subtypes of acute psychosis are called other acute psychotic
episodes. The term schizophreniform disorder is not used as a discrete
category in ICD-10. For review of brief psychotic disorders and their
outcome, see Fusar-Poli et al (2016).

Schizophrenia-like disorders with prominent affective symptoms Some
patients have a more or less equal mixture of schizophrenic and
affective symptoms. Such patients are classified under schizoaffective
disorder in both DSM-5 and ICD-10. The term schizoaffective disorder has
been used in several distinct ways. It was first applied by Kasanin
(1994/1933) to a small group of young patients with severe mental
disorders characterized by a very sudden onset in a setting of marked
emotional turmoil. The psychosis lasted a few weeks and was followed by
recovery. The current definitions differ substantially from this
description. DSM-5 requires that there should have been an uninterrupted
period of illness during which there is a major depressive or manic
episode concurrent with symptoms that meet criterion A for
schizophrenia. During this continuous episode of illness, acute
psychotic symptoms must have been present for at least 2 weeks in the
absence of prominent mood symptoms (or the diagnosis would be a mood
disorder with psychotic features). However, the episode of mood
disturbance must have been present for a substantial part of the
illness. The definition of schizoaffective disorder in ICD-10 is
similar. It also specifies that the diagnosis should only be made when
both definite schizophrenic and definite affective symptoms are equally
prominent and present simultaneously, or within a few days of each
other. (This is an important point. The label 'schizoaffective' should
not be applied just because a patient has an

isolated symptom or two consistent with both diagnoses, or because the
assessment has not been sufficiently detailed to identify the primary
diagnosis). ICD-10 classifies schizoaffective disorder according to
whether the mood disturbance is depressive, manic, or mixed. In DSM-5
schizoaffective disorder is specified as either depressive type or
bipolar. The reliability and nosological status of schizoaffective
disorder is questionable (Kotov et al., 2013), with neither genetic nor
neurobiological separation from schizophrenia or bipolar disorder
(Cardno and Owen, 2014). The outcome of schizoaffective disorder is
generally thought to be better than that for schizophrenia, with
negative symptoms rarely developing; however, the data are limited. As
noted above, it is not uncommon for patients with schizophrenia to
develop depression as the symptoms of acute psychosis subside. This is
recognized in ICD-10 as postschizophrenic depression, where prominent
depressive symptoms have been present for at least 2 weeks while some
symptoms of schizophrenia (either positive or negative) still remain.

Persistent disorders without all of the required symptoms for
schizophrenia A difficult problem is presented by cases that have
longstanding schizophrenia-like symptoms but which do not fully meet the
diagnostic criteria. There are four groups. â

Patients who have exhibited the full clinical picture of schizophrenia
in the past, but who no longer have all of the symptoms required to make
the diagnosis. These cases are classified as residual schizophrenia in
ICD-10.

â

People who from an early age have behaved oddly or eccentrically and
shown features seen in schizophrenia---for example, ideas of reference,
persecutory beliefs, and unusual types of thinking. These disorders can
be classified as personality disorders in DSM-5 (schizotypal personality
disorder), or with schizophrenia in ICD-10 (schizotypal disorder).
Because of a suggested close relationship to schizophrenia, these
disorders have also been called latent schizophrenia, or part of the
schizophrenia spectrum.

â

People with social withdrawal, lack of initiative, odd behaviour, and
blunting of emotion, in whom positive psychotic symptoms are never known
to have occurred. A variety of terms may be applicable, including simple
schizophrenia, schizoid personality disorder, and Asperger's syndrome.
(We advise caution in using the terms simple schizophrenia or latent

265

26

266

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia schizophrenia. Both of these lack
utility---since treatment is rarely indicated or sought---and represent
speculative diagnostic labels for what many would consider simply to be
eccentricity.) â

People with stable, persistent delusions but without other features of
schizophrenia (see Chapter 12).

Comorbidity Many patients with schizophrenia also meet the criteria for
another psychiatric diagnosis, complicating diagnosis and treatment, and
worsening the outcome. The example of depression (which occurs in 50% of
cases) has already been mentioned. The estimated lifetime prevalence of
any substance abuse is 47%, and of alcohol abuse is 21%. Psychiatric
disorders often comorbid with schizophrenia include post-traumatic
stress disorder (29%), obsessive--compulsive disorder (23%), and panic
disorder (15%). For a review, see Buckley et al. (2009).

Differential diagnosis We have already described how current
classifications include schizophrenia-like disorders as well as
schizophrenia, but the boundary between them is blurred and to some
extent arbitrary. Similarly, there is no clear distinction between
disorders that are considered to be variants of schizophrenia, some of
which are viewed as being part of its differential diagnosis. For
example, delusional disorders and schizotypal disorder are often
included in both categories. Such difficulties reflect the unknown
validity of the syndrome(s), and are unlikely to be resolved until the
classification is based upon aetiology or other empirically validated
markers (Lawrie et al., 2016b). In this regard, the distinction between
schizophrenia and organic schizophrenialike disorders is also not only
unhelpful (Chapter 2) but becomes increasingly blurred as potential
causes of some cases of 'schizophrenia' are discovered, such as copy
number variants and antineuronal antibodies (see below). With these
caveats in mind, current diagnostic practice requires schizophrenia to
be distinguished from a number of other disorders, summarized in Box
11.8. Organic syndromes. Acute schizophrenia can be mistaken for
delirium, especially if there is pronounced thought disorder and a
rapidly fluctuating affect and mental state. Careful observation is
needed for clouding of consciousness, disorientation, and other features
of delirium (see Chapter 14).

Box 11.8 Differential diagnosis of schizophrenia Cases meeting some but
not all criteria for schizophrenia Brief psychotic disorder Delusional
disorder Schizotypal disorder

Cases with affective and psychotic symptoms Schizoaffective disorder
Psychotic depression Bipolar disorder

Schizophrenia-like disorders attributable to a specific cause
Schizophrenia-like disorder due to psychoactive substance use Organic
schizophrenia-like disorder

Other Autism and related disorders Obsessive--compulsive disorder Body
dysmorphic disorder Schizoid personality disorder Paranoid personality
disorder

Schizophrenia-like disorders can also occur, in clear consciousness, in
a range of neurological and medical disorders. These conditions are
referred to as a psychotic disorder due to another medical condition
(DSM-5), organic delusional disorder (ICD-10), or simply as secondary
schizophrenia. Classic examples include temporal lobe epilepsy (complex
partial seizures), general paralysis of the insane, and metachromatic
leukodystrophy (see Chapter 14, and Hyde and Ron, 2011). Visual,
olfactory, and gustatory hallucinations are said to be suggestive of an
organic aetiology. The occurrence of organic schizophrenia-like
disorders emphasizes the importance of a careful medical history and
physical examination (and investigations, if indicated) in all such
patients. One study in London found that 10 out of 268 cases (3.7%) of
'first-episode schizophrenia' had an organic cause other than substance
misuse (Johnstone et al., 1987).

276

Epidemiology Drug-induced states (including substance misuse). Certain
prescribed drugs, particularly steroids and dopamine agonists, can cause
florid psychotic states. Psychoactive substance misuse, particularly
with psychostimulants or phencyclidine, and also alcohol, should always
be considered in the presentation of schizophrenia-like psychoses. Urine
or hair testing can be helpful in diagnosis, as is the temporal
association between drug use and symptoms. However, the high prevalence
of recreational drug use in young adults means that a clear distinction
between a drug-induced psychosis and schizophrenia is not always
possible. See also Chapter 20. Mood disorders with psychotic features.
The distinction of schizophrenia (and schizoaffective disorder) from
affective psychosis depends on the degree and persistence of the mood
disorder, the relationship of any hallucinations or delusions to the
prevailing mood, and the nature of the symptoms in any previous
episodes. The distinction from mania in young people can be

particularly difficult, and sometimes the diagnosis can only be
clarified by longer-term follow-up. A family history of mood disorder
may be a useful pointer. Delusional disorders. These disorders (see
Chapter 12) are characterized by chronic, systematized paranoid
delusions, but lack other symptoms of schizophrenia, and many areas of
the mental state are unremarkable. Personality disorder. Differential
diagnosis from personality disorder, especially of the paranoid,
schizoid, or schizotypal forms, can be difficult when insidious changes
are reported in a young person, or paranoid ideas are present. Prolonged
observation may be required to detect genuine symptoms of psychosis, and
the additional features indicative of schizophrenia. Some patients with
borderline personality disorder also exhibit transient psychotic
symptoms, although the presence of affective instability and other
features means that there should rarely be diagnostic confusion with
schizophrenia.

Epidemiology Schizophrenia is a disorder with a low incidence and a high
prevalence. Estimates of both have varied, reflecting the methodology
and diagnostic criteria used, as well as probable differences between
populations. Recent reviews and meta-analyses have helped to clarify the
estimates and their confidence intervals (McGrath et al., 2008;
Jablensky et al., 2011).

Incidence The annual incidence using current diagnostic criteria is
0.16--1.00 per 1000 population using a broad definition; for more
restrictive diagnoses (e.g.Â DSM-IV criteria), the incidence is about two
to three times lower (Jablensky et al., 2011). A meta-analysis reported
a mean incidence of 0.24 per 1000 population but a median incidence of
0.15 per 1000 (McGrath et al., 2008). The difference reflects a skew,
with many estimates in the upper tail of the distribution, which in turn
results from studies that sampled from within populations with a high
incidence (e.g.Â migrant groups, as discussed below). Another
metaanalysis found an incidence of schizophrenia in England of 15.2 per
100,000 person years (Kirkbride et al., 2012a). These recent analyses
strongly question the belief, which arose largely from the WHO
Ten-Country Study (Jablensky et al., 1992), that schizophrenia has a
similar incidence (and prevalence) in all populations. Indeed,

data indicate a fivefold global variation in incidence, with rates
higher in developed than developing countries (McGrath et al., 2008).
There are also variations in incidence related to a number of other
environmental factors (see below). Suggestions made in the latter part
of the last century that the incidence of schizophrenia was falling have
not been borne out; indeed, the incidence of diagnosed early-onset
schizophrenia has, if anything, increased over the past four decades
(Okkels et al., 2013).

Prevalence Systematic reviews indicate a lifetime prevalence of about 5
per 1000 (Simeone et al., 2015), and a lifetime morbid risk of 7.2 per
1000 (McGrath et al., 2008). These are median values because the data
are skewed; the means are higher, at 5.5 and 11.9 per 1000,
respectively. The latter figure is more consistent with the frequent
statement that about 1 in 100 people develop schizophrenia, but the
value of 7 in 1000 is statistically more appropriate.

Age at onset Schizophrenia can begin at any stage of life, from
childhood to old age. The usual onset is between 15

267

268

268

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia and 54 years, most commonly in the
mid-twenties; more detailed analyses suggest that there are two peaks,
one at 20 years, and a second peak at 33 years. Gender differences in
age of onset may explain these observations, as men have a single peak
in their early twenties, whereas women have a broader range of age of
onset, and a second peak in their fourth decade. However, the gender
difference in mean age of onset is smaller and less robust than often
stated (Eranti et al., 2013). For review of schizophrenia in children
see Chapter 16 and Hollis (2015); for review of late-onset schizophrenia
see Chapter 19 and Cohen CI et al.Â (2015).

Gender In addition to possible gender differences in age of onset,
meta-analyses show that schizophrenia is more common in men than in
women, with a male:female ratio of 1.4:1. The difference is more marked
for severe cases, and is not due to differences in referral,
identification, or age of onset. It has been attributed to the
neuroprotective effects of oestrogen, but the evidence for this is poor.
Gender differences in genetic and epigenetic risk factors may also be
relevant. For a review of gender issues in schizophrenia and its
management, see Abel et al.Â (2010).

Fertility Whether patients with schizophrenia show decreased fertility
has been a controversial topic, not least because of its implications
for debate about whether schizophrenia is a 'disease', and with regard
to its genetic basis. A metaanalysis showed a substantial reduction in
fertility in people with schizophrenia (about 40% of that expected),
which was greater in men than in women (Bundy et al., 2011). These
figures are difficult to interpret as being an intrinsic feature of
schizophrenia, since opportunities for patients to have children have
historically been limited by institutionalization, as well as by the
amenorrhoea and sexual dysfunction caused by antipsychotic drugs. On the
other hand, fertility is also decreased before the onset of psychosis
(Zimbron et al., 2013) and is slightly reduced in the unaffected
siblings of patients (Bundy et al., 2011). There are various theories
but no explanation as to why schizophrenia persists in the population
despite the apparent reduction in fertility.

Other aspects of schizophrenia epidemiology Epidemiological aspects
relevant to aetiology are considered in the next section. The course and
outcome of schizophrenia are discussed later in the chapter.

Aetiology Overview Views about the aetiology of schizophrenia have been
inextricably linked with the controversies regarding its nature and
classification discussed earlier in this chapter. Schizophrenia
therefore exemplifies the whole range of biological, psychological, and
social factors considered to be important in psychiatric causation and
the methods that have been applied to try to identify them. This section
summarizes the current knowledge and theories in each domain, and also
mentions some outdated but influential views. Table 11.3 lists the main
evidencebased contemporary aetiological factors and theories. Key
aspects of the present consensus regarding the aetiology of
schizophrenia can be summarized as follows. The most important influence
is genetic, with about 80% of the risk being inherited. The mode of
inheritance is complex, and the genes---some of which have recently been
identified---act as risk factors, not determinants of

illness. A number of environmental factors contribute too, many of which
act early in life, and which interact with the genetic predisposition.
Together, these and subsequent risk factors lead to a neurodevelopmental
disturbance that renders the individual vulnerable to the later
emergence of symptoms, and that manifests itself premorbidly in a range
of behavioural, cognitive, and biological features. In schizophrenia,
there are minor but clear differences in brain structure and function,
and their characteristics support the view that the syndrome is a
disorder of brain connectivity. Acute psychosis is associated with
excessive dopamine neurotransmission in the basal ganglia, which may be
secondary to abnormalities of the glutamate system. Various psychosocial
factors significantly influence the onset, and course, of illness.
Finally, it is emphasized that there are few certainties about the
aetiology of schizophrenia, and even where the facts are robust, their
interpretation often remains unclear.

269

Aetiology

Table 11.3 Schizophrenia: aetiological factors and theories Category

Examples

Genetic

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in many genes (e.g.Â ZNF804A) Copy number
variation (e.g.Â 22q11 deletion) Rare variants (e.g.Â SETD1A)

Early environment

Maternal malnutrition Maternal infection Birth complications Urban birth

Social

Migration Ethnic minority status

Other

Early cannabis use

Hypotheses

Neurodevelopmental Gene--environment interactions Dopamine Glutamate
Dysconnectivity Immune/inflammatory

In this section, we discuss the genetic and environmental risk factors
for schizophrenia. In the following sections we discuss in turn the key
neurobiological, social and psychological elements, and the major
explanatory models proposed regarding the nature of the disorder. For
contemporary reviews of the aetiology of schizophrenia, see van Os et
al.Â (2010), Howes and Murray (2014), and Owen et al.Â (2016).

Family studies The first systematic family study was conducted in
Kraepelin's department by Rudin, who showed that the rate of dementia
praecox was higher among the siblings of probands than in the general
population. Gottesman (1991) reviewed the combined results of many
studies and provided estimates for the lifetime risk of schizophrenia in
various classes of relatives (Table 11.4). Whilst some of these
estimates may be questioned, they do provide clear evidence of a
familial aetiology, and the greater concordance rates in monozygotic
compared to dizygotic twins indicates that this arises primarily from
shared genes. Equally, the higher incidence in dizygotic twins than in
siblings supports a role for shared environmental factors. Family
studies can also be used to determine whether the liability to
schizophrenia and other disorders (e.g. bipolar disorder) is transmitted
independently, which should be the observed pattern if the two disorders
are separate syndromes with differing aetiology. Earlier studies gave
inconclusive or inconsistent results, but recent large studies indicate
clearly that there is no such independent transmission. For example,
Lichtenstein et al. (2009) show in the Swedish population that
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder coexist in families. It is also known
that the risk of schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and
schizotypal and paranoid personality disorders is increased in
first-degree relatives of patients with schizophrenia. These findings
support the concept of a schizophrenia spectrum, in which the familial

Table 11.4 Lifetime risk of schizophrenia in relatives of a proband with
schizophrenia Relative type

Lifetime risk of schizophrenia

Monozygotic twin

48%

Dizygotic twin

17%

Sibling

9%

Half-sibling

6%

Genetics

Child with one affected parent

17%

Family, twin, and adoption studies have all been applied extensively in
schizophrenia, and cumulatively provide irrefutable evidence for a major
genetic contribution to the syndrome. Such studies set the context for
the current wave of genomic and molecular studies designed to identify
the individual genes and mechanisms by which the risk for schizophrenia
is mediated.

Child with two affected parents

46%

First cousin

2%

Baseline risk

1%

Source: data from Gottesman I, Schizophrenia Genesis: the origins of
madness, Copyright (1991), W. H. Freeman.

269

270

270

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia predisposition is to a range of disorders, not
simply schizophrenia itself. This is also consistent with recent
findings from genome-wide studies, discussed below.

Twin studies Twin studies were introduced in Chapter 5. They have been
of considerable importance in research on schizophrenia, providing
unequivocal evidence of the heritability of this disorder. The first
substantial twin study was conducted in Munich by Luxenberger in the
1920s. He found concordance in 11 of his 19 monozygotic (MZ) pairs and
in none of his 13 dizygotic (DZ) pairs. Subsequent investigations all
agree that concordance is several-fold higher in MZ than in DZ twins,
with representative estimates of 40-- 50% concordance for MZ twins and
about 10% for DZ twins (Box 11.4, and see Cardno and Gottesman, 2000).
Modern twin studies also produce estimates of heritability (the
proportion of liability to schizophrenia in the population that can be
attributed to genes; see page 103), and can separate environmental
factors into those that are unique to the individual and those that are
shared with others. A meta-analysis of twin studies (Sullivan et al.,
2003) confirmed the substantial heritability of schizophrenia (81%; 95%
confidence interval \[CI\], 73--90%). These data unambiguously show that
inheritance (i.e.Â genes) contribute the majority of the risk for
schizophrenia. However, there are caveats about the interpretation of
heritability figures. For example, the estimates make some assumptions
about the 'genetic architecture' (i.e.Â how the genetic factors operate)
and include gene--environment interactions. The metaanalysis also showed
that most of the environmental contribution comes from shared rather
than individualspecific influences (11%; 95% CI, 3--19%). The identity
of these shared environmental factors is unknown. It is also worth
noting that estimates for schizophrenia heritability from population
studies are somewhat lower (e.g.Â 64% in the study by Lichtenstein et
al., 2009) than those of twin studies, for reasons which are not
entirely clear. Among discordant MZ twins, the risk of schizophrenia is
increased equally in children of the unaffected and the affected
co-twin. This indicates that the unaffected co-twin indeed had a similar
genetic susceptibility to developing schizophrenia as the affected twin,
but for some reason did not express the phenotype. This is most probably
due to environmental protective factors, or chance ('stochastic
processes'), affecting the penetrance or expression of the genetic
predisposition. Moreover, as a group, unaffected identical co-twins do
exhibit some mild features of schizophrenia (in terms of symptoms

and biological findings), which fall short of being diagnostically
significant, but which are on average greater than those seen where
neither member of a twin pair has schizophrenia. This probably reflects
a partial expression of the risk genotype.

Adoption studies Adoption studies provide another way to try and
disambiguate genetic from family environmental factors. Heston (1966)
studied 47 adults who had been born to mothers with schizophrenia and
separated from them within 3 days of birth. As children they had been
brought up in a variety of circumstances, although not by the mother's
family. At the time of the study their mean age was 36 years. Heston
compared them with controls matched for circumstances of upbringing, but
whose mothers had not suffered from schizophrenia. Among the offspring
of the affected mothers, five were diagnosed as having schizophrenia,
compared with none of the controls. The rate for schizophrenia among the
adopted-away children was comparable with that among children with a
schizophrenic parent who remained with their biological family. Further
evidence came from a series of Danish studies that started in the 1960s
(Petersen and Sorensen, 2011). In one project, two groups of adoptees
were identified--- a group of 33 adoptees who had schizophrenia, and a
matched group who were free from schizophrenia. Rates of disorder were
compared in the biological and adoptive families of the two groups of
adoptees. The rate for schizophrenia was higher among the biological
relatives of the adoptees with schizophrenia than among the relatives of
the controls, a finding which supports the genetic hypothesis.
Furthermore, the rate for schizophrenia was not increased among couples
who adopted the affected children, which suggests that environmental
factors were not of substantial importance. Follow-up studies using a
national sample of Danish adoptees confirmed that biological
first-degree relatives of patients with schizophrenia have an
approximately tenfold increased risk of suffering from schizophrenia or
a related ('spectrum') disorder (Kety et al., 1994). The data from
adoption studies thus strongly support the view that genetic factors
explain the familial clustering of schizophrenia. However, it should be
noted that they cannot control for the prenatal environment, which other
studies, discussed below, suggest is important. Nor can they rule out an
interaction between environmental causes in the adoptive family and
genetic predisposition; indeed, Finnish data show that adoptees at high
genetic risk of schizophrenia are more sensitive to adverse upbringing
(Tienari et al., 2004).

271

Aetiology

The mode of inheritance As pointed out in a seminal paper by Gottesman
and Shields (1967), the frequency profile of schizophrenia among people
with different degrees of genetic proximity to the proband does not fit
any simple Mendelian pattern, as would be expected if the disorder was
caused by a single major gene. Instead, the pattern indicates that
schizophrenia arises from the cumulative effect of many genes, each of
small effect, as a so-called polygenic disorder, also known as a complex
genetic or nonMendelian disorder. The liability to schizophrenia lies
along a continuum in the population, and is expressed when a certain
threshold of genetic susceptibility is exceeded. No genes are either
necessary or sufficient, and they act as risk factors, not determinants.
Indeed, no families in which schizophrenia is inherited as a single-gene
dominant or recessive disorder have been identified. Within a polygenic
model, there can be a range of different kinds of genetic variation and
genetic mechanisms (sometimes called genetic architecture), which
ongoing genomic and related approaches are beginning to reveal.

Schizophrenia susceptibility genes Despite the high heritability, and a
considerable research effort, it has proved difficult to identify
schizophrenia genes. This difficulty reflects a number of factors (Box
11.9). However, significant progress has been made in the past decade,
due mainly to advances in genomics knowledge (e.g.Â copy number variants
\[CNVs\]) and methods (e.g.Â genome-wide association studies \[GWAS\]),
coupled with larger sample sizes and more sophisticated analyses. The
findings now show that three types of genetic variation contribute to
schizophrenia risk: â

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).

â

Copy number variants (CNVs).

â

Rare variants.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms Much of the genetic risk for
schizophrenia comes from SNPs (see Chapter 5), as revealed by GWAS.
These SNPs affect many hundreds or thousands of genes, with each one
contributing a very small effect (odds ratios typically about 1.05). The
largest study to date, in over 35,000 cases and 80,000 controls,
identified 108 genomic loci, containing over 600 known protein-coding
genes, that were each statistically associated with schizophrenia risk
(Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium,
2014). These genes include a number that are consistent with prior
hypotheses about

Box 11.9 Why finding schizophrenia genes has been difficult Knowing the
right phenotype to study. Most genetic studies have been conducted on
subjects who meet diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, yet there are
no grounds for assuming this syndrome has a specific genetic basis. As
discussed, there is good evidence that the genetic predisposition is to
a broader range of disorders than just schizophrenia. Equally, different
genes may contribute to different aspects of schizophrenia
(e.g.Â cognitive deficits, negative symptoms), sometimes called
endophenotypes or intermediate phenotypes. No single or major gene, but
multiple genes of small effect. Many previous studies used genetic
linkage to identify regions of the genome that segregated with
schizophrenia. Linkage works best when a single gene is causing the
phenotype being studied, explaining why it proved of very limited value
in schizophrenia. Finding multiple genes of small effect requires very
large samples (tens of thousands) of cases and controls. Genetic
heterogeneity. Beyond simply the large number of genes, schizophrenia is
genetically heterogeneous in that the genetic risk (as explained below)
comes from three kinds of variation---SNPs, CNVs, and rare
variants---which likely vary between individuals, as well as between
ethnic groups. These factors further confound detection of statistically
robust genetic signals. Gene--gene interactions (epistasis). Epistasis
is common for many complex traits and disorders. Existing studies have
rarely been designed or powered to investigate epistasis in
schizophrenia. Its importance thus remains unknown. Gene--environment
interactions. Many genes may affect schizophrenia risk indirectly, by
affecting an individual's response to environmental factors, as
discussed in the following section. Since environmental data are rarely
collected in genomic studies, most of these interactions will have been
missed. Lack of good candidate genes. Until genomewide methods became
available (in the early 2000s), a 'candidate gene' approach was
required, in which researchers studied one or a few genes, believed for
whatever reason to be involved in schizophrenia. This led to both
false-positive and false-negative findings and means that most of the
pre-GWAS era findings are now given little credence.

271

27

272

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia schizophrenia (e.g.Â dopamine D2 receptor,
several glutamate genes) but also many that were not. These results are
a major advance in schizophrenia genetics, but they also leave many
questions unanswered. For example, these multiple loci still only
explain a small amount of the heritability. Neither is it clear which
genes, and what mechanisms, explain the statistical association. These
issues are discussed below; see also Harrison (2015a).

Copy number variants CNVs were introduced in Chapter 5. There is now
strong evidence that specific CNVs are associated with schizophrenia.
The major schizophrenia associated CNVs are shown in Table 11.5; the
best known CNV is deletion of chromosome 22q11 (velocardiofacial
syndrome; Box 11.10). The CNVs can either be deletions or duplications
of a length of DNA. In contrast to SNPs, each CNV is extremely rare but,
if present, confers a significant effect on risk. For example, as shown
in Table 11.5, deletion of 1.35 million nucleotides from chromosome
15q11.2, affecting seven genes, occurs in about 0.14% of cases of
schizophrenia compared to 0.02% of controls: an odds ratio of 7.
Overall, about 2.5% of patients and 0.9% of controls carry a CNV
strongly supported as a schizophrenia risk factor. For review, see Kirov
et al.Â (2015). About half of the CNVs associated with schizophrenia are
inherited, the others are de novo---that is, they are

not seen in either parent of the affected person; in effect, they are
sporadic mutations, and the person's illness has not been inherited.
However, if the affected person has children, each child has a 50%
chance of inheriting the CNV, and their illness would therefore have
been inherited. Most schizophrenia-associated CNVs are also associated
with a risk of one or more other neuropsychiatric phenotypes. However,
there is not a clear excess of CNVs in bipolar disorder (Green et al.,
2016), and this may be one of the points of separation in the aetiology
of these disorders.

Rare variants A further proportion of cases of schizophrenia are due to
rare single nucleotide (or dinucleotide) variants in individual genes
which, if present, confer a high risk of the disorder. The variants are
predicted to cause a lossof-function of the gene concerned, and are
sometimes referred to as mutations. The best example to date concerns a
gene called SETD1A, of which 10 such variants were seen amongst 5000
cases, but in only two out of 45,000 controls, conferring an odds ratio
of 32 (Singh et al., 2016). As with CNVs, some rare variants are
inherited, some occur de novo. The overall importance of rare variants
in schizophrenia will become apparent from ongoing studies are using
exome or genome sequencing in large samples.

Table 11.5 Copy number variants associated with schizophrenia risk Locus

Size (kb)

Genes affected

Frequency in cases

Frequency in controls

Odds ratio

P value

Other phenotypes

1q21.1 del

820

11

0.17%

0.02%

8

10--13

Microcephaly, heart defects

1q21.1 dup

820

11

0.13%

0.04%

3

10--4

NRXN1 del

Varies

1

0.18%

0.02%

9

10--11

15q11.2 del

290

4

0.59%

0.28%

2

10--10

Epilepsy

15q13.3 del

1350

7

0.14%

0.02%

7

--10

10

Epilepsy

16p13.11 dup

790

8

0.31%

0.13%

2

10

--5

ADHD

16p11.2 dup

560

26

0.35%

0.03%

11

10

ASD, microcephaly

22q11.2 del

1240

40

0.29%

0.0%

n.a.

10--40

Multiple, including cardiac

--24

Adapted from Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 21(3), Kirov G et al,
What a psychiatrist needs to know about copy number variants,
pp.Â 157--163, Copyright (2015), with permission from The Royal College
of Psychiatrists. Only CNVs with a frequency in schizophrenia greater
than 0.1% are included. NRXN1, neurexin 1; del, deletion; dup,
duplication; kb, kilobases; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; ADHD,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

273

Aetiology

Box 11.10 Velocardiofacial syndrome: a schizophrenia-associated CNV
Unlike most CNVs associated with schizophrenia, which were discovered by
chance from GWAS, velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS, also known as di
George syndrome) was already well known, being detectable using standard
clinical genetic techniques. VCFS is caused by deletion of one copy of
chromosome 22q11 (hence its alternative name, 22q11 hemideletion
syndrome). It is a relatively common cytogenetic anomaly, occurring in 1
in 4000 live births, and causes a range of physical abnormalities. Of
relevance here, it is also associated with psychosis (either
schizophrenia-like or affective) in about 30% of individuals. Even
though VCFS is a rare cause of schizophrenia overall, 22q11 is
implicated as a locus for schizophrenia genes in general, and several
such genes within this region have been identified. 22q11 hemideletion
is also associated with other neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric
syndromes (e.g.Â intellectual disability, attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder \[ADHD\]), illustrating how one CNV can produce different
phenotypes (pleiotropy). For review, see Jonas et al.Â (2014).

â

Many additional genetic variants, especially rare variants, which will
be identified as sample sizes increase and extensive whole genome
sequencing is carried out.

â

Epistasis (see Box 11.9).

â

Gene--environment interactions (Iyegbe et al., 2014).

â

Epigenetic factors, some of which are heritable. See Dempster et
al.Â (2013) and Toth (2015).

The relative importance of these four factors in explaining the missing
heritability is unknown.

Crow's lateralization hypothesis A very different view of the aetiology
of schizophrenia was proposed by Crow (2002). He argued that
schizophrenia is due to a single gene, which is also responsible for
cerebral asymmetry and language. For various reasons, the gene is
postulated to reside at a particular location on the sex chromosomes.
The theory is ingenious but not widely supported.

The biology of schizophrenia genes The discovery of multiple loci and
genes associated with schizophrenia has been followed by attempts to
understand the biological implications and the molecular mechanisms.
Although these are at an early stage, several broad conclusions can be
drawn: â

The genes converge on several functional networks and biochemical
pathways. In particular, current data highlight aspects of
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated signalling and synaptic
plasticity, immune function, calcium signalling, and histone
modification. See Box 11.11; Hall et al.Â (2015).

â

CNVs likely exert their effects through gene dosage. That is, a deletion
leads to insufficient levels of gene expression, and duplications to
excess. Deletions may also be pathogenic by revealing the effects of a
harmful recessive allele on the undeleted chromosome.

â

The mechanism by which SNPs alter gene function to affect the risk of
schizophrenia is more complicated to determine, for several reasons.
Firstly, GWAS does not identify the causal variant, merely one that is
'tagging' the genetic risk. Secondly, even where the causal variant has
been inferred, very few are coding substitutions (c.f. ApoE4, see Box
5.5), and so their functional significance is unclear. The mechanism is
likely to be that they affect how the gene is regulated---for example,
when and where it is transcribed, or spliced---with some data suggesting
that this particularly affects prenatal brain development.

Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC 1)
deserves mention because it has a unique place in schizophrenia
genetics. It was identified from extensive studies of a large Scottish
family in which a translocation between chromosomes 1 and 11 is linked
with a high incidence of schizophrenia and several other disorders. DISC
1 is the gene thought to be affected ('disrupted') by the translocation,
and to be the likely cause of the observed phenotypes. However, it is
unclear as to the role of DISC 1 in schizophrenia outside this one
family, and the heated debate illustrates broader controversies about
the genetics of schizophrenia (Sullivan, 2013; Porteous et al., 2014).

The 'missing heritability' Much of the heritability of schizophrenia is
still unexplained (or 'missing'), despite the large numbers of SNPs,
CNVs, and rare variants already identified. It has been estimated that
SNPs collectively will explain about 30% of the genetic risk, and CNVs
perhaps another 5--10%. The remainder likely arises from four sources:

273

274

274

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Box 11.11 Convergence of schizophrenia genes: the examples of immune
function and NMDA receptor signalling Immune function. The major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) locus on chromosome 6 shows the
strongest statistical association to schizophrenia (Schizophrenia
Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014). There are
two main interpretations of this finding. The first is that it supports
a role for immune, autoimmune, or inflammatory factors in schizophrenia,
consistent with a range of epidemiological and biological evidence
discussed later in this chapter. The alternative interpretation is that
is also known that many 'immune genes' (such as the classical complement
pathway) also play a role in brain development, influencing
synaptogenesis and other processes, and this might be the basis for the
genetic association. In support, Sekar et al.Â (2016) showed that the
genetic signal to the MHC locus arises mainly from the complement
component 4 (C4) gene, which is expressed by developing neurons and
synapses. They also showed that individuals with the risk forms of C4
express the gene at higher levels, and that (at least in mice) this is
associated with more pruning of synapses during brain development. NMDA
receptor signalling. A role for glutamate and NMDA receptor hypofunction
has long been postulated in schizophrenia. It is now supported by clear
evidence that genes involved in NMDA receptor signalling, and synaptic
function more generally, are overrepresented among the genes affected by
schizophrenia risk SNPs and CNVs (Hall et al., 2015).

For review, see Harrison (2015a).

Clinical and therapeutic implications of schizophrenia genetics At
present there is no direct clinical role of genetic testing for
schizophrenia in clinical practice, since none of the genetic findings
are diagnostic and they do not have clearly established prognostic or
therapeutic implications. The only possible exception is testing for
CNVs, which some authorities argue may now be justified, and which
raises several ethical issues (Rees et al., 2014). Genetic discoveries
are also providing new potential drug targets and encouraging investment
in the field, but seem unlikely to lead directly to new
pharmacotherapies

in the near future because of the many complexities involved (Schubert
et al., 2014).

Environmental risk factors Despite the prominent genetic component, the
twin studies discussed earlier, along with many epidemiological and
other studies, show that environmental factors are also important in the
aetiology of schizophrenia. A range of factors, especially prenatal and
perinatal ones, have been identified (Table 11.6); for some, the
relative risks they confer have been estimated from metaanalyses (Table
11.6, and see text). For review, see van Os et al.Â (2010) and McGrath
and Murray (2011). Several issues are worth bearing in mind when
considering the individual risk factors to be discussed: â

The causality of most environmental risk factors for schizophrenia is
often unknown, and differing interpretations of the reported
associations are possible.

â

Many of the environmental risk factors are not specific to schizophrenia
but, like the genetic factors, are shared by one or more other
disorders.

â

The distinction between genetic and environmental factors is an
oversimplification. In fact, as noted earlier, interactions between them
are common, and

Table 11.6 Environmental risk factors for schizophrenia, and the
relative risk conferred Factor

Relative risk

Maternal infections

?

Maternal malnutrition

2

Birth complications

2

Winter birth

1.1

Advanced paternal age

1.7

Urban birth and upbringing

1.9

Childhood trauma and adversity

2.8

Being an immigrant

2.9

Cannabis smoking

2

Tobacco smoking

2.2

Life events

3.2

275

Aetiology can complicate identification of both types of factor (Iyegbe
et al., 2014). Some specific examples are given in the following
sections.

Obstetric complications Rates of schizophrenia are increased in
individuals who experienced obstetric complications, compared with their
unaffected siblings or normal controls. Metaanalyses suggest an odds
ratio of about 2 (Cannon et al., 2002). A range of exposures is
associated with increased risk, including antepartum haemorrhage,
diabetes, low birth weight, asphyxia, and Rhesus incompatibility.
Obstetric complications may be more relevant in individuals who also
have a genetic predisposition to schizophrenia (Nicodemus et al., 2008).
The association of obstetric complications with schizophrenia has
several possible explanations. They might be directly causal (e.g.Â via
fetal hypoxia), or a reflection of pre-existing fetal abnormality, or
even a reflection of maternal characteristics.

Infective and inflammatory factors Several studies have suggested that
fetuses exposed during the second trimester to influenza, especially the
1957 influenza A2 pandemic, have an increased risk of schizophrenia.
Some biological support for this association was provided by animal
studies, which showed that prenatal influenza affects fetal brain
development. Additional support emerged with the demonstration that
serological evidence of influenza infection during early pregnancy was
associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia in the offspring.
However, other studies, and a meta-analysis of the 1957 pandemic,
yielded negative results (Selten et al., 2010), and a relationship
between influenza and schizophrenia has been hard to establish
(Khandaker et al., 2013). Several other maternal (and childhood)
infections have also been associated with schizophrenia, including
toxoplasmosis, herpes simplex virus 2, and rubella, with varying degrees
of support (Khandaker et al., 2013). A number of studies have measured
inflammatory markers (such as interleukins, cytokines, and Creactive
protein) in serum collected during pregnancy and related this to
schizophrenia risk in the offspring (Khandaker et al., 2013; Canetta et
al., 2014). Although these markers are often taken as supportive of an
infective origin, inflammation may occur for various reasons (Cannon et
al., 2014). Genetic factors may well modify the relationship between
maternal infection and schizophrenia. For

example, a large population study found that the association between
maternal infection and schizophrenia risk was only observed in women
with a history of psychiatric disorder (Blomstrom et al., 2016). For
review of maternal infection, inflammation, and schizophrenia, see Brown
and Derkits (2010).

Maternal malnutrition Children born to mothers who experienced famine
early in their pregnancy have an increased risk of schizophrenia, with
an odds ratio of about 2. This was shown initially in children born
after the Dutch 'Hunger Winter' of 1944, and subsequently in two large
Chinese populations exposed to famines in the 1960s. The mechanism is
proposed to be epigenetic---viz.Â that malnutrition alters DNA
methylation and other processes regulating gene expression in the
affected offspring (Kirkbride et al., 2012b). It is not known whether
the cause is related to general malnutrition or lack of specific
micronutrients (e.g.Â vitamin D), nor is it clear whether less extreme
fluctuations in nutritional status during pregnancy affect schizophrenia
risk. For review, see Brown and Susser (2008).

Winter birth Schizophrenia is slightly more frequent among people born
in the late winter than among those born in the summer (Davies et al.,
2003). This season of birth effect has been shown in both the northern
and southern hemispheres, and becomes more prominent at higher
latitudes. The explanation is unknown. It has been linked to the
prevalence of influenza earlier in the winter, and to sunshine and
vitamin D levels around the time of birth; it could also be related to
factors related to the time of conception, via seasonal fluctuations in
the genetic make-up of gametes.

Paternal age A replicated finding is that schizophrenia is associated
with paternal age, especially in those without a family history of
psychosis. A meta-analysis found a relative risk of 1.66 for fathers
over 50 years old compared to those aged 25--29 (Miller et al., 2011).
The favoured explanation is that the frequency of mutations in sperm
increases with age. However, the phenomenon is only observed for a man's
first-born child, and not for subsequent ones (Petersen et al., 2011).
This suggests that the paternal age effect may instead be related to how
personality (or relationship factors) modify the age at which a man
first fathers a child.

275

276

276

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Child development Parnas et al.Â (1982) reported a study of 207 children
of mothers with schizophrenia who were first assessed when they were
8--12 years of age and then again, as adults, 18 years later, by which
time 13 individuals had developed schizophrenia and 29 had 'borderline
schizophrenia'. Of the measures that were used on the first occasion,
those that predicted schizophrenia were poor rapport at interview, being
socially isolated from peers, disciplinary problems mentioned in school
reports, and parental reports that the person had been passive as a
baby. In a national birth cohort of more than 16,000 children
prospectively studied over a 16-year period, those who developed
schizophrenia could be distinguished at the age of 11 years, if not
earlier, by greater hostility towards adults, and by speech and reading
difficulties (Done et al., 1994). This difference was apparent compared
to those who grew up to develop neurotic illness, as well as those who
remained well. In another large prospective cohort study, Jones et
al.Â (1994) found that children who eventually developed schizophrenia
showed delayed milestones and speech problems, together with lower
education test scores and less social play. A graded relationship
between delayed milestones (e.g.Â age at walking) and schizophrenia has
been confirmed in several subsequent cohorts. The behaviour of children
(including motor acts in infants), as recorded in home movies and
videotapes, is also associated with later schizophrenia (Schiffman et
al., 2004). These and other studies provide good evidence that
individuals who will develop schizophrenia show increased rates of
intellectual and motor dysfunction and poor social competence in
childhood. However, it is unclear how specific these changes are, or how
they are related to the subsequent development of the illness. Most of
the children who were destined to develop schizophrenia were not
considered clinically abnormal at the time, and many children who
perform poorly on these indices do not develop schizophrenia.
Nevertheless, the findings support an early neurodevelopmental
contribution to schizophrenia.

Substance use The high prevalence of drug and alcohol use in patients
with schizophrenia is well established, but whether substance misuse
plays a causal role in schizophrenia is more controversial. If substance
use is considered to have directly caused or precipitated the psychosis,
it is diagnosed as such, and not as schizophrenia. However,

there is evidence that prior use of some drugs, particularly cannabis,
is associated with an increased risk of later developing schizophrenia.
Andreasson et al. (1987) followed up over 45,000 Swedish conscripts for
15 years, and found that the relative risk of developing schizophrenia
was 2.5 times higher in subjects who used cannabis, with a sixfold
increase in risk for heavy users. Subsequent longitudinal studies show a
consistent association between cannabis use and psychosis (with an odds
ratio of about 2), which may be modified by interaction with genetic and
other factors, such as the strain of cannabis (Gage et al., 2015).
Cannabis use is also associated with an earlier age of onset of
psychosis (Large et al., 2011). However, the causality and specificity
of the relationship between cannabis use and psychosis, and hence the
implications for public health policy, remain controversial (Hall and
Degenhardt, 2011) (see also Chapter 20). Tobacco smoking is also a risk
factor for development of psychosis, and is associated with an earlier
onset of symptoms (Gunillo et al., 2015). As with cannabis use, it is
not certain whether this is causal; for example, given the strong
effects of nicotine on the dopamine system, the relationship could
reflect an attempt at selfmedication (Kumari and Postma, 2005).

Social and psychosocial factors Although neglected in recent years
compared to biological risk factors, social and psychosocial factors are
also important in schizophrenia. For review, see van Os et al. (2010)
and Bebbington and Kuipers (2011).

Occupation and social class Schizophrenia is overrepresented among
people of lower social class. In Chicago, Hollingshead and Redlich
(1958) found both the incidence and the prevalence of schizophrenia to
be highest in the lowest socioeconomic groups. At first, these findings
were thought to be of aetiological significance, but they could be a
consequence of schizophrenia. For instance, Goldberg and Morrison (1963)
found that people with schizophrenia were of lower social status than
their fathers, and that this was usually because they had changed status
after the onset of the illness. However, Castle et al.Â (1993) found
that, compared with controls, patients with schizophrenia were more
likely to have been born into socially deprived households. Those
authors proposed that some environmental factor of aetiological
importance was more likely to affect individuals of lower socioeconomic
status.

27

Aetiology

Place of birth and residence Faris and Dunham (1939) studied the place
of residence of mentally ill people in Chicago, and found that
individuals with schizophrenia were overrepresented in the disadvantaged
inner-city areas. This distribution has been confirmed in other cities,
and it has been suggested that unsatisfactory living conditions can
cause schizophrenia. These findings have often been ascribed to the
occupational and social decline ('social drift') described above, or to
a search for social isolation by people who are about to develop
schizophrenia. However, recent data suggest that schizophrenia is
associated with place of birth and early upbringing, findings that
cannot be explained as a consequence of illness. Specifically,
population-based studies in several countries show that urban birth is
associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia. Larger cities carry
a higher odds ratio than small towns or suburban areas (Pedersen and
Mortensen, 2001). The cause of the association remains unclear, and may
relate to social deprivation, migration, infections, stress, or
interactions between genetic vulnerability and urban environments (Peen
and Dekker, 2004). Recent data support the view that genetic liability
to schizophrenia plays a significant part in the social drift (Sariaslan
et al., 2016).

Migration and ethnicity In a study of Norwegians who had migrated to
Minnesota, Ãdegaard (1932) found that the inception rate for
schizophrenia was twice that of Norwegians living in Norway. Many
subsequent studies have confirmed high rates of schizophrenia among
migrants. Meta-analyses confirm that schizophrenia is more common in
migrants, and in their children, and show that this cannot be explained
solely by selection (Bourque et al., 2011). The relative risk ranges
from about 2 to 4.5, and tends to be higher in migrants from lower- and
middle-income countries. A particularly controversial aspect of
migration and schizophrenia concerns the Afro-Caribbean population in
the UK. This group has a strikingly increased incidence of
schizophrenia, particularly in the 'second generation', who were born in
the UK. The relative risk for all psychosis ascertained in the
multicentre first-onset AESOP study was 6.7 for the Afro-Caribbean
population and 1.5 for the Asian population, compared with the white
population in the UK (Fearon et al., 2006). Overall, rates in
Caribbean-born migrants and their descendants in England are increased
4.7-fold (Tortelli et al., 2015). There has been concern that the high
rates in the UK represent misdiagnosis because of poor diagnostic
practice, and even 'institutional racism' (Singh and Burns,

2006). However, several studies have compared the diagnoses in
Afro-Caribbean and white patients using structured research instruments,
and found them to be equivalent (Singh and Burns, 2006). The most
rigorous test was the AESOP study mentioned, which, despite the raised
rates, found that symptom profiles were broadly the same across the
ethnic groups, and the association with known risk factors was also
similar. Thus, there is now strong evidence that the raised incidence is
a real phenomenon, but its explanation is unclear (Morgan et al., 2010).
The increased rate of schizophrenia has sometimes been attributed to a
disproportionate migration of people who are unsettled because they are
becoming mentally ill.Â Alternatively, the effect of migration could be
due to exposure to environmental factors in the host country, especially
in those who are genetically or otherwise predisposed. Thus both 'social
selection' and 'social causation' may contribute to an excess of
schizophrenia among migrants. Amongst the latter category, evidence
indicates that experiential factors likely play a significant part.
Studies show that the high incidence in ethnic-minority patients varies
according to where they grew up in the host country. Controlling for
known risk factors (e.g.Â cannabis use and deprivation), the rates are
still more than doubled when these individuals grow up in areas where
they are members of a small minority as opposed to areas where they are
a relatively large minority. The mechanism by which this differential
'ethnic density' impacts upon rates of schizophrenia is unclear. For
review, see Shaw et al.Â (2012).

Life events and difficulties Life events and difficulties have often
been proposed as precipitants of schizophrenia. In one of the most
convincing studies, Brown and Birley (1968) used a standardized
procedure to collect information from 50 patients newly admitted with a
precisely datable first onset or relapse of schizophrenia. By comparison
with a control group, the rate of 'independent' events in those with
schizophrenia was increased during the 3 weeks before the onset of the
acute symptoms. Paykel (1978) calculated that experiencing a life event
doubles the risk of developing schizophrenia during the subsequent 6
months. A recent meta-analysis yielded an odds ratio of 3.2 for life
events and psychosis (Beards et al., 2013). For review, see Bebbington
and Kuipers (2011).

Childhood trauma There is an increased prevalence of childhood trauma
and abuse, including bullying, in individuals who

277

278

278

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Box 11.12 Psychodynamic and family theories of aetiology Psychodynamic
theories Freud elaborated his theory of schizophrenia in his 1911
analysis of the Judge Schreber case. He proposed that libido was
withdrawn from external objects and attached to the ego, resulting in
exaggerated self-reference. The withdrawal of libido deprived the
external world of salience so meaning was derived from abnormal beliefs.
The libidinal withdrawal meant the patient could not form a transference
and therefore could not be treated by psychoanalysis. Although Freud
developed his general ideas later and elaborated his theory he did not
replace it. Melanie Klein (1952) believed that schizophrenia originated
in infancy. In the 'paranoid schizoid position', the infant neutralized
innate aggressive impulses by splitting his ego and his experience of
his mother into two parts, one wholly bad and the other wholly good.
Only later did the child realize that the same person could be good at
one time and bad at another. Failure to pass through this stage
adequately was the basis for the later development of schizophrenia and
the sense of persecution common in it.

The family as a cause of schizophrenia The family has been proposed as a
cause of schizophrenia, either through deviant role relationships
(associated with Fromm-Reichmann and Lidz) or disordered communication
(associated with Bateson and Wynne). The role of the family in
influencing the course of schizophrenia is discussed later.

develop schizophrenia, with an odds ratio of about 3. The risk is
greater for multiple and severe adversities. The relationship is not
explained fully by genetic factors or other potential confounders, and
may therefore be at least partly causal. For review, see Morgan and
GayerAnderson (2016).

Psychological factors Personality Several early writers, including
Bleuler, commented on the frequency of abnormalities of personality
preceding the onset of schizophrenia. In the 1930s, Kretschmer proposed
that both personality and schizophrenia were related to the asthenic
type of body build.

The 'schizophrenogenic' mother, a cold and distant figure unable to
foster emotional growth, was suggested by the analyst Fromm-Reichmann in
1948, whilst Lidz and his colleagues used intensive psychoanalytical
methods to study the families of 17 wealthy patients with schizophrenia,
and suggested two abnormal family patterns:

Marital skew, in which one parent yielded to the other's (usually the
mother's) eccentricities, which dominated the family. â Marital schism,
in which the parents maintained contrary views, and consequently the
child had divided loyalties. â

The double bind (Bateson et al., 1956) is said to occur when an
instruction is given overtly, but is contradicted by a second more
covert instruction. For example, a mother may overtly tell her child to
come to her, while conveying by her manner and tone of voice that she
rejects him. Double binds are only pathogenic within families that
implicitly prohibit the acknowledgement of this contradiction. They are
(after all) far from uncommon. Double binds trap the child in ambiguous
responses and inhibit the development of logical thinking. An
association between abnormal social communication in parents and
schizophrenic illness in children may in fact be a consequence of a
shared genetic inheritance or, indeed, as a response to the stresses of
relating to the child. These and other speculations about the causative
role of family relationships have had the unfortunate consequence of
inducing unjustified guilt in parents.

He suggested a continuous variation between normal personality, schizoid
personality, and schizophrenia. He regarded schizoid personality as a
partial expression of the psychological abnormalities that are
manifested in their full form in schizophrenia. Such ideas must be
treated with caution, as it is difficult to distinguish between
premorbid personality and the prodromal phase of emerging illness.
However, Kretschmer's ideas are similar to the current concept of the
schizophrenia spectrum, in which schizophrenia represents the most
severe end of a continuum. Taken together, the findings suggest that
abnormal personality features are not uncommon among people who later
develop schizophrenia, and among their first-degree relatives. However,
many people with schizophrenia have no obvious disorder of personality
before the onset of

279

Neurobiology the illness, and only a minority of people with schizotypal
or schizoid personalities develop schizophrenia. For review of
personality and psychosis, see Ohi et al. (2012).

Psychological theories In the past, psychological theories of
schizophrenia were based on psychodynamic concepts and often centred on
a pathogenic role of family (see Box 11.12). Such theories are now
largely of historical interest, since they lack empirical evidence.
However, it is important to know about them because they help focus
attention on interpersonal and developmental aspects, and because they
remain influential with some families and health professionals. Current
psychological models of schizophrenia are more grounded within
neuroscience, and reflect the

increasing focus on cognitive aspects of schizophrenia introduced
earlier. For review, see Palmer et al.Â (2009). An early
neuropsychological model of schizophrenia proposed that positive
symptoms arise from a failure to integrate stored memories with current
stimuli (Gray et al., 1991). The aberrant salience model of Kapur
(2003), mentioned later, shares some features with Gray's model and
links neuropsychology to the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia. Frith
(1996) argued that in schizophrenia there is a breakdown in the internal
representation of mental events. For example, a failure to monitor and
identify one's own willed intentions might give rise to the idea that
thoughts and actions arise from external sources, resulting in delusions
of control. This theory has a counterpart in models of aberrant
connectivity and brain networks, to be discussed below (Menon, 2011).

Neurobiology Schizophrenia is at the forefront of attempts to understand
psychiatric disorders in terms of alterations in brain structure and
function, utilizing the whole range of contemporary neuroscientific
concepts and techniques. For general reviews, see Kahn et al.Â (2015) and
Owen et al.Â (2016). See Kahn and Sommer (2015) for review of the
neurobiology of onset and first-episode psychosis, and Remington et
al.Â (2014) for the neurobiology of relapse.

Structural brain imaging In a landmark study, Johnstone et al.Â (1976)
used the novel technique of computerized tomography, and found
significantly larger ventricles and cerebral

Box 11.13 Summary of structural brain changes in schizophrenia

Structural brain changes Whether there is a neuropathology associated
with schizophrenia has been a matter of debate for over a century. The
search began with Alzheimer, who spent a decade studying the brains of
patients with dementia praecox (Box 11.5) before he reported the case of
presenile dementia with which his name is associated. The failure of
Alzheimer and others to identify a neuropathology was central to the
view of schizophrenia as a functional disorder rather than an organic
one. However, evidence has accrued over the past 40 years which
disproves the null hypothesis that there are no structural differences
in the brain in schizophrenia, albeit their details and interpretation
remain poorly understood, and the findings are not clinically useful in
the diagnosis of individual patients. The main findings are summarized
in Box 11.13.

Brain imaging Decreased brain volume Decreased intracranial volume â
Enlarged lateral and third ventricles â Smaller hippocampus and thalamus
â Thinner cortical grey matter â Altered white matter pathways â â

Neuropathology Decreased brain weight Absence of neurodegenerative
changes or gliosis â Reductions in synaptic and dendritic markers â
Decreased markers of some interneurons â Smaller pyramidal neurons in
some areas â Fewer thalamic neurons â â

279

280

280

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia atrophy in 17 elderly hospitalized patients
with schizophrenia than in eight healthy controls. Lateral ventricular
enlargement in schizophrenia had been reported decades previously using
pneumoencephalography, but it was the study by Johnstone and colleagues
that stimulated renewed interest. A large number of subsequent imaging
studies, mostly using MRI, have confirmed and extended those findings. A
meta-analysis of brain volumes in over 18,000 subjects (Hajima et al.,
2013) concluded that, in schizophrenia, ventricular volumes are
increased by about 30%, brain volume decreased by 2.6%, and intracranial
volume reduced by 2%. The latter finding suggests strongly that much of
the structural brain changes occur early in childhood. Effect sizes were
largest in hippocampus and thalamus, and greater for grey matter than
white matter. The results were broadly similar in antipsychotic-naÃ¯ve as
in medicated patients. Longitudinal studies have attempted to identify
the course of structural brain changes. The results are complex. Some of
the volume reductions are present before the onset of symptoms, and
likely relate to the genetic predisposition to the disorder, while
others emerge at the first episode. Thereafter, there is some further
loss of grey and white matter, but the timing, magnitude, and
explanation, remain unclear (Weinberger and Radulescu, 2016). For
example, the extent to which progressive volume reductions are
attributable to the disease process versus antipsychotic medication or
other confounders, and whether typical and atypical antipsychotics
differ in this regard (Fusar-Poli et al., 2013b). Other notable aspects
of structural brain imaging in schizophrenia include: â

There is no evidence for an 'organic' subtype. Rather, there is a
unimodal shift in ventricular and brain volumes in the disorder.

â

There are few clear clinicopathological associations, although
particular structural alterations have been associated with specific
symptoms; for example, thought disorder with smaller superior temporal
gyri.

â

Despite their robustness, the changes are small, with significant
overlap between patients and controls. Furthermore, the findings are not
diagnostically specific---for example, some of the findings are also
seen in bipolar disorder (Ellison-Wright and Bullmore, 2010).

As well as volume changes, MRI methods such as diffusion tensor imaging
have shown alterations in white matter connectivity. A range of
differences has

been reported in schizophrenia, generally indicative of decreased or
otherwise aberrant white matter pathways, especially involving the
frontal cortex (Samartzis et al., 2014).

Neuropathology Post-mortem neuropathological studies have sought to
explain the cellular and molecular basis for the neuroimaging findings
(see Box 11.13). For review, see Harrison (1999) and Dorph-Petersen and
Lewis (2011). A few findings deserve mention here. â

Brain weight is decreased by 2--3%.

â

There is no evidence of any neurodegenerative processes. This supports a
neurodevelopmental origin of the pathology, and also argues that any
progression of pathology during the illness, as inferred from some MRI
studies, is not neurotoxic or degenerative in nature (Zipursky et al.,
2013).

â

The main positive findings are reductions in some markers of synapses
and dendrites, and in specific neuronal populations (e.g.Â the
parvalbumin subclass of interneurons, and layer III pyramidal neurons).

â

An abnormal position or clustering of some neurons, notably in the
entorhinal cortex and in the subcortical white matter, has been reported
in several studies.

â

Studies of gene expression are consistent with the involvement of
neurons and oligodendroglia in schizophrenia.

The nature of the neuropathological changes is strongly suggestive of an
origin early in life, and has contributed to the neurodevelopmental
hypothesis of schizophrenia. However, virtually all of the patients
whose brains are studied post mortem had been ill, and medicated, for
many years. It is therefore difficult to determine the extent to which
the findings in schizophrenia are confounded by the consequences of
illness, antipsychotic medication, and other factors (e.g. smoking).

Functional brain imaging As described in Chapter 5, a number of imaging
techniques, particularly positron emission tomography (PET),
single-photon emission tomography (SPET), and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), have been used to assess patterns of brain
activity in schizophrenia. Study designs usually compare groups of
patients with groups of controls, either at rest, or during

281

Neurobiology performance of different kinds of cognitive task. For a
review, see Meyer-Lindenberg (2010).

Cerebral blood flow The first study was conducted by Ingvar and Franzen
(1974), who used injections of radioactive xenon, and found decreased
perfusion of the frontal cortex compared with the posterior regions in
chronic, medicated patients with schizophrenia. This 'hypofrontality'
has sometimes been considered to be a feature of schizophrenia and,
although many studies have given negative results, was confirmed in a
meta-analysis (Hill et al., 2004). However, stronger relationships with
hypofrontality are seen if the phase of illness and symptom profile are
taken into account (e.g.Â the association with psychomotor poverty) (see
Table 11.1).

Neurophysiological findings Neurophysiological function in schizophrenia
has been examined using a range of methods. For a review, see Winterer
and McCarley (2011).

Electroencephalography The electroencephalogram (EEG) in schizophrenia
generally shows increased amounts of theta activity, fast activity, and
paroxysmal activity. The significance of these findings is not known.
More sophisticated combinations of EEG and event-related potential
analyses show a decreased synchronization or coherence of electrical
activity in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia, suggestive of
'noisy' or inefficient cortical processing (Winterer and Weinberger,
2004).

BOLD signal on fMRI

Sensory evoked potentials: P300 and P50

Altered frontal activity is also apparent in fMRI studies of
schizophrenia, particularly in the prefrontal cortex during performance
of working memory tasks, such as the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and the
N-back task. The profile of changes is complex (Minzenberg et al.,
2009). When patients are matched with controls for performance, patients
require more frontal cortex activation to achieve the same level of
performance as controls, which suggests that there is a reduced
'efficiency' of cortical processing (Callicott et al., 2003). Other fMRI
studies have looked at the cerebral correlates of specific
symptoms---for example, the cortical regions that are activated during
auditory hallucinations (Jardri et al., 2011)---whilst there is also
emerging interest in alterations in 'resting state' brain activity (Kuhn
and Gallinat, 2013).

The P300 response is an auditory evoked potential that occurs 300
milliseconds after a subject has identified a target stimulus embedded
in a series of irrelevant stimuli. The response provides a measure of
auditory information processing. In patients with schizophrenia, and a
proportion of their first-degree relatives, the amplitude of the P300
wave is reduced. Abnormalities in another evoked potential, the P50
wave, have also been reported in patients with schizophrenia and their
relatives. Moreover, molecular genetic studies in families with
schizophrenia have shown that P50 deficits are linked to the gene coding
for a subunit of the nicotinic cholinergic receptor. This suggests that
alterations in cholinergic neurotransmission could underlie
abnormalities in information processing in schizophrenia. A
meta-analysis confirmed the presence of P300 and P50 deficits in
schizophrenia (Bramon et al., 2004).

Aberrant connectivity Bleuler conceptualized the fundamental symptoms of
schizophrenia as 'psychic splitting' or a failure of integration of
mental functions, and Wernicke and other neuroanatomists of the late
nineteenth century took a 'connectionist' view (Collin et al., 2016). A
similar view is currently framed in terms of 'dysconnectivity', whereby
the activity of different brain circuits or networks is aberrant in
schizophrenia (Stephan et al., 2009). Some variants of this model also
involve a structural component (changes in the 'wiring' of the brain),
consistent with the structural imaging and neuropathology findings
mentioned earlier. Recent studies focus on brain oscillations and
network activity, the coordinated firing of ensembles of neurons between
brain areas underlying cognition, and other brain operations
(Gonzalez-Burgos et al., 2015).

Biochemical findings Dopamine Two early lines of research converged and
implicated dopamine as having a key role in schizophrenia. The first
concerned the effects of amphetamine which, among other actions,
releases dopamine at central synapses. Repeated use of amphetamine at
high doses can induce a disorder similar to acute schizophrenia, and
acute amphetamine administration worsens psychotic symptoms in people
with schizophrenia. The second approach starts from the finding that all
antipsychotic drugs are dopamine-receptor antagonists, and that their

281

28

282

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia affinity at dopamine D2 receptors is the
property that correlates best with their clinical potency. These
observations led to the well-known 'dopamine hypothesis' of
schizophrenia, which emerged during the early 1970s and has persisted.
Despite the prominence and longevity of the theory, evidence that
dopamine neurotransmission is excessive or otherwise abnormal in
schizophrenia was hard to obtain, in part because of the difficulty in
distinguishing drug effects from disease effects in medicated patients.
However, the use of PET and SPET techniques to image dopamine receptors
and dopamine synthesis has now provided good evidence to support the
presumed 'hyperdopaminergia' in acute schizophrenia. There is a slight
increase in dopamine D2 receptors, and an increased occupancy of D2
receptors, but the main finding is that the synthesis and release of
striatal dopamine are markedly increased (Howes et al., 2012). Moreover,
the extent of this increase predicts the response to antipsychotic
medication. The abnormality develops during the prodrome and is not seen
in patients during remission. Contrary to expectations, the excess
dopamine function occurs primarily in the associative and not the
ventral striatum (i.e.Â in the mesocortical rather than the mesolimbic
dopamine pathway). For review, see Howes et al. (2015). Other phases and
aspects of schizophrenia may be associated with different abnormalities
in dopamine function. In particular, various lines of evidence suggested
that there is deficient dopaminergic activation of the prefrontal
cortex, relevant to the enduring cognitive deficits of the illness. The
first direct evidence to support the presence of dopamine deficits in
the cortex in schizophrenia came from Slifstein et al.Â (2015), using a
new PET ligand. There are plausible pathways and mechanisms to link
these opposing dopaminergic abnormalities in striatum and frontal
cortex. The cause of dopaminergic involvement in schizophrenia is
unclear. There may be a genetic component, but current theories
emphasize dysregulation secondary to glutamatergic and developmental
abnormalities, as outlined below. A phenomenological account has been
proposed by Kapur (2003). He argues that the known roles of dopamine in
cognition and behaviour suggest that it mediates the 'salience' of
external events and internal representations, and that in schizophrenia
the dopamine abnormalities lead the patient to misattribute stimuli and
their meaning. Delusions and hallucinations are viewed as the
consequence of these experiences and the patient's attempt to make sense
of them.

Glutamate The excitatory neurotransmitter amino acid glutamate is second
only to dopamine in neurochemical theories of schizophrenia. The key
finding that triggered this interest was that antagonists of the NMDA
type of glutamate receptor (e.g.Â phencyclidine and ketamine) can induce
a schizophrenia-like psychosis (Javitt and Zukin, 1991). This finding is
now complemented by several other lines of evidence (see Box 11.14). For
review, see Howes et al.Â (2015). The origins of glutamatergic
involvement in schizophrenia are not known. The 'NMDA receptor
hypofunction' model postulates a developmental abnormality in the
receptor (Olney and Farber, 1995). As mentioned earlier, there is a
genetic component, and a small percentage of cases may be attributable
to anti-NMDA receptor antibodies (Lennox et al., 2012, 2017). The
glutamate and dopamine systems are intricately linked, and their
dysfunction in schizophrenia is also thought to reflect shared factors.
Glutamate is generally considered to be the more primary or 'trait'
abnormality, with the dopamine abnormality downstream and
'state'related. Alternatively, there may be differential involvement of
glutamate and dopamine in different patients (Howes et al., 2015).

Gamma-aminobutyric acid Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the major
inhibitory transmitter in the brain, and it is implicated in

Box 11.14 Evidence for glutamatergic involvement in schizophrenia
NMDA-receptor antagonists induce or exacerbate schizophrenia symptoms
NMDA-receptor co-agonists (e.g.Â D-serine) reduce some symptoms
Alterations in glutamate markers and receptors in schizophrenia brain
Altered levels of glutamate and its metabolites in schizophrenia brain
shown using spectroscopy (Merritt et al., 2016) Schizophrenia risk genes
affect glutamate signalling Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies in some cases
of schizophrenia

283

Neurodevelopmental model schizophrenia for several reasons. There is a
decrease in its synthetic enzyme, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), in
the cerebral cortex, and reductions in the connections made by a type of
GABA neuron (parvalbumincontaining interneurons). There are also
alterations in the expression of GABAA receptors, and reduced GABA
levels as measured by spectroscopy. The relationship between GABA and
glutamate alterations in schizophrenia is unclear; one point of
convergence is that NMDA receptors on GABA neurons may be especially
vulnerable in the disorder. For review see Gonzalez-Burgos et al.
(2015).

Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) A role for serotonin (5-HT) in
schizophrenia has long been considered, because the hallucinogen,
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), is an agonist at 5-HT2 receptors.
Other evidence that suggests such a role is that 5HT2-receptor
antagonism may contribute to the atypical profile of some
antipsychotics, and alterations in 5-HT

receptor densities in schizophrenia, notably a reduction in the number
of frontal cortex 5-HT2A receptors and an increase in 5-HT1A receptors.

Inflammatory markers The possible involvement of inflammation in the
causation of schizophrenia has been mentioned with regard to risk genes
and prenatal factors. There are also many studies showing alterations in
various inflammatory markers in the blood in patients with the disorder,
suggestive of a proinflammatory state. Such activation can in turn
influence the dopamine, glutamate, and 5-HT systems (Muller et al.,
2015). Evidence of inflammation in the brain was provided by Bloomfield
et al.Â (2016), who used PET to show activation of microglia (resident
inflammatory cells of the brain) in patients with schizophrenia and
during the prodrome. However, the finding awaits replication, and
overall the significance of inflammation in schizophrenia remains
unclear (Manu et al., 2014; van Kesteren et al., 2017).

Neurodevelopmental model The notion that schizophrenia is a disorder of
neurodevelopment was proposed by Clouston in 1892 and by others,
including Kraepelin, at the turn of the last century. The current
interest can be traced to Murray and Lewis (1987), and especially to
Weinberger (1987). Specific forms of the neurodevelopmental model
implicate the second trimester in utero, adolescence, or an interaction
between the two. Evidence in favour of the model has accrued from
several sources and is summarized in Box 11.15. Many of the factors have
already been discussed in this chapter.

There are no serious challenges to the neurodevelopmental model as a
hypothesis of schizophrenia pathogenesis. This partly reflects its
vagueness, which allows most findings to be interpreted as being
consistent with it. Its weaknesses include a failure to readily explain
the variable course of the disorder or provide a convincing explanation
for late-onset schizophrenia. For review, see Weinberger and Levitt
(2011) and Howes and Murray (2014).

Box 11.15 Findings that support the neurodevelopmental hypothesis of
schizophrenia Structural brain changes present at or before illness
onset

Most environmental risk factors relate to prenatal and perinatal period

Limited progression of brain changes after onset

'Soft' neurological signs at presentation

Motor, cognitive, and social impairments in children who later develop
schizophrenia

Minor physical anomalies and aberrant dermatoglyphics

Neuropathological changes without gliosis implies a prenatal timing

Schizophrenia risk genes affect brain development

Increased frequency of large cavum septum pellucidum Findings from
animal models

283

284

284

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Course and prognosis The course and long-term outcome of schizophrenia
has been a fiercely debated issue, in part due to differing ways in
which diagnosis was made, patients followed up, and recovery defined.
Kraepelin initially believed that dementia praecox had an invariably
poor outcome, although later reported that 17% of his patients
eventually were socially well-adjusted. Manfred Bleuler (1974), son of
Eugen Bleuler, personally followed up 208 patients who had been admitted
to his hospital in Switzerland between 1942 and 1943. He concluded that
the outcome was not so gloomy: 20 years after admission, 20% exhibited
complete remission, 35% had good social adjustment, and 24% remained
severely disturbed. When full recovery had occurred, this was usually
within the first 2 years. In recurrent illnesses subsequent episodes
usually resembled the first one in clinical features. Bleuler's
conclusions were broadly supported by Ciompi (1980). Using well-kept
records of 1642 schizophrenia patients followed up for an average of 37
years, he found one-third had a good or fair social outcome, with
symptoms becoming less severe in the later years. However, Ciompi
reported his percentages of followed-up subjects rather than recruited
subjects, many of whom had died, so his outcomes are probably
overoptimistic. A more recent 15- and 25-year follow-up study of patient
cohorts in 15 countries found that one-sixth of the patients had
achieved full recovery (Harrison et al., 2001); importantly, late
recovery was seen in a significant minority, challenging the therapeutic
pessimism that such improvements are very rare. A 10-year follow-up of
first-episode psychosis in the UK AESOP study found that 23% had had an
unremitting illness, and 45% had been free of psychotic symptoms for at
least 2 years; this study also highlighted that social outcomes are
often worse than symptomatic ones (Morgan et al., 2014). A recent
meta-analysis, defining recovery as requiring improvement in both
symptoms and social/functional roles, persisting for at least 2 years,
reported that about 14% of patients met this criterion (Jaaskelainen et
al., 2013). Whether the outcome of schizophrenia has improved since
Kraepelin's era remains unclear. A meta-analysis found a 'recovery rate'
of 35% prior to 1955, and 49% for the period 1956--1985, a difference
that may reflect the introduction of antipsychotic drugs. However, the
rate fell back to 36% between 1986 and 1992 (Hegarty et al., 1994). Any
apparent time trends must be interpreted

very cautiously because of changes in diagnostic practice and outcome
measures during the twentieth century. For a review of the course and
clinical outcome of schizophrenia, see an der Heiden and HÃ¤fner (2011).
Kooyman and Walsh (2011) have reviewed the societal outcomes.

Physical health, mortality, and suicide in schizophrenia Originally
reported by Ãdegaard in Norway in 1951, there is an increased mortality
in patients with schizophrenia. In an early meta-analysis, Harris and
Barraclough (1998) found that the risk of death from all causes was
increased 1.6-fold. Subsequent studies have found a higher figure,
typically around threefold, and suggest that the 'mortality gap' is
increasing (Saha et al., 2007). Expressed another way, men with
schizophrenia die approximately 20 years prematurely, and women 15 years
prematurely. All-cause mortality rates are increased several-fold
further in patients with schizophrenia who have comorbid alcohol and
substance misuse (Hjorthoj et al., 2015). About 60% of the excess early
mortality in schizophrenia is accounted for by unnatural causes (suicide
and accidents), and the rest from natural causes. The latter are
especially cardiovascular disease, partly reflecting the high rates of
smoking, as well as poor diet, sedentary lifestyle, and higher rates of
obesity, type 2 diabetes, and other physical illnesses. Lower rates of
diagnosis and less active treatment of these disorders may also
contribute (Shiers et al., 2015). Medication, especially atypical
antipsychotics, has been postulated to contribute significantly to this
excess mortality, from metabolic syndrome. However, moderate levels of
antipsychotic use are associated with the lowest mortality in patients
with schizophrenia, and even high doses are associated with lower
mortality than no treatment (Torniainen et al., 2015). As an aside, the
incidence of, and mortality from, some cancers and autoimmune disorders
is lower than expected in individuals with schizophrenia and in their
relatives (Catts et al., 2008). The mechanisms involved are not known.
The lifetime risk of suicide in schizophrenia is often quoted as 10% or
more, but recent meta-analyses suggest a figure of about 5%. The risk is
greatest early in the illness, and in those with affective symptoms, a
history of suicide attempts, recent discharge from hospital, and number
of psychiatric admissions (Popovic et al., 2014).

285

Course and prognosis For review of early mortality in schizophrenia, see
Laursen et al.Â (2014).

Predictors of outcome The outcome of schizophrenia is, as noted earlier,
heterogeneous and still largely unpredictable (an der Heiden and HÃ¤fner,
2011). However, epidemiological data, and some characteristics of the
first presentation, have identified a number of poor prognostic factors,
including younger age of onset, male sex, poor premorbid functioning, a
prolonged duration of untreated psychosis, and early negative symptoms
and cognitive impairment. See Box 11.16 for a list of factors
influencing outcome in schizophrenia. However, their modest predictive
value is emphasized, and caution should always be exercised when asked
to predict the outcome of individual cases. International studies
suggest that the course and outcome of schizophrenia may differ between
countries. The International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia (World Health
Organization, 1973) found the 2-year outcome was better in India,
Colombia, and Nigeria than in western countries, particularly for the
proportion achieving complete remission. A 15- and 25-year follow-up
study confirmed the stability of geographical differences in course, and
suggested that a difference in the severity and type of illness at first
presentation is an important contributory factor (Harrison et al.,
2001). Nevertheless, the better outcome of schizophrenia in developing
countries, and its explanation, remains controversial.

Social stimulation In the 1940s and 1950s, clinicians recognized that
among people with schizophrenia living in institutions, many clinical
features were associated with an unstimulating environment. Wing and
Brown (1970) investigated patients at three mental hospitals. One was a
traditional institution, another had an active rehabilitation programme,
and the third had a reputation for progressive policies and short
admissions. The research team devised a measure of 'poverty of the
social milieu', which took into account little contact with the outside
world, few personal possessions, lack of constructive occupation, and
pessimistic expectations on the part of ward staff. Poverty of social
milieu was found to be closely related to three aspects of the patients'
clinical condition, namely social withdrawal, blunting of affect, and
poverty of speech. The causal significance of these

Box 11.16 Factors predicting a poor outcome in schizophrenia Demographic
factors Male Single Younger age at onset Family history of schizophrenia
Comorbid substance abuse

Clinical features Poor premorbid adjustment Insidious onset Long
duration of untreated psychosis Hebephrenic (disorganized) subtype
Negative symptoms Cognitive impairment Absence of affective symptoms
Poor insight

Other factors High expressed emotion in family Poor adherence with
treatment

social conditions was strongly supported by a further survey 4 years
later; improvements had taken place in the environment of the hospitals,
and these changes were accompanied by corresponding improvements in the
three aspects of the patients' clinical state. It is possible that
similar factors also apply to patients living in the community, where
environments can also be impoverished or understimulating in various
ways.

Family life and expressed emotion Overstimulation also appears to be
associated with poorer outcomes. Brown and colleagues found that
patients with schizophrenia returning to their families generally did
worse than those entering hostels. Relapse rates were greater in
families with high expressed emotion ('high EE') (Brown et al., 1962).
This consisted of making critical comments, expressing hostility, and
showing signs of emotional overinvolvement. In such families the risk of
relapse was greater if there were high levels of contact (measured as
more or less than 35 hours a

285

286

286

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia week). The association with expressed emotion
appeared to be mediated by antipsychotic medication, with the highest
rates of relapse (92%) occurring in those with high EE, intense contact,
and no medication (Vaughn and Leff, 1976). Further studies (Leff et al.,
1985) demonstrated that relapse rates could be reduced in high EE
families by a behavioural programme involving family sessions. Training
in this intervention became an integral part of the Thorn Course for
psychiatric nurses. Despite the strong evidence base and its inclusion
in clinical guidelines (see below), it has struggled to be adopted in
routine practice (Couldwell and Stickley, 2007).

Effects of schizophrenia on the family Relatives caring for patients
with schizophrenia describe two main kinds of problems: social
withdrawal and episodes of disturbed behaviour. Patients tend not to
interact with other family members; they seem slow, lack conversation,
have few interests, and neglect themselves and stay in bed. Qualitative
studies with families

indicate that this self-neglect is experienced as a greater burden than
the problems of more obviously disturbed or socially inappropriate
behaviour, and occasional threats of violence. Relatives of patients
with schizophrenia may feel anxious, depressed, guilty, or bewildered.
They may be understandably uncertain about how to deal with difficult
and odd behaviour. It is this 'anticipatory anxiety' and sense of stigma
rather than the practical burden of caring that families find wearing
and demoralizing. Further difficulties can arise from differences in
opinion between family members, and from a lack of understanding and
sympathy among neighbours and friends. Although few mental health
professionals still harbour discredited theories of family causation of
schizophrenia (Box 11.12), there is still considerable popular support
for such ideas. While this is less than it was a generation ago,
families do often feel blamed and blame themselves. Community services
and support for patients with schizophrenia and their relatives are
often less than adequate, but improving help, advice, and services to
carers of patients is a priority in many countries. In the UK all carers
are now entitled to an annual assessment of their needs.

Treatment Antipsychotic drugs are the mainstay of treatment for
schizophrenia, but are used with increasing caution, and complemented by
specific psychological and psychosocial interventions. This section is
concerned with the evidence regarding individual treatments. The
following section, on Management, deals with how these treatments are
used together and delivered in clinical practice.

Clinical guidelines for schizophrenia Several recent consensus
guidelines are available for the treatment and management of
schizophrenia. There is broad agreement on most key issues, but also
some differences: â

NICE have produced updated UK guidelines for the management of
schizophrenia in adults (National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence, 2014a) and in children and adolescents (National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2013b). Compared

to the two guidelines mentioned below, the NICE guidelines are
relatively short on details, and the adult guideline has been criticized
for overemphasizing psychological and psychosocial interventions (Taylor
and Perera, 2015). â

Scottish guidelines (Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, 2013)
give a greater focus upon the use of antipsychotic medication, on
treatment-resistant schizophrenia, and on perinatal issues.

â

Australasian guidelines (Galletly et al., 2016) are the most detailed.
They provide specific recommendations for a wide range of situations
(such as comorbid substance abuse, acute behavioural disturbance, older
patients, etc.), and include an algorithm for the pharmacological
treatment of first-episode psychosis.

Pharmacological treatment There is a strong evidence base supporting the
use of antipsychotic drugs in the treatment of schizophrenia for
prevention of relapse. However, there are important limits to their
effectiveness, and significant side effects

278

Treatment and other potential harms. Some of the key issues are listed
in Box 11.17, and in the evidence summarized below, together with data
regarding other physical treatments used in schizophrenia. As noted,
discussion of how medication is used in practice and integrated with

Box 11.17 Key points in the pharmacological treatment of schizophrenia
Acute episode Initiate antipsychotic medication at lower end of the
licensed dose range. â Do not use loading doses ('rapid
neuroleptization'). If sedation is needed, use adjunctive
benzodiazepines. â The choice of drug should be based on patient
preference, effects of previous treatments, and relative liability of
the drug to cause serious side effects (especially extrapyramidal and
metabolic syndromes). â Titrate dose within licensed range, monitoring
for effects and side effects. â Aim to achieve optimum dose with good
adherence for 2 weeks. If no response at that time, consider changing
drug. â Record the indications for medication, the anticipated benefits
and time course, and discussions with patient and carers. â Consider
psychological interventions whenever medication is being introduced or
changed. â

Maintenance and relapse prevention Continue medication for a year, or
longer, using the same principles as for the acute episode. â Ensure
that dose, duration, and adherence are adequate before switching drug. â
Drug withdrawal should be gradual, and the mental state should be
monitored. â Continuous treatment is more effective than intermittent
treatment. â Monitor adherence regularly. â Monitor for side effects,
including metabolic syndrome, regularly. â Consider depot formulations,
especially if adherence is a problem. â Always consider psychological
interventions together with pharmacological options. â

other aspects of treatment is deferred to the following section. The
pharmacology of antipsychotic drugs is covered in Chapter 25.

Effectiveness and side effects of antipsychotic drugs The effectiveness
of antipsychotic medication in the treatment of acute schizophrenia is
well established by multiple placebo-controlled and active comparator
studies (Leucht et al., 2009; 2013). The median effect size compared to
placebo is 0.44 (Leucht et al., 2013). About two-thirds of patients show
a significant therapeutic response, but at present there are no
clinically useful ways of predicting whether an individual patient will
respond. Importantly, antipsychotic drugs only treat the positive
symptoms of schizophrenia. They have little or no clinically significant
effect on negative (Fusar-Poli et al., 2015) or cognitive (Nielsen et
al., 2015) symptoms, although a recent clinical trial reports efficacy
of the new atypical antipsychotic cariprazine against negative symptoms
(Nemeth et al., 2017). There are no substantial differences in efficacy
between one antipsychotic and another (with the exception of clozapine),
nor between typical and atypical antipsychotics. However, this does not
mean that all antipsychotics are the same. There are considerable
differences in their side effect profile (discussed in Chapter 25).
These were confirmed in a recent multiple-treatments meta-analysis,
which also showed slight but robust differences in efficacy and overall
tolerability for individual drugs (Leucht et al., 2013; see Table 11.7).
These factors should be taken into account when discussing the choice of
antipsychotic drug with a patient, as discussed in the section on
Management.

Onset of action Antipsychotics do not have a delayed onset of action, as
is sometimes believed (Agid et al., 2003). Improvement in psychotic
symptoms, as well as sedation, can often be detected within 24 hours
(Kapur et al., 2005). Moreover, if there has not been a 20% improvement
in symptom score after 2 weeks, the chances of a later response to that
drug and dose are small (Samara et al., 2016).

Dosage Studies using PET and SPET to measure dopamine D2 receptor
occupancy, discussed in Chapter 25, provide a rationale for the dosing
of antipsychotic drugs. This evidence complements clinical guidelines,
which

287

28

288

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Table 11.7 Antipsychotic drugs ranked by effect sizes for efficacy, side
effects, and tolerability (excluding clozapine)

Efficacy

Greatest effect/ Most likely to

Smallest effect/ Least likely to

Amisulpride

Lurasidone

Olanzapine

Asenapine

Risperidone

Chlorpromazine

Continue on the Amisulpride drug Olanzapine

Lurasidone

Paliperidone

Asenapine

Olanzapine

Haloperidol

Chlorpromazine

Lurasidone

Quetiapine

Aripiprazole

Haloperidol

Olanzapine

Chlorpromazine

Quetiapine

Lurasidone

Aripiprazole

Paliperidone

Aripiprazole

Risperidone

Quetiapine

Haloperidol

Asenapine

QTc prolongation Amisulpride

Lurasidone

Risperidone

Aripiprazole

Asenapine

Paliperidone

Chlorpromazine

Amisulpride

Quetiapine

Paliperidone

Olanzapine

Aripiprazole

Weight gain

Extrapyramidal side effects

Increased prolactin

Sedation

Haloperidol

Three drugs are highlighted in each category, but note that in many
instances there are other drugs that have very similar properties.
Clozapine, and antipsychotics not currently licensed in the UK, have
been omitted from the table. Adapted from Lancet, 382(9896), Leucht S et
al, Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 15 antipsychotic drugs in
schizophrenia: a multipletreatments meta-analysis, pp.Â 951--962,
Copyright (2013), with permission from Elsevier.

emphasize that antipsychotic drugs should be used at the lowest
effective dose. The latter is lower in the first episode than
subsequently (Kahn and Sommer, 2015), and applies particularly to
adolescents requiring antipsychotic medication (National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence, 2013). Clozapine is the only
antipsychotic for which it is often worth measuring plasma levels (see
page 295).

Maintenance treatment and prevention of relapse Since the original
demonstration by Pasmanick et al. (1964), many controlled trials have
confirmed the effectiveness of continued antipsychotic medication in
preventing relapse. A meta-analysis reported a 1-year relapse rate of
65% in those who discontinued medication, compared to 27% in those who
had continued it, with an NNT of 3 (Leucht et al., 2012). Antipsychotic
continuation was also associated with a better quality of life. An even
more striking effect was seen in a systematic review, which looked
selectively at recurrence after a first episode of psychosis. It
reported a 1-year recurrence rate of 77% in those who discontinued
medication, but only 3% in those who remained on medication (Zipursky et
al., 2014). Continuous medication is more effective than intermittent
treatment strategies (De Hert et al., 2015). These meta-analyses
emphasize the effectiveness of maintenance antipsychotic treatment in
schizophrenia, as noted in all clinical guidelines, and notwithstanding
some concerns about their long-term use (Moncrieff, 2015). However,
there is less evidence as to how long maintenance treatment should last
after an acute episode, reflected in differences between guidelines:
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2014a) suggests
1--2 years, whereas Galletly et al.Â (2016) recommends 2--5 years.

Treatment adherence Partial or non-adherence to treatment with
antipsychotic drugs is common, and is associated with worse outcomes. A
recent meta-analysis reported non-adherence rates of up to 52%, with
non-adherence being related to poor insight and negative attitudes to
medication; other variables, such as severity of illness and side
effects showed inconsistent effects (Sendt et al., 2015). Frequency of
administration is an important factor, with adherence greatest for
once-daily dosing, declining successively with twice and three times
daily dosing (Medic et al., 2013).

Depot antipsychotics (long-acting injectables) Long-acting depot
injections of antipsychotics (more recently called long-acting
injectables) were introduced to deal with the problem of non- (or
uncertain) adherence to treatment. Depot injections are more successful
than oral medication in preventing relapse, presumably due to improved
compliance, with a meta-analysis showing a relative risk reduction of
about 30% (Leucht et al.,

289

Treatment 2012). Long-acting injectables are prescribed to about 30% of
patients with schizophrenia in the UK (Barnes et al., 2009).

Clozapine At least 30% of patients do not respond to antipsychotics, or
are intolerant of them. The only proven drug intervention for this group
is clozapine, which is effective in about one-third of such patients, as
shown by the key trial by Kane et al.Â (1988), and confirmed in
subsequent studies and meta-analyses (Leucht et al., 2009). There is no
evidence that any other atypical antipsychotic shares this greater
efficacy. Clozapine may also have benefits with regard to suicide risk,
aggression, and substance misuse, although earlier suggestions that it
might improve persistent negative symptoms have not been borne out.
Nevertheless, its beneficial properties give clozapine a unique place in
the treatment of schizophrenia, despite its risks and side effects (see
Chapter 25, and below). A recent network meta-analysis challenges the
widely accepted superiority of clozapine over other antipsychotics in
treatment-resistant schizophrenia (Samara et al., 2016). Limiting their
analysis to the small number of double-blind randomized studies, it
found few significant differences between drugs; clozapine was superior
to haloperidol and chlorpromazine but was not more effective than
olanzapine or risperidone. Interpretation of this study is unclear, not
least since it contrasts with the finding of another methodologically
similar metaanalysis (Leucht et al., 2013). Issues include
generalization from the blinded trials to clinical practice, shifting
definitions of treatment resistance, and clozapine dosage (Kane and
Correll, 2016). There is little evidence-based guidance on the
appropriate treatment of patients who are unresponsive to, or unable to
take, clozapine. There are two common augmentation strategies. The first
is to add an antipsychotic such as amisulpride that has a high affinity
for the dopamine D2 receptor; there is also a vogue for using
aripiprazole. This is the only situation that justifies prescribing two
antipsychotics at once. The other strategy is to add a mood stabilizer,
especially lamotrigine. Occasionally, ECT is used to augment clozapine,
and a recent systematic review suggest that it merits greater
consideration in this situation (Lally et al., 2016). However, overall
there is limited evidence for any clinically or statistically
significant clozapine augmentation strategy, nor for how to deal with
treatment resistance if clozapine cannot be used (Miyamoto et al.,
2015).

Other drug classes used in schizophrenia Antidepressants. Despite the
prevalence of depression in schizophrenia, and the frequent use of
antidepressant drugs, there is limited evidence regarding their efficacy
in this situation, and recommendations for their use vary between
clinical guidelines. A recent meta-analysis does show clear but modest
beneficial effects against depressive and negative symptoms, especially
for SSRIs, and a good safety profile (Helfer et al., 2016). Mood
stabilizers. The value of mood stabilizers in treating schizophrenia is
unproven. There is no evidence that they have an antipsychotic effect,
and the beneficial effects reported in some trials could be due to
treatment of affective symptoms. A systematic review confirmed that the
benefits of lithium in schizophrenia occur in patients with affective
symptoms (or with schizoaffective disorder) (Leucht et al., 2004). The
use of mood stabilizers in enhancing clozapine response was mentioned
earlier. Benzodiazepines. There is no role for benzodiazepines in
augmenting antipsychotic drugs (Dold et al., 2013), but they are useful
acutely as part of rapid tranquillization (see below). Future drug
treatments. A diverse group of medications are under investigation,
especially for negative and cognitive symptoms (Vreeker et al., 2015).
These include minocycline, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, and
polyunsaturated fatty acids. Some have clinical trial data suggesting
efficacy but none is ready for routine clinical use.

Electroconvulsive therapy The traditional indications for
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in schizophrenia are catatonic stupor,
severe comorbid depressive symptoms, and severe behavioural disturbance.
In each situation the clinical impression is that the effects of ECT can
be dramatic, but data are limited (Pompili et al., 2013). ECT is used
infrequently in the treatment of schizophrenia in the UK. However, it
remains more widely used in some other countries and, as noted above, it
may have value in clozapine augmentation.

Psychosocial approaches The development of community-based services, and
concerns about the limitations of medication, has led to an increasing
emphasis on psychosocial interventions in the treatment of
schizophrenia. These interventions

289

290

290

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Box 11.18 Psychosocial interventions for schizophrenia Family therapy
(psychoeducation) Cognitive behaviour therapy Cognitive remediation Art
therapy Social skills training Illness management skills Supported
employment Integrated treatment for comorbid substance misuse

are of several different kinds (Box 11.18), but share the following
aims: â

Enhancement of interpersonal and social functioning, including promotion
of independent living in the community.

â

Attenuation of symptom severity and associated comorbidity.

Family therapy Family therapy, both formal and informal, is often
employed at various stages of treatment. The most systematically
evaluated intervention is that designed to decrease expressed emotion in
family members. The procedure is usually combined with education about
the illness and its consequences, together with practical advice on
management (see Box 11.19). A metaanalysis confirmed that such
interventions lower rates of relapse (NNT = 7) and improve medication
compliance (NNT = 6). However, the studies showed a wide range of
outcomes and may overestimate the treatment effect (Pharoah et al.,
2010). Psychoeducation alone is effective

Box 11.19 Elements of family intervention in schizophrenia Education
about schizophrenia Improving communication Lowering expressed emotion
Expanding social networks Adjusting expectations Reducing number of
hours of daily contact

in improving family members' knowledge and coping, but is of less
effectiveness in reducing expressed emotion (Sin and Norman, 2013).

Cognitive behavioural therapy The use of cognitive behavioural therapy
(CBT) in schizophrenia is based on the rationale that positive psychotic
symptoms are amenable to structured reasoning and behavioural
modification. Several trials, and meta-analyses, have found CBT to be
effective in schizophrenia, following Tarrier et al.Â (1998), who
reported that it was more effective than supportive counselling in
decreasing positive symptoms (see Turner et al., 2014). In patients with
delusional beliefs, for example, individual ideas are traced back to
their origin and alternative explanations are explored. Similarly, it
may be possible to modify a patient's beliefs about the omnipotence and
origin of auditory hallucinations, with a resulting decrease in the
distress that accompanies the experience and, perhaps, in the intensity
of the hallucinations. Although normally used as an adjunct to
medication, a recent study found CBT to be effective in patients who had
chosen not to take an antipsychotic (Morrison et al., 2014). All current
guidelines recommend CBT as part of an integrated treatment package for
schizophrenia. However, there have also been studies with negative
findings, and other reviews that have come to more cautious conclusions,
especially regarding its use in routine clinical settings. Indeed, a
recent systematic review concluded that CBT for schizophrenia has only a
very small effect (Jauhar et al., 2014) and the NICE guideline (National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2014a) has been criticized
for overemphasizing the evidence for, and role of, CBT (Taylor and
Perera, 2015).

Cognitive remediation As noted above, cognitive impairments are
important determinants of poor outcome in schizophrenia, and current
pharmacological strategies have little, if any, effect. At present, the
evidence is stronger for psychological approaches. Most of these rely on
mental exercises and training to improve performance through practice.
One of the most extensively tested is cognitive remediation therapy, and
there is now good evidence that it has some effect both on cognitive
performance and on functional outcomes, especially if there is real
world practice of the learned cognitive skills (Medalia and Saperstein,
2013).

291

Management

Other psychosocial interventions Social skills training uses a range of
approaches to teach the patient complex interpersonal skills, including
behavioural reversal, feedback, and training. It is not recommended in
current UK guidelines (National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence, 2014a). However, a recent meta-analysis does indicate some
efficacy against negative symptoms (Turner et al., 2014). Arts therapies
are included in NICE guidelines amongst psychosocial interventions that
should be considered (National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence, 2014a). However, there is little evidence for their
effectiveness (Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, 2013), and a
recent multicentre randomized clinical trial was negative (Crawford et
al., 2012). In the past, dynamic psychotherapy was commonly used in the
treatment of schizophrenia (more so in the USA and France than in the
UK). Evidence from clinical trials is sparse, but does not support the
use of this

kind of psychological treatment. In addition to the lack of convincing
evidence for efficacy, there are concerns that dynamic psychotherapy may
cause overstimulation and relapse. Exercise is effective in improving a
range of symptoms, quality of life, and global functioning in
schizophrenia (Dauwan et al., 2016). It is also valuable more generally
for physical health, and for counteracting the weight gain propensity of
many antipsychotic drugs. Adherence therapy (previously referred to as
compliance therapy) is a brief intervention using motivational
interviewing, which aims to improve outcome by enhancing adherence to
treatment use. UK guidelines state that it should not be offered
(Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, 2013; National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2014a). However, a recent
metaanalysis found that adherence therapy had a significant effect on
reducing symptoms, even though it did not improve adherence or alter
attitudes to medication adherence (Gray et al., 2016).

Management Successful management of schizophrenia depends on first
establishing a good relationship with the patient. This can be difficult
because of the nature of the illness but, with skill and patience,
progress can usually be made. All plans that are made should be
realistic, and acceptable to the patient and their carers. The
importance of medication needs to be carefully explained, as well as its
limitations and its side effects. The same principle applies to all
other interventions. Such discussions should be informed by an
up-to-date knowledge of the evidence, as outlined in the preceding
section on Treatment. Novel modes of service delivery are likely to
impact on the management of schizophrenia over the next few years, and
it is important to keep up to date with these developments too. Box
11.20 summarizes the key elements of the management of schizophrenia.
When reading the following sections, the reader is also referred to the
various current clinical guidelines available to inform and guide
management decisions (Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, 2013;
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2013b; 2014a;
Galletly et al., 2016).

The acute illness Admission to hospital for assessment and treatment is
usually needed for the first episode of schizophrenia and for severe
relapses, and not infrequently requires use of the Mental Health Act.
Hospital admission allows a thorough assessment, provides a safe
environment, and gives a period of relief to the family, who will often
have experienced considerable distress during the emergence of the
illness. However, for less severe episodes, and with adequate resources,
home treatment is possible and has some advantages, including patient
preference (Killaspy et al., 2006). This is reflected in the development
of crisis teams, who aim to treat and support acutely ill patients at
home, although the evidence that such teams reduce admissions is
relatively weak (Jacobs and Barrenho, 2011). A drug-free observation
period is a counsel of perfection, and is rarely attempted now, in part
because of the pressure on inpatient beds. The main difficulty in
establishing the diagnosis is often to elicit all of the symptoms from a
withdrawn or suspicious patient. This procedure may require several
interviews, as well as information

291

29

292

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Box 11.20 Components and principles of the management of schizophrenia
Therapeutic partnership with patient and carers Early intervention for
the first episode, and prompt intervention for later episodes
Integrated, multidisciplinary working, involving primary and secondary
care Antipsychotic drugs for treatment and maintenance, with attention
to side effects and adherence Trial of clozapine for all patients who
meet the criteria Cognitive behavioural therapy Family interventions
Cognitive remediation Assertive outreach for vulnerable patients Regular
assessment of needs Crisis resolution and home treatment teams as
alternatives to admission Maintain realistic therapeutic optimism

from relatives or close friends and careful observations by nursing
staff. A physical examination and routine investigations should be
carried out as soon as the mental state permits, for two reasons. The
first is to exclude the possibility of an 'organic' or drug-induced
psychosis; the second is to ensure that medical comorbidities are
detected and to provide baseline data for metabolic syndrome monitoring
(see below). While the diagnosis is being established, a social
assessment should be carried out. This includes a history of the
patient's personality, level of functioning, work record, accommodation,
and leisure pursuits, and the attitudes to the patient of relatives and
any close friends. The current social functioning and capabilities can
be assessed by other members of the multidisciplinary team, notably
occupational therapists, social workers, and nurses. Discussions about
the appropriate use and choice of psychosocial interventions (such as
CBT) can also be carried out, although the patient is unlikely to be
able to engage fruitfully in specific psychological therapies at this
stage.

Drug treatment of the acute episode Antipsychotic medication is the
mainstay of the treatment of schizophrenia and other psychoses. It will

usually be initiated soon after the diagnosis is made--- or even while
this remains uncertain---and will often continue for several years.
Therefore the use of medication, and appropriate involvement of the
patient and their carer in decision-making, are key aspects of
management. If the patient is acutely disturbed, rapid tranquillization
may be required (Chapter 25). However, in other situations, treatment
with low to moderate doses of an oral antipsychotic drug should be
started. In general, in patients presenting with a first episode of
psychosis, antipsychotic drug doses should be towards the lower end,
certainly at the initiation of treatment; for example, risperidone (1--4
mg/day), amisulpride (100-- 400 mg/day), or aripiprazole (5--20 mg/day).
It has been suggested that olanzapine should be avoided as a firstline
treatment in first episode psychosis because of its greater propensity
to cause metabolic syndrome (Dixon and Stroup, 2015); however, it is
widely used, and its sedative properties can be valuable in the acute
situation. As discussed earlier, the choice of drug should be based on
an understanding of their differences in likely side effect profile,
drug interactions, presence of any contraindications, and other clinical
considerations (see Chapter 25). Metabolic syndrome is prevalent even in
unmedicated first-episode psychosis, being present in about 10% of
patients (Mitchell et al., 2013). The rate rises significantly later in
the illness, presumably as a result of antipsychotic medication and
lifestyle factors (Vancampfort et al., 2013). Hence baseline examination
and investigations for metabolic syndrome (Chapter 25) should be carried
out before initiating antipsychotic medication and at recommended
intervals thereafter (Cooper et al., 2016). As soon as the patient's
mental state permits---and ideally before initiating antipsychotic
medication---it is essential to explain the need for drug treatment and
to obtain full consent, especially in view of the risk of serious and
long-term side effects. If the patient is judged to be unable to make
decisions of this nature, the appropriate legal safeguards under the
Mental Health Act and its code of practice should be employed. The
patient's family should be involved as far as possible in all decisions
about treatment as a matter of principle, and because they will have a
role in encouraging compliance. The use of patient advocates is also
helpful. In the early stages of treatment, the choice and timing of
doses should be adjusted if necessary from one

293

Management day to the next, until the most acute symptoms have been
brought under control. Thereafter, regular once- or twice-daily doses
are usually appropriate. It is important to be alert for acute dystonic
reactions in the early days of treatment. A careful watch should also be
kept for parkinsonian side effects as treatment progresses. For the
elderly or physically ill, observations of temperature and blood
pressure should be made to detect hypothermia or postural hypotension.
Although patients usually become rapidly more settled after starting
antipsychotic drugs, improvement in psychotic symptoms is usually
gradual, with full resolution taking a number of weeks. Current trends
are to maintain the dose of antipsychotic drugs at a modest steady level
and not to escalate the dose in the hope of speeding up the rate of
improvement. For patients in whom agitation and distress continue to
cause concern, (re)introduction of short-term intermittent treatment
with a benzodiazepine is a better option than increasing the dose of
antipsychotic. If there are doubts about whether the patient is
swallowing tablets, the drug can be given as syrup or as an orally
dispersible tablet. Short-acting depot preparations (of zuclopenthixol
acetate or olanzapine) are available, but are not recommended in
patients whose tolerance of antipsychotics has not been determined.
Anticholinergic drugs should be prescribed if extrapyramidal side
effects are troublesome, but should not be given routinely or for
sustained periods. As noted earlier, the acute symptoms of excitement,
restlessness, irritability, and insomnia can be expected to improve
rapidly after instituting treatment. Delusions, hallucinations, and
other psychotic symptoms also begin to respond during this time, with
improvement developing further over a period of several weeks. By the
time that meaningful symptomatic improvement has occurred, and prior to
discharge, the team should have formulated a provisional plan for
continuing care, based upon the social assessment that has been carried
out. In the UK, this will occur within the framework of the Care
Programme Approach (CPA).

Care plans and the Care Programme Approach Care plans are important
because of the need for coordinated multidisciplinary working, risk
management, and clear documentation of responsibilities for their
delivery. In the UK this responsibility has been formalized in the CPA
(see Chapter 26). CPA is particularly appropriate for those with
schizophrenia, who often require

complex and long-term support. The essential elements of a care plan are
to identify and record: â

A systematic assessment of health and social needs.

â

A treatment plan agreed by the relevant staff, the patient, and
relatives.

â

The allocation of a key worker whose task is to maintain contact with
patients, monitor their progress, and ensure that the treatment
programme is being delivered.

â

Regular review of patients' progress and needs.

Management after the acute episode Once the acute episode has settled,
the priorities for management are to maximize and maintain recovery.
This will usually require maintenance medication which, as noted
earlier, should normally continue for at least 1--2 years, and for
longer after a second or subsequent episode. For many patients, depot
injections are a helpful way to ensure adherence with medication (Box
11.21). The emphasis on medication in no way diminishes the importance
of multidisciplinary care in the longterm management of schizophrenia.
It is important to use medication as part of an integrated package of
care. This can involve supporting realistic structured activity, whether
it be attending a day centre, pursuing education, or seeking a job.
Advice should be given about avoiding obviously stressful events. CBT
and other psychological interventions should continue, or be
reconsidered if they have not previously been implemented. The patient
should be seen regularly as an outpatient or at home by a member of the
community mental health team (often a psychiatric nurse). The extent and
duration of ongoing care after an acute episode of schizophrenia depend
on the severity and nature of the residual symptoms and impairments. At
one extreme, following a single episode with excellent recovery,
medication and other interventions can gradually be tailed off, and the
patient returned to the care of the GP with a cautiously good prognosis.
At the other end of the spectrum, the patient whose schizophrenia proves
refractory to treatment requires longterm and intensive support. Between
these extremes lie the majority of patients, whose illness is relapsing
and remitting, who never return to their premorbid level of functioning,
and who have persistent difficulties or problems that need to be

293

294

294

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia â

Living accommodation and circumstances. Will the patient be able to live
alone or will they return to live with their parents or other relatives?
Will accommodation need to be arranged?

â

Occupational activities. Will the patient be able to undertake some form
of paid employment or voluntary work?

â

Activities of everyday living. Patients often need help to re-learn and
implement basic living skills such as cooking, budgeting, shopping,
housework, and personal hygiene.

â

If available, cognitive remediation, social skills training, or related
therapies mentioned earlier that are aimed at improving cognition and
social functioning.

â

Monitoring and management of any comorbid condition or substance misuse.

â

Monitoring and management of physical health problems.

â

Optimization of the efficacy and tolerability of medication, while
recognizing that any further response beyond that achieved earlier in
the illness is unlikely.

â

The family, and any other carers, must be fully supported, to help them
to understand the patient's illness, to have realistic expectations of
what the patient can accomplish, and to decrease their emotional
involvement where appropriate. Work of this nature can be undertaken by
community psychiatric nurses, social workers, psychiatrists, and GPs
working together. Support groups for families and carers are also
valuable. Specific interventions to help such carers have been trialled,
and the evidence suggests that both support and psychoeducation reduce
distress (Yesufu-Udechuku et al., 2015).

Box 11.21 Use of antipsychotic depot preparations For a number of
reasons, some patients do not take their drugs reliably, and in these
circumstances one of the intramuscular depot preparations may be useful.
At the start of treatment a small test dose is given to find out whether
serious side effects are likely to occur with the full dose, although
this is not considered necessary with atypical antipsychotic
preparations (Taylor et al., 2015). The appropriate maintenance dose is
then established by observation and careful followup. Since depot
preparations have long half-lives, it may take several weeks for maximum
plasma concentrations to be reached (see Table 25.4). This has
implications for the rate at which dose increases and decreases should
be made, and also for the tapering of doses of oral antipsychotic
medication once depot treatment has started. It should be noted that
treatment with olanzapine pamoate has been associated acutely with
excessive sedation, confusion, and sometimes coma. Although these
reactions are not common (they affect about 2% of patients) and full
recovery occurs within 24--72 hours, all patients receiving this
preparation require medical observation for at least 3 hours post
injection.

identified and managed. This group includes patients with prominent
negative symptoms, poor social adjustment, and cognitive and behavioural
deficits characteristic of chronic schizophrenia. In patients who fail
to return to their premorbid level of functioning and activities,
despite resolution of their positive symptoms, it is important to
consider the cause. For example, it may be due to negative symptoms,
depressive symptoms, cognitive impairments, or the side effects of
medication. If a cause is identified, appropriate action should be
taken; this may include interventions for depression, a change in
medication, or referral for psychological treatment. Despite the above
steps, the reality is that many patients progress to an illness state in
which few specific new treatment options remain. Once a clinical picture
of chronic schizophrenia has become established, the main emphasis is on
a programme of support, tailored to the needs of the individual patient.
An occupational therapist and clinical psychologist can make valuable
contributions. The following specific issues require attention.

Some patients with chronic schizophrenia understandably tend to withdraw
from treatment and follow-up. For those who are judged to be at
continuing risk of relapse, more assertive outreach (see Chapter 26) has
a useful role to play (Burns and Firn, 2016).

Treatment-resistant schizophrenia About one in three patients with
schizophrenia come into this category, also known as refractory
schizophrenia. For review, see Howes et al., (2017). Management is
particularly challenging because of the nature of the illness and the
lack of evidence-based treatment options other than clozapine. The use
of clozapine is hampered by the need for regular blood monitoring and
the risks of agranulocytosis, as well as by other serious side

295

Management effects, notably weight gain, sedation, and hypersalivation
(Chapter 25). Nevertheless, because of its efficacy, clozapine should be
recommended to all patients who do not respond to or cannot tolerate at
least two other antipsychotics. In practice, only a minority of suitable
patients have a trial of the drug, and often this does not occur until
many years into the illness. Assessment involves a detailed review of
the history and establishment of the current symptom profile (Box
11.22). It is also worth trying to establish that the patient is
refractory to treatment and not simply nonadherent; a recent study found
that half of patients considered treatment-resistant had low or
undetectable antipsychotic plasma levels (McCutcheon et al., 2015). The
use of clozapine in clinical practice requires skill and experience to
optimize adherence and efficacy, and to minimize and manage the common
side effects and the rare but serious adverse events (Mortimer, 2011).
Plasma levels are worth measuring if there are concerns about
non-response or non-compliance. A minimum trough level of 200 Î¼g/l
should be attained; higher levels, up to 500 Î¼g/l or more, may increase
response, but at the cost of more side effects. For practical advice on
clozapine use and monitoring, see Chapter 25 and Taylor et al.Â (2015).
Despite the focus on clozapine, management of refractory schizophrenia
should also pay due attention to optimizing all other aspects of care,
including physical

Box 11.22 Assessment of treatmentresistant schizophrenia Review
diagnosis (e.g.Â possibility of organic psychosis) Review comorbidities
(e.g.Â substance misuse, physical health) Review treatment history
(e.g.Â drugs, doses, psychological therapies) Rate current symptoms and
severity using established scales (e.g.Â BPRS, PANSS, CGI) Physical
examination (e.g.Â for metabolic syndrome) Discuss patient's views
regarding treatment Check for treatment adherence (e.g.Â drug levels)
Consider routine blood tests and further investigations (e.g.Â imaging)

health and psychosocial functioning, as described above for other
patients with chronic schizophrenia. For review of management of
refractory schizophrenia, see Beck et al.Â (2014).

Other aspects of management Early intervention As noted earlier in the
chapter, there is now a consensus that early treatment of schizophrenia
may improve the long-term prognosis, based on a number of lines of
evidence (PenttilÃ¤ et al., 2014). â

In conventional practice, patients have often been psychotic for many
months before the diagnosis is made and treatment is initiated. Patients
with a longer duration of untreated psychosis have a poorer longer-term
prognosis.

â

The treatment response becomes slower and less frequent during
subsequent psychotic episodes.

â

Much of the deterioration in social function takes place during the
first 2 years after diagnosis.

These observations imply that it may be worth attempting to identify
patients with psychosis as early as possible, so that effective
treatment can be instituted. Specific 'Early Intervention in Psychosis
Service' (EIS) teams were mandated in the UK in the 2000 NHS Plan, and
are endorsed in the current NICE guidelines (National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence, 2014a). These teams are described in
Chapter 26. Despite the widespread introduction of EIS teams, the
evidence that they are effective remains limited and actively debated.
There is no convincing evidence that early intervention reduces the
duration of untreated psychosis (Lloyd-Evans et al., 2011), and the
effectiveness, desirability, and cost-effectiveness of such
interventions remain controversial (Castle, 2012; McGorry, 2015). The
EIS approach has also been extended to trials of treatment in
individuals thought to be in the prodrome of illness but who do not have
overt psychotic symptoms, and even to those considered to be at
'ultra-high risk' of developing schizophrenia. There is some evidence
that low-dose medication and cognitive behavioural approaches may
decrease the conversion to psychosis, and in one study, omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids significantly reduced the risk of onset of
psychosis over the subsequent 6 years (Amminger et al., 2015). For
review, see Thompson et al., 2016).

295

296

296

Chapter 11 Schizophrenia

Substance misuse Schizophrenia patients who misuse drugs and alcohol are
now more the rule than the exception. They tend to have a worse
symptomatic course and to be more difficult to engage in treatment. In
addition, substance misuse is associated with increased risks of
homelessness, violent behaviour, poor general health, and a substantial
excess early mortality (Hjorthoj et al., 2015). Comprehensive outpatient
and assertive community programmes that address both substance misuse
and psychotic illness in an integrated way have been proposed for this
group, although evidence for their efficacy is limited. Antipsychotic
drugs, especially clozapine, show some efficacy in reducing cannabis use
(Wilson and Bhattacharyya, 2016).

The violent patient Overactivity and disturbances of behaviour are
common in schizophrenia, and although major violence towards others is
not common, it does occur. Using data linkage for the entire Swedish
population, Fazel et al.Â (2014a) found that 10.7% of male and 2.7% of
female schizophrenia patients were convicted of a violent offence within
5 years of diagnosis. Comorbid substance misuse is probably the main
factor implicated in the increased risk of violence (Fazel et al.,
2009a), but Fazel et al. (2014a), showed that this risk is reduced by
medication. However, patients with schizophrenia are much more at risk
of being victims of violence than of being perpetrators (Dean et al.,
2007). Careful follow-up and close community supervision may reduce the
likelihood of victimization. General management for the potentially
violent patient is the same as that for any other patient with
schizophrenia, although compulsory treatment is more likely to be
required. Much can be done by providing a calm, reassuring, and
consistent environment in which provocation is avoided. Threats of
violence should be taken seriously, especially if there is a history of
such behaviour, whether or not the patient was ill at the time. The
danger usually resolves as acute symptoms are brought under control, but
a few patients pose a continuing threat. In patients with persistent
hostility and violence, clozapine and paliperidone extended release were
highlighted as beneficial by a recent systematic review (Victoroff et
al., 2014).

The management of violence is considered further in Chapter 18.

Suicide risk We have already seen that the rate of suicide is markedly
increased in schizophrenia. As in other psychiatric disorders,
demographic risk factors apply, such as male gender, social isolation,
unemployment, and a previous episode of suicidal behaviour (Popovic et
al., 2014). Other risk factors include: â

comorbid depression and hopelessness

â

frequent exacerbations of psychosis

â

being in the early stage of the disorder

â

during hospitalization or shortly after discharge.

Patients with pronounced negative symptoms are less likely to make
suicide attempts. Although suicide may be associated with active
positive symptoms such as delusions of control or auditory
hallucinations, more often it occurs in those with previously high
levels of educational attainment who are relatively well at the time.
Such patients often have depressive symptoms in the context of high
premorbid expectations of themselves and dismay at how their illness has
damaged their future prospects. Lowering the risk of suicide in
schizophrenia involves being aware of and managing the relevant risk
factors, and treating depressive symptoms vigorously. Clozapine (Meltzer
et al., 2003) and antidepressants (Tiihonen et al., 2012) have been
associated with reduced suicide rates in schizophrenia.

Management of schizophrenia in children and adolescents There is
relatively little evidence to guide management in this population.
Guidelines agree that the same principles apply as to adults with
schizophrenia, but greater caution is advised concerning the use and
dosage of antipsychotic medication, with a correspondingly more
prominent role for psychological interventions (Stafford et al., 2015).
For review, see National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
(2013b), and also Chapter 16.

Management of schizophrenia in older patients See Chapter 19 and Cohen
CI et al.Â (2015).

279

Further reading

Discussing schizophrenia with patients and carers There is probably more
stigma and misunderstanding associated with schizophrenia than with any
other psychiatric diagnosis. It is therefore particularly important that
the term is used carefully and sensitively, and all patients and their
carers should have regular opportunities to ask questions, express their
views, and raise any concerns that they may have. The involvement of the
family in all decisions about treatment and management has already been
mentioned. There should be discussion about the nature of the illness,
identification of any misapprehensions, and an explanation of the
current meaning of the term schizophrenia. It is worth discussing what
is known about the aetiology, in part to ensure that misconceptions do
not lead to unnecessary guilt. For example, some parents worry,
incorrectly, that their behaviour may have caused the illness. Mention
of its heritability may lead to questions about the risks of
schizophrenia in other relatives or future generations. These can be
answered using the figures in Table 11.4, acknowledging the increased
risk while emphasizing the probability that offspring and unaffected
relatives will remain well. If, after discussion, the family continue to
have very different concepts of schizophrenia from those of the clinical
team, such views should be respected. The prospects for recovery should
be portrayed realistically but optimistically, given that some people
wrongly believe schizophrenia is untreatable and inevitably follows an
unremitting or deteriorating course. The key role of medication,
together with psychosocial factors (e.g.Â family environment, substance
misuse), in influencing outcome should be emphasized. Note that the
family may have very different views about the

meaning of recovery. The 'Recovery Approach' (sometimes referred to as
the 'Recovery Movement') has achieved considerable prominence and
influence in UK policy (Slade et al., 2014). Originating in the USA and
well established in New Zealand, it is a relatively loose collection of
ideas and principles that emphasize the priority of the patient's
aspirations and the goal of living life as fully as possible with the
illness. Recovery advocates often criticize psychiatrists for having too
pessimistic a view of the prognosis in schizophrenia, and insist on the
need for optimism. A further area in which there may be a difference in
emphasis between psychiatrist and carer or patient is the focus upon the
content rather than the nature of the patient's beliefs. That is, the
psychiatrist is usually more concerned as to whether a thought is or is
not delusional, or whether a perception is or is not a hallucination,
whereas patients wish to discuss the thought or percept itself and its
meaning for them. The psychiatrist should give the patient or carer
adequate time to voice these concerns, while also explaining why it is
necessary to ask detailed questions about the nature of the experiences.
Other than noting these broad themes, the psychiatrist must be prepared
to adapt to the circumstances of each case. As noted, the full
involvement of the patient and their carers should be an integral part
of the management of schizophrenia. It is reasonable to assume that
establishing and maintaining a genuine therapeutic alliance in this way
will increase the likelihood that the patient maintains contact with
psychiatric services, is adherent with treatment, and thereby has an
improved prognosis.

Further reading Bleuler E (1911). Dementia Praecox or the Group of
Schizophrenias (English edition 1950). International University Press,
New York. Kraepelin E (1919). Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia.
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.

Weinberger DR, Harrison PJ (2011). Schizophrenia, 3rd edn.
Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.

297

298

29

CHAPTER 12

Paranoid symptoms and syndromes Introduction 299

Specific delusional disorders 306

Paranoid symptoms 300

Assessment of paranoid symptoms 311

Paranoid personality disorder 301

Treatment of paranoid symptoms and

Paranoid symptoms in psychiatric disorders 302 Delusional disorders
(paranoid psychoses) 304

delusional disorder 311 Prognosis of delusional disorder 312

Introduction The term paranoid can be applied to symptoms, syndromes, or
personality types. Paranoid symptoms are overvalued ideas or delusions
that are most commonly persecutory, but not always so (see Box 1.4, page
12). Paranoid syndromes are those in which paranoid delusions form a
prominent part of a characteristic constellation of symptoms, such as
pathological jealousy or erotomania. In paranoid personality disorder,
there is excessive self-reference and undue sensitiveness to real or
imaginary humiliations and rebuffs, often combined with self-importance
and combativeness. Thus the term paranoid is descriptive; if we
recognize a symptom or syndrome as paranoid, this does not constitute
making a diagnosis, but it is a preliminary to doing so. In this respect
it is like recognizing stupor or depersonalization. Paranoid syndromes
present considerable problems of classification and diagnosis. The
difficulties can be reduced by dividing them into two distinct groups: â

Paranoid symptoms occurring as part of another psychiatric disorder,
such as schizophrenia, mood disorder, or an organic mental disorder.

â

Paranoid symptoms occurring without evidence for any underlying
disorder. This group of disorders has gone by a variety of names,
commonly paranoid states or paranoid psychosis, but the ICD-10 and DSM-5
category is delusional disorder. It is this second group that has caused
persistent difficulties in several respects---for example, regarding
their terminology, their relationship to schizophrenia, and their
forensic implications.

This chapter begins with definitions of the common paranoid symptoms,
expanding upon their descriptions in Chapter 1, and then reviews the
causes of such symptoms. Next there is a short account of paranoid
personality. This is followed by a discussion of primary psychiatric
disorders with which paranoid symptoms are frequently associated, and
the differentiation of these disorders from delusional disorders. The
general features of delusional disorder and its major subtypes are then
reviewed. A historical perspective is also given, with particular
reference to paranoia and paraphrenia. The chapter ends with a summary
of the assessment and treatment of patients with paranoid symptoms.

30

300

Chapter 12 Paranoid symptoms and syndromes

Paranoid symptoms Although the vast majority of paranoid delusions are
persecutory, the term is also applied to the less common delusions of
grandeur and jealousy, and sometimes to delusions concerning love,
litigation, or religion. It may seem puzzling that such varied delusions
should be grouped together. The reason is that the central abnormality
implied by the term paranoid is a morbid distortion of beliefs or
attitudes concerning relationships between oneself and other people. If
someone believes falsely or on inadequate grounds that he is being
victimized, or exalted, or deceived, or loved by a famous person, then
in each case he is construing the relationship between himself and other
people in a morbidly distorted way. The varieties of paranoid symptom
were discussed in Chapter 1, but important ones are also outlined in Box
12.1 for convenience. The definitions are derived from the glossary to
the Present State Examination (see page 66; Wing et al., 1974).

Causes of paranoid symptoms When paranoid symptoms occur as part of
another psychiatric disorder, the main aetiological factors are those
that determine the primary illness. However, the question still arises
as to why some people develop paranoid symptoms, while others do not.
This has usually been answered in terms of premorbid personality and
social isolation.

Premorbid personality Many writers, including Kraepelin, have held that
paranoid symptoms are most likely to occur in patients with premorbid
personalities of a paranoid type (see next section). Kretschmer (1927)
also believed this, and thought that such people developed sensitive
delusions of reference ('sensitive Beziehungswahn') as an understandable
psychological reaction to a precipitating event. Subsequent studies of
so-called late-onset paraphrenia have supported

Box 12.1 Some paranoid symptoms Ideas of reference

Delusions of persecution

Ideas of reference are held by people who are unduly selfconscious. The
subject cannot help feeling that people take notice of him in buses,
restaurants, or other public places, and that they observe things about
him that he would prefer not to be seen. He realizes that this feeling
originates within himself and that he is no more noticed than other
people, but all the same he cannot help the feeling, which is quite out
of proportion to any possible cause.

When a person has delusions of persecution he believes that a person,
organization, or power is trying to kill him, harm him in some way, or
damage his reputation. The symptom may take many forms, ranging from the
direct belief that he is being hunted down by specific people, to
complex, bizarre, and impossible plots.

Delusions of reference Delusions of reference consist of an elaboration
of ideas of reference, to the point that the beliefs become delusional.
The whole neighbourhood may seem to be gossiping about the subject, far
beyond the bounds of possibility, or he may see references to himself in
the media. He may hear someone on the radio say something connected with
a topic he has just been thinking about, or he may seem to be followed,
his movements observed, and what he says recorded. The importance of
distinguishing a delusion of reference from an idea of reference is that
the former is a symptom of psychosis.

Delusions of grandeur These may be divided into delusions of grandiose
ability and delusions of grandiose identity. The subject with delusions
of grandiose ability thinks that he is chosen by some power, or by
destiny, for a special purpose because of his unusual talents. He may
think that he is able to read people's thoughts, is much cleverer than
anyone else, or has invented machines or solved mathematical problems
beyond most people's comprehension. The subject with delusions of
grandiose identity believes that he is famous, rich, titled, or related
to prominent people. He may believe that he is a changeling and that his
real parents are royalty.

301

Paranoid personality disorder these views (see Box 12.2). Thus Kay and
Roth (1961) found paranoid or hypersensitive personalities in over half
of a group of 99 subjects with late-onset paraphrenia. Freud proposed
that, in predisposed individuals, paranoid symptoms could arise through
a convoluted process involving the defence mechanisms of denial and
projection, based upon his study of Daniel Schreber, the presiding judge
of the Dresden Appeal Court. Freud never met Schreber, but read the
latter's autobiographical account of his paranoid illness (now generally
accepted as being paranoid schizophrenia), together with a report by
Weber, the physician in charge. Freud speculated that Schreber could not
consciously admit his homosexuality, and projected his unacceptable
desires ('I do not love him, he loves me') and then inverted this with
another denial ('he does not love me, he hates me'). This configuration
was abandoned fairly early on, and never had much clinical support.

Social isolation and deafness Social isolation may also predispose to
the emergence of paranoid symptoms. Prisoners (especially those

in solitary confinement) and migrants have been considered to be prone
to paranoid symptoms and syndromes, with social isolation being the
common factor. However, there are no data that unambiguously support
this view, and there are some which suggest other explanations. For
example, the association between migration and psychosis is better
explained in terms of broader psychosocial factors or marginalization,
rather than just isolation (Singh and Burns, 2006; see also Chapter 11).
There is better evidence that the social isolation produced by deafness
increases the risk of paranoid symptoms, as originally noted by
Kraepelin. For example, Kay and Roth (1961) found hearing impairment in
40% of patients with late-onset paraphrenia. Subsequent studies have
confirmed that hearing impairment is a risk factor for disorders in
which paranoid symptoms occur, especially in the elderly (David et al.,
1995). However, it should be remembered that the great majority of deaf
people do not become paranoid, and that many deaf people are not
socially isolated.

Paranoid personality disorder The concept of personality disorder is
discussedin Chapter 15, and paranoid personality disorder is also
briefly described there. It is characterized by the following: â

extreme sensitivity to setbacks and rebuffs

â

suspiciousness

â

a tendency to misconstrue the actions of others as hostile or
contemptuous

â

a combative and inappropriate sense of personal rights.

This definition embraces a wide range of types. At one extreme is the
excessively sensitive young person who shrinks from social encounters
and thinks that everyone disapproves of him. At the other is the
assertive and challenging woman who flares up at the least provocation.
An American study found a 4.4% prevalence of paranoid personality
disorder, which is higher than previous estimates; the study also showed
that the disorder

had a significant impact on social and role functioning (Grant et al.,
2004). Because of the implications for treatment, it is important to
distinguish paranoid personality disorder from the delusional disorders
to be described later. The distinction can be very difficult to make,
and is based on the fact that in paranoid personality disorder there are
no delusions (only overvalued ideas), and no hallucinations.
Considerable skill is needed to separate paranoid ideas from delusions.
The criteria for doing so were given in Chapter 1, and exemplified by
the comparison between ideas of reference and delusions of reference
(Box 12.1). In reality, the conditions probably lie along a continuum.
Thus family studies indicate a genetic relationship between paranoid
personality disorder and delusional disorder, and individuals with
paranoid personality traits are at increased risk of developing
delusional disorder. For review of paranoid personality disorder and its
management, see Carroll (2009) and Triebwasser et al.Â (2013).

301

302

302

Chapter 12 Paranoid symptoms and syndromes

Paranoid symptoms in psychiatric disorders Paranoid symptoms are often
secondary to a primary psychiatric disorder. Thus when paranoid
symptoms, especially persecutory delusions, are elicited it is important
to assess for the other features of these disorders. The diagnosis of
delusional disorder, to be considered below, is in many respects a
'residual' category, used for patients whose delusions cannot be
attributed to one of these other conditions. As the primary disorders
are described at length in other chapters, they will be mentioned only
briefly here.

Paranoid symptoms in organic disorders It is important to consider an
organic aetiology for paranoid symptoms, especially in the elderly or in
cases where there is other evidence for a medical illness. In such
situations, paranoid symptoms are likely to be a feature of delirium.
Impaired grasp of what is going on around the patient may give rise to
apprehension and misinterpretation, and so to suspicion. Delusions may
then emerge, which are usually transient and disorganized; these may
lead to disturbed behaviour, such as querulousness or aggression.
Similarly, persecutory delusions commonly occur at some stage in
dementia, and are occasionally the presenting feature. Paranoid symptoms
and delusional disorders may occur with focal brain lesions of various
causes, including tumour, stroke, and trauma. Some examples are given
later in this chapter when the specific delusional disorders are
considered. Finally, paranoid symptoms can occur in learning disability
and other neurodevelopmental disorders.

Paranoid symptoms in substance misuse disorders Paranoid symptoms occur
in many substance misuse disorders, especially those associated with
amphetamines,

cocaine, and alcohol. An important example is the association between
alcohol misuse and morbid jealousy, described below. Some therapeutic
drugs can also precipitate paranoid symptoms, such as l-DOPA.

Paranoid symptoms in mood disorders Paranoid symptoms are not uncommon
in patients with severe depressive disorders, and paranoid delusions are
a feature of psychotic depression. Conversely, depressive symptoms often
occur in delusional disorders, although the diagnostic criteria for the
latter require that their total duration is relatively brief (see Box
12.3). In practice, it is sometimes difficult to determine whether the
paranoid symptoms are secondary to depressive disorder, or vice versa,
as both scenarios are common. The distinction is of some importance, as
the two disorders differ with regard to treatment and prognosis. A
depressive disorder is likely if the mood changes have occurred earlier
and are of greater intensity than the paranoid features. Previous
psychiatric history and family history may also be useful pointers.
Finally, in depressive disorder the patient typically accepts the
persecution as justified by their own guilt or wickedness. This is a
useful point clinically, as it contrasts with non-affective psychoses,
in which such persecutions are bitterly resented. Paranoid symptoms also
occur in mania, and are typically mood-congruent and thus grandiose
rather than persecutory.

Paranoid symptoms and paranoid schizophrenia Paranoid schizophrenia was
described in Chapter 11. Its distinction from delusional disorders has
been problematic, both conceptually and practically (see Box 12.2;
Opjordsmoen, 2014). A relatively large recent study

Box 12.2 Historical background: paranoia and paraphrenia The terms
paranoia and paraphrenia have played a prominent part in psychiatric
thought. Although the classic studies are now several decades old, much
can still be learned from reviewing the issues and the conceptual
difficulties involved. The term paranoia, from which the adjective
paranoid is derived, has a long and chequered history. It has probably
given rise to more controversy and confusion of thought than any other
term used in psychiatry. A comprehensive

review of the large body of literature, which is mostly German and from
the period before the 1970s, has been provided by Lewis (1970) (see also
Box 1.4). The word is derived from the Greek para (beside) and nous
(mind). It was used in ancient Greek literature to mean 'out of mind'
(i.e.Â of unsound mind or insane). This broad usage was revived in the
eighteenth century, but when it came into prominence in the second half
of the nineteenth century, in German psychiatry, it became particularly
associated

30

Paranoid symptoms in psychiatric disorders

with conditions characterized by delusions of persecution and grandeur.
The German term Verrucktheit was often applied to these conditions, but
was eventually superseded by paranoia. There were many different
conceptions of these disorders. The main issues, most of which remain
today, can be summarized as follows. â Did these conditions constitute a
primary disorder, or were they secondary to another disorder? â Did they
persist unchanged for many years, or were they a stage in an illness
which later manifested deterioration of intellect and personality? â Did
they sometimes occur in the absence of hallucinations? â Were there
forms with a good prognosis? Kahlbaum raised these issues as early as
1863, when he classified paranoia as an independent primary condition
which would remain unchanged over the years. Kraepelin had a strong
influence on the conceptual history of paranoia, although he was never
comfortable with the term, and his views changed strikingly over the
years. In 1896 he used the term only for incurable, chronic, and
systematized delusions without severe personality disorder. In the sixth
edition of his textbook he wrote: The delusions in dementia praecox
\[schizophrenia\] are extremely fantastic, changing beyond all reason,
with an absence of system and a failure to harmonize them with events of
their past life; while in paranoia the delusions are largely confined to
morbid interpretations of real events, are woven together into a
coherent whole, gradually becoming extended to include even events of
recent date, and contradictions and objects are apprehended and
explained. (Kraepelin, 1904, p.Â 199)

In later descriptions, Kraepelin (1919) used the distinction made by
Jaspers (1913) between personality development and disease process. He
proposed paranoia as an example of the former, in contrast to the
disease process of dementia praecox. In his final account, Kraepelin
(1919) developed these ideas by distinguishing between dementia praecox,
paranoia, and a third paranoid psychosis, namely paraphrenia. He made
the following suggestions: Dementia praecox had an early onset and a
poor outcome, ending in mental deterioration, and was fundamentally a
disturbance of affect and volition. â Paranoia was restricted to
patients with late onset of completely systematized delusions and a
prolonged course, usually without recovery, but not inevitably
deteriorating. An important point was that the patient did not have
hallucinations. â Paraphrenia was somewhat intermediary, in that the
patient had unremitting systematized delusions but did not progress to
dementia. The main difference from paranoia was that the patient with
paraphrenia had hallucinations. â

Bleuler's concept of the paranoid form of dementia praecox (which he
later called paranoid schizophrenia) was broader than that of Kraepelin
(Bleuler, 1906, 1911). Bleuler did not regard paraphrenia as a separate
condition, but as part of dementia praecox. However, he accepted
Kraepelin's view of paranoia as a separate entity, although he differed
from Kraepelin in maintaining that hallucinations could occur in many
cases. Bleuler was particularly interested in the psychological
development of paranoia; at the same time he left open the question of
whether paranoia had a somatic pathology. From this time, two views of
paranoia predominated. The first was that paranoia was distinct from
schizophrenia and psychogenic in origin. The second view was that
paranoia was part of schizophrenia. Some celebrated studies of
individual cases appeared to support the first theme. For example, Gaupp
(1974) made an intensive study of the diaries and mental state of the
mass murderer Ernst Wagner, who murdered his wife, four children, and
eight other people as part of a careful plan to revenge himself on his
supposed enemies. Gaupp concluded that Wagner suffered from paranoia in
the sense described by Kraepelin. At the same time, he believed that
Wagner's first recognizable delusions developed as a psychogenic
reaction. The most detailed argument for psychogenesis was put forward
by Kretschmer (1927) in his monograph Der Sensitive Beziehungswahn.
Kretschmer believed that paranoia should not be regarded as a disease,
but as a psychogenic reaction occurring in people with particularly
sensitive personalities. However, many of Kretschmer's cases would
nowadays be classified as schizophrenia. In 1931, Kolle put forward
evidence for the second view, that paranoia is part of schizophrenia. He
analysed a series of 66 patients with so-called paranoia, including
those diagnosed by Kraepelin in his Munich clinic. For several reasons,
both symptomatic and genetic, Kolle came to the conclusion that paranoia
was really a mild form of schizophrenia. Considerably less has been
written about paraphrenia. However, it is interesting that 50 of
Kraepelin's series of 78 paraphrenic patients later developed
schizophrenia. Indeed, paraphrenia has increasingly been regarded as
late-onset schizophrenia or schizophrenia-like disorder of good
prognosis. Kay and Roth (1961) used the term 'late paraphrenia' to
denote paranoid conditions in the elderly that were not due to primary
organic or affective illnesses. These authors found that a large
majority of their 99 patients had the characteristic features of
schizophrenia. In current classifications, the term paranoia has, in
effect, been replaced by delusional disorder. Paraphrenia does not
feature either, but it continues to be used clinically to describe
chronic, atypical, paranoid psychoses of middle and late life.

303

304

304

Chapter 12 Paranoid symptoms and syndromes emphasized a number of ways
in which delusional disorder differed from paranoid schizophrenia,
including a later age of onset and better premorbid adjustment and
overall functioning, but more severe delusions, and poorer response to
antipsychotic medication (Peralta and Cuesta, 2016). When diagnosing an
individual case, it is useful also to focus on the differences in the
core features of delusional disordere compared to paranoid
schizophrenia: â

â

The diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia is suggested if the delusions
are particularly odd in content (often referred to by psychiatrists as
bizarre delusions), whereas the delusional themes are more 'plausible'
in delusional disorder. Criterion A of the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria
for delusional disorder specified that the delusions were non-bizarre.
However, because of the poor reliability of this distinction, the
specifier was removed in DSM-5 (Cermolacce et al., 2010). Neither is it
included in ICD-10. In schizophrenia, delusions tend to be fragmented
and multiple, whereas in delusional disorder they are

systematized and based around a single, internally consistent theme. In
delusional disorder, the delusional system is also characteristically
encapsulated, such that the rest of the mental state can appear
remarkably normal, in contrast to schizophrenia. â

Patients with paranoid schizophrenia often have auditory hallucinations,
and the content of these appears to be unrelated to their delusions. In
delusional disorder, hallucinations are very rare, and when they do
occur they are fleeting and clearly related to the delusions.

Paranoid symptoms in schizophrenia-like syndromes Paranoid symptoms are
features of several schizophrenialike syndromes, which were discussed in
Chapter 11. These include the DSM-5 categories of brief psychotic
disorders and schizophreniform disorder, and the ICD10 categories
grouped under the heading 'Acute and transient psychotic disorders'.

Delusional disorders (paranoid psychoses) As mentioned in the
introduction, the terminology and classification of psychoses which are
neither affective, organic, nor schizophrenia have been disputed for
many years. Box 12.2 summarizes the main historical terms and themes,
and provides the backdrop to the way in which the disorders are
currently categorized. In this section, the core features of delusional
disorders---the current terminology for these conditions---are
described. The specific types of delusional disorder are covered in the
following section.

Classification of delusional disorder DSM-5 uses the term delusional
disorder to describe a disorder with one or more persistent delusions
that is not due to any other disorder. It is synonymous with the widely
used term paranoid psychosis, and includes the non-specific term
paranoid states. ICD-10 has a similar category of persistent delusional
disorders. The essence of the modern concept of delusional disorder is
that of a stable delusional system that develops insidiously in a person
in middle or late life. The delusional system is encapsulated, and there
is no impairment of other

mental functions. The patient can often continue working, and his social
life may be maintained fairly well. The criteria for delusional disorder
in DSM-5 are summarized in Box 12.3, with the subsequent description of
five specific subtypes of delusional disorder and two other categories:
â

persecutory

â

jealous

â

erotomanic

â

somatic

â

grandiose

â

mixed

â

unspecified.

Of these, persecutory is much the commonest subtype. ICD-10 gives a
similar definition for the principal category (F22.0) of persistent
delusional disorders. Unlike DSM-5, the symptoms must have been present
for at least 3 months. ICD-10 also includes litigious and
self-referential subtypes, and has a separate subcategory (F22.8) of
'other persistent delusional disorders'. The latter includes delusional
dysmorphophobia, whereas DSM-5 groups all types of body dysmorphic

305

Delusional disorders (paranoid psychoses)

Box 12.3 DSM-5 criteria for delusional disorder A. One or more
delusions, of at least 1 month's duration. B. Criterion A for
schizophrenia has never been met. Hallucinations, if present, are not
prominent, and are related to the delusional theme. C. Apart from the
impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning is not
markedly impaired and behaviour is not obviously odd or bizarre. D. The
total duration of any mood episodes has been brief relative to the
duration of the delusional periods. E. The disturbance is not due to the
direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g.Â a drug of abuse, a
medication) or a general medical condition. Source: data from Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright
(2013), American Psychiatric Association.

disorder together within the category of obsessive-- compulsive
disorders (Phillips et al., 2006). For review of delusional disorder,
see Munro (2009).

Epidemiology of delusional disorder Delusional disorder is regarded as
being an uncommon illness, although there are relatively few data.
Kendler (1982) reviewed the literature and reported an incidence of 1--3
per 100,000 per year, with delusional disorder constituting 1--4% of all
psychiatric admissions. In a large population survey, delusional
disorder had a lifetime prevalence of 0.18% (Peraala et al., 2007). In a
large case series, the mean age of onset of delusional disorder was 46
years, and the diagnosis remained stable over a 10-year period, with
only 21% being rediagnosed with schizophrenia (Marneros et al., 2012).
Significant depressive symptoms are common in delusional disorder (note
category D in Box 12.3; Peralta and Cuesta 2016)

Aetiology of delusional disorder What little is known about the
aetiology of delusional disorder is based upon its relationship to, and
comparison with, schizophrenia, paranoid personality disorder,

and depressive disorder (Kendler, 1982). This question has been
addressed by family and neurobiological studies. However, the relatively
small sample sizes and varying diagnostic definitions mean that few
conclusions can be drawn. Psychological explanations for delusional
disorder centre upon the delusions themselves (see Garety and Freeman,
2013).

Family studies of delusional disorder First-degree relatives of patients
with delusional disorder have an increased incidence of paranoid
personality disorder (Kendler et al., 1985). The familial relationship
of delusional disorder to schizophrenia is less clear. Although the risk
of delusional disorder is increased in first-degree relatives of
patients with schizophrenia, relatives of patients with delusional
disorder do not have an increased risk of schizophrenia or schizotypal
personality (Kendler et al., 1995; Kendler and Walsh, 1995; Tienari et
al., 2003). This familial association pattern has been called asymmetric
coaggregation, and may be because of a number of factors: â

Differences in the incidence rates of the two disorders in the general
population.

â

Differences in the diagnostic error rate between probands and relatives
(probands are usually subject to more intensive assessment).

â

A higher genetic loading for severe illness in those who come to medical
attention (and are therefore assessed as probands).

Overall, there appears to be a weak genetic link between delusional
disorder and, on the one hand, schizophrenia, and on the other, paranoid
personality disorder. However, the extent of this overlap is unclear,
and no individual loci or genes associated with delusional disorder have
been identified. There is also a familial clustering of delusional
disorder and alcoholism (Kendler and Walsh, 1995), which could
contribute to the association between morbid jealousy and alcohol misuse
(see page 306).

Neurobiological studies Very little is known regarding biological
correlates of delusional disorder, nor the extent to which they overlap
with or differ from schizophrenia. One MRI study reported that elderly
patients with delusional disorder have enlarged cerebral ventricles
(Howard et al., 1995). A recent study of younger patients with
delusional disorder found alterations in brain activation and cortical
thickness, especially in the insula and cingulate cortex (Vicens et al.,
2016).

305

306

306

Chapter 12 Paranoid symptoms and syndromes

Specific delusional disorders As noted above, specific subtypes of
delusional disorder are recognized, on the basis of the content of the
predominant delusion(s) (see Box 12.4). Historically, these symptoms
have been of particular interest to French psychiatrists. Classification
in this area is confusing for two reasons. â

Some of the disorders are often referred to by older, eponymous, terms,
or by categories that are not included in ICD-10 or DSM-5 but which
remain in common usage.

â

Some of the syndromes can be viewed as symptoms (e.g.Â delusional
misidentification), or can occur secondary to other psychiatric
disorders.

In this section we also consider stalking and persistent litigants, as
both behaviours may be secondary to delusional disorder.

Pathological jealousy Pathological or morbid jealousy (other synonyms
are listed in Box 12.4) will be described first and in most detail as it
is the archetypal delusional disorder; it is also the commonest (other
than 'persecutory delusional disorder', not otherwise specified) and,
importantly, appears to carry the greatest risk of dangerousness. The
essential feature is an abnormal belief that the patient's partner is
being unfaithful. The condition is termed pathological because the
belief, which may be a delusion or an overvalued idea, is held on
inadequate grounds and is unaffected by rational argument. The belief is
often accompanied by strong emotions and characteristic behaviour, but
these do not in themselves constitute pathological jealousy. A man who
finds his wife in bed with a lover may experience extreme jealousy and
may behave in an uncontrolled way, but this should not be called
pathological jealousy. The term should be used only when the jealousy is
based on unsound evidence and reasoning. The main sources of information
about pathological jealousy come from the classic paper by Shepherd
(1961), and from surveys by Langfeldt (1961), Vauhkonen (1968), and
Mullen and Maack (1985). Shepherd examined the hospital case notes of 81
patients in London, and Langfeldt did the same for 66 patients in
Norway. Vauhkonen conducted an interview study of 55 patients in
Finland, and Mullen and Maack examined the hospital case notes of 138
patients.

Pathological jealousy is more common in men, with the surveys mentioned
above finding that about two men were affected for every woman. The
frequency of the condition in the general population is unknown, but it
is not uncommon in psychiatric practice. Each case merits careful
attention, not only because of the great distress that the condition
causes within relationships, but also because these individuals may be
highly dangerous.

Clinical features of pathological jealousy As indicated above, the main
feature is an abnormal belief in the partner's infidelity. This may be
accompanied by other abnormal beliefs---for example, that the partner is
plotting against the patient, trying to poison him, taking away his
sexual capacities, or infecting him with venereal disease. The mood of
the pathologically jealous patient may vary with the underlying
disorder, but often it is a mixture of misery, apprehension,
irritability, and anger. Typically, the behaviour involves an intensive
search for evidence of the partner's infidelity---for example, by

Box 12.4 Types of delusional disorder Type

Synonymous with, or includes

Jealous

Morbid jealousy, pathological jealousy, erotic jealousy, sexual
jealousy, Othello syndrome

Erotic

Erotomania, De ClÃ¨rambault's syndrome

Somatic

Monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis, delusional body dysmorphic
disorder

Querulous

Persecutory

Shared

Induced delusional disorder, folie Ã  deux, communicated insanity

Other

Delusional misidentification syndrome, Capgras syndrome, Fregoli
delusion, intermetamorphosis, syndrome of subjective doubles

370

Specific delusional disorders looking through diaries and by examining
bed linen and underwear. The patient may follow the partner about, or
engage a private detective. The jealous person often cross-questions the
partner incessantly. This may lead to violent quarrelling and paroxysms
of rage in the patient. Sometimes the partner becomes exasperated and
worn out, and is finally goaded into making a false confession. If this
happens, the jealousy is inflamed rather than assuaged. An interesting
feature is that the jealous person often has no idea who the supposed
lover may be, or what kind of person they may be. Moreover, he may avoid
taking steps that could produce unequivocal proof one way or the other.
Behaviour may be strikingly abnormal. A successful city businessman
carried a briefcase that contained not only his financial documents but
also a machete for use against any lover who might be detected. A
carpenter installed an elaborate system of mirrors in his house so that
he could watch his wife from another room. A third patient avoided
waiting alongside another car at traffic lights, in case his wife, who
was sitting in the passenger seat, might surreptitiously make an
assignation with the other driver.

Aetiology of pathological jealousy Pathological jealousy, like other
paranoid symptoms and syndromes, can occur in a range of primary
disorders (see Box 12.5). In the surveys mentioned, the frequencies of
disorders varied, probably reflecting the population studied and the
diagnostic scheme used. For example, paranoid schizophrenia was reported
in 17-- 44% of patients, depressive disorder in 3--16%, neurosis and
personality disorder in 38--57%, alcoholism in 5--7%, and organic
disorders in 6--20%. The role of personality in the genesis of
pathological jealousy should be emphasized. It is often found that the
patient has a pervasive sense of inadequacy, together with low
self-esteem. There is a discrepancy

Box 12.5 Disorders associated with pathological jealousy Schizophrenia
Mood disorder Organic disorder Substance misuse (especially alcohol)
Paranoid personality disorder

between his ambitions and his attainments. Such a personality is
particularly vulnerable to anything that may threaten this sense of
inadequacy, such as loss of status or development of sexual dysfunction.
In the face of such threats the person may project the blame on to
others, and this may take the form of jealous accusations of infidelity.
As mentioned earlier, Freud believed that unconscious homosexual urges
played a part in all jealousy, but clinical studies do not support an
association between homosexuality and pathological jealousy. Similarly,
although pathological jealousy has sometimes been attributed to the
onset of sexual difficulties, there is no good evidence of such an
association.

Prognosis of pathological jealousy Little is known about the prognosis
of pathological jealousy. It probably depends on a number of factors,
including the nature of any underlying psychiatric disorder and the
patient's premorbid personality. When Langfeldt (1961) followed up 27 of
his patients after 17 years, he found that over 50% of them still had
persistent or recurrent jealousy. This confirms a general clinical
impression that the prognosis is often poor.

Risk of violence Although there are no reliable estimates of the risks
of violence, there is no doubt that people with pathological jealousy
can be dangerous (Silva et al., 1998). In addition to homicide, the risk
of physical injury inflicted by jealous patients is considerable. In one
series, around 25% had threatened to kill or injure their partner, and
56% of men and 43% of women had been violent towards or threatened the
supposed rival (Mullen and Maack, 1985). Schanda et al.Â (2004), studying
convicted murderers in Austria, found that delusional disorder (subtype
not specified) is associated with homicide, with an odds ratio of 6.
There is also a risk of suicide, particularly when an accused partner
finally decides to end the relationship.

Assessment of pathological jealousy The assessment of a patient with
pathological jealousy should be particularly thorough, and should always
include the partner, who should be interviewed separately whenever
possible. The partner may give a much more detailed account of the
patient's morbid beliefs and actions than can be elicited from the
patient. The doctor should try to find out tactfully how firmly the
patient believes in the

307

308

308

Chapter 12 Paranoid symptoms and syndromes partner's infidelity, how
much resentment he feels, and whether he has contemplated any vengeful
action. What factors provoke outbursts of accusations and questioning?
How does the partner respond to such outbursts? How does the patient
respond in turn to the partner's behaviour? Has there been any violence
so far? Has there been any serious injury? In addition to these
enquiries, the doctor should take a detailed relationship and sexual
history from both partners, and assess for underlying psychiatric
disorder, as this will have implications for treatment.

Treatment of pathological jealousy The treatment of pathological
jealousy, as with other delusional disorders, is in principle fairly
straightforward, the mainstay being antipsychotic drugs, but in practice
can be very difficult because of the patient's lack of insight and their
reluctance to collaborate with the treatment plan. Furthermore, there is
a lack of randomized evidence. Adequate treatment of any associated
disorder, such as schizophrenia or a mood disorder, is a first
requisite. If alcohol or other substance misuse is present, specific
treatment will be needed. In other cases the pathological jealousy may
be the symptom of a delusional disorder, or an overvalued idea in a
patient with low self-esteem and personality difficulties. If the
jealousy appears to be delusional in nature, a careful trial of an
antipsychotic drug is worthwhile, although the results are often
disappointing. As noted above, even when depressive disorder is not the
primary diagnosis, it frequently complicates pathological jealousy and
may worsen it. Treatment with an antidepressant may help in these
circumstances, and also when the jealousy appears to be an overvalued
idea rather than a delusion. Psychotherapy may be attempted in cases
where the jealousy appears to arise from personality problems. One aim
is to reduce tensions by allowing the patient (and their partner) to
ventilate their feelings. Behavioural methods include encouraging the
partner to produce behaviour that reduces jealousy; for example, by
refusal to argue, depending on the individual case. A study of the use
of cognitive therapy, in which patients were encouraged to identify
faulty assumptions and were taught strategies of emotional control, gave
superior results compared with a waiting list control group (Dolan and
Bishay, 1996). If there is no response to outpatient treatment, or if
the risk of violence is high, inpatient care may be

necessary. Not uncommonly, however, the patient appears to improve as an
inpatient, only to relapse on discharge. If there appears to be a risk
of violence, the doctor should warn the partner, even if this involves a
breach of confidentiality. In some cases the safest procedure is to
advise separation. It is not uncommon for feelings of pathological
jealousy to wane once a relationship has ended. Sometimes, however, the
problem re-emerges if the patient enters a new relationship.

Erotomania and erotic delusions Erotic delusions can occur in any
psychotic disorder, especially paranoid schizophrenia, but they are the
predominant and persistent symptom in a form of delusional disorder
called erotomania. It was a French psychiatrist, De ClÃ©rambault, who in
1921 proposed that a distinction should be made between paranoid
delusions and delusions of passion. The latter differed in their
pathogenesis and in being accompanied by excitement. This distinction is
of historical interest only, but the syndrome is still sometimes known
as De ClÃ©rambault's syndrome. Erotomania is rare and occurs almost
entirely in women, though Taylor et al.Â (1983) reported four cases in a
series of 112 men charged with violent offences. The woman, who is
usually single, believes that an exalted person is in love with her. The
supposed lover is usually inaccessible, as he is already married, or is
a famous person. According to De ClÃ©rambault, the infatuated woman
believes that it is the supposed lover who first fell in love with her,
and that he is more in love with her than she is with him. She derives
satisfaction and pride from this belief. She is convinced that the
supposed lover cannot be a happy or complete person without her. The
patient often believes that the supposed lover is unable to reveal his
love for various unexplained reasons, and that he has difficulties in
approaching her, has indirect conversations with her, and has to behave
in a paradoxical and contradictory way. The woman may cause considerable
nuisance to the supposed lover. She may be extremely tenacious and
impervious to reality. Other patients turn from a delusion of love to a
delusion of persecution, become abusive, and make public complaints
about the supposed lover. This was described by De ClÃ©rambault as two
phases---hope followed by resentment. There are few data regarding the
treatment and outcome of erotomania. For review see Seeman (2016). For a
review of the concept of erotomania, see Berrios and Kennedy (2002).

309

Specific delusional disorders

Stalking A proportion of 'stalkers' appear to suffer from delusional
disorders, including erotomania, which is why the topic is mentioned
here. There is no clear consensus about the definition of stalking. Most
formulations contain the following elements: â

a pattern of intrusive behaviour

â

the intrusive behaviour is associated with implicit or explicit threats

â

the person being stalked experiences fear and distress.

Stalkers typically follow their victims around and loiter outside their
house or place of work. Unwanted communications by telephone, letter, or
graffiti, and, in more recent times, by email or social media, are very
common. Behaviour can then become more threatening, with hoax
advertisements or orders for services, scandalous rumour mongering,
damage to the victim's property, threats of violence, and actual
assault. Stalkers are a heterogeneous group with differing underlying
psychopathologies (Dressing et al., 2006). Some, usually women, have
erotomania or erotic delusions secondary to other psychotic disorders.
More commonly, stalkers suffer from a personality disorder,
predominantly with borderline, narcissistic, and sociopathic traits.
They have often had a relationship with their victim that may have been
quite superficial; in other cases, however, a serious relationship has
cooled. A previous history of domestic violence in the relationship puts
the victim at particularly high risk of assault and injury. Whether or
not the victim suffers actual assault, they invariably experience severe
psychological stress, which can lead to anxiety and mood disorders and
post-traumatic stress disorder. Risk assessment is important (Mullen et
al., 2006). For a review of stalking, see Mullen et al.Â (2009).

Somatic delusional disorder People with somatic delusional disorder
believe that they suffer from a physical illness, deformity, or
infestation (e.g.Â delusional parasitosis, also called Morgellons
disease). The term encompasses monosymptomatic hypochondriacal
psychosis, as there is often a single, intense delusional belief of this
kind. Somatic delusional disorder needs to be distinguished from the
hypochondriacal delusions (and somatic hallucinations) that can occur in
other disorders (e.g.Â schizophrenia, psychotic depression, cocaine
abuse), and from genuine somatic symptoms that occur secondary to
organic disorders

(e.g.Â the pruritus of hepatic failure). It must also be distinguished
from the common occurrence of obsessional thoughts or overvalued ideas
about similar bodily issues. A specific example of the latter is body
dysmorphic disorder (also called dysmorphophobia). In fact there is much
overlap clinically, and perhaps therapeutically, between delusional and
non-delusional forms of body dysmorphic disorder (Phillips et al.,
2006). The difference between how ICD-10 and DSM-5 classify these
disorders was noted earlier. Because of the content of the belief,
somatic delusional disorders often present to the relevant medical
specialism---for example, body dysmorphic disorder to plastic surgeons,
or delusional parasitosis to dermatologists (e.g.Â Lepping et al., 2010).
To ensure correct identification and appropriate treatment, it is
necessary that the physician recognizes the nature of the disorder, and
is able either to treat it or to involve a psychiatrist in its
management. However, this does not always occur, and in any event
patients are often reluctant to accept the diagnosis.

Querulant delusions and reformist delusions Querulant delusions were the
subject of a special study by Krafft-Ebing in 1888. Patients with this
kind of delusion indulge in a series of complaints and claims lodged
against the authorities. Closely related to querulant patients are
paranoid litigants, who undertake a succession of lawsuits, and become
involved in numerous court hearings, in which they may become
passionately angry and may make threats against the magistrates. The
characteristics of persistent litigants have been reviewed by Lester et
al.Â (2004). Baruk (1959) described 'reformist delusions', which are
based on religious, philosophical, or political themes. People with
these delusions constantly criticize society and sometimes embark on
elaborate courses of action. Their behaviour may be violent,
particularly when the delusions are political. Some political assassins
fall within this group. It is extremely important that this diagnosis is
made on clear psychiatric grounds rather than on political grounds, as
occurred in the former Soviet Union (see Chapter 2).

Delusional misidentification syndrome Another group of delusions
involves different aspects of misidentification, either of the self or
of others. Like

309

310

310

Chapter 12 Paranoid symptoms and syndromes all delusions, they often
occur in other psychotic disorders, especially schizophrenia and organic
disorders, but they can also occur in isolation, and have been given the
collective label of delusional misidentification syndrome
(Christodoulou, 1991). The category is not named in ICD-10 or DSM-5, but
constitutes an example of 'other persistent delusional disorders' coded
in the former. One argument for bringing them together is that they all
appear to be 'face-processing disorders', and associated with
abnormalities in the posterior part of the right hemisphere, where the
systems responsible for face recognition are located. Note also the
seemingly close relationship of these disorders to the neurological
category of prosopagnosia (the inability to recognize familiar faces).
Interestingly, the delusions are specific to a few, usually familiar,
people, and recognition of other faces (and objects) is not impaired.
Although the beliefs are delusional, the patient is aware that something
is wrong with the 'replacement' person. The patient may be extremely
distressed, and may occasionally act against individuals whom they
believe to be impostors. Four main variants of delusional
misidentification are recognized. In each case there is debate as to
whether they constitute a symptom or a syndrome.

Capgras syndrome In this rare condition---which is really a delusion
rather than a syndrome, hence its alternative name, Capgras
delusion---the patient, usually a woman, believes that a person closely
related to her (often her partner) has been replaced by a double. She
accepts that the misidentified person has a strong resemblance to the
familiar person, but still believes that they are different people. Some
patients with Capgras syndrome may behave dangerously by attacking the
presumed double. A history of depersonalization, derealization, or dÃ©jÃ 
vu is not unusual. Schizophrenia is said to be the most frequent
diagnosis (Berson, 1983), although in older subjects, Lewy body disease
or other neurodegenerative disorders are common (Josephs, 2007). The
syndrome is an example of a reduplicative paramnesia. The name derives
from the classic description by Capgras and Reboul-Lachauz in 1923, who
called it l'illusion des sosies (illusion of doubles). However, as noted
above, it is a delusion, not an illusion. For review, see Edelstyn and
Oyebode (1999).

Fregoli syndrome In this condition, also called the Fregoli delusion,
the patient believes that one or more individuals have changed their
appearance to resemble familiar people,

usually in order to persecute the patient in some way. The symptom is
usually associated with schizophrenia or with organic brain disease. Its
name derives from an actor called Fregoli who had remarkable skill in
changing his facial appearance. Originally described by Courbon and Fail
in 1927, the condition is even rarer than the Capgras delusion. For
review, see Langdon et al.Â (2014).

Intermetamorphosis In this syndrome, the patient believes that one or
more individuals have been transformed, both physically and
psychologically, into another person or people, or that people have
exchanged identities with each other. As with the other forms of
delusional misidentification, note that intermetamorphosis is not a
hallucination---the abnormality is one of interpretation, not
misperception.

The syndrome of subjective doubles In the syndrome of subjective
doubles, the patient has the delusion that another person has been
physically transformed into his own self, like a doppelganger.

Shared (induced) delusional disorder Sometimes a person who is in a
close relationship with someone who already has an established
delusional system develops similar ideas. The commonest term is a folie
Ã  deux, although the ICD-10 category is shared delusional disorder. The
condition has also been called communicated insanity. The frequency of
induced psychosis is not known, but it is low. Sometimes more than two
people are involved (folie Ã  plusieurs), but this is exceedingly rare.
It has also been speculated that some apocalyptic cults involve
phenomena of this kind. Over 90% of reported cases are members of the
same family. Usually there is a dominant partner with fixed delusions
who appears to induce similar beliefs in a dependent or suggestible
partner, sometimes after initial resistance. The beliefs in the
recipient may or may not be truly delusional. Generally the two people
have lived together for a long time in close intimacy, often in
isolation from the outside world. Once established, the condition runs a
chronic course. It is usually necessary to advise separation of the
affected individuals. This may lead to resolution of the
quasi-delusional state in the recipient; the original patient should be
treated in the usual fashion for delusional disorder. For a review of
shared delusional disorder, see Silveira and Seeman (1995).

31

Treatment of paranoid symptoms and delusional disorder

Assessment of paranoid symptoms The assessment of paranoid symptoms
involves two stages---first, the recognition of the symptoms themselves,
and, secondly, the diagnosis of the underlying condition. Sometimes it
is obvious that the patient has persecutory ideas or delusions. At other
times recognition of paranoid symptoms may be exceedingly difficult, and
considerable skill is required by the interviewer. The patient may be
suspicious or angry. They may be very defensive, say little, or speak
fluently about other topics while steering away from persecutory beliefs
or denying them completely. The psychiatrist should be tolerant and
impartial, acting as a detached but interested listener who wants to
understand the patient's point of view. The interviewer should show
compassion, but not collude in the delusions or give promises that
cannot be fulfilled. When an apparently false belief is disclosed,
considerable time and effort may then be needed to determine whether or
not it meets the criteria for a delusion rather than an overvalued idea
or other form of belief. This is of crucial diagnostic significance, as
the presence of a delusion is likely to be the symptom

upon which a diagnosis of psychotic disorder is based, whereas
non-delusional thoughts which may be similar in content are consistent
with a range of other diagnostic categories. If delusions are detected,
the next step is to diagnose the type of psychosis, based upon the
diagnostic features of the disorders noted earlier in this chapter. It
is also important to determine whether the patient is likely to try to
harm the alleged persecutor. A full risk assessment is needed. This
calls for close study of the patient's personality, history of violence,
and the characteristics of their delusions and any associated
hallucinations. Hints or threats of homicide should be taken seriously.
The doctor should be prepared to ask tactfully about possible homicidal
plans and preparations to enact them. In many ways the method of enquiry
resembles the assessment of suicide risk: 'Have you ever thought of
doing anything about it?', 'Have you made any plans?', and 'What might
prompt you to do it?' The assessment of dangerousness is discussed
further in Chapter 18.

Treatment of paranoid symptoms and delusional disorder General
principles Management of paranoid symptoms and delusional disorder is
frequently difficult. Patients will typically regard their delusional
beliefs as justified, and therefore see no need for treatment. Or, they
may be suspicious and distrustful, believing that psychiatric treatment
is intended to harm them. Considerable tact and skill are needed when
dealing with such patients, not only to encourage them to describe their
symptoms fully, as discussed above, but also to persuade them to accept
treatment and then to adhere to it. Sometimes treatment can be made
acceptable by offering to help non-specific symptoms such as anxiety or
insomnia, or by pointing out the harmful consequences of the beliefs.
Thus a patient who believes that he is surrounded by persecutors may
agree that his nerves are being strained as a result, and that this
needs treatment. A decision must be made as to whether to admit the
patient for inpatient care. This may be indicated if there is a
significant or immediate risk of violence to others, or

of suicide. When assessing such factors, it is important to consult
other informants and obtain a history of the patient's behaviour. If
voluntary admission is refused, compulsory admission may be justified to
protect the patient or other people, although this is likely to add to
the patient's resentment.

Drug treatment Paranoid symptoms in delusional disorder are treated with
antipsychotic drugs just as in other psychoses, although there are few
randomized trial data to guide decision-making (Manschreck and Khan,
2006; Lepping et al., 2007). Pimozide was advocated as the antipsychotic
of choice for monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis (delusional
disorder, somatic type) and pathological jealousy (Munro, 2009).
However, the assertion is not supported by good evidence, and the
cardiotoxicity of pimozide should also be taken into account. In
general, any high-potency, non-sedating antipsychotic is suitable
(e.g.Â risperidone), always starting with a low dose. Signs

311

312

312

Chapter 12 Paranoid symptoms and syndromes of improvement, notably a
decrease in preoccupation with the delusion(s) and a reduction in
agitation, may be seen within a few days. The importance of establishing
a good therapeutic relationship to improve collaboration with treatment
has already been emphasized. With regard to the delusional form of body
dysmorphic disorder, some data suggest that selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) rather than antipsychotics should be used as
first-line treatment, with antipsychotic augmentation for those patients
who do not respond (Phillips et al., 2006). The role of antidepressants
in other delusional disorders remains unclear, although they are often
used at some stage in treatment, reflecting the frequency of comorbid
depressive symptoms, and their emergence during treatment. The risk of
suicide should be monitored regularly.

Psychological treatment Patients with paranoid symptoms require support,
encouragement, and reassurance. This form of nonspecific psychological
treatment is an integral part of management, and essential if the
patient is to be persuaded of the benefits of more targeted
interventions. Of the latter, drugs are the mainstay of treatment, but
specific psychological therapies may have a role, too. In particular,
cognitive therapy, as used for the treatment of delusions in
schizophrenia, may be worth trying if a sufficiently good therapeutic
rapport exists. Interpretative psychotherapy and group psychotherapy are
unsuitable, because suspiciousness and hypersensitivity may easily lead
the patient to misinterpret what is being said.

Prognosis of delusional disorder There are no reliable data on long-term
outcomes. Clinical impression suggests that the prognosis in delusional
disorder is poor, although Munro (2009) claims that in patients who are
compliant with medication, recovery occurs in 50% of cases, with
substantial improvement in a further 30%. Certainly, compared to
schizophrenia, long-term outcome and overall functioning are relatively
good (Marneros et al., 2012). In some

patients, medication can be reduced or stopped without ill effects,
while in others (probably the majority) delusions recur rapidly on
discontinuation, and treatment must be maintained for prolonged periods.
This issue can be judged only by a careful clinical trial with regular
monitoring of the patient's mental state, and it requires discussion
with the patient of the risks and benefits of long-term medication.

Further reading Enoch MD and Ball HN (2001). Uncommon Psychiatric
Syndromes, 4th edn. Edward Arnold, London. (Fascinating descriptions of
many delusional disorders and eponymous psychiatric syndromes.) Hirsch
SR and Shepherd M (eds) (1974). Themes and Variations in European
Psychiatry. John Wright, Bristol. (See the following sections: E
StrÃ¶mgren, Psychogenic psychoses; R Gaupp, The scientific significance
of the case of Ernst Wagner and The illness

and death of the paranoid mass murderer schoolmaster Wagner: a case
history; E Kretschmer, The sensitive delusion of reference; H Baruk,
Delusions of passion.) Lewis A (1970). Paranoia and paranoid: A
historical perspective. Psychological Medicine, 1, 2--12. (A scholarly
review of the origin and development of the term paranoid and related
concepts.) Munro A (1999). Delusional Disorders. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

31

CHAPTER 13

Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders Eating disorders 313 Sleep disorders
324

The drives to eat, sleep, and have sex can all become impaired or
dysfunctional in many psychiatric and

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity 330

medical disorders. They can also all be primary disorders, and it is the
latter which are the focus of this chapter.

Eating disorders Eating disorders are characterized by abnormalities in
the pattern of eating and the amount and nature of food eaten. These
behaviours are determined primarily by the patients' attitudes to their
weight and shape. The disorders share a distinctive core
psychopathology, which is best described as an overevaluation of weight
and shape, such that patients judge their self-worth in terms of their
shape and weight and their ability to control these. The disorders
covered in this are anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, as well as a
number of related conditions. Obesity is not covered, as it is not a
psychiatric disorder (Marcus and Wildes, 2009), although it is
associated with an increased risk of various psychiatric disorders, and
there may be shared mechanisms (Lopresti and Drummond, 2013). Until the
late 1970s, eating disorders were believed to be uncommon. Following the
description of bulimia nervosa, they have increasingly been seen as
conspicuous and disabling. It remains uncertain whether the rapid rise
in presentation and diagnosis reflects a true increase in incidence or
an increase in detection and diagnosis. Many eating disorders go
clinically unrecognized, and it is estimated that only about 50% of the
cases of anorexia nervosa in the general population are

detected in primary care; for bulimia nervosa the figure is
substantially less, and the majority of individuals with bulimia are
untreated. Within secondary care, eating disorders are seen and managed
by general psychiatrists as well as by specialist eating disorder
services. For introductory reviews, see Jones et al.Â (2012) and Nicholls
and Barrett (2015).

Classification Although anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are the two
best known eating disorders, many cases show significant features of one
or both disorders but do not meet the specified diagnostic criteria of
either. ICD-10 and DSM-5 differ in how they classify eating disorders
and deal with this complexity (Table 13.1). For example, DSM-5 includes
the diagnoses 'binge eating disorder' and 'other specified eating or
feeding disorder', whereas ICD-10 uses the prefix 'atypical' and the
category of 'eating disorder, unspecified' (sometimes abbreviated as
EDNOS). ICD-11 is likely to move closer to the DSM-5 approach (Uher and
Rutter, 2012). Adding to the uncertainties about the most appropriate
classification, even patients who do meet criteria for anorexia nervosa
or bulimia nervosa 'migrate' between

314

314

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

Table 13.1 Diagnostic classification of eating disorders DSM-5 Feeding
and eating disorders

ICD-10 Eating disorders

Anorexia nervosa

Anorexia nervosa

Bulimia nervosa

Bulimia nervosa

Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder

Atypical anorexia nervosa

Binge eating disorder

Atypical bulimia nervosa

Other specified feeding or eating disorder

Other eating disorders (e.g.Â pica)

Unspecified feeding or eating disorder

Eating disorder, unspecified

Anorexia nervosa Although there were many previous case histories,
anorexia nervosa was first named in 1868 by the English physician
William Gull, who emphasized the psychological causes of the condition,
the need to restore weight, and the role of the family. The other key
description at this time was by Charles Lasegue in Paris. The main
features of anorexia nervosa are: â

Very low body weight (defined as being 15% below the standard weight, or
body mass index (BMI) of less than 17.5 kg/m2), which is maintained by
restriction of energy intake.

â

Extreme concern about weight and shape, characterized by an intense fear
of gaining weight and becoming fat and a strong desire to be thin.

â

An undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation.

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

â

Lack of recognition of the seriousness of low body weight.

â

ICD-10, but not DSM-5, includes amenorrhoea as a criterion in women.

categories over time (Figure 13.1), suggesting that they share a common
pathophysiology, and that the boundaries between them are largely
arbitrary (Fairburn and Harrison, 2003). These issues should be borne in
mind when reading the following sections. The order of categories has
been modified to facilitate comparison. ICD-10 also has categories of
overeating and vomiting associated with other psychological
disturbances; DSM-5 also has a category of rumination disorder.

Most patients are young women (see the section on Epidemiology, below).
The condition usually begins in adolescence, although childhood-onset
and older-onset cases are encountered. It generally begins with ordinary
efforts at dieting, which then get out of control. The central
psychological features are the characteristic overvalued ideas about
body shape and weight (Fairburn et al., 1999). The pursuit of thinness
may take several forms. Patients generally eat little and set themselves
very low daily calorie limits (often between 600 and 1000 kcal). Some
try to achieve weight loss by inducing vomiting, exercising excessively,
and misusing laxatives (purging). Patients are often preoccupied with
thoughts of food, and sometimes enjoy cooking elaborate meals for other
people. Some patients with anorexia nervosa admit to stealing food,
either by shoplifting or in other ways. Binge eating. A subgroup of
patients have repeated episodes of binge eating. (A binge is an episode
of eating when a large amount of food is consumed in a short period of
time, and during which there is a sense of loss of control.) This
behaviour becomes more frequent with chronicity and increasing age.
During binges, the patient typically eats foods that are usually
avoided. After overeating they feel bloated and may induce vomiting.
Binges are followed by remorse and intensified efforts to lose weight.
If other people encourage them to

Pica

Anorexia nervosa

Atypical eating disorders

Bulimia nervosa

Figure 13.1 Schematic representation of temporal movement between the
eating disorders. The size of the arrow indicates the likelihood of
movement in the direction shown. Arrows that point outside of the circle
indicate recovery. Reproduced from The Lancet, 361(9355), Fairburn CG,
Harrison PJ, Eating disorders, pp.Â 407--16, Copyright (2003) with
permission from Elsevier.

315

Eating disorders eat, the patient is often resentful; they may hide food
or vomit in private as soon as the meal is over. In DSM-5, anorexia
nervosa with binge eating and purging (selfinduced vomiting or the
misuse of laxatives or diuretics) is recognized as a distinct type,
which differs from the restricting subtype. This distinction is
supported by evidence that they have different trajectories and
cognitive features (Treasure et al., 2015). Amenorrhoea is one of
several physical abnormalities that have traditionally been incorporated
in diagnostic criteria (but not, as noted, in DSM-5). It occurs early in
the development of the condition, and in about 20% of cases it precedes
obvious weight loss, although careful history-taking generally reveals
that these patients had already started dieting. Some cases first come
to medical attention with amenorrhoea rather than disordered eating.
Other symptoms. Depressive, anxiety, and obsessional symptoms, lability
of mood, and social withdrawal are all common. Three-quarters of
patients report a lifetime history of major depressive disorder. Lack of
sexual interest is usual. For a review of anorexia nervosa, see Zipfel
et al.Â (2015).

Physical consequences A number of important symptoms and signs of
anorexia nervosa are secondary to starvation. Several body systems can
be affected, with increasing involvement as BMI falls (see Box 13.1).
Some cases first come to medical attention because of one of these
complications rather than because of disordered eating itself. For a
review of the physical consequences, see Mitchell and Crow (2006).

Epidemiology The incidence of anorexia nervosa based upon primary care
and mental health surveys is about 5 per 100,000. Rates in the community
are considerably higher. Incidence is greatest among young women, with
40% of all incident cases occurring in 15--19-year-old females. Reported
incidence rates increased from the beginning of the twentieth century up
to the 1970s, but have remained fairly stable since then. It is rare in
children under 13 years of age, and in this age group the sex ratio is
closer to one. Prevalence estimates vary depending on the method of
ascertainment, country, and age range studied, and whether atypical
anorexia nervosa is included. If so, population studies find a lifetime
prevalence of between 0.9% and 4% in women; rates in men are always
lower, but the sex ratio is less than the 10:1 figure often stated. The
condition is thought to be more common in the

upper than the lower social classes, and is reported to be rare in
non-western countries and in the non-white population of western
countries. For review of anorexia nervosa epidemiology, see Smink et
al., (2012).

Onset, course, and prognosis In its early stages, anorexia nervosa often
runs a fluctuating course, with exacerbations and periods of partial
remission. The long-term prognosis is difficult to judge owing to
incomplete follow-up, or because there may be normalization in weight or
menstrual function but persistent abnormalities of eating habits and
attitudes to weight and shape. A review of 119 studies reported that
weight and menstrual function recover in about 60% of patients, and
eating behaviour becomes normalized in almost 50% (Steinhausen, 2002). A
more recent population study found that about two-thirds of women with
anorexia nervosa had largely or fully recovered at 5 years (Smink et
al., 2012). Poor prognostic factors include onset before puberty or in
adulthood, long history (\>3 years), premorbid personality problems,
comorbid substance misuse, and childhood obesity. Recognition and
management of the group of patients with severe and enduring anorexia
nervosa poses particular challenges (Robinson, 2014). In addition to
their chronic psychopathology and physical health problems, they have
significant impairments in social functioning and employment, and impose
a major burden on carers (Schmidt et al., 2016). Anorexia nervosa has
the highest mortality rate of any major psychiatric disorder, with a
fourfold to fivefold increase in mortality (Arcelus et al., 2011; Franko
et al., 2013). One in five deaths is from suicide; the others reflect
the many adverse health consequences of the disorder, notably cardiac
events and sepsis. There is evidence that the excess mortality rate has
fallen in recent years.

Aetiology Genetics Anorexia nervosa is strongly familial, with a
reported heritability of 28--74%, suggesting that much of the
familiality reflects genetic predisposition (Yilmaz et al., 2015). A
proportion of the genetic risk is shared with other psychiatric
disorders, including obsessive-- compulsive disorder and, perhaps more
surprisingly, schizophrenia (Bulik-Sullivan et al., 2015). However, no
individual risk genes for anorexia nervosa have yet been identified by
genome-wide association studies, in part because of their insufficient
sample size. The genetic risk

315

316

316

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

Box 13.1 Main physical features of anorexia nervosa Physical symptoms
Heightened sensitivity to cold Gastrointestinal symptoms---constipation,
fullness after eating, bloating Dizziness and syncope Amenorrhoea Lack
of sexual interest Poor sleep, with early-morning wakening

Physical signs Emaciation Stunted growth and failure of breast
development (if onset is prepubertal) Dry skin, with orange
discoloration of the palms and soles Fine downy hair (lanugo) on the
back, forearms, and sides of face Salivary gland swelling Erosion of the
inner surface of the front teeth (perimylolysis) in those who vomit
frequently Cold hands and feet; hypothermia Bradycardia; hypotension;
cardiac arrhythmias (especially in those with electrolyte abnormalities)
Peripheral oedema Weak proximal muscles (e.g.Â difficulty in rising from
a squatting position)

Abnormalities on physical investigation Endocrine abnormalities Low
luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and oestradiol levels

Low T3, with T4 in low normal range and normal concentrations of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (low T3 syndrome) Increase in cortisol and
dexamethasone non-suppression Raised growth hormone concentration
Hypoglycaemia Cardiovascular abnormalities Conduction defects,
especially prolongation of the QT interval Gastrointestinal
abnormalities Delayed gastric emptying Decreased colonic motility (if
chronic laxative misuse) Acute gastric dilatation (rare, secondary to
binge eating or excessive re-feeding) Haematological abnormalities
Normocytic normochromic anaemia Mild leucopenia with relative
lymphocytosis Thrombocytopenia Other metabolic abnormalities
Hypercholesterolaemia Raised serum carotene Hypophosphataemia
(exaggerated during re-feeding) Dehydration Electrolyte disturbances,
especially hypokalaemia (in those who vomit frequently or misuse
laxatives or diuretics) Other abnormalities Osteopenia and osteoporosis

Adapted from The Lancet, 361(9355), Fairburn CG, Harrison PJ, Eating
disorders, pp.Â 407--16, Copyright (2003) with permission from Elsevier.

may also vary with age of onset, with a lesser heritability of eating
disorder symptoms in preadolescent and early adolescent cases.

abnormalities are causal, or are the result of starvation and weight
loss. Nevertheless, some findings are of interest:

Neurobiology

â

Cognitively, there are difficulties in switching between tasks, and
relative impairment of strategic planning compared to detailed focusing
on tasks.

â

Structurally, grey matter volume is increased in the orbitofrontal
cortex and insula, regions known to be involved in assessing reward and
in introspection, respectively.

There have been many brain imaging and other neurobiological studies of
anorexia nervosa, and a range of structural, functional, and biochemical
abnormalities reported. These include reductions in brain volume, and
alterations in the 5-HT (serotonin) system. However, it is often
difficult to determine whether

371

Eating disorders â

Functional neuroimaging also indicates involvement of brain regions
involved in responses to food rewards.

Linking neuroimaging with neurochemistry, one theory is that the
restrictive eating of anorexia nervosa is a maladaptive attempt to
reduce the negative affect caused by an imbalance between the aversive
(serotonergic) and reward (dopaminergic) systems of the brain (Kaye et
al., 2013).

Sociocultural factors The fact that anorexia nervosa is more common in
certain societies suggests that cultural factors play a part in its
development. Important among such factors is likely to be the notion
that thinness is desirable and attractive. Surveys in affluent societies
show that most schoolgirls and female college students diet at one time
or another. However, when other risk factors are taken into account,
people who develop anorexia nervosa have no greater exposure to factors
that increase the risk of dieting. This suggests that the problem is
more due to how an individual reacts to dieting than to dieting itself.
Emerging evidence supports the importance of media and peer groups in
influencing weight and shape concerns in adolescents (Keel and Forney,
2013).

Individual psychological causes Bruch (1974) was one of the first
writers to discuss the psychological antecedents of anorexia nervosa.
She suggested that these patients are engaged in 'a struggle for
control, for a sense of identity and effectiveness, with the relentless
pursuit of thinness as a final step in this effort'. These clinical
observations are supported by epidemiological studies, which implicate
low self-esteem and perfectionism in the development of the disorder
(Fairburn, 1999). It has been suggested that these premorbid personality
traits can make it particularly difficult for an individual to negotiate
the demands of adolescence.

Causes within the family Disturbed relationships are often found in the
families of patients with anorexia nervosa, and some authors have
suggested that they have an important causal role. Minuchin et
al.Â (1978) held that a specific pattern of relationships could be
identified, consisting of 'enmeshment, overprotectiveness, rigidity and
lack of conflict resolution'. They also suggested that the development
of anorexia nervosa in the patient served to prevent dissent within the
family.

Epidemiological studies suggest that people who develop anorexia nervosa
are more likely than healthy controls to be exposed to a range of
childhood adversities, including poor relationships with parents and
parental psychiatric disorder, particularly depression. However, these
risk factors are not specific to anorexia nervosa, but are found with
equal frequency among people who subsequently develop other psychiatric
disorders (Fairburn, 1999). It seems likely that these general risk
factors interact with specific factors within the individual, such as
perfectionism and low self-esteem, to increase the risk of developing
anorexia nervosa. For review, see Keel and Forney (2013).

Assessment Most patients with anorexia nervosa are reluctant to change
their behaviour, let alone see a psychiatrist, so it is important to try
to establish a good relationship. This means listening to the patient's
views, explaining the treatment alternatives, and being willing to
consider compromises. A thorough history should be taken of the
development of the disorder, the present pattern of eating and weight
control, and the patient's ideas about body weight (see Boxes 13.2 and
13.3). In the mental state examination, particular attention should be
given to depressive symptoms, as well as to the characteristic
psychopathology of anorexia nervosa itself. More than one interview may
be needed to obtain this information and gain the patient's confidence.
In children and adolescents, gathering information on early feeding and
parental weight and shape concerns are important; and parents and
teachers should be interviewed. It is essential to perform a full
physical examination. Particular attention should be paid to the degree
of emaciation (including measurement of weight and BMI), cardiovascular
status (blood pressure, heart rate), and temperature. Routine
investigations include full blood count, urea and electrolytes, blood
glucose, liver function tests, and ECG. The results may also reveal that
the patient is at high risk of medical complications and may require
further urgent investigations or inpatient treatment (Box 13.4). A range
of medical and psychiatric disorders may present with weight loss or
loss of appetite, and lead to the possibility of anorexia nervosa being
raised (Box 13.5). However, there should rarely be significant
diagnostic uncertainty once the presence or absence of the cardinal
psychopathology of anorexia nervosa has been determined.

317

318

318

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

Box 13.2 Assessment of eating What is a typical day's eating? What are
the mealtime arrangements at home and at school/work?

Box 13.3 Assessment of psychological issues

To what degree is the patient attempting restraint?

What does the patient feel about her body and her weight?

Is there a pattern? Does it vary? Is eating ritualized?

If she is restraining her eating, what is her motivation?

Does the patient avoid particular foods? If so, why?

Does she feel fat? Does she dislike her body? If so, in what way?

Does she restrict fluids? What is the patient's experience of hunger or
of any urge to eat? Does she binge? Are these objectively large binges?
Does she feel out of control? How do binges begin? How do they end? How
often do they occur?

Does she have a distorted body image? If so, in what way? What does she
feel would happen if she did not control her weight or her eating? Does
she fear loss of control? Is she able to say what she means by this?

Does she make herself vomit? If so, how?

Does she feel guilt or self-disgust? If so, what leads her to feel this?

Does she take laxatives, diuretics, emetics, or appetite suppressants?
If so, with what effects?

Does anything about her disorder lead her to feel good?

Does she fast for a day or longer? Can she eat in front of others? Does
she exercise? Is this to 'burn off calories'? Reproduced from Palmer B,
Helping People with Eating Disorders: A clinical guide to assessment and
treatment, Copyright (2000), with permission from John Wiley and Sons.

If she binges, what are her feelings before, during, and afterwards?
What has she told others about her eating disorder---if anything? How
does she think about her disorder? What does she make of it? Reproduced
from Palmer B, Helping People with Eating Disorders: A clinical guide to
assessment and treatment, Copyright (2000), with permission from John
Wiley and Sons.

Treatment of anorexia nervosa There has been a lack of good evidence
about treatment and management of anorexia nervosa, meaning that
clinical experience and expert opinion are prominent in guidelines.
However, since the National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence
(NICE) guidelines were published in 2004 (National Institute for Health
and Clinical Excellence, 2004a; see Box 13.6), the evidence base for
specific psychotherapeutic and pharmacotherapeutic interventions has
increased considerably. For recent reviews and guidelines, see Watson
and Bulik (2013) and Hay et al.Â (2014). In addition, there is current
interest in the possibility that deep brain stimulation may be of
benefit in severe, intractable cases, but the evidence is very
preliminary and there are significant ethical issues (Park et al.,
2017).

Psychotherapy Psychotherapies are the mainstay of treatment for anorexia
nervosa. In the past, these were based on

psychodynamic concepts, but these have largely been superseded by
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and related therapies. Both family
and individual interventions have been used. Family therapy has been
widely advocated, reflecting the belief that family factors are
important in the origins of anorexia nervosa. Various kinds of family
therapy have been used. Evidence suggests that, for children and
adolescents, family-based treatments that focus on the eating disorder
and related issues are more effective than those addressing broader
family processes, and more so than individual psychotherapy (Lock,
2015). In adults, individual treatments predominate. Generic CBT has
only modest benefits, but a specifically tailored form ('CBT-E') has
efficacy in weight restoration and in weight maintenance (Fairburn et
al., 2009a, 2013). As discussed below, CBT-E is also highly effective
for bulimia nervosa, and is the first evidence-based

319

Eating disorders

Box 13.4 Abnormalities requiring urgent follow-up or intervention in
anorexia nervosa

Box 13.5 Differential diagnosis of anorexia nervosa Medical disorders

General BMI \<14 kg/m2

Neoplasia (e.g.Â gastrointestinal, hypothalamic, lymphoma, cachexia)

Temperature \<35.5oC

Inflammatory bowel disease

Cardiovascular

Malabsoprtion syndromes (e.g.Â coeliac disease, chronic pancreatitis)

Bradycardia (\<50 beats/minute) Blood pressure \<80/50 mmHg Postural
hypotension \>20 mmHg Postural tachycardia (increase \>20 beats/minute)
Arrythymia

Hyperthyroidism Chronic infection Diabetes mellitus Pituitary failure
Cystic fibrosis

QTc \>50 msec

Psychiatric disorders Blood tests Hypokalaemia (\<3.0 mmol/l)
Hypophosphataemia (\<0.5 mmol/l) Hypoglycaemia

Other eating disorders Depression Somatoform disorders
Obsessive--compulsive disorder

Neutropenia Adapted from Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 48(11), Hay P et al., Royal Australian and New Zealand
College of Psychiatrists clinical practice guidelines for the treatment
of eating disorders, pp.Â 977-1008, Copyright (2014), with permission
from SAGE Publications; Lancet Psychiatry, 2(12), Zipfel S et al.,
Anorexia nervosa: aetiology, assessment, and treatment, pp.Â 1099-1111,
Copyright (2015), with permission from Elsevier.

'trans-diagnostic' eating disorder therapy. Other psychological
interventions with some support include focal psychodynamic
psychotherapy and a form of cognitive-- interpersonal therapy (Zipfel et
al., 2015). Nevertheless, anorexia nervosa remains difficult to treat,
with many patients reluctant to engage in treatment or proving
refractory to it. For review of psychological treatments in anorexia
nervosa, see Hay (2013).

Medication Both antidepressants and antipsychotics are used in anorexia
nervosa, with antidepressants sometimes prescribed in high dosage.
However, systematic reviews show no clear effect of antidepressants on
weight gain, maintenance, or psychological symptoms during re-feeding

(de Vos et al., 2014). Small trials have suggested possible benefit from
olanzapine (Kishi et al., 2012), but overall the evidence is similarly
negative for the use of antipsychotics and they are not recommended.
Antidepressants are also used to treat depression in anorexia nervosa.
The evidence for their effectiveness in this situation is weak, and
guidelines suggest that antidepressants should not be used until it is
apparent that the symptoms are not merely due to starvation, and that
they persist during restoration of weight (Hay et al., 2014). Particular
care in prescribing is required in patients under 18 years old, and
because of the high risks of medical complications and side effects in
underweight patients.

Management Starting treatment Success largely depends on establishing a
good relationship with the patient. It should be made clear that
achieving an adequate weight is essential to reverse the physical and
psychological effects of starvation. It is important to agree a specific
dietary plan, while emphasizing that weight control is only one aspect

319

320

320

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

Box 13.6 NICE (2004) guidelines for anorexia nervosa Most people with
anorexia nervosa should be managed on an outpatient basis, with
psychological treatment and monitoring of their physical condition. â
Psychological therapies for anorexia nervosa include cognitive analytic
therapy (CAT), cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT), interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT), focal psychodynamic therapy, and family
interventions focused explicitly on eating disorders. â Outpatient
psychological treatment for anorexia nervosa should normally be of at
least 6 months' duration. Failure to improve or deterioration should
lead to more intensive forms of treatment (e.g.Â a move from individual
therapy to combined individual and family work, or day care, or
inpatient care). Dietary counselling should not be provided as the sole
treatment for anorexia nervosa. â For inpatients with anorexia nervosa
it is important to monitor the patient's physical status during
refeeding. Psychological treatment should be provided that has a focus
both on eating behaviour and attitudes to body weight and shape, and on
wider psychosocial issues with the expectation of weight gain. Rigid
inpatient behaviour modification programmes should not be used in the
management of anorexia nervosa. â Following inpatient weight
restoration, people with anorexia nervosa should be offered outpatient
psychological treatment that focuses both on eating behaviour and
attitudes to body weight and shape, and on wider psychosocial issues,
with regular monitoring of both physical and psychological risk. â

Adapted from National Institute for Clinical Excellence, Eating
Disorders: core interventions in the treatment and management of
anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and eating disorders, Clinical
Guideline 9, Copyright (2004a), with permission from National Institute
for Clinical Excellence.

of the problem, and help should be offered with the accompanying
psychological problems, as well as dealing with any medical
complications. Educating patients and their families about the disorder
and its treatment is important. There is good evidence that early
intervention (within 3 years of onset) is associated with better
outcomes, and so every effort should be made to engage

with the patient as promptly as possible. Conversely, in longstanding
cases of anorexia nervosa, treatment goals may be more modest, and
include helping patient and carers cope with a serious and chronic
illness (Hay et al., 2012).

Setting of treatment Most cases may be treated on an outpatient or
daypatient basis, ideally within a specialist eating disorder service.
There is no good evidence that inpatient care is more effective, and
admission to hospital is now unusual. However, it may be indicated in
two situations: to a medical ward, if there are serious and imminent
physical health risks (Box 13.5), or to psychiatric inpatient care if
there is acute suicidal ideation or if sustained attempts at out-patient
or day-patient treatment have failed. Compulsory treatment for anorexia
nervosa is controversial both legally and ethically (see Chapter 4). It
is rarely used, although re-feeding is accepted as a treatment for
eating disorders under the Mental Health Act. For children and
adolescents unable or unwilling to give informed consent, either the
Mental Health Act or Children Act (1989) may be utilized. The views of
the parents as well as the patient are critical in decisions of this
kind (Nicholls and Barrett, 2015).

Restoring weight A reasonable aim is an increase of 0.5 kg a week, which
will usually require an extra 500--1000 calories a day. More rapid
re-feeding is potentially dangerous. The target weight should be above a
minimum healthy level (a BMI above 18.5); it is not a good idea to agree
a compromise target lower than this except in severe and refractory
cases. It is good practice to monitor the patient's physical state
regularly, and to prescribe vitamin supplements if indicated. It is also
important to assess and modify other weight-reducing strategies that the
patient may employ, such as overexercising and laxative misuse.
Previously, for those receiving inpatient treatment, the patient would
usually stay in hospital until her agreed target weight was reached and
maintained, and strict behavioural regimes were often used. Currently,
much shorter admissions, with a more collaborative therapeutic approach,
are the norm, followed by outpatient or day-patient care. Whilst in
hospital, eating should be supervised by a nurse, who has three
roles---to reassure the patient that she will not lose control over her
weight, to be clear about the agreed targets, and to ensure that the
patient does not induce vomiting or take laxatives.

321

Eating disorders

Bulimia nervosa The term bulimia refers to binge eating, defined
earlier. As mentioned, binge eating occurs in some cases of anorexia
nervosa, and is also the hallmark of binge eating disorder (see below).
The syndrome of bulimia nervosa was first described by Russell (1979) in
an influential paper in which he named the condition and described the
key clinical features in 30 patients who were seen between 1972 and
1978. The prevalence of bulimic behaviours and the associated harms soon
became apparent, and the syndrome was first included in DSM-III. The
central features of bulimia nervosa are as follows: â

A preoccupation with eating, with an irresistible and recurrent urge to
overeat, manifesting in repeated 'binges' when large amounts of food are
consumed in a short time, accompanied by a sense of loss of control.

â

The use of extreme measures to control body weight, especially
self-induced vomiting and use of laxatives, as well as periods of
starvation or excessive exercise.

â

Overvalued ideas concerning shape and weight, of the type seen in
anorexia nervosa.

DSM-5 specifies that these behaviours have occurred at least once a week
for 3 months, and that they do not occur solely during times when the
person met criteria for anorexia nervosa. (As an aside, many of the
cases in Russell's original series also suffered from concomitant
anorexia nervosa and would thus not currently be diagnosed with bulimia
nervosa.) Bulimia nervosa also needs to be distinguished from binge
eating disorder, described below. DSM-5 classifies the severity of
bulimia nervosa according to the frequency of 'inappropriate
compensatory behaviours', ranging from mild (1--3 per week) to extreme
(14 or more per week). ICD-10 does not have these elements. Patients
with bulimia nervosa are usually of normal weight (BMI 18.5--25), not
least since patients who are substantially underweight usually qualify
for a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa, which takes precedence. There is a
profound loss of control over eating. Episodes of binge eating may be
precipitated by stress, or by the breaking of self-imposed dietary
rules, or may occasionally be planned. During the episodes, large
amounts of food are rapidly consumed, on average over 2000 kcal (e.g.Â a
loaf of bread, pot of jam, cake, and biscuits). This voracious eating
usually takes place when the patient is alone. At first it brings relief
from tension, but this is soon followed by guilt and disgust, and the
patient induces vomiting or engages in another compensatory behaviour.

Depressive symptoms are very common, and usually secondary to the eating
disorder. A high proportion of patients meet the criteria for major
depression. The depressive symptoms usually remit as the eating disorder
improves. For review of bulimia nervosa, see Fairburn et al. (2009b).

Physical consequences Bulimia nervosa can impact on physical health,
mostly due to repeated vomiting or use of laxatives or other drugs. With
vomiting, reflux symptoms are common, and teeth become pitted by the
acidic gastric contents. Russell's sign describes callouses on the
knuckles caused by repeatedly putting fingers down the throat to induce
vomiting. More serious physical health problems can occur, but all are
very rare (Box 13.7). The physical complications are best treated by
cessation of the causative behaviour, but symptomatic treatments are
also available for some; for example, proton pump inhibitors for
oesophageal reflux, or spironolactone for peripheral oedema. However,
medication for these purposes should be used with caution, and only in
severe cases. For review, see Sachs and Mehler (2016).

Epidemiology As with anorexia nervosa, the prevalence and incidence of
bulimia nervosa are uncertain. In the community, the prevalence is
around 1% among women aged between 16 and 40 years in western societies
(Kessler et al., 2013). It is at least 10 times less common in men. The
dramatic increase in presentation and diagnosis seen in the UK in the
early 1990s has been followed by stability or a modest decline. For
review, see Smink et al.Â (2012).

Onset, course, and prognosis Bulimia nervosa usually has an onset in
late adolescence or early adulthood (i.e.Â several years later than
anorexia nervosa). It often follows a period of concern about body shape
and weight, and 25% of patients have a history of anorexia nervosa (see
Figure 13.1). There is commonly an initial period of dietary restriction
which, after a variable length of time, but usually within 3 years,
breaks down, with increasingly frequent episodes of overeating. As the
overeating becomes more frequent, the body weight returns to a more
normal level. At some stage, self-induced vomiting or laxative abuse are
adopted to compensate for the overeating. However, this may result in
even less control of eating.

321

32

322

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

Box 13.7 Physical complications of bulimia nervosa General Menstrual
irregularities Non-specific gastrointestinal symptoms

Related to vomiting Cardiac arrhythmias Oesophageal reflux Oesophageal
tears Gastric rupture Epistaxis and subconjunctival haemorrhage Damage
to teeth (perimyolysis) Parotid gland enlargement (sialadenosis) and
raised salivary amylase Metabolic alkalosis Peripheral oedema Myopathy
and cardiomyopathy\*

Related to stimulant laxatives Metabolic abnormalities as described for
vomiting Hyponatraemia Chronic constipation Melanosis coli \*When syrup
of ipecac is used to induce vomiting.

Despite the original assertion by Russell (1979) that bulimia nervosa
was an 'ominous variant', its outcome is clearly better than anorexia.
Nevertheless, even 5-- 10 years later between one-third and a half of
individuals still have a clinical eating disorder, although in many of
these cases it will take an atypical form (Fairburn et al., 2000). No
convincing predictors of course or outcome have been identified,
although childhood obesity and low self-esteem may be associated with a
worse prognosis (Fairburn et al., 2000). The mortality rate is
approximately doubled, but the excess is significantly less than that
for anorexia nervosa (Franko et al., 2013).

Aetiology Like anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa appears to be the
result of exposure to general risk factors for psychiatric disorder,
including a family history (in part, reflecting a genetic
predisposition), especially depression and substance misuse, and a range
of adverse childhood

experiences. No risk genes have been identified. It was thought that
childhood sexual abuse was especially common, but the evidence suggests
that the rate is no higher than among those who develop other types of
psychiatric disorder (Fairburn, 1999). Epidemiological studies also
suggest that, unlike those with anorexia nervosa, patients with bulimia
nervosa have increased exposure to factors that specifically promote
dieting, such as childhood obesity, parental obesity, and early
menarche. Perfectionism appears to be less of a risk factor than in
anorexia nervosa (Fairburn, 1999). The neurobiological mechanisms appear
to be broadly similar to those described above for anorexia nervosa
(Kaye et al., 2013). There are also recent models of bingeing, which
conceptualize it as 'food addiction' (Smith and Robbins, 2013), or note
its similarities to impulsive/compulsive behaviours (Pearson et al.,
2015), but these remain speculative.

Treatment of bulimia nervosa There has been much more research into the
treatment of bulimia nervosa than into that of anorexia nervosa, at
least amongst adults, and more evidence for effective psychological and
pharmacological treatments. For a few people, guided self-help according
to CBT may be sufficient, but in most cases formal treatment is
indicated. For review, see Fairburn et al.Â (2009b).

Psychotherapy Both CBT and interpersonal therapy are effective in
bulimia nervosa. Of those who complete treatment (about 20% drop out),
60% will have stopped binge eating, and there is an 80% reduction
overall. Psychological aspects improve in parallel. Early response is a
strong predictor of outcome. The effect is maintained, with low relapse
rates seen over 12 months. The most striking evidence comes from a
specifically tailored CBT-based approach ('CBT-E'), mentioned above in
the description of anorexia nervosa treatment. In a relatively large
study, CBT-E reduced or abolished core behavioural and psychological
symptoms of eating disorders, and showed sustained efficacy (Fairburn et
al., 2009a). The treatment was delivered in two forms---a 'simple'
intervention which focused solely on the eating disorder, and a
'complex' intervention in which personality, mood, and interpersonal
issues were also addressed. The authors suggested that the simple
treatment is the default version and widely applicable to bulimia
nervosa (and other eating disorders), whereas the latter could be
limited to individuals with additional psychopathology. Subsequent
studies have confirmed the efficacy of CBT-E and showed its superiority
over psychoanalytic

32

Eating disorders psychotherapy (Poulsen et al., 2014) and interpersonal
psychotherapy (Fairburn et al., 2015). As with anorexia nervosa,
family-based treatments may have some advantages over individual therapy
in adolescents with bulimia nervosa (Le Grange et al., 2015).

Medication Antidepressants are effective, producing a reduction of about
50% in the frequency of binge eating, and cessation in 20% of cases. The
onset is more rapid than in depression, but a higher dose may be needed
(e.g.Â fluoxetine 60 mg daily). However, long-term data are less
encouraging and show poor compliance. Antidepressants should be used
rarely, and viewed as second-line treatment and only if an effective
psychological treatment is unavailable or unsuccessful. Topiramate is
effective in suppressing binge eating, but side effects limit its
usefulness and its use in bulimia nervosa is not advocated. For review
of the drug treatment of bulimia nervosa, see McElroy et al.Â (2012).

Management The management of bulimia nervosa is easier than that of
anorexia nervosa because the patient is more likely to wish to recover,
and a good working relationship can often be established. Furthermore,
there is no need to manage the complications of starvation nor restore
weight. However, it is necessary to assess the patient's physical state
and to measure electrolyte status in those who are vomiting frequently
or misusing laxatives (Box 13.7). As with many common disorders, a
'stepped-care' approach appears to be the best way of providing
appropriate care for large numbers of people with varying degrees of
severity of disorder (National Institute for Clinical Excellence,
2004a). Step 1. Identify the small minority (less than 5%) of
individuals who need urgent specialist care because of severe
depression, physical complications, or substance abuse that requires
treatment in its own right. Step 2. Offer guided cognitive behavioural
self-help, using a self-help book and with the guidance of a
nonspecialist facilitator. Treatment usually takes about 4 months and
requires eight to ten meetings with the facilitator. Guided self-help is
appropriate for primary care, and appears to lead to good progress in
about one-third of patients. Step 3. Patients who do not show benefit
within 4--6 weeks of commencing Step 2 require CBT-E. In a minority of
cases, where concomitant depressive

symptoms are severe or persistent, it is worthwhile adding an
antidepressant drug such as fluoxetine in doses of up to 60 mg daily.
Step 4. Patients who do not improve with CBT require comprehensive
specialist reassessment. In some cases, measures to provide more
intensive cognitive therapy or an antidepressant drug may be useful. It
is important to review the initial treatment with the patient, with the
aim of agreeing a treatment approach that the patient finds acceptable.

Binge eating disorder This is a new diagnostic category in DSM-5. It is
characterized by recurrent bingeing episodes in the absence of the other
diagnostic features of bulimia nervosa; in particular, there are no
compensatory behaviours such as vomiting or purging. In ICD-10, such
patients would be classified as eating disorder, unspecified. Patients
may have depressive symptoms and some dissatisfaction with their body
weight and shape; however, this is usually less severe than in bulimia
nervosa. Nevertheless, binge eating disorder is of comparable severity
to bulimia nervosa in terms of personal and public health (Kessler et
al., 2013) and increased mortality, likely related to the comorbid
obesity (Smink et al., 2012; Franko et al., 2013). The risk factors for,
and mechanisms underlying, binge eating disorder are thought to be
similar to those for bulimia nervosa (Balodis et al., 2014). About 25%
of patients who present for treatment for obesity have features of binge
eating disorder. The condition generally affects an older age group than
bulimia nervosa, and up to 25% of those who present for treatment are
men. Binge eating disorder has a relatively high spontaneous remission
rate and larger effect sizes for response to CBT, interpersonal therapy,
and antidepressants. Recently, lisdexamfetamine was licensed for binge
eating disorder in the USA. For review of treatment of binge eating
disorder, see McElroy et al.Â (2015).

Other eating disorders Other specified feeding or eating disorder As
noted earlier, many patients with eating disorders do not meet criteria
for anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa. Whilst some are now accounted
for in the DSM-5 category of binge eating disorder, others are not. In
DSM5, most of the remainder are diagnosed as 'Other specified feeding or
eating disorder', which largely comprises atypical or mixed forms of the
three aforementioned

323

324

324

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders disorders. The ICD-10
equivalent is 'Eating disorder, unspecified'. These states share much of
the core psychopathology of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, and
respond well to CBT-E.

Psychogenic vomiting Psychogenic vomiting is chronic and episodic
vomiting without an organic cause, which usually occurs after meals and
in the absence of nausea. It differs from bulimia nervosa, in which
self-induced vomiting follows episodes of binge eating. It must also be
distinguished from diabetic gastroparesis and other causes of vomiting.
Psychogenic vomiting appears to be more common in women than in men, and
usually presents in early or middle adult life. It is reported that both
psychotherapeutic and behavioural treatments can be helpful. For a
review of idiopathic vomiting disorders, see Olden and Chepyala (2008).

Pica Pica is the repeated eating of non-nutritional, 'non-food'
substances. A wide range of substances may be ingested, such as hair,
paper, or stones. In some cases, the ingested substance may be
correcting a mineral deficiency. Pica is

particularly common in people with intellectual disability, and is also
seen in several other psychiatric disorders, including autism and
schizophrenia. It is also associated with pregnancy and iron deficiency.
In each of these situations, a diagnosis of pica should only be made if
the behaviour is sufficiently persistent or severe to require clinical
attention. Pica can lead to medical or surgical emergencies due to
poisoning, obstruction, nutritional deficiencies, or parasitosis. The
differential diagnosis includes anorexia nervosa, factitious disorder,
and personality disorder. Behavioural approaches are usually used; SSRIs
or atypical antipsychotics are sometimes tried in refractory cases.

Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder DSM-5 introduced this
category, which occurs in children who have insufficient dietary intake
to the point where there is nutritional deficiency, failure to thrive,
and impaired psychosocial functioning. The child may lack interest in
food, or be worried about its sensory characteristics, or its adverse
consequences. However, there is no disturbance of body image or
preoccupation with weight. It replaces a previous category of 'Feeding
disorder of infancy and early childhood'.

Sleep disorders There has been increasing recognition in recent years of
the prevalence and clinical significance of sleep problems for mental
and physical health, and a resulting growth of the specialty of sleep
medicine. However, psychiatrists are often still asked to see patients
whose main problem is either difficulty in sleeping (dyssomnia, which
includes insomnia and hypersomnia) or behaviours associated with sleep
(parasomnias). Many other patients seen by psychiatrists also complain
about sleep problems as one of their symptoms. Sleep problems are
important for several reasons. â

They may represent primary sleep disorders (which are the focus of this
section).

â

They may be symptoms of psychiatric disorder, especially mood disorders,
or occur in a range of medical disorders. In these situations they may
be called secondary sleep disorders.

â

They may be causes of psychological symptoms and contribute to the onset
of psychiatric disorders.

â

Persistent sleep difficulties are significantly associated with a range
of adverse physical health outcomes.

For a review of the biology of sleep and its disorders, see Siegel
(2009), and for its impact on psychiatric disorders and physical health,
see Wulff et al.Â (2010).

Classification DSM-5 recognizes 10 categories of sleep disorders, which
it calls sleep--wake disorders (Box 13.8). Classification in ICD-10 is
rather different, with sleep disorders occurring in different parts of
the classification (Box 13.9). Unlike DSM-5, ICD-10 distinguishes sleep
disorders based on their presumed aetiology. Only the category of
'Non-organic sleep disorders' (defined as those 'in which emotional
causes are considered to be a primary factor') is located within Chapter
V. Other sleep disorders are considered either to be organic (such as
Kleine--Levin syndrome) or nonpsychogenic (e.g.Â narcolepsy).

325

Sleep disorders

Box 13.8 Classification of sleep-- wake disorders in DSM-5 Insomnia
disorder Hypersomnolence disorder Narcolepsy Breathing-related sleep
disorders Circadian rhythm sleep--wake disorders Non-rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep arousal disorders Nightmare disorders REM sleep behaviour
disorder Restless legs syndrome Substance/medication-induced sleep
disorder Source: data from Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

A more complex classification of sleep disorders intended for use by
specialists in sleep medicine is the third edition of the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD 3). It has 80 types of sleep
disorder.

Epidemiology Sleep disorders are frequent, but there is a wide range of
variation in estimates, depending on the definition and the population
studied; for example, 22% of adults meet the DSM-IV criteria for
insomnia (DSM-5 data are not available), but only 4% meet the ICD-10
criteria (Roth et al., 2011). Excessive sleepiness occurs in 5% of
adults, and about 15% have some form of chronic sleep--wake disorder.
Groups at particular risk of persistent sleep problems include young
children and adolescents (Stores, 2015), the elderly, the physically
ill, and those with learning disability (Heussler, 2016).

Assessment Assessment requires a full psychiatric and medical history,
together with detailed enquiries about the sleep complaint (see Box
13.10). In some cases specialist investigation, including
polysomnography, is necessary.

Insomnia Insomnia is a condition of unsatisfactory quality and/or
quantity of sleep, with difficulty falling asleep, remaining asleep, or
waking early and being unable to return to sleep.

Box 13.9 Classification of sleep disorders in ICD-10 Non-organic sleep
disorders (F51) Non-organic insomnia Non-organic hypersomnia Non-organic
disorder of the sleep--wake cycle Sleepwalking (somnambulism) Sleep
terrors (night terrors) Nightmares Other non-organic sleep disorders
Non-organic sleep disorder, unspecified

Sleep disorders of organic origin (G47) Narcolepsy Kleine--Levin
syndrome Sleep apnoea Episodic movement disorders

Other (R33) Primary nocturnal enuresis Source: data from The ICD-10
classification of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health
Organization.

Transient insomnia occurs at times of stress or as 'jet lag'. Short-term
insomnia is often associated with personal problems---for example,
illness, bereavement, relationship difficulties, or stress at work.
Sleep-onset insomnia can be a relatively common complaint among
adolescents. Insomnia in clinical practice is usually secondary to other
disorders, notably painful physical conditions, depressive disorders,
and anxiety disorders; it also occurs with excessive use of alcohol or
caffeine, and in dementia. It can also be provoked by prescribed drugs.
In about 15% of cases of insomnia, no cause is found. For diagnosis,
ICD-10 requires insomnia to have been present for at least three nights
per week for 1 month, and to cause distress or affect daytime
functioning; DSM-5 is similar but requires a 3-month duration. For a
review of insomnia, see Winkelman (2015).

Assessment of insomnia Usually the diagnosis of insomnia is made on the
basis of the account given by the patient, or parent/carer in the

325

326

326

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

Box 13.10 Assessment of sleep disturbance Screening questions Do you
sleep well enough and long enough? Are you very sleepy during the day?
Is your sleep disturbed at night?

Sleep history Detailed history of the sleep complaint and a typical
sleep--wake cycle Factors that improve or worsen sleep Effect on mood
and functioning Past and present treatment History from bed partner

Box 13.11 Treatments for insomnia Cognitive and behavioural
interventions Sleep hygiene Sleep restriction Stimulus control Cognitive
therapy Relaxation therapy

Pharmacological treatments Short-acting benzodiazepines (e.g.Â temazepam)
'Z drugs' (zolpidem, zopiclone) Low-dose sedative antidepressants
(e.g.Â trazodone, mirtazapine) Melatonin or melatonin agonists

Sleep diary Systematic 2-week or longer record

Possible investigations Video recording Actigraphy (wrist-worn)
Polysomnography HLA typing Cerebrospinal fluid orexin (hypocretin)
levels

Box 13.12 Principles of sleep education (sleep hygiene) Sleep
environment Familiar and comfortable Dark Quiet

case of children. Assessment should focus on the nature of the sleep
problem and its daytime consequences, as well as screening for
psychiatric and medical disorders and use of alcohol and drugs. Sleep
studies are rarely undertaken.

Treatment of insomnia Both non-pharmacological and pharmacological
approaches can be used to treat insomnia (Riemann et al., 2015).
Hypnotic drugs were widely prescribed in the past, but
non-pharmacological approaches are now recommended as first-line
treatment. These include a range of cognitive and behavioural components
(Box 13.11), including sleep hygiene (Box 13.12). Sleep hygiene refers
to a series of steps that are useful for all patients with insomnia and
can be applied in primary care. For more serious or persistent insomnia,
a range

Encourage Bedtime routines Consistent time for going to bed and waking
up Going to bed only when tired Thinking about problems before going to
bed Regular exercise

Avoid Late-evening exercise Caffeine-containing drinks late in the day
Using mobile devices or watching TV in bed Excessive alcohol and smoking
Excessive daytime sleep Large late meals Too much time in bed lying
awake

372

Sleep disorders of additional specific non-pharmacological treatments
have been shown to be effective. For example, stimulus control focuses
on the principle that one only goes to bed when sleepy, and, if not
asleep within 20 minutes, one should get up and engage in a relaxing
activity before returning to bed. Adaptations of CBT for insomnia for
delivery via the internet are being evaluated and show promise.
Medication has a limited role to play. Although it is sometimes
justifiable and useful to give a hypnotic for short-term use (e.g.Â in
the early stages of SSRI treatment), demands for prolonged medication
should be resisted. Apart from the risks of tolerance, dependence, and
'hangover' effects, withdrawal of hypnotics can lead to insomnia that is
as distressing as the original sleep disturbance. Low doses of sedative
antidepressants, such as trazodone or mirtazapine, are an alternative
pharmacological treatment for insomnia. For guidelines on the use of
medication to treat insomnia and other sleep disorders, see Wilson et
al. (2010).

Hypersomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness Excessive daytime
sleepiness is common (with a reported prevalence of 3--5%) and
underdiagnosed. Many cases are secondary to loss of night-time sleep.
Box 13.13 lists the principal causes. For review, see Zeman et
al.Â (2004). For a discussion of the treatment of excessive daytime
sleepiness, see Billiard (2009).

Narcolepsy Narcolepsy is an important cause of chronic sleepiness,
affecting about 1 in 2000 people. It usually begins with the sudden
onset of persistent daytime sleepiness between the ages of 10 and 20
years, although diagnosis is often delayed by several years. A useful
diagnostic clue is that, unlike daytime sleepiness caused by
insufficient sleep or that which is often observed in teenagers, people
with narcolepsy typically feel refreshed after a full night's sleep. In
addition, narcolepsy is characterized by a disturbance in rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep, which can occur at any time and lead to unusual
states in between sleep and wakefulness (such as hypnopompic and
hypnogogic hallucinations). The most striking of these REM-like states
is cataplexy: sudden episodes of partial or complete paralysis of
voluntary muscles,

Box 13.13 Causes of excessive daytime sleepiness Insufficient sleep
Narcolepsy Depression Other medical disorders (e.g.Â hypothyroidism,
Prader-- Willi syndrome) Shift-work sleep disorder Use of sedative
medications Obstructive sleep apnoea

sometimes causing the person to fall to the ground. Cataplexy does not
occur in all patients, being limited to type I narcolepsy (see below).
Additional clinical features of narcolepsy include a tendency to obesity
(owing to a low metabolic rate), and depression is common. For review of
narcolepsy, see Scammell (2015).

Aetiology and pathology Considerable progress has been made in
understanding narcolepsy in recent years, and has led to the delineation
of two types. Type 1 narcolepsy is characterized by cataplexy and by
marked reduction of a peptide called orexin-A (also called hypocretin-1)
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This occurs because of a severe and
selective loss of the hypothalamic neurons that make this peptide, which
is known to be involved in regulation of wakefulness. Type 2 narcolepsy
is not associated with cataplexy, and CSF orexin-A levels are normal;
its diagnosis is therefore more challenging, and its biological basis
less well understood. The predominant genetic association to narcolepsy
is HLA-DQB1*06:02. More than 98% of patients with type 1 narcolepsy (and
50% of those with type 2 narcolepsy, have this genotype, compared to
about 15--30% of the general population. HLA-DQB1*06:02 has been
estimated to increase the risk of narcolepsy by a factor of 200. Other
genes involved in immune function are also implicated in narcolepsy
risk. There is increasing evidence that narcolepsy may be an autoimmune
disorder, triggered by infections or other stimuli (Mahlios et al.,
2013). For example, its onset is most common in late spring, and may
follow streptococcal infections. Strikingly, there was a marked increase
in cases of narcolepsy in children given a specific brand of influenza

327

328

328

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders vaccine in 2009--2010,
but only in those with HLADQB1\*06:02 genotype. It is thought that these
genetic and environmental triggers lead to an immune response that
damages the orexin-A producing cells.

Assessment Narcolepsy usually presents to neurologists. The differential
diagnosis is from other causes of excessive daytime sleepiness (Box
13.13). A full history, especially a sleep history, is the main
assessment tool. The Epworth Sleepiness Scale is often used. In
specialist settings the multiple sleep latency test (in which the
latency to daytime naps, and the occurrence of REM sleep during them) is
carried out. Measurement of HLA status and orexin-A levels in CSF is
sometimes undertaken, but is not routine. A psychiatrist may be involved
in the care of a person with narcolepsy for several reasons: â

To assist in the diagnostic assessment.

â

If cataplexy is triggered by strong emotions, as is often observed.

â

If the patient has comorbid psychiatric disorder, or is distressed by
the psychological and social consequences of their symptoms, especially
cataplexy.

â

To advise regarding the use of psychotropic medication for treatment of
narcolepsy.

Treatment of narcolepsy Patients need considerable help in adjusting to
a disabling chronic illness. They should be encouraged to follow a
regular routine, with good quality sleep at night and planned naps
during the day. If stressful events or other factors (e.g.Â fatigue)
appear to provoke cataplexy, efforts should be made to avoid them or to
arrange the patient's lifestyle so as to minimize their impact.
Particular caution should be taken with driving and other activities
where sudden drowsiness or cataplexy may be dangerous. Most patients
require treatment with stimulant drugs. For mild or moderate cases,
modafinil, a nonamfetamine stimulant, reduces daytime sleepiness and
increases alertness. Amfetamines are more potent but have more side
effects and risk of abuse. Venlafaxine, clomipramine, and other
antidepressants can be used to decrease cataplexy. Night-time sleep can
be improved by sodium oxybate, with beneficial effects on daytime
functioning, but its side effects restrict its use to severe cases.

For guidelines on the treatment of narcolepsy, see Scammell (2015).

Breathing-related sleep disorder This syndrome consists of daytime
drowsiness together with periodic respiration, recurrent apnoeas, and
excessive snoring at night. It is usually associated with upper airways
obstruction, hence the term obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome. The
prevalence is about 4% in the male population. The typical patient is a
middle-aged overweight man who snores loudly. Treatment consists of
relieving the cause of the respiratory obstruction and encouraging
weight loss. Continuous positive pressure ventilation using a face mask
is often effective. Compliance with advice is often poor. Obstructive
sleep apnoea is a risk factor for stroke. Some children with a history
of problems with tonsils, adenoids, and/or ear infections can have
frequent arousals during sleep, diminishing the overall quality of sleep
from obstructed airways, leading to daytime difficulties with
irritability and attentional problems.

Kleine--Levin syndrome This very rare secondary sleep disorder consists
of episodes of somnolence, increased appetite, and hypersexuality, often
lasting for days or weeks, with long intervals of normality between
them. It usually affects adolescent boys. The symptoms suggest a
hypothalamic disorder, but its aetiology is unknown. There is no
established treatment, but stimulants, lithium, and other mood
stabilizers, are used. For review, see Miglis and Guilleminault (2014).

Circadian-rhythm sleep disorder (sleep--wake schedule disorders) There
are several forms of circadian-rhythm sleep disorder, of which jet lag
is the most familiar. Shift-work sleep disorder is a common and
increasing problem, the consequences of which are widely underestimated.
Fatigue and transient difficulties in sleeping accompany regular changes
of shift, or the irregular alternation of night work and days off may
lead to chronic problems of poor sleep, fatigue, impaired concentration,
and an increased

329

Sleep disorders risk of accidents as well as adverse physical and social
effects (Wulff et al., 2010). Puberty triggers a change towards an
evening preference in a sizeable proportion of adolescents (up to 40%),
exacerbated by a range of social and behavioural factors. The most
prevalent sleep complaint therefore tends to be an inability to wake up
for school, with significant impairment in a small subset of
adolescents. For a review of the assessment and treatment of
circadian-rhythm sleep disorders, see Morgenthaler et al. (2007).

Parasomnias Parasomnias are abnormal behaviours or physiological events
occurring in association with sleep, specific sleep stages, or
sleep--wake transitions. Some types of parasomnia are especially common
in children (Stores, 2015), whereas others occur mostly in older adults
and may be associated with neurodegenerative disorders. For review, see
Howell (2012).

Nightmares (dream anxiety disorder) A nightmare is an awakening from REM
sleep to full consciousness with detailed dream recall. Children
experience nightmares with a peak frequency around the age of 5 or 6
years. Nightmares may be stimulated by frightening experiences during
the day, and frequent nightmares usually occur during a period of
anxiety. Other causes include post-traumatic stress disorder, fever,
psychotropic drugs, and alcohol detoxification.

Night terror disorder Night terrors are much less common than
nightmares. They are sometimes familial. The condition begins and
usually ends in childhood, but occasionally persists into adult life. A
few hours after going to sleep, the child, while in stage 3--4 non-REM
sleep, sits up and appears terrified. They may scream, and they usually
appear confused. There are marked increases in heart rate and
respiratory rate. After a few minutes the child slowly settles and
returns to normal calm sleep. There is little or no dream recall. A
regular bedtime routine and improved sleep hygiene have been shown to be
helpful. Benzodiazepines and imipramine have been shown to be effective
in preventing night terrors, but their prolonged use should be avoided.

Sleepwalking disorder Sleepwalking is an automatism that occurs during
deep non-REM sleep, usually in the early part of the night. It is most
common between the ages of 5 and 12 years, and 15% of children in this
age group walk in their sleep at least once. Occasionally, the disorder
persists into adult life. Sleepwalking may be familial. Most children do
not actually walk, but sit up and make repetitive movements. Some walk
around, usually with their eyes open. They do not respond to questions,
and are very difficult to wake. They can usually be led back to bed.
Most episodes last for a few seconds or minutes. As sleepwalkers can
occasionally harm themselves, they need to be protected from injury.
Doors and windows should be locked and dangerous objects removed. Adults
with severe problems should be given advice about safety, avoidance of
sleep deprivation, and any other circumstances that might make them
excessively sleepy (e.g.Â drinking alcohol before going to bed).

Other parasomnias Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behaviour disorder is a
parasomnia that should be considered when behavioural problems,
particularly agitation or aggression, occur during the night. It is
thought to occur when the normal atonia of REM sleep is lost, so that
dreams are acted out. It is more common in the elderly, particularly
men. It is associated with, and can precede the onset of,
neurodegenerative disorders, particularly Parkinson's disease and Lewy
body dementia (Boeve et al., 2013). Clonazepam and donepezil may be
effective. Restless legs syndrome is a distressing and painful condition
that can result in severe insomnia and periodic limb movements during
sleep. It is common, with 2.5% of the population having significant
symptoms. Risk factors include female gender, pregnancy, ageing, low
iron status, and parkinsonism. The syndrome can be mistaken for a
psychiatric symptom or disorder (e.g.Â anxiety, akathisia), and it can be
comorbid, especially with depression. For review, see Yeh et al.Â (2012).
Sleep paralysis is an inability to perform voluntary movements during
the transitions between sleep and wakefulness, either at sleep onset
(hypnagogic) or during awakening (hypnopompic). The episodes are often
accompanied by extreme fear.

329

30

330

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity In the
past, as reflected in earlier editions of this book, sexual matters were
more prominent in psychiatry than is now the case, for several reasons:

with an individual's anatomical sex, that person is said to have a
gender dysphoria (formerly gender identity disorder).

â

Sexual factors were considered to be important in psychodynamic theories
of causation and, perhaps related to this historical view, more
attention was paid to the patient's sexual history, attitudes, and
behaviour than is now usual.

â

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity were often
attributed to mental illness and therefore in the domain of psychiatry.
Notably, homosexuality was a category of psychiatric disorder until the
1970s.

â

Sex therapy was more widely practised by psychiatrists (Althof, 2010).

Note that a brief sexual history continues to be an integral part of
assessment (Chapter 3), and knowledge of how psychiatric disorders and
treatments can impair sexual function remains important. The psychiatric
aspects of childhood sexual abuse are discussed in Chapter 16, and
forensic aspects of sexual offences covered in Chapter 18. The
epidemiology, physiology, and psychology of sexual behaviour are not
covered here. Regarding sexual orientation, a 2013 study on
18--44-year-olds in the US showed that 92% of women and 95% of men said
they were 'heterosexual or straight'; 1.3% of women and 1.9% of men said
they were 'homosexual, gay, or lesbian'; 5.5% of women and 2.0% of men
said they were bisexual; and 0.9% of women and 1.0% of men said 'don't
know' or declined to answer (Copen et al., 2016). For review of
psychiatric aspects of sexual orientation, see Meyer (2013).

In contemporary psychiatry, there has been a marked shift in the
psychiatric relevance of, and involvement in, disorders of sexual
function, preference, and gender identity. These are now seen primarily
in specialized clinics, where a multidisciplinary approach is taken.
Within this setting, the psychiatrist's main role is to identify and
manage any comorbid mental illness or distress that has arisen. Much
less emphasis is placed on the 'psychiatric' basis of sexual disorder
itself. This chapter reflects these developments, whilst recognizing
that current classifications use categories and concepts that retain
many elements of the earlier views. Hence, we discuss the main features
of the three categories of disorders affecting sex and gender that are
recognized in ICD-10 and DSM-5 (see Table 13.2). In ICD-11, substantial
changes to terrminology and classification in this area are anticipated
(Reed et al., 2016). â

Sexual dysfunction denotes impaired or unsatisfying sexual enjoyment or
performance. Such conditions are common. They are subdivided, according
to the stage of the sexual response that is mainly affected, into
disorders of sexual desire, disorders of sexual arousal, and disorders
of orgasm. There are also categories for the painful conditions
vaginismus and dyspareunia. For a DSM-5 diagnosis, these disorders need
to last at least 6 months.

â

Abnormalities of sexual preference (paraphilias) are uncommon, but they
take many forms and have forensic implications.

â

Gender identity refers to one's sense of being male or female. When this
sense of identity is at variance

Sexual dysfunction In men, sexual dysfunction refers to repeated
impairment of normal sexual performance, and less often to impairment of
sexual interest and pleasure. In women it more often refers to a
repeated unsatisfactory quality to the experience, or to impaired desire
for it. Note also that there is no agreed definition of 'dysfunction' in
this context. What is regarded as 'normal' (e.g.Â in terms of the
frequency or duration of sexual activity) depends in part on the
expectations of the individuals concerned. As explained above, problems
of sexual dysfunction are classified into those that affect: â

sexual desire and sexual enjoyment

â

the genital response (erectile impotence in men, and lack of arousal in
women)

â

orgasm (premature or delayed ejaculation in men, and orgasmic
dysfunction in women).

To this list can be added problems that result in pain during sex
(vaginismus and dyspareunia in women, and painful ejaculation in men).
It is important to remember that sexual function may not be disclosed
directly, but only revealed during enquiries about another complaint,
such as depression or poor sleep, or gynaecological symptoms.

31

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity

Table 13.2 Classification of sexual and gender identity disorders DSM-5

ICD-10

Sexual dysfunctions

Sexual dysfunction not caused by organic disorders\*

Sexual desire/arousal disorders

Lack or loss of sexual desire Sexual aversion and lack of sexual
enjoyment

â Female sexual interest/arousal disorder

Failure of genital response

â Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder â Erectile disorder

Orgasm disorders

Orgasmic dysfunction

â Female orgasmic disorder â Delayed ejaculation

Premature ejaculation

Premature ejaculation

Genitopelvic pain/penetration disorder (classified under specific
phobia) Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction Non-organic
dyspareunia Non-organic vaginismus Excessive sexual drive Paraphilic
disorders

Disorders of sexual preferenceâ 

Anomalous sexual preferences Exhibitionistic disorder

Exhibitionism

Voyeuristic disorder

Voyeurism

Frotteuristic disorder Sexual masochism disorder

Sadomasochism

Sexual sadism disorder

Anomalous target preferences Paedophilic disorder

Paedophilia

Fetishistic disorder

Fetishism

Transvestic disorder

Fetishistic transvestism

Gender dysphoria

Gender identity disordersâ¡

In children In adolescents and adults \* In ICD-10, sexual dysfunction
is part of F5, 'Behavioural syndromes associated with physiological
disturbances and physical factors'. â  In ICD-10, these disorders are
part of F6, 'Disorders of adult personality and behaviour'. â¡ In ICD-10,
gender identity disorders are part of F6. Source: data from The ICD-10
classification of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health
Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

331

32

332

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders For comprehensive review
of assessment and treatment of sexual dysfunction see Wincze and
Weisberg (2015).

Prevalence of sexual dysfunction In the UK, a sample of over 11,000
people aged 16-- 44 years were asked about sexual problems that had
lasted for more than 1 month and for more than 6 months (Mercer et al.,
2003). The response rate was 65%. It is not known whether the
self-reported problems would have met the diagnostic criteria for the
corresponding sexual dysfunction. The reported rates are shown in Table
13.3. More women than men reported problems, and among both the majority
of problems lasted for less than 6 months. Nazareth et al.Â (2003)
surveyed patients from 13 general practices in London, with a 70%
response rate to the questionnaire. Around 22% of the men and 40% of the
women met the criteria for an ICD-10 diagnosis of a sexual problem. The
most frequent problems were inhibited female orgasm (19%), lack or loss
of sexual desire (17% of women and 7% of men), male erectile dysfunction
(9%), and female sexual arousal dysfunction (3.6%). A systematic review
of 135 studies of female sexual dysfunction showed considerable
heterogeneity, with an overall estimate in premenopausal women of 41%

Table 13.3 Reported frequency of sexual dysfunction among people aged
16--44 years with a sexual partner (respondents could report more than
one disorder)\* Lasting 1 month

Lasting 6 months

Lack of sexual interest

17%

2%

Erectile difficulty

6%

1%

Premature orgasm

12%

3%

Anxiety about performance

9%

2%

Lack of sexual interest

40%

10%

Inability to reach orgasm

14%

4%

Pain during coitus

12%

3%

Anxiety about performance

7%

2%

Males

Females

\*Adapted from British Medical Journal, 327(7412), Mercer CH et al,
Sexual function problems and help seeking behaviour in Britain: national
probability sample survey, pp.Â 426--7, Copyright (2003), with permission
from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

(95% confidence interval \[CI\] = 37--44). Prevalence rates of
individual sexual disorders ranged from 21% (lubrication difficulties)
to 28% (hypoactive sexual desire disorder). Further analyses showed
significantly higher rates in studies in Africa (McCool et al., 2016).
Erectile dysfunction is common and increases with age, but overall rates
for sexual dysfunction, estimated at 35%, are lower than those for women
(Angst et al., 2015; Shamloul and Ghanem, 2013). The more restrictive
DSM-5 criteria (requiring a 6-month duration) will produce lower
prevalence rates.

Causes of sexual dysfunction The aetiology of most sexual dysfunction
will be multiply determined, as often both physical and psychological
factors are present. Causes can be split into three broad categories:
biological/medical, psychological, and as a result of sociocultural
influences. For a review of female sexual dysfunction see McCool et
al.Â (2016), and for a review of male dysfunction, see Shamloul and
Ghanem (2013).

Biological/medical causes Sexual dysfunction sometimes dates from a
period of abstinence associated with the debilitating effects of
physical illness (see Box 13.14). Of the diseases that have a direct
effect on sexual performance, diabetes mellitus is particularly
important, due both to autonomic neuropathy and vascular disease. For
example, the presence of penile microangiopathy in a middle-aged male
diabetic can cause erectile difficulties. Erectile dysfunction can also
be an early marker for cardiovascular disease. Similarly, hormonal
changes that can accompany menopause in women can produce vaginal
dryness and dyspareunia. Other important organic causes of sexual
dysfunction include neurological disorders (Rees et al., 2007), as well
as a range of general medical conditions (Basson and Schulz, 2007).
Several commonly used classes of drugs---psychiatric, medical, and
recreational---have side effects that involve sexual function (see Box
13.15). The psychotropic medications most likely to negatively affect
sexual functioning are: serotonergic antidepressants, prolactin-inducing
antipsychotic medications, and mood stabilizers or anticonvulsants that
lower bioavailable testosterone (Clayton et al., 2016). Intoxication
from or the excessive use of alcohol and illicit drugs can also impair
sexual performance.

Psychological causes Psychological contributions to dysfunction include
negative body image and performance anxiety (fear of

3

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity

Box 13.14 Medical conditions and surgical procedures commonly associated
with sexual dysfunction

Box 13.15 Some drugs that may impair sexual function Therapeutic agents

Medical conditions Endocrine â Diabetes, hyperthyroidism â Addison's
disease, hyperprolactinaemia Gynaecological â Vaginitis, endometriosis,
pelvic infections Cardiovascular â Hypertension, myocardial infarction,
peripheral vascular disease Respiratory â Asthma, obstructive airways
disease Other â Prostate cancer â Arthritis â Renal failure â Pelvic
autonomic neuropathy, spinal cord lesions, stroke

Diuretics and antihypertensive agents â Î²-blockers, calcium channel
blockers, spironolactone Antidepressants and mood stabilizers â SSRIs,
tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, lithium
Anxiolytics and hypnotics â Benzodiazepines Antipsychotics
Antihistamines and histamine H2-receptor antagonists â Diphenhydramine â
Ranitidine Parkinson's disease medications

Misused substances Alcohol, heroin, amphetamine, MDMA, cocaine,
marijuana

Surgical procedures Mastectomy Colostomy, ileostomy Prostate surgery
Prolapse surgery

Assessment of patients with sexual dysfunction History-taking

negative evaluation, hypervigilance, or rejection). Many psychiatric
disorders may impair sexual function, as discussed in other chapters.
There is a strong relationship with depression, in which rates of sexual
dysfunction are estimated to be up to 50%, compounded by
treatmentemergent sexual dysfunction with rates of 37--62%
(Reichenpfader et al., 2014).

Sociocultural influences Causes of sexual dysfunction can also arise
from a person's social context. For example communication and
relationship inequalities can foster sexual dysfunction, whilst larger
sociocultural influences such as sex-role or religious proscriptions may
also have an impact on sexual functioning. Furthermore, there are
impacts of the environment under which sexual activity occurs, such as a
lack of privacy and disparate work schedules, which have been identified
as significant contributors to sexual dysfunction.

The interviewer needs to be particularly sensitive when enquiring about
sexual function and dysfunction, and when detecting and dealing with
embarrassment experienced by the patient. Whenever possible, the patient
and their sexual partner should be interviewed, both separately and
together. The major areas of enquiry are listed in Box 13.16. In
addition to full characterization of the dysfunction itself, the
assessment should search for evidence of any of the medical and
psychiatric disorders noted earlier that can lead to sexual dysfunction.

Physical examination and special investigations If the general
practitioner or another specialist has not already done so, a physical
examination should be performed, especially in men (see Box 13.17).
Laboratory tests or other investigations should be arranged in
appropriate cases---for example, fasting blood sugar, testosterone, and
other hormones in men with erectile dysfunction.

333

34

334

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

Box 13.16 Assessment of sexual dysfunction Define the problem (ask both
partners) Origin and course Prior (baseline) sexual function With other
partners? Sexual drive Knowledge and fears Social relationships
generally Relationship between the partners Psychiatric disorder
Substance misuse Medical illness; medical or surgical treatment Why seek
help now?

Physical examination Laboratory tests

Box 13.17 Physical examination of male patients presenting with sexual
dysfunction General examination (directed especially to evidence of
diabetes mellitus, thyroid disorder, and adrenal disorder) Hair
distribution Gynaecomastia Blood pressure Peripheral pulses Ocular fundi
Reflexes Peripheral sensation

Genital examination Penis: congenital abnormalities, foreskin, pulses,
tenderness, plaques, infection, urethral discharge Testicles: size,
symmetry, texture, sensation Prostate

Treatment of sexual dysfunction The main treatments for sexual
dysfunction are shown in Box 13.18. The first step, after a detailed
assessment, is to provide advice and reassurance, since the problem is
often longstanding by the time the patient presents, and it may have led
to adverse secondary effects---for example, by increasing anxiety or
impairing the quality of the relationship generally. Where possible, the
underlying causes should be treated. Specific interventions include a
range of psychological and behavioural treatments, including sex
therapy/sensate focus techniques. Psychological interventions have been
shown in a systematic review to be effective treatment options for
sexual dysfunction (effect size 0.58) (FrÃ¼hauf et al., 2013), with the
strongest evidence for female hypoactive sexual desire disorder and
female orgasmic disorder. There are also physical treatments, of which
drug therapy with phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE-5) inhibitors is by far
the most widely used (Shamloul and Ghanem, 2013). The roles of the
various treatment modalities and the evidence for their efficacy vary
according to the specific type of sexual dysfunction, as discussed
below.

Sex therapy As noted above, many patients benefit from simple advice and
reassurance. Other cases resolve with treatment of

the cause of the sexual dysfunction, or the use of medication. For some
people, a formal type of behavioural therapy, known as sex therapy, may
be appropriate. In the UK, its availability within the National Health
Service is very limited, although it is also provided by the charity
Relate. Sex therapy owes much to the work of Masters and Johnson (1970),
and has four characteristic features. 1. The partners are treated
together. 2. They are helped to communicate better about their sexual
relationship. 3. They receive education about the anatomy and physiology
of sexual intercourse. 4. They complete a series of graded tasks, often
called Sensate Focus, which are a hierarchical series of structured
touching opportunities with a focus as much on what must not yet be
attempted as what is to be done. This prohibition often significantly
reduces 'performance anxiety', resulting in increased confidence and
subsequent success through a system of systematic desensitization
(Linschoten et al., 2016).

35

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity

Box 13.18 Treatments for sexual dysfunction Advice, information, and
reassurance Treatment of underlying cause Psychological methods Sexual
skills training Sex therapy (including sensate focus exercises) CBT
Marital therapy Systematic desensitization Educational intervention

Drug treatments PDE-5 inhibitors

Other physical treatments Vacuum devices Dilators

As with the majority of treatments for sexual dysfunction, there are few
adequately controlled studies of sex therapy.

female is manifested as reduced vaginal lubrication. This may be due to
inadequate foreplay, lack of sexual interest, anxiety, or low oestrogen
levels (typically related to the menopause).

Male erectile disorder (erectile dysfunction; impotence) This condition
is the inability to achieve an erection or to sustain it for long enough
for satisfactory coitus. It may be present from the first attempt at
intercourse (primary male erectile disorder) or develop after a period
of normal function (secondary male erectile disorder). It is more common
among older than younger men (in contrast with premature ejaculation;
see below). Primary cases may occur because of a combination of low
sexual drive and anxiety about sexual performance. Secondary cases may
arise from diminishing sexual drive in the middle-aged or elderly, loss
of interest in the sexual partner, anxiety, depressive disorder, or
organic disease and its treatment. It is thought that abnormalities of
the vascular supply to the penile erectile tissue are important factors
in erectile failure associated with physical disease, including diabetes
and peripheral vascular disease (as above). The following aspects of the
assessment are particularly important. â

Has there been a previous period of normal function?

â

Does erection occur during foreplay?

â

Does erection occur on waking or in response to masturbation? Erection
in these circumstances suggests psychological causes for the failure of
erection at other times.

â

Is there evidence of alcohol or drug abuse? (Ask the partner as well as
the patient.)

â

Are there possible effects of any medication?

Types of sexual dysfunction In this section we discuss the features and
treatment of the more common categories of sexual dysfunction.

Lack or loss of sexual desire (hypoactive sexual desire disorder)
Complaints of diminished sexual desire are much more common among women
than among men. There is controversy about the extent to which lack of
sexual desire, especially in women, should be considered a psychiatric
disorder (Angel, 2010). Lack of desire can be categorized as either a
lack or a loss, and as either global or situational. Hypoactive sexual
desire disorder can be treated effectively with psychological
interventions---especially sexual skills training or CBT (FrÃ¼hauf et
al., 2013). Testosterone may be used in men with hypogonadism (Snyder et
al., 2016).

Female sexual arousal disorder This category is now combined with
hypoactive sexual desire disorder in DSM-5. Lack of sexual arousal in
the

If the aetiology is uncertain after history-taking, physical
examination, and blood tests, several special investigations may be
considered, including measurements of tumescence and blood flow using
ultrasound. Any reversible causes should be treated. The first-line
specific therapy is now the use of PDE-5 inhibitors--- sildenafil
(Viagra), vardenafil, and tadalafil---which are effective in about 70%
of cases (Tsertsvadze et al., 2009). These inhibit the breakdown of
cyclic GMP by a phosphodiesterase located in the vascular smooth muscle
of the penis. They do not initiate arousal but enhance the effects of
sexual stimulation. Care should be taken to observe the manufacturer's
advice about contraindications and interactions. The most common side
effects are headache, flushing, dyspepsia, and nasal congestion.

335

36

336

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders PDE-5 inhibitors have
almost entirely supplanted earlier physical treatments for erectile
dysfunction (i.e.Â intracavernosal injections, vacuum devices, and
surgical methods). For review of erectile dysfunction, see Shamloul and
Ghanem (2013).

Female orgasmic disorder Many women do not regularly reach orgasm during
intercourse, but do so in response to clitoral stimulation. Whether
failure to reach orgasm regularly should be regarded as a disorder has
been questioned (Heiman, 2002). Nevertheless, some women regard it as a
problem and ask for advice and help. The best evidence is for sexual
skills training.

Male orgasmic disorder This term refers to serious delay in, or absence
of, ejaculation. It is usually associated with general inhibition about
sexual relationships, but it may be caused by drugs, including SSRIs,
antipsychotics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors.

Premature ejaculation This term refers to habitual ejaculation either
before penetration or so soon afterwards that the woman has not
experienced pleasure. It is more common among younger men, especially
during their first sexual relationships. When it persists, it is often
caused by fear of failure. Psychological causes should be treated
initially with advice and reassurance. If the partner is willing, the
'squeeze technique' can be useful. When the man indicates that he will
soon have an orgasm, his partner grips the penis for a few seconds and
then releases it suddenly. Intercourse is then continued. There are also
other methods designed to regulate and reduce the amount of sexual
stimulation in order to delay orgasm, which can be implemented as part
of sex therapy. Sometimes SSRIs, which delay ejaculation, are used in
treatment, but continued use is required.

Genitopelvic pain/penetration disorder Dyspareunia. This refers to pain
on intercourse, and implicitly relates to women, although it can occur
in men. Such pain can have many different causes. Pain that is
experienced after partial penetration may result from impaired
lubrication of the vagina, from scars or other painful lesions, or from
the muscle spasm of vaginismus. Pain on deep penetration strongly
suggests

pelvic pathology such as endometriosis, ovarian cysts or tumours, or
pelvic infection, although it can be caused by impaired lubrication
associated with low sexual arousal. For a review, see Steege and Zolnoun
(2009). Vaginismus. This refers to spasm of the vaginal muscles, which
causes pain when intercourse is attempted, in the absence of a physical
cause. The spasm is usually part of a phobic response to penetration,
and may be made worse by an inexperienced partner. Spasms often begin as
soon as the man attempts to enter the vagina; in severe cases they occur
even when the woman attempts to introduce her own finger. Points of
special relevance in the sexual history include the circumstances and
objects that provoke spasm, the partner's sexual technique, and any
history of traumatic sexual experience. There have been very few trials
of treatment for dyspareunia and vaginismus, so therapy has to be based
on clinical experience (FrÃ¼hauf et al., 2013). Treatment employs the
general sex therapy techniques described above, with emphasis on an
initial ban on attempts at intercourse. Fears are treated by using
psychological approaches, and the woman is helped to desensitize herself
gradually by inserting first her finger and then dilators of increasing
size.

Abnormalities of sexual preference (paraphilias) The concept of abnormal
sexual preference has a social aspect---that is, the behaviour does not
conform to some generally accepted view of what is normal. The accepted
view is not the same in every society or at every period in history. For
centuries, abnormalities of sexual preference were regarded as offences
against the laws of religion, rather than conditions that doctors should
study and treat. The systematic investigation of these disorders began
in the 1870s. Krafft-Ebing, a professor of psychiatry in Vienna, wrote a
systematic account of paraphilias in his book Psychopathia Sexualis,
which was first published in 1886. In England, Havelock Ellis
(1859--1939) wrote extensively about these and other sexual disorders,
which at the time included masturbation. In a current psychiatric
context, the status of paraphilia remains controversial. The important
feature that delineates abnormal sexual preference is harm or mental
distress to the person or to others (McManus et al., 2013).

37

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity This
distinction is recognized in DSM-5, in which 'a paraphilic disorder is a
paraphilia that is currently causing distress or impairment to the
individual or . . . harm, or risk of harm, to others'. The specific
paraphilic disorders are classified in Table 13.2. All are much commoner
in men than in women. Some carry major legal implications and
interactions, and so the more serious disorders are primarily in the
domain of forensic psychiatrists. However, any doctor may encounter
abnormalities of sexual preference in their clinical work---for example,
as a request for help, or an expression of concern by a third party. For
a review of this subject, see Beech et al.Â (2016) and Konrad et
al.Â (2015).

Types of abnormality of sexual preference Abnormalities of sexual
preference can be divided into two groups---abnormalities of the object
of the person's sexual interest, and abnormalities in the preference of
the sexual act. Abnormalities of the sexual object include paedophilic
disorder and fetishistic disorder. Abnormalities of preference of the
target for the sexual act include exhibitionistic disorder, voyeuristic
disorder, and sexual masochism disorder.

Aetiology of abnormalities of sexual preference

behaviours and might elucidate aspects of the pathophysiological process
(Solla et al., 2015).

Assessment of abnormalities of sexual preference Assessment often takes
place in the context of possible or actual legal proceedings. It is
important therefore to explain the relationship of the interview to any
such proceedings, to explain the position with regard to confidentiality
and its limits, and to obtain the necessary consent. People who are seen
for the assessment of abnormality of sexual preference are often
reluctant to disclose the true nature of their desires, or of their
sexual behaviour. Whenever possible, consent should be obtained for an
interview with any regular sexual partner, and with other informants who
may be able to assist with, for example, the assessment of personality.
Assessment includes a psychiatric history, and should incorporate the
following steps. â

Exclude another psychiatric disorder, especially if the patient first
presents with the abnormal sexual preference in middle age or later.
Abnormal sexual preference is sometimes secondary to dementia,
alcoholism, or mania.

â

Document the sexual behaviour and its effect. Obtain details of the
normal and abnormal sexual behaviour, both currently and in the past.
Remember that it is not uncommon for people to have more than one form
of abnormal sexual preference. Find out what part the abnormal sexual
preference is playing in the patient's life other than as a source of
sexual arousal.

â

Assess the patient's motivation. This will influence decisions about
management. Patients' motives for seeking treatment are often mixed.
Individuals who have little wish to change their sexual behaviour may
consult a doctor because of pressure from a sexual partner, a relative,
or the police. Such people may hope to be told that no treatment can
help, so as to justify the continuation of their paraphilia. Others seek
help when they are depressed and feel guilty about their behaviour. A
strong desire for change, expressed during a period of depression, may
fade quickly as the patient's normal mood is restored.

â

Psychophysiological assessment. Some specialists use penile
plethysmography or polygraphy to assess sexual interests. These methods
are not part of routine assessment.

The aetiology of paraphilias remains unknown, although a range of
theories have been proposed, none of which are supported by good
evidence. â

Behavioural models. According to these models, sexual preference is
shaped by events and reinforcements during development. For example, in
1877 Alfred Binet proposed that fetishism arises from the chance
co-occurrence of sexual excitement with the object that later becomes
the fetish object.

â

Psychoanalytical models. For example, Freud argued that fetishism arises
when castration anxiety is not resolved in childhood, with each fetish
object representing a phallus.

â

Biological models. These include reports linking paraphilias with
abnormal brain activity or structure, or with genetic predisposition.

â

Disease models. Paraphilias that begin in middle age or later may be
secondary to dementia or other organic disorders, or to their treatment.
For example, high-dose dopamine agonists that are used to treat
Parkinson's disease are associated with a range of abnormal sexual

337

38

338

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders

The management of abnormalities of sexual preference Some aspects of
management apply to all kinds of abnormality of sexual preference.
Management specific to particular disorders is described below, along
with the other aspects of those disorders. The following outline is
suggested: â

Complete the assessment to make a provisional diagnosis.

â

Assess the immediate risks---for example, whether the patient should be
reported to the authorities, or whether their level of distress requires
urgent treatment or admission. Often it is a crisis that first leads the
person to present---for example, if they have been accused of a sexual
offence or have been caught in a compromising sexual act.

â

Decide what treatment is indicated and acceptable to the patient. This
includes agreement about the aims of treatment, and the patient's
motivation. It may also include incentives or punishments determined by
the legal system.

â

Treatments for the paraphilias are of three types, although the field is
hampered by little available highquality evidence: â
psychotherapy---individual, couple, or group based

on behavioural or psychodynamic theories â pharmacotherapy---SSRIs,

synthetic steroidal analogues and gonadotropin-releasing hormone
analogues

â rehabilitation---counselling, education, social skills

training. An algorithm to assist clinicians in determining appropriate
biological treatments for individuals with paraphilic disorders has been
developed, which provides guidance on treatments depending on severity
of impairment and risk of harm (Thibaut et al., 2010). For an overview
of treatments for paraphilias see Bradford (2014) and for a review on
biological treatments see Holoyda et al.Â (2016).

Types of abnormality of preference for the sexual object These
abnormalities involve preferences for an 'object' other than another
adult for the achievement of sexual excitement. The alternative 'object'
may be inanimate, as in fetishistic disorder, or may be a child
(paedophilic disorder) or an animal (zoophilia). The more common
paraphilias are mentioned below.

Fetishistic disorder In sexual fetishism, the preferred or only means of
achieving sexual excitement are inanimate objects or parts of the human
body that do not have direct sexual associations. The objects that evoke
sexual arousal are many and varied, the most common being female items
of clothing, but for each individual there is usually only a small
number of such objects. Contact with the object causes sexual
excitement, which may be followed by solitary masturbation or by sexual
intercourse that incorporates the fetish. The disorder merges into
normal sexual behaviour, but is considered to be abnormal when the
behaviour takes precedence over the usual patterns of sexual
intercourse. The estimated prevalence is 1--18% in men, and the disorder
is very rare in women. There are no good data on natural history or
treatment outcome.

Transvestic disorder Transvestic disorder ranges from the occasional
wearing of a few articles of clothing of the opposite sex to complete
cross-dressing (Beech et al., 2016). The prevalence of the disorder in
men is estimated to be around 1%, although 3% of males report having
been sexually aroused by dressing in clothes associated with the
opposite gender. Onset usually occurs at around the time of puberty.
Most are heterosexual and many have sexual partners, who may or may not
know about the behaviour. Transvestic disorder is rare among women.
There have been no reliable followup studies or evaluated treatments.

Paedophilia In contrast to the generally benign effects of fetishism on
others, paedophilia has serious forensic and clinical implications.
Paedophilia is repeated sexual activity (or fantasizing about such
activity) with prepubertal children as a preferred or exclusive method
of deriving sexual excitement. Like most paraphilias, it is most
prevalent in the male population, although female cases are recognized
(Gannon and Rose, 2008). Paedophilia has to be distinguished from
intercourse with young people who have passed puberty but not yet
reached the legal age of consent (which differs between legislations).
Paedophiles usually choose a child aged between 6 years and puberty, but
some prefer very young children. The child may be of the opposite sex
(heterosexual paedophilia) or the same sex (homosexual paedophilia).
Some paedophiles approach children within their extended family, or in
their professional care, while others befriend unrelated children.
Although most

39

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity
paedophiles who are seen by doctors are men of middle age, the condition
is usually established early in life. With younger children, fondling or
masturbation is more likely to occur than full coitus, but sometimes
young children are injured by forcible attempts at penetration. There
are rare and tragic cases of paedophilia associated with sexual sadistic
disorder. Estimates of the prevalence of paedophilic disorder range from
1% to 5% in the male population (Konrad et al., 2015; Beech et al.,
2016). It occurs in all ethnic and socioeconomic groups. As is evident
from the existence of child prostitution in some countries, the ready
sale of pornographic material depicting sex with children and the number
of internet sites that show such material, interest in sexual
relationships with children is not rare. Treatments are discussed in the
Forensic chapter under child sexual abuse (Chapter 18).

Abnormalities in the preference for the sexual act The second group of
abnormalities of sexual preference involves variations in the behaviour
that is engaged in to obtain sexual arousal.

Voyeuristic disorder Voyeurism refers to observing the sexual activity
of others repeatedly as a preferred means of sexual arousal. The rates
are estimated to be as high as 12% in males and 4% in females for
lifetime prevalence of this disorder (Beech et al., 2016), with some
co-occurrence with exhibitionistic disorder. The voyeur spies on
individuals (occasionally with video cameras) who are undressing or
without clothes, but does not attempt to engage in sexual activity with
them. Voyeurism is usually accompanied by or followed by masturbation.
There is limited treatment efficacy reported with either pharmacological
or psychoanalytical approaches.

Exhibitionistic disorder Exhibitionistic behaviour---broadly defined as
the exposing of the genitals to an unsuspecting stranger---is the most
commonly reported of all sex offences (McNally and Fremouw, 2014).
Exhibitionistic behaviour is estimated to occur at rates as high as
2--4% in the general population. It is almost entirely a male disorder,
and adolescents account for approximately 10% of exhibitionistic
offences. It is less frequent than voyeuristic disorder but perpetrators
often commit multiple offences on multiple occasions (Beech et al.,
2016). It is usually done for the purpose of achieving sexual
excitement, without any attempts at further sexual activity with

the person. The name exhibitionism was suggested by LasÃ¨gue in 1877.
(This technical use of the term is clearly different from its everyday
meaning.) Over a 5-year follow-up, 5--10% of exhibitionistic
perpetrators were found to escalate to contact sexual offending, while
approximately 25% recidivated with a subsequent exhibitionistic offence.
The strongest risk factor for escalation was a general clustering of
antisocial behavior, including a history of sexual and non-sexual
convictions (McNally and Fremouw, 2014). As a generalization, two groups
of exhibitionists can be described. The first group includes men of
inhibited temperament who struggle against their urges and feel much
guilt after the act; they sometimes expose a flaccid penis. The second
group includes men who have aggressive traits, sometimes accompanied by
features of antisocial personality disorder; they usually expose an
erect penis. They gain pleasure from any distress they cause, and often
feel little guilt. Few evidence-based treatments exist, but those that
are most effective are along the lines of treatment for sex offenders
and can include CBT (Beech et al., 2016).

Frotteuristic disorder In frotteurism, the preferred form of sexual
excitement is by rubbing the male genitalia against another person, or
by fondling the breasts of an unwilling participant, who is usually a
stranger, generally in a crowded place. Frotteuristic activity usually
starts in adolescence, with most acts occurring between the ages of 15
and 25 years, and prevalence estimates suggest that approximately 30% of
the population has committed acts that would qualify as frotteuristic
(Beech et al., 2016).

Sexual sadism disorder Sadism is named after the Marquis de Sade
(1740--1814), who inflicted extreme cruelty on women for sexual
purposes. Sexual sadism refers to the achievement of sexual arousal
habitually, and in preference to heterosexual intercourse, by inflicting
pain on another person, by bondage, or by humiliation. The acts may be
symbolic, causing little actual harm. However, at times serious injuries
are caused, including severe acts of mutilation in a murder. In these
rare cases, ejaculation may occur during the sadistic act, or later,
during intercourse with the dead body (necrophilia). Sexual sadism as
the predominant sexual practice is uncommon, but sexual sadism as a part
of 'normal' sexual activity has an estimated prevalence of 3--20%. No
treatment has been shown to be effective. Men who have committed serious
injury are dealt with by legal means. The risks must not be
underestimated when

339

340

340

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders potentially dangerous
behaviour has been planned or has taken place.

Sexual masochism disorder Sexual masochism disorder involves using the
experience of suffering or humiliation as a preferred or exclusive
practice for achieving sexual excitement. The condition is named after
Leopold von Sacher-Masoch (1836--1895), an Austrian novelist, who
described sexual gratification from the experience of pain. The
suffering may take the form of being beaten, trodden upon, or bound, or
the enactment of various symbolic forms of humiliation. Masochism,
unlike most other sexual deviations, occurs relatively commonly in
women, although its prevalence in both genders is difficult to gauge.
There is little data on treatment efficacy.

Gender dysphoria Gender dysphoria (formerly gender identity disorder) is
a term that denotes persistent discomfort with one's biologic sex or
assigned gender. It is receiving significant attention, and referrals to
gender-confirming clinics (formerly known as sex reassignment clinics)
are dramatically rising, as is the prominence of the subject in all
forms of the media (Zucker et al., 2016). The management of gender
dysphoria should be multidisciplinary, as endocrine, surgical, and
psychological input are all often needed. There is, however, a growing
argument that these dysphorias should not necessarily sit within a
psychopathological or psychiatric model (Wylie et al., 2016). Such
models are seen as outdated and not able to reflect the multitude of
different experiences and terms used to describe individuals whose
gender identity or gender role behaviour does not match up with societal
expectations or stereotypes associated with the (biological)
male--female binary (Drescher et al., 2012; Zucker et al., 2016).
Reflecting the changing views, DSM-5 adopted the term gender dysphoria
to replace 'gender identity disorder', placing emphasis on the emotional
distress that can result when there is a marked incongruence between
one's experienced/expressed gender and one's assigned gender. An
increasing number of other terms are also being used with regard to
gender and gender dysphoria (see Box 13.19, also Winter et al., 2016).
Subtypes have been described that include sexual orientation--- whether
sexually attracted to males, females, both, or neither, as well as age
of onset of the gender dysphoria, with early-onset usually denoting the
preschool period. The implications of these subtypes are unclear,
although they have played a historical role in assessments for sex

Box 13.19 Some terms used relevant to gender dysphoria Transgender: an
umbrella term for people whose gender (identity, expression, general
sense of self) is different from the sex they were assigned at birth
Transsexual: someone who has transitioned from one sex to the other
through the use of hormones and/or surgical procedures Transgender
woman/trans woman/MtF: someone who was assigned male at birth but living
as a woman (male to female) Transgender man/trans man/ FtM: someone who
was assigned female at birth but living as a man (female to male) Sexual
orientation: refers to an individual's enduring physical, romantic,
and/or emotional attraction to another person. Transgender people may be
straight, bisexual, lesbian, gay, or asexual Non-binary: someone who
does not identify with either gender, or has a gender that changes over
time, or feels in between genders Cisgender: someone who identifies with
the gender they were assigned at birth

reassignment surgery. For review of gender dysphoria in adults see
Zucker et al.Â (2016) and in adolescents and children see Zucker et
al.Â (2015). For review of transgender people and mental health, see
Wylie et al.Â (2016) and Winter et al.Â (2016).

Epidemiology Prevalence rates are difficult to determine. Previous data
were drawn from numbers of referrals to specialist centres and also on
numbers requesting a change to the gender they had been assigned in
their passports. This, however, is unlikely to be a true prevalence rate
because of the stigma attached to individuals with gender dysphoria and
the limited services available. As public understanding has increased,
there has been an increase in the reported prevalence rates; this might
reflect a bona-fide increase or, more likely, just an increase in those
who would previously not have sought treatment. Conron et al.Â (2012)
conducted telephone interviews on over 28,000 adults (aged 18--64 years)
and found that

341

Disorders of sexual function, preference, and gender identity 0.5%
considered themselves to be transgender. Studies using stricter caseness
criteria, such as Dhejne et al. (2014), reported a point prevalence in
Sweden of 1:7750 adult males and 1:13,000 females who had applied for a
legal name change. Judge et al.Â (2015) reported a prevalence of 1:10,000
adult males and 1:28,000 females referred for hormonal treatment in
Ireland. A metaanalytic review of 21 studies concluded that the
prevalence of transsexualism in males was 1:15,000 and 1:38,000 in
females (Zucker and Lawrence, 2009).

Associated psychopathology Comorbid psychopathology is significantly
more prevalent in adults with gender dysphoria than in the general
population. Mood and anxiety disorders are the most common. A study of
all persons in Sweden who had undergone sex reassignment surgery, a
cohort of over 300 individuals, showed that 19% of males-to-females and
17% of females-to-males had been hospitalized for psychiatric problems
other than gender dysphoria prior to undergoing sex reassignment surgery
(compared to 3--4% of controls) (Dhejne et al., 2014). Their risk for
hospitalization for psychiatric problems remained over double that of
controls after surgery, and they were 4.9 times more likely to have made
a suicide attempt, and 19 times more likely to have died from suicide.
Another large study of over 300 people with gender dysphoria treated in
clinics across Europe showed that 38% had a current Axis I disorder and
69% had a lifetime Axis I disorder---predominantly mood and anxiety
disorders (Heylens et al., 2014). This is consistent with many other
studies that have shown a high prevalence of comorbid psychopathology
(Zucker et al., 2016).

Aetiology A number of causal mechanisms have been proposed. These are
predominantly based on general principles of 'normative' or 'sex
typical' psychosexual development--- that becomes inverted in the
development of gender dysphoria. Genetic causes: family and twin studies
demonstrate that there is some genetic contribution to gender dysphoria,
but no genes have been identified. In a study of twins with gender
dysphoria, 39% of monozygotic twins were concordant for gender
dysphoria, whereas none of the dizygotic twins were concordant (Heylens
et al., 2012). Prenatal sex hormones: it has been hypothesized that
feelings of gender incongruence may arise from atypical sexual
differentiation of the brain under the influence of prenatal hormones
(Swaab, 2009).

Sex-dimorphic brain structure and function: brain structure and function
have been studied to determine whether they show atypical sexual
differentiation. The studies demonstrate that homosexual male-to-females
are dissimilar to their natal sex in grey matter volume (Simon et al.,
2013), cortical thickness (Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2013), and white
matter microstructure (Rametti et al., 2011). For non-homosexual
male-to-females the picture is less clear. For natal females, who are
more likely to be similar in sexual orientation (homosexual),
female-tomales had larger grey matter volumes than female controls, and
the majority of studies have shown support for atypical sexual
differentiation of their brains (Zucker et al., 2016). Psychosocial
processes: in some children and adults, gender identity can be observed
as more fluid and less trait-like. For example, clinical populations of
children with gender dysphoria show a diminution of their cross-gender
behaviour over time, which may lead to a shift in their underlying
gender identity or identification, especially in samples in which a
social transition to living as the desired gender has not occurred prior
to puberty (Steensma et al., 2013). There were also historical studies
exploring the relationship quality and warmth between mothers and
fathers with the person with gender dysphoria, but it is difficult to
draw conclusions from these studies. For review, see Zucker et
al.Â 2016).

Treatment The treatment of adults with gender dysphoria has been
standardized across many high-income countries, reflecting the influence
of a number of clinical guidelines. The Standards of Care for the Health
of Transsexual, Transgender and Gender-Nonconforming People, Version 7
(SOC-7) is the most influential (Coleman et al., 2012). A key change in
these latest guidelines is that the diagnosis can be made by any
appropriately trained health professional, not only by a mental health
professional. The latter historically played a gatekeeper role to
receiving hormone therapy, but this might have inadvertently undermined
individual autonomy in a person who might need the treatment and not
have a mental illness. Nevertheless, a psychological and psychiatric
assessment is important to rule out and treat any significant comorbid
mental illness, as well as provide interventions that might help in
alleviating the dysphoria. The guidelines generally follow expert
consensus rather than evidence from clinical trials. Current treatment
includes the following steps:

341

342

342

Chapter 13 Eating, sleep, and sexual disorders Counselling and
psychotherapy should deal with the full range of options available. It
emphasizes the need to set realistic goals and to consider the full
consequences of any contemplated changes, both for the person and for
their family. It is now considered unethical to make the focus of
therapeutic work a goal for that person's gender identity to be more
congruent with the sex they have been assigned at birth, as, although
gender dysphoria can remit in some cases, the agreed consensus at
present is to make the focus of therapeutic involvement the 'long-term
comfort in . . . gender identity expression, with realistic chances for
success in . . . relationships, education and work' (Coleman et al.,
2012). Real life experience in the preferred gender role. Almost all
individuals with gender dysphoria will have to live in their new gender
role for a period of 1 year prior to surgery. During this time,
appropriate hormone treatment (see below) is prescribed. At the end of
the year, an individual who can demonstrate to an assessment panel that
they are better adjusted in the new gender role than in the old one may
be considered for surgery. Despite the widespread requirement to live in
the new gender role for a year, there is little evidence to support it,
and it carries psychosocial risks, including loss of employment,
impaired relationships, and gender-based discrimination; thus it has
been argued that, if a person with gender dysphoria can achieve
satisfactory relief with hormone therapy and sex reassignment surgery,
it is unclear why they have to undertake the real life experience
(Zucker et al., 2016). Hormonal therapy. Hormone therapy is effective
and reasonably safe in adults with gender dysphoria; those undergoing
hormone therapy demonstrate significant improvement in quality of life
if they undergo concomitant sex reassignment surgery (Murad et al.,
2010) than if they do not (Gorin-Lazard et al., 2012). The treatments
for males-to-females include testosterone suppression, spironolactone,
cyproterone acetate, or gonadotropinreleasing hormone (GnRH) agonists.
Androgens may be prescribed to females-to-males, as a result of which
the voice deepens, hair increases on the face and body, menstruation
ceases, the clitoris enlarges, and sex drive increases.
Gender-confirming (sex reassignment) surgery. Opinions differ about the
merits of sex reassignment, and decisions should be taken with the
person and members of

the multidisciplinary team. For a male-to-female, possible surgical
procedures include mammoplasty, penectomy, orchidectomy, and the
creation of a vagina-like structure. For a female-to-male, surgical
procedures include mastectomy, ovariectomy, and phalloplasty. Follow-up
studies show that outcomes after surgery are generally favourable. In a
study of 46 males-tofemales and 11 females-to-males, objective
psychological measures improved after hormone therapy and became similar
to those of the general population, but no further improvement was noted
following sex reassignment surgery (Heylens et al., 2014). A
meta-analysis showed that 86% of females-to-males and 71% of
males-to-females reported improvement in quality of life (Murad et al.,
2010); equally, it is important to note that a significant minority do
not. Factors predictive of less satisfactory functioning include
non-homosexual orientation relative to natal sex, greater
dissatisfaction with secondary sex characteristics, and more comorbid
psychopathology (Smith et al., 2005).

Gender identity disorders in children Children with gender dysphoria
display behaviours that reflect identification with the other sex. There
are early-onset forms (before 12 years, and usually between 2--4 years)
and later-onset forms. The early-onset form in both biological males and
females is associated with later homosexual orientation, whereas the
late-onset form is typically non-homosexual (Lawrence, 2010). Boys are
referred more often than girls. It is not clear whether this is because
such behaviour is less frequent or more socially acceptable in girls.
Parents should be discouraged from making attempts to force children
into stereotyped 'gender-based' behaviours and roles, as this has no
demonstrated benefits and can cause discord and distress. There is
emerging evidence that, for a proportion of adolescents for whom gender
dysphoria is persistent, the negative impacts on social adaptation,
general mental health, and peer and family relations might encourage
biomedical treatments, including initiating hormonal therapies to delay
or suppress somatic puberty. For further information, see Giordano
(2013) and Zucker et al.Â (2015). For a summary of the controversies, see
Drescher et al.Â (2016).

34

Further reading

Further reading Fairburn CG (2008). Cognitive Behavior Therapy and
Eating Disorders. Guilford Press, New York. Kryger MH et al.Â (2016).
Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine. 6th edn. Elsevier,
Philadelphia, PA.

Wincze, J. P., and Weisberg, R. B. (2015). Sexual dysfunction: A guide
for assessment and treatment, Guilford Publications, 3rd edition, New
York.

343

34

345

CHAPTER 14

Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders Introduction
345

Cerebrovascular disorders 377

Classification 346

Head injury 378

Symptoms associated with regional brain

Epilepsy 379

pathology 346

Intracranial infections 385

Assessment of the 'neuropsychiatric patient' 350

Brain tumours 386

Delirium 351

Other neuropsychiatric syndromes 387

Amnesia and amnesic disorders 354

Secondary or symptomatic neuropsychiatric

Dementia 356

syndromes 389

Movement disorders 373

Introduction Neuropsychiatry comprises psychiatric disorders that arise
from demonstrable abnormalities of brain structure and function.
Cognitive impairments are the most prominent feature, especially in
dementia and delirium, but behavioural and emotional disturbances are
also common, and may be the sole manifestations. The term
neuropsychiatry is sometimes used interchangeably with organic
psychiatry (see David, 2009a). However, the latter category is broader,
including psychiatric disorders that arise from general medical
disorders with their basis outside the brain (e.g.Â endocrine and
metabolic disorders). Moreover, the term organic has the fundamental
problem that it wrongly implies that other psychiatric disorders do not
have any such basis (Spitzer et al., 1992; see Chapter 2). Finally,
regardless of terminology, there is always the risk that psychological
and social factors will be neglected if a disorder is considered to be
'physical', and vice versa.

In this chapter we cover the range of disorders conventionally
considered under the heading of neuropsychiatry, which include: â

delirium---acute, generalized impairment of attention and cognition in
the setting of altered consciousness

â

dementia---chronic, generalized cognitive impairment in clear
consciousness. As with delirium, the syndrome of dementia can be caused
by many separate disease processes. (This chapter covers the clinical
features and aetiology of dementia; its treatment and management are
covered in Chapter 19).

â

amnesic (or amnestic) syndromes (or disorders)--- circumscribed deficits
in memory

â

cerebrovascular disorders

â

movement disorders

â

epilepsy

â

head injury

346

346

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders â

other neuropsychiatric disorders, including focal cerebral syndromes,
encephalitis, tumours, and multiple sclerosis

â

secondary or symptomatic neuropsychiatric disorders---disorders such as
depression and anxiety,

which in particular cases can be attributed directly to a
neuropsychiatric cause (e.g.Â psychosis due to cerebral vasculitis).
Psychiatric disorders secondary to diseases elsewhere in the body are
covered in Chapter 22.

Classification In ICD-10, organic psychiatric disorders are grouped
together in category F00--F09, as organic, including symptomatic, mental
disorders. In DSM-5, the equivalent chapter is entitled neurocognitive
disorders; as in DSM-IV, the term 'organic' is not used. The two
classifications are compared in Table 14.1 (the order of diagnoses has
been modified to facilitate the comparison). Despite many similarities,
ICD-10 and DSM-5 differ to a significant extent, and more so than in
most other areas of psychiatric diagnosis: â

The most substantial difference is that DSM-5 introduces the new
category of neurocognitive disorder, and divides it into major and minor
forms (Sachdev et al., 2014). Major neurocognitive disorder subsumes the
conventionally distinct categories of dementia and amnestic disorder.
The term dementia is still used descriptively in DSM-5, but amnesic
syndrome is not. Mild neurocognitive disorder describes cases that show
lesser degrees of cognitive and functional impairment (and which would
not meet criteria for dementia). Both major and minor neurocognitive
disorders are then subcategorized by their presumed aetiology (e.g.Â due
to Alzheimer's disease). Neurocognition in DSM-5 is divided into six
domains: complex attention, executive function,

learning and memory, language, perceptual--motor, and social cognition.
The individual neurocognitive disorders vary as to the relative
involvement of these domains. In this chapter, we follow the ICD10
approach, and retain the terms dementia and amnesic disorder. â

In ICD-10, the category of organic disorder includes subcategories for
any mental disorder that is due to brain damage and dysfunction and to
physical disease, and for personality and behavioural disorders that are
due to brain disease, damage, and dysfunction (e.g.Â 'organic anxiety
disorder, thyrotoxicosis'). In DSM-5, such conditions are classified
separately, under the relevant psychiatric disorder, with the addition
of a code to indicate that the disorder is secondary to a medical
condition.

â

Conversely, DSM-5 includes cases of delirium or dementia (major
neurocognitive disorder) that are due to use of psychoactive substances,
whereas ICD10 excludes these conditions and records them in a separate
section on 'mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive
substance abuse' (F10--F19). Thus, for example, amnestic syndrome that
is due to alcohol dependence is classified as a psychoactive substance
abuse disorder.

Symptoms associated with regional brain pathology Before considering the
various syndromes, it is helpful to consider the characteristic features
associated with lesions in different regions of the brain, and the
neuroanatomical basis of memory. Knowledge of the regional affiliation
of neurological and psychopathological findings is relevant when
attempting to localize neuropsychiatric conditions. However, the
clinical features are not diagnostically specific and the
clinicopathological correlations are often modest rather than strong.
For a review of this subject, see David (2009a).

Frontal lobe The frontal lobes, together with their reciprocal
connections to other cortical and subcortical regions, have a crucial
role in personality and judgement. Patients with a frontal lobe syndrome
may present with a variety of clinical syndromes. â

They may be disinhibited, overfamiliar, tactless, and garrulous, make
fatuous jokes and puns (Witzelsucht),

374

Symptoms associated with regional brain pathology

Table 14.1 Classification of organic mental disorders in ICD-10 and
DSM-5 ICD-10 F00--F09. Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders

DSM-5 Neurocognitive disorders

Delirium (not induced by alcohol and other psychoactive substances)

Delirium Substance intoxication delirium Substance withdrawal delirium
Medication-induced delirium Delirium due to another medical condition
Delirium due to multiple aetiologies

Dementia Dementia in Alzheimer's disease Vascular dementia Dementia in
Pick's disease Dementia in Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease Dementia in
Huntington's disease Dementia in Parkinson's disease Dementia in HIV
disease Unspecified dementia

Major neurocognitive disorder (dementia) Due to Alzheimer's disease Due
to vascular disease Due to frontotemporal lobar degeneration Due to
prion disease Due to Huntington's disease Due to Lewy body disease Due
to HIV infection Due to traumatic brain injury Due to
substance/medication use Due to another medical condition Due to
multiple aetiologies Unspecified

Organic amnesic syndrome (not induced by alcohol and other psychoactive
substances)

Minor neurocognitive disorder Subcategories as listed for major
neurocognitive disorder

Other mental disorders due to brain damage and dysfunction and to
physical disease Organic hallucinosis Organic catatonic disorder Organic
delusional disorder Organic mood disorders Organic dissociative disorder
Mild cognitive disorder Personality and behavioural disorders due to
brain disease, damage, and dysfunction Unspecified organic or
symptomatic mental disorder Source: data from The ICD-10 classification
of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and
diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health Organization;
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition,
Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

commit errors of judgement and sexual indiscretions, and disregard the
feelings of others. â

They may appear inert (abulic) and apathetic, with a paucity of
spontaneous speech, movement, and emotional expressions.

â

They may engage in obsessive, ritualistic behaviours, with perseveration
of thought and gesture.

Measures of formal intelligence are generally unimpaired in frontal lobe
disease. However, there may be

difficulties in abstract reasoning (e.g.Â 'How are glass and ice
different?') and cognitive estimates are typically inaccurate but
precise (e.g.Â '364 miles from London to New York'). Concentration and
attention are reduced, and insight is often markedly impaired. Verbal
fluency, assessed using word generation by letter (e.g.Â number of words
beginning with 's' in 1 minute) and category (e.g.Â number of animals),
is reduced, and unusual (lowfrequency) examples may be volunteered. The
patient has difficulty switching between tasks (perseveration),

347

348

348

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
carrying out sequenced movements, and understanding rules. Utilization
behaviour (e.g.Â donning several pairs of spectacles) may be evident.
Posterior extension of a dominant frontal lobe lesion may involve
Broca's area and produce an expressive (non-fluent) dysphasia.
Encroachment on the motor cortex or deep projections may result in a
contralateral hemiparesis. Other signs may include ipsilateral optic
atrophy or anosmia, a grasp or other primitive reflexes and, if the
process is bilateral or in the midline, incontinence of urine.

Parietal lobe Lesions of the parietal lobe may cause various
neuropsychological disturbances that are easily mistaken for conversion
disorder (see page 000). Involvement of the non-dominant parietal lobe
characteristically gives rise to visuospatial difficulties, with neglect
of contralateral space, and constructional and dressing apraxias.
Lesions of the dominant lobe may be associated with receptive dysphasia,
limb apraxia, body image disorders, right--left disorientation,
dyscalculia, finger agnosia, and agraphia. Other signs may include
contralateral sensory loss, astereognosis, and agraphaesthesia, and
(with more extensive lesions) a contralateral hemiparesis or homonymous
inferior quadrantanopia. Persistent unawareness of neurological deficit
(anosognosia) is not uncommon, especially with nondominant parietal
lesions. In extreme cases, the patient may deny that a paretic limb
belongs to him. This should be distinguished from denial due to a
psychological unwillingness to recognize disability and its
consequences.

Temporal lobe The temporolimbic syndromes are characterized by complex
and wide-ranging neuropsychiatric clinical pictures. There may be
personality change resembling that of frontal lobe lesions, but more
often accompanied by specific cognitive deficits and neurological signs.
The relatively florid behavioural disturbances that characterize the
frontotemporal dementias reflect the combined temporal and frontal
involvement, and their interconnections. Unilateral medial temporal lobe
lesions, especially those involving the hippocampus, produce
lateralizing memory deficits---left hippocampal damage impairs verbal
memory (and semantic impairment and fluent

dysphasia), whereas right hippocampal damage affects non-verbal
(spatial) aspects of memory. Some evidence also suggests that left
medial temporal lobe lesions are more likely to produce psychotic
symptoms, and rightsided lesions produce affective ones.

Occipital lobe Occipital lobe lesions rarely present to psychiatrists,
but they may cause disturbances of visual processing that are easily
misinterpreted as being of psychological origin. Such phenomena
occasionally accompany migraine or occipital lobe seizures. Complex
visual hallucinations may occur with lesions involving visual
association areas, sometimes referred to a hemianopic field. These
include multiple visual images (polyopia), persistent aftertraces of the
features of an image (visual perseveration or palinopsia), and
distortions of the visual scene (metamorphopsia). Lesions that impinge
anteriorly on the parietal or temporal lobes may produce visual
disorientation (inability to localize objects in space under visual
guidance) with asimultagnosia (difficulty in perceiving the visual scene
as a unity), or prosopagnosia (inability to recognize familiar faces).
In patients with suspected occipital lobe pathology, the visual fields
should be mapped using perimetry, and neuropsychological tests performed
to delineate visual agnosias and other higher-order derangements of
visual processing. Some patients who are blind due to occipital lobe
damage deny that they are blind (Anton's syndrome).

Corpus callosum Corpus callosum lesions (classically, the 'butterfly
glioma') typically extend laterally into both hemispheres. They then
produce a picture of severe and rapid intellectual deterioration, with
localized neurological signs varying with the degree and direction of
extension into adjacent structures. Pure callosal lesions (usually
iatrogenic, following surgery for intractable epilepsy) can be
surprisingly difficult to identify, and require specialized
neuropsychological testing to expose a 'disconnection syndrome',
reflecting disruption of interhemispheric communication. These unique
'split-brain' patients raise intriguing questions concerning the
mechanisms that normally bind the two hemispheres together to generate a
consistent, unitary sense of the self (Gazzaniga, 2000). Callosal
degeneration is a hallmark of the rare Marchiafava--Bignami syndrome,
which is seen in severe alcohol dependence.

349

Symptoms associated with regional brain pathology

Subcortical structures and cortico-subcortical circuits The regional
cortical associations with cognitive, affective, and behavioural
features reflect the classic 'locationist' approach to neurology and
neuropsychiatry. Increasingly, this has been replaced by a
'connectionist' approach, in which emphasis is placed on distributed
neural systems in which cortical regions are linked with subcortical
structures, and with the white matter pathways that connect them.
Mesulam (1998) described five networks: â

a right-hemisphere spatial awareness network, including the posterior
parietal cortex and frontal eye fields

â

a left-hemisphere language network, including Broca's and Wernicke's
areas

â

a memory--emotion network, including the hippocampus, amygdala, and
cingulate cortex

â

a working memory--executive function network, including the prefrontal
cortex and posterior parietal cortex

â

a face and object recognition network in the temporoparietal and
temporo-occipital cortex.

Another influential model is that of Alexander and Crutcher (1990), who
proposed four parallel circuits linking different parts of the cerebral
cortex with specific basal ganglia and thalamic nuclei. Each circuit
mediates different functions. For example, the 'limbic' circuit, which
is involved in emotional and motivational processes, links the anterior
cingulate cortex and medial prefrontal cortex with the ventral striatum,
ventral pallidum, and mediodorsal thalamus.

Thalamus, basal ganglia, and cerebellum A variety of cognitive and
psychiatric consequences have been described following lesions of
subcortical nuclei. These structures, which were previously considered
to be primarily involved in sensory processing (the thalamus) or in
motor control (the basal ganglia and cerebellum) are now all known also
to be integrally involved in cognition and behaviour, and lesions
therein may present with psychiatric as well as neurological features
(DeLong and Wichmann, 2007; Schmahmann and Pandya, 2008), and include
disturbances of memory, language, and mood. Reduced initiation of
actions is also characteristic of basal ganglia pathology, and impaired
consciousness with thalamic lesions.

Rostral brainstem Behavioural disturbances frequently accompany lesions
of the rostral brainstem. The most characteristic features are an
amnestic syndrome (see below), hypersomnia, and the syndrome of akinetic
mutism ('vigilant coma') or stupor.

White matter As well as the corpus callosum, mentioned earlier, damage
to other white matter tracts---both subcortical and
periventricular---has important neuropsychiatric and behavioural
consequences. The clinical features of white matter pathology depend on
the location of the damage and whether it is focal or diffuse. For
review, see Schmahmann et al.Â (2008).

Memory systems and their neuroanatomy Clinical, neuropsychological, and
brain imaging studies (both structural and functional) support the
existence of multiple memory systems in the human brain. These functions
may all be affected more or less selectively by brain lesions. The most
basic division lies between implicit (i.e.Â procedural) and explicit
(i.e.Â declarative) memory. The former includes a range of phenomena that
are not usually subject to conscious analysis, such as motor skills,
conditioned behaviours, and repetition priming. Explicit memory is
subclassified into episodic (memory of autobiographical events) and
semantic (knowledge of the world) functions. The short-term store
underpins working memory (e.g.Â when dialling an unfamiliar telephone
number). Distinct anatomical substrates for short-term storage of verbal
and visuospatial information, both controlled by a central executive,
have been proposed. In neuropsychological terms, 'short-term' refers to
immediate recall. By contrast, the concept of 'short-term' memory, as
sometimes applied by clinicians to recall over minutes and days, does
not correspond to an anatomical substrate. Specific types of memories,
such as faces and topographical information, may engage dedicated
subsystems. Episodic memory has both anterograde (new learning) and
retrograde (recall of past events) components. It appears to be mediated
by a network of cortical and subcortical structures, which include the
hippocampus, parahippocampal and entorhinal cortices, amygdala,
mammillary bodies, fornix, cingulate, thalamus, and frontobasal cortex,
whereas semantic memory may

349

350

350

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders be
subserved by a partly independent network overlapping the language
areas. Broadly speaking, verbal memories are mediated by the left
(dominant) hemisphere and non-verbal memories by the right hemisphere.

For a review of the classification and neuroanatomical basis of memory
and its dysfunction, see David and Kopelman (2009) and Ranganath and
Ritchey (2012).

Assessment of the 'neuropsychiatric patient' The assessment of cognitive
function was introduced in Chapters 1 and 3 as part of the general
psychiatric assessment, and in this chapter the evaluation of amnesia,
delirium, and dementia will be discussed. In this section, we introduce
key aspects of the initial approach to the patient who has a suspected
neuropsychiatric disorder. For a more detailed discussion, see Kipps and
Hodges (2005) and David (2009b). Before embarking upon the assessment,
it is worth bearing in mind the range of major diagnostic possibilities.
One question to be addressed early on is whether there is clouding of
consciousness, as this defines delirium, and the assessment can proceed
to determine its cause. If there is no impaired consciousness, the main
diagnostic categories to consider are amnesia, dementia, or a
'functional' cause of cognitive impairment. The key feature of an
amnestic syndrome is a specific deficit in episodic memory, as outlined
above; although rare, amnestic syndrome needs to be considered in
patients presenting with memory impairment, especially in those with
alcohol dependence. A functional cause should always be considered, as
memory impairment may occur secondary to many psychiatric disorders; in
particular, depression in the elderly may present as pseudodementia (see
Chapter 19). Distinction between organic and functional causes requires
positive evidence to be sought for both forms of disorder, and is an
important distinction to make, as it has a significant impact upon
treatment and prognosis. Once these other causes of cognitive impairment
(delirium, amnestic syndrome, and functional disorder) have been ruled
out, a provisional diagnosis of dementia can be made (assuming that the
impairment is of sufficient severity), and attention can then turn to
determining the type of dementia from which the patient is suffering, as
discussed later.

History and mental state examination Although physical examination and
laboratory investigations play a much larger role than elsewhere in

psychiatry, the history remains essential: 'the difference between a
good neuropsychiatrist and a mediocre one is a good history' (David,
2009b). An informant is especially important, as the presence of
impaired cognition or consciousness will necessarily limit the patient's
ability to provide a full and accurate history. Key points in the
history include the onset, duration, and progression of the
impairment---for example, an acute onset suggests delirium or, if it
began after a fall, may indicate a subdural haematoma. The neurological,
medical, and family history is important too, as many causes of
cognitive impairment are secondary to pre-existing disorders or have a
genetic basis.

Physical examination The physical examination needs to be comprehensive
and careful, as signs may not be conspicuous. Particular attention
should be paid to the nervous system, as well as to searching for
peripheral stigmata of systemic disease and alcohol dependence. Specific
signs may provide diagnostic clues (Cooper and Greene, 2005) (e.g.Â the
Argyll--Robertson pupil of neurosyphilis, optic disc pallor in vitamin
B12 deficiency, or cranial nerve involvement in neurosarcoidosis).

Investigations The choice and extent of investigations will depend on
the findings from the history, mental state examination, and physical
examination, but usually include a core set of tests, such as the
cognitive tests and blood tests used in evaluation of dementias noted
below. In difficult or atypical cases, and in younger patients,
investigations may be extensive, and the opinion and assistance of a
neurologist, physician, or neurosurgeon may be required. Some examples
of specialized investigations used in neuropsychiatric evaluation are
listed here. Many are described later in the chapter with regard to
investigation of dementia.

351

Delirium â

â

â

Structural brain imaging with CT or MRI. Neuroimaging can detect focal
and diffuse pathologies, and longitudinal scans can map progressive
changes that mirror clinical decline. MRI is superior to CT for most
purposes, including evaluation of white matter disease, and the ability
to perform volumetric measurements. Functional brain imaging with fMRI,
MRS, SPECT, or PET is a valuable research tool, but is not in widespread
clinical use. Neuropsychological testing is less widely used than
previously, in part because of the increasing availability of brain
imaging. However, it can still play a valuable part in characterization
of the cognitive impairment (e.g.Â the cognitive domains that are most
affected), and measurement of severity and progression (David, 2009b).
Rating scales for the assessment of dementia are considered below.
Electroencephalogram (EEG) studies retain a limited but valuable role in
several situations where EEG findings are characteristic---for example,
in delirium,

prion disease, and detection of non-convulsive status epilepticus. They
are also useful in the differential diagnosis of stupor, as a normal EEG
would suggest a dissociative state. â

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination after lumbar puncture is essential
if an inflammatory or infective process is suspected. It may also become
more widely used in the evaluation or prediction of dementia, as
different proteins are discovered to have diagnostic or prognostic value
as biomarkers.

â

Genetic testing has a key role in the diagnosis (and prediction) of a
very limited range of familial disorders in which the mode of
inheritance, and the causative gene, are known (e.g.Â Huntington's
chorea).

â

Brain biopsy, usually of the right frontal lobe, is occasionally
indicated as a last resort in the diagnosis of unexplained cognitive
impairment or in suspected prion disease. However, the risks of this
procedure must always be weighed against the diagnostic and prognostic
information that will be obtained from it.

Delirium Delirium is characterized by global impairment of consciousness
(clouding of consciousness), resulting in reduced level of alertness,
attention, and perception of the environment, and thence cognitive
performance. A number of other terms, such as acute confusional state,
acute brain failure, and acute organic syndrome, have also been used,
but delirium is the preferred term in both ICD-10 and DSM-5. For a
review of delirium and its management, see Inouye et al.Â (2014a) and
O'Connell et al.Â (2014).

Epidemiology The prevalence of delirium in the elderly is 1--2% in
community samples, 8--17% in emergency departments, 18--35% on admission
to hospital, with an overall occurrence in inpatients of 29--64% (Inouye
et al., 2014a). Rates of about 8% have been reported in residential care
homes (Boorsma et al., 2012). Delirium is much more common in the
elderly than in younger people, and in individuals with diminished
'cerebral reserve', notably those with pre-existing dementia and other
medical factors (Box 14.1). Delirium is thus a common disorder in all
medical settings, especially for older people. Moreover, it is
associated with several adverse outcomes, discussed below, and so its
prompt recognition and treatment are important.

Clinical features The cardinal feature of delirium is disturbed
consciousness. It is manifested as drowsiness, decreased awareness of
one's surroundings, disorientation in time and place, and
distractibility. At its most severe the patient may be unresponsive
(stuporose), but more commonly the impaired consciousness is quite
subtle. Indeed, the first clue to the presence of delirium is often one
of its other features, which include mental slowness, distractibility,
perceptual anomalies, and disorganization of the sleep-- wake cycle (see
Box 14.2). Symptoms and signs vary widely between patients, and in the
same patient at different times of day, typically being worse at night.
For example, some patients are hyperactive, restless, irritable, and
have psychotic symptoms, while others are hypoactive, with retardation
and perseveration. Repetitive, purposeless movements are common in both
forms. Thinking is slow and muddled, but often rich in content
('dream-like'). Ideas of reference and delusions (often persecutory) are
common, but are usually transient and poorly elaborated. Visual
perception is often distorted, with illusions, misinterpretations, and
visual hallucinations, sometimes with fantastic content. Tactile and
auditory hallucinations also occur. Anxiety, depression, and emotional
lability are common. The patient may be frightened, or

351

352

352

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Box 14.1 Delirium: predisposing and precipitating factors Predisposing
factors Dementia Previous episode of delirium Functional impairment
Sensory impairment History of cerebrovascular disease Alcohol misuse
Older age

Precipitating factors Substance-related Prescribed medical drugs
(e.g.Â steroids, digoxin, diuretics) Psychotropic medication
(e.g.Â sedatives, opiates, hypnotics) Alcohol---intoxication, withdrawal,
delirium tremens Use of more than one drug Physiological causes
Septicaemia Infection (e.g.Â urinary tract, respiratory) Hypoxia
(e.g.Â postoperative) Organ failure (e.g.Â renal, hepatic, cardiac)
Abnormal albumin Metabolic acidosis Hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia
Dehydration Neurological causes Post-ictal Head injury Space-occupying
lesion Encephalitis Use of physical restraints Bladder catheter Pain
Sleep deprivation Constipation Adapted from Lancet, 383(9920), Inouye
SK, Westendorp RGJ and Saczynski JS, Delirium in elderly people,
pp.Â 911-922, Copyright (2014a), with permission from Elsevier.

Box 14.2 Clinical features of delirium Clouding of consciousness
Impaired attention Disorientation for time and place Impaired memory
Psychotic-like symptoms Perceptual disturbances Delusions Perplexity
Thought disorder Behavioural and other symptoms Agitation Irritability
Labile affect Word-finding difficulties Temporal course Rapid onset
Fluctuation over 24-hour period Reversal of sleep--wake cycle

of delirium screening tools are available (De and Wand, 2015), of which
the Confusion Assessment Method is most widely used.

Aetiology The main causes of delirium are listed in Box 14.1. In
practice, most cases are multifactorial, and sometimes idiopathic. In
elderly people in medical settings, drugs (especially polypharmacy) and
infection are probably the commonest causes; in other settings and
populations, delirium has a wide range of causes and hence requires
urgent and wideranging investigations (see below). The
pathophysiological basis of delirium is unclear. The severity of
clinical disturbance correlates with the degree of slowing of cerebral
rhythms on EEG, and the neurotransmitters dopamine and acetylcholine are
implicated in a final common pathway. Inflammatory, metabolic, and
genetic factors also contribute (Inouye et al., 2014a).

Management of delirium perplexed. Experiences of depersonalization and
derealization are sometimes described. Attention and registration are
particularly impaired, and on recovery there is usually amnesia for the
period of the delirium. A range

Prevention There are more effective interventions to prevent delirium
than to treat it. This applies to pharmacological

35

Delirium and particularly to non-pharmacological strategies. The latter
include a range of validated approaches such as the Hospital Elder Life
Program (HELP) and targeting of delirium risk factors
(e.g.Â reorientation, promotion of sleep) (Inouye et al., 2014a). Low
doses of antipsychotics, gabapentin, and melatonin also have some
efficacy in preventing delirium (Friedman et al., 2014). In practice,
however, preventative interventions are often not possible, or resources
not available, and it becomes necessary to treat delirium.

Treatment Delirium is a medical emergency. Although it is a clinical
diagnosis, it is essential to identify and treat the underlying cause,
and a range of investigations may be required (see Box 14.3). Many are
routine (e.g.Â electrolytes, full blood count, urinalysis), whereas
others are carried out depending on the context (e.g.Â lumbar puncture).
Vital signs need regular measurement. As delirium is often caused by
drugs (due to side effects or withdrawal effects), these should always
be suspected until there is evidence of another cause. The mainstay of
treatment should be nonpharmacological, since there is little evidence
that any medication improves outcome, and antipsychotics (which are
commonly used) have known adverse effects (Inouye et al., 2014b).
General measures should always be used to relieve distress, control
agitation, and prevent exhaustion. These include frequent explanation,
reorientation, and reassurance. Unnecessary changes in the staff caring
for the patient should be avoided. The patient should ideally be nursed
in a quiet single room. Relatives should be encouraged to visit
regularly. At night, lighting should be sufficient to promote
orientation, while not preventing sleep. In many cases, use of these
behavioural measures can be sufficient to manage the patient whilst the
cause of the delirium is being investigated and treated. Nevertheless,
despite such interventions, in practice many patients with delirium are
treated with medication to control agitation and distress, and to allow
adequate sleep. Antipsychotics are usually first-line medication. They
should be limited to cases with severe agitation (endangering the
patient) and for psychotic symptoms causing distress (hallucinations or
delusions) (Inouye et al., 2014b). Haloperidol has conventionally been
used, starting at a very low dose, and then carefully titrated to

Box 14.3 Investigations for delirium Blood tests Full blood count Urea
and electrolytes Renal function tests Liver function tests Calcium
Random blood glucose Blood cultures Arterial blood gas Syphilis serology

Other tests Urinalysis Chest X-ray Drug screen Cardiac enzymes MRI or CT
brain scan EEG Lumbar puncture

achieve the desired calming effect without excess sedation or side
effects. If necessary, the first dose can be given intramuscularly,
followed by doses every 6 hours (typically 1--5 mg per day, although
elderly patients may require less). Atypical antipsychotics are now
often prescribed instead of haloperidol; the same principles of careful
administration and monitoring apply. Some causes of delirium require
avoidance of antipsychotics, or particular caution when using them. This
includes all patients with coexisting dementia, especially dementia with
Lewy bodies, (see page 000). Antipsychotics should be avoided in
delirium associated with alcohol withdrawal (delirium tremens; see page
000) or with epilepsy, because of the risk of seizures. In delirium
tremens, a benzodiazepine is the standard treatment (either lorazepam or
chlordiazepoxide; see page 000). All drugs should be used with caution
in liver failure because of the danger of precipitating hepatic coma.
For a practical review of delirium management, see O'Connell et
al.Â (2014).

353

354

354

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Outcome Many cases of delirium recover rapidly. The prognosis is related
to the underlying cause, and is worse in the elderly and in those with
pre-existing dementia or physical illness. Patients with a 'hypoactive'
behavioural profile have a worse outcome than those who are
'hyperactive'. There is an elevated mortality rate following delirium,
with an estimated 25% mortality at 3 months, although published
estimates vary markedly; a recent meta-analysis of elderly patients
found that an episode of delirium was associated with a twofold
increased risk of death in the next 2 years (Witlox et al., 2010).

The relationship between delirium and dementia is complex and
bidirectional (Inouye et al., 2014a). As noted earlier, pre-existing
dementia is a major risk factor for delirium, and there is now
increasing evidence that delirium has a role in the onset of dementia.
The Witlox et al.Â (2010) meta-analysis reported a fivefold increase in
incidence of dementia 2 years after an episode of delirium, and
subsequent studies find similar or even greater effects (Davis et al.,
2012). A large recent study shows that delirium acts synergistically
with underlying dementia neuropathology to accelerate the pace of
cognitive decline (Davis et al., 2017).

Amnesia and amnesic disorders Amnesia is loss of memory, and amnesic
(also called amnestic) disorders or syndromes are those in which
episodic memory is specifically and persistently affected, and with a
decline from previous level of functioning. In ICD-10 and in routine
clinical practice, these criteria together distinguish amnesic disorders
from dementia, delirium, or neurodevelopmental disorders (see Box 14.4).
However, as noted earlier, DSM-5 subsumes amnesic disorders within the
broader category of major neurocognitive disorder, removing the
distinction from dementia. Amnesic disorders manifest as an inability to
learn new information (anterograde amnesia) and to recall past events
(retrograde amnesia). To make the diagnosis, there should be a
significant impairment in social or occupational functioning, and
evidence of a general medical condition which can be aetiologically
related to the memory impairment. Korsakov syndrome (also called
Korsakoff syndrome) is sometimes erroneously referred to synonymously
with amnesic disorder, but is in fact a specific form of it, as
described below. For a review of amnesia and amnesic disorders, see
Markowitsch and Staniloiu (2012).

Clinical features The cardinal feature is a profound deficit in episodic
memory. The full clinical picture is striking. There is disorientation
for time, loss of autobiographical information (often extending back for
many years), severe anterograde amnesia for verbal and visual material,
and lack of insight into the amnesia. Events are recalled

Box 14.4 Causes of amnesia Transient Transient global amnesia Transient
epileptic amnesia Head injury Alcoholic blackouts Post-electroconvulsive
therapy Post-traumatic stress disorder Psychogenic fugue Amnesia for
criminal offence

Persistent (amnestic syndrome) Korsakov syndrome Herpes encephalitis
Posterior cerebral artery and thalamic strokes Head injury

immediately after they occur, but forgotten a few minutes later. Thus
the digit span, which tests the shortterm memory store, is typically
normal. New learning is grossly defective, but retrograde memory is
variably preserved and shows a temporal gradient, with older memories
being better preserved. Other cognitive functions are relatively intact,
although some emotional blunting and inertia are often observed.

35

Amnesia and amnesic disorders The other classic feature, seen
particularly in Korsakov syndrome, is confabulation, in which gaps in
memory are filled by a vivid and detailed but wholly fictitious account
of recent activities, which the patient believes to be true. The
confabulating patient is often highly suggestible.

Aetiology and pathology Amnesia results from lesions in the medial
thalamus, other midline diencephalic structures, or medial temporal
lobes (hippocampus and adjacent temporal cortex) (Markowitsch and
Staniloiu, 2012). Cases due to damage in the medial temporal lobe
typically produce the 'purest' amnesia, with little in the way of
disorientation or confabulation; these features are characteristic of
thalamic and diencephalic lesions.

Korsakov syndrome The commonest cause of amnesic disorder is Korsakov
syndrome, named after the Russian neuropsychiatrist who described it in
1889. The alternative term, Wernicke-- Korsakov syndrome, was proposed
by Victor et al.Â (1971), because the syndrome often follows an acute
neurological syndrome called Wernicke's encephalopathy, consisting of
delirium, ataxia, pupillary abnormalities, ophthalmoplegia, nystagmus,
and a peripheral neuropathy. Korsakov syndrome is usually caused by
thiamine deficiency, secondary to alcohol abuse, although it
occasionally results from other causes, such as hyperemesis gravidarum
and severe malnutrition (Scalzo et al., 2015). The classic
neuropathological findings are neuronal loss, gliosis, and
microhaemorrhages in the periaqueductal and paraventricular grey matter,
the mammillary bodies, and the anterior and mediodorsal thalamus (Kril
and Harper, 2012). Other causes of amnesic syndrome include tumours and
infarcts in the medial thalamus (diencephalic amnesia) and encephalitis.

Investigation and management Alertness to the possibility of amnesic
syndrome is essential; the patient may not fit the stereotype of chronic
alcohol misuse associated with Korsakov syndrome, and this is a
potentially reversible condition. Useful findings from investigations
include a reduced red cell transketolase level, which is a marker of
thiamine deficiency, and an increased MRI signal in midline structures.

In practice, Korsakov syndrome should be assumed to be the cause of
amnesic syndrome until another aetiology (see Box 14.5) can be
demonstrated, and should be treated urgently with thiamine without
awaiting the results of investigations. Thiamine is given parenterally
in an acute presentation, together with rehydration, general nutritional
support, and treatment of supervening alcohol withdrawal. Thiamine
replacement should always precede administration of intravenous
glucosecontaining solutions. Close liaison with physicians and
neurologists is important. Apart from thiamine, there are no
interventions of proven efficacy for amnesic disorders. In the longer
term, amnesic syndrome may require substantial rehabilitation and
support, as the condition markedly impairs normal activities and ability
to provide self-care.

Course and prognosis In the series of Victor et al.Â (1971), consisting
of 245 patients with Wernicke--Korsakov syndrome, 96% of the patients
presented with Wernicke's encephalopathy. Mortality was 17% in the acute
stage, and 84% of the survivors developed a typical amnesic syndrome.
There was no improvement in 50% of cases, complete recovery in 25%, and
partial recovery in the remainder. Favourable prognostic factors were a
short history before diagnosis and prompt commencement of thiamine
replacement. The prognosis is poor in cases of amnesic syndrome
resulting from viral encephalitis and other causes of irreversible
bilateral hippocampal or diencephalic damage. However, amnesic syndrome
owing to head injury has a better outlook. Progressive amnesia suggests
a slowly expanding structural lesion, such as a midbrain tumour.

Transient global amnesia The syndrome of transient global amnesia is
important in the differential diagnosis of paroxysmal neurological and
psychiatric disturbance (see Box 14.5). It occurs in middle or late
life. The clinical picture is of sudden onset of isolated, often
profound, anterograde amnesia in a clear sensorium, generally lasting
for between 15 minutes and 24 hours. Functional imaging studies during
transient global amnesia have demonstrated localized transient
hypoperfusion or hyperperfusion consistent with dysfunction of circuits
that mediate episodic memory.

355

356

356

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Box 14.5 Differential diagnosis of transient amnesia and other
paroxysmal neuropsychiatric symptoms Organic Syncope (cardiogenic,
vasovagal, reflex) Transient ischaemic attacks Migraine Epileptic
seizure (ictal or post-ictal) Hypoglycaemia Phaeochromocytoma Transient
global amnesia Narcolepsy and other parasomnias Tonic spasms of multiple
sclerosis Treatment-related complications in Parkinson's disease

The patient appears bewildered, and requires repeated reorientation,
only to ask the same questions moments later. However, there is no
disturbance of alertness, and (in contrast to psychogenic fugue)
personal identity is retained. Procedural memory is spared---for
example, the patient may carry on driving competently during the
episode. Apart from the memory disturbance, the neurological examination
is entirely normal.

Drug abuse Medial temporal lobe tumour

Functional Panic attacks and hyperventilation Dissociative disorder
Schizophrenia Bipolar affective disorder Aggressive outburst in
personality disorder Temper tantrums (in children) Breath-holding spells
(in children)

Complete recovery, with amnesia for the period of the episode, is usual
and recurrence is rare. However, investigation is always indicated, to
exclude other causes of amnesia (see above and Box 14.5). Patients with
transient global amnesia often present as emergencies, and the syndrome
may be misdiagnosed as a dissociative fugue. For a review see Arena and
Rabinstein (2015).

Dementia Dementia is an acquired global impairment of intellect, memory,
and personality, but without impairment of consciousness (Burns and
Illiffe, 2009). It is usually but not always progressive. The syndrome
of dementia is caused by a wide range of diseases, but the majority of
cases are due to Alzheimer's disease, which is the commonest cause,
followed by vascular dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies (Box 14.6).
Only a small proportion of cases (4% in one large series) are currently
potentially reversible (Hejl et al., 2002). Although dementia is a
global or generalized disorder, it often begins with focal cognitive or
behavioural disturbances. However, ICD-10 requires impairment in two or
more cognitive domains (memory, language, abstract thinking and
judgement, praxis, visuoperceptual skills, personality, and social
conduct), sufficient to interfere

with social or occupational functioning. Deficits may be too mild or
circumscribed to fulfil this definition, and are then called mild
cognitive impairment (see page 000). In this section, the main features
of the dementia syndrome are described, followed by the principles of
assessment. We then discuss the clinical, aetiological, and
neuropathological features of the major diseases that produce dementia.
Note in Box 14.6 that many other neuropsychiatric disorders and some
medical disorders can also include cognitive impairment; these
conditions are considered later in this chapter and in Chapter 22,
respectively. Dementia as a result of substance misuse, especially
alcohol misuse, is discussed in Chapter 20. The management of dementia,
and the relationships between dementia and ageing, are deferred until
Chapter 19.

375

Dementia

Box 14.6 Causes of dementia Primary neurodegenerative disorders
Alzheimer's disease*, dementia with Lewy bodies, frontotemporal
dementias*, Parkinson's disease*, prion diseases*, Huntington's
disease\*

Vascular causes Vascular dementia\*, strokes, focal thalamic and basal
ganglia strokes, subdural haematoma

Inflammatory and autoimmune causes Systemic lupus erythematosus, other
forms of cerebral vasculitis, BehÃ§et's disease, neurosarcoidosis,
Hashimoto's encephalopathy, multiple sclerosis

Trauma Severe head injury, repeated head trauma ('dementia pugilistica')

Infections and related conditions HIV, iatrogenic and variant CJD (prion
disease), neurosyphilis, postencephalitic

Metabolic and endocrine causes Renal failure, hepatic failure,
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism,

hypoglycaemia, Cushing's syndrome, hypopituitarism, adrenal
insufficiency

Neoplastic causes Intracranial space-occupying lesions, carcinomatous or
lymphomatous meningitis, paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis

Post-radiation Acute and subacute radionecrosis, radiation
thromboangiopathy

Post-anoxia Severe anaemia, post-surgical (especially cardiac bypass),
carbon monoxide poisoning, cardiac arrest, chronic respiratory failure

Vitamin and other nutritional deficiencies Vitamin B12 deficiency,
folate deficiency

Toxins Alcohol, poisoning with heavy metals, organic solvents,
organophosphates

Other Normal-pressure hydrocephalus Leucodystrophy\*

- Can occur in genetically determined forms.

Clinical features of dementia The presenting complaint is usually of
poor memory. Other features include disturbances of behaviour, language,
personality, mood, or perception. The clinical picture is much
determined by the patient's premorbid personality, as well as by the
underlying cause. People with good social skills may continue to
function adequately despite severe intellectual deterioration. Dementia
is often exposed by a change in social circumstances or an intercurrent
illness. The elderly, socially isolated, or deaf are less likely to
compensate for failing intellectual abilities; however, their
difficulties may go unrecognized or be dismissed. Forgetfulness is
usually early and prominent, but may sometimes be difficult to detect in
the early stages. Impaired attention and concentration are common and
non-specific. Difficulty with new learning is usually the

most conspicuous feature. Memory loss is more evident for recent than
for more remote material. Disturbed episodic memory is manifested as
forgetfulness for recent day-to-day events, with relative preservation
of procedural memory (e.g.Â how to ride a bicycle) and, at least
initially, general knowledge about the world at large. By contrast,
words and, ultimately, the very objects to which they refer, lose their
meaning for patients with semantic memory impairment (as in certain
frontotemporal dementias). Loss of flexibility and adaptability in new
situations, with the appearance of rigid and stereotyped routines
('organic orderliness'), and, when taxed beyond restricted abilities,
sudden explosions of rage or grief ('catastrophic reaction') may occur.
As dementia worsens, patients are less able to care for themselves and
they neglect social conventions. Disorientation for time, and later for
place and person, is common. Behaviour

357

358

358

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
becomes aimless, and stereotypies and mannerisms may appear. Thinking
slows and becomes impoverished in content and perseverative. False
ideas, often of a persecutory kind, gain ground easily. In the later
stages, thinking becomes grossly fragmented and incoherent. This is
reflected in the patient's speech, with syntactical and dysnomic errors.
Eventually the patient may become mute. Mortality is increased, with
death often following bronchopneumonia and a terminal coma (Mitchell et
al., 2009). Behavioural, affective, and psychotic features often
accompany the cognitive deficits. They appear to be part of the
underlying biology of the disease process, although in the early stages,
while insight is retained, they may also be a psychological response to
the realization of cognitive decline. Mood disturbances are particularly
common, together with distress, anxiety, irritability, and sometimes
aggression. Later, emotional responses become blunted, and sudden,
apparently random, mood changes occur. Psychotic symptoms are also a
common and fluctuating feature during dementia. The balance of these
core symptoms and signs, together with some additional features, forms
the basis for the clinical differentiation between the various causes of
dementia, as summarized in Table 14.2 and described in the following
sections.

Subcortical and cortical dementia A distinction is sometimes drawn
between subcortical and cortical dementia, based upon their putative
neuroanatomical basis. Although the distinction is blurred, clinically
and pathologically, the terms have descriptive utility (Turner et al.,
2002). The key features are summarized in Table 14.3, and examples of
the diseases are listed in Box 14.7. The term subcortical dementia is
seen to refer to a syndrome of slowness of thought, difficulty with
complex, sequential intellectual tasks, and impoverishment of affect and
personality, with relative preservation of language, calculation, and
learning. It contrasts with the spectrum of dysfunction (including
early, prominent impairments of memory, word finding, or visuospatial
abilities) that is seen in cortical dementias.

Presenile and senile dementia Another traditional distinction was that
made between dementia occurring in those under 65 years of age
(presenile or early-onset dementia) and dementia beginning later in life
(senile or late-onset dementia). It arose in part because of the belief
that the major causes were different---Alzheimer's disease in the
former, and

vascular dementia in the latter. With the realization that Alzheimer's
disease is the commonest form of dementia in both groups, less attention
is now paid to this categorization. However, presenile dementia does
differ in certain respects from late-onset dementia (Rossor et al.,
2010). Frontotemporal dementia and prion disease are relatively more
common, vascular dementia is rarer, and a higher proportion of cases are
due to genetic diseases. Patients with presenile dementia are more
likely to be referred to and investigated by neurologists before
psychiatrists become involved in their care. Investigations are more
intensive and extensive to give a definite diagnosis and provide a clear
prognosis. The clinical course tends to be more rapid than in late-onset
cases.

Assessment of dementia Assessment of a patient who is presenting with a
complaint of cognitive impairment involves several stages. A key
question to be addressed initially is whether the impairment is due to
dementia. This involves ruling out other causes, notably delirium,
amnesia, and depression. Other patients will have mild cognitive
impairment. Having established the probable diagnosis of dementia, its
characteristics (including severity, symptom and behaviour profile, and
associated risks) are considered, together with assessment of its cause,
and identification of potentially reversible causes. In the study
mentioned earlier, the latter consisted mostly of hydrocephalus and
space-occupying lesions (Hejl et al., 2002).

Assessment of the severity and clinical profile Screening tests are
useful in the assessment of dementia and its severity, and for
monitoring progression. Different scales are available to assess
cognition, behavioural symptoms, global functioning and activities of
daily living, and depression; the latter is useful because depression
can coexist with dementia and worsen functioning. Some commonly used
screening tests, most of which take 10 minutes or less, are listed in
Box 14.8. For review of screening tests for dementia, see Sheehan (2012)
and Velayudhan et al.Â (2014). For cognitive impairment, the benchmark is
the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), which has a sensitivity and
specificity for dementia of around 80% when a cut-off score of 23 is
chosen (Mitchell, 2009). The MoCA and clock test are valuable and brief
alternatives. The ADAS-cog is specifically designed for suspected
Alzheimer's disease, and is widely used in clinical trials

359

Dementia

Table 14.2 Clinical features that help to distinguish between major
causes of dementia

Alzheimer's disease

Prominent symptoms and signs

Other clinical features

Memory loss, especially short-term

Relentlessly progressive

Dysphasia and dyspraxia

Survival 5--8 years

Sense of smell impaired early on Behavioural changes (e.g.Â wandering)
Vascular dementia

Personality change

Stepwise progression

Labile mood

Signs of cerebrovascular disease

Preserved insight

History of hypertension Commoner in men, and in smokers

Dementia with Lewy bodies

Fluctuating alertness

Frequent adverse reactions to antipsychotics

Parkinsonism Visual hallucinations Falls and faints Frontotemporal
dementia

Prominent behavioural change

Onset usually before the age of 70 years

Expressive dysphasia

Range of clinical subtypes

Early loss of insight Early primitive reflexes Prion disease

Myoclonic jerks

Often early-onset

Seizures

Rapid onset and progression

Cerebellar ataxia

Transmissible

Psychiatric symptoms (vCJD) Normal-pressure hydrocephalus

Mental slowing, apathy, inattention

Commonest in 50--70-year age group

Urinary incontinence

Commonest reversible dementia

Problems walking (gait apraxia)

to monitor treatment response. The CAMCOG is largely a research tool.
Note that these tests are validated for use in the diagnosis of
dementia, and are not recommended for 'case finding' in the population
(Brown, 2015). Careful evaluation of the behavioural symptoms of
dementia is an integral part of the assessment, and needs to be repeated
during the illness, since these symptoms are common, fluctuate, and pose
many difficulties for carers.

Assessment of the cause of dementia Definitive diagnosis of the cause of
dementia can usually only be made neuropathologically or, in rare cases,
by identification of genetic mutations. However, the differing profiles
of the various dementias allow 'probable' diagnoses to be made by
experienced clinicians with reasonable accuracy. The use of biochemical,
radiological, and genetic investigations only modestly

359

360

360

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Table 14.3 Features of cortical and subcortical dementias Subcortical
dementia

Cortical dementia

Memory impairment

Moderate

Severe, early

Language

Normal

Dysphasias, early

Mathematical skills

Preserved

Impaired, early

Personality

Apathetic, inert

Indifferent

Mood

Flat, depressed

Normal

Coordination

Impaired

Normal

Cognitive and motor speed

Slowed

Normal

Abnormal movements

Common, e.g.Â tremor

Rare

increases the diagnostic accuracy for common dementias, but is important
for ruling out rarer and reversible causes. Box 14.9 summarizes the
investigations for dementia. An MRI or CT scan is recommended as routine
in many guidelines but, in practice, brain scanning, like most
investigations, is used in some but not all patients. Recent findings
have shown the value of PET imaging with ligands to detect Î²-amyloid,
and of CSF measurement of specific proteins in the differential
diagnosis of dementia (Skillback et al., 2015; Scheltens

Box 14.7 Examples of cortical, subcortical, and mixed causes of dementia
Cortical Alzheimer's disease Frontotemporal dementias

Subcortical Huntington's disease Parkinson's disease Focal thalamic and
basal ganglia lesions Multiple sclerosis

Mixed Vascular dementia Dementia with Lewy bodies Corticobasal
degeneration

et al., 2016). However, these tests are not yet routinely available. The
extent to which investigations are carried out, as well as the addition
of more specialized tests, depends upon the patient's age and history,
the results of the initial tests, and the subsequent differential
diagnosis.

Assessment of risk in dementia Patients with dementia are at risk from
self-neglect, poor judgement, wandering, and abuse. Their physical
health is often a problem. Risks to others may occur because of
aggressive or disinhibited behaviour. Fitness to drive is a specific
issue to consider, and may be difficult to determine in the early stages
(Wilson and Pinner, 2013); current UK regulations allow those with
'sufficient skills' and whose 'progression \[of dementia\] is slow' to
continue to drive, subject to annual review. Thus risk assessment is
part of a full assessment of dementia. A good history from carers and
other informants is essential, and an occupational therapist has an
important role to play in assessment of functional ability.

Early detection of dementia Mild cognitive impairment Increasing
attention is being given to the earlier diagnosis of dementia in those
with equivocal evidence, or subjective complaints, of worsening memory.
This is in part driven by the research focus on developing treatments to
delay or prevent progression to dementia. This intermediate category,
which was introduced in ICD-10, is called mild cognitive impairment
(MCI). In people presenting with features of MCI, it is important to
consider

361

Dementia

Box 14.8 Screening tests for dementia

Box 14.9 Investigations for establishing the cause of dementia

Cognitive function

In primary care

Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) Six-Item Cognitive Impairment Test
Seven-minute screen Clock drawing test Hopkins Verbal Learning Test
(HVLT) Mental Test Score (MTS) Alzheimer's Disease Assessment
Scale---cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog) Montreal Cognitive Assessment
(MoCA) Cambridge Examination for Mental Disorders of the Elderly,
cognitive section (CAMCOG)

Full blood count Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Urea and electrolytes
Liver function tests Calcium and phosphate Thyroid function tests
Vitamin B12 and folate

Behavioural and psychological features Neuropsychiatric Inventory
MOUSEPAD BEHAVE-AD Cohen--Mansfield Aggression Inventory

Activities of daily living Bristol Scale Alzheimer's Disease Functional
Assessment and Change Scale Disability Assessment for Dementia

Depression Cornell Scale Geriatric Depression Rating Scale

Global assessment Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR)

and exclude depression and other 'non-dementia' causes of cognitive
impairments. Amnesic MCI refers to cases in which memory loss is the
most prominent feature, and which is thought to be prodromal Alzheimer's
disease. It is important to note that the clinical and prognostic
significance of MCI remains unclear. Only 5--20% of patients convert to
dementia each year, and 40--70% of MCI patients have not progressed to
dementia 10 years

In secondary care MRI or CT brain scan Urinalysis Syphilis serology HIV
status Chest radiograph Neuropsychological assessment Genetic testing
*EEG* PET: amyloid or fluorodeoxyglucose imaging *CSF: measurement of
amyloid AÎ²1-42 and tau* \*Tests not routinely available. Adapted from
The BMJ, 338, Burns A and Illiffe S, Dementia, b75, Copyright (2009),
with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

later. For review of MCI, see Langa and Levine (2014); for management of
MCI see page 000.

Presymptomatic diagnosis and biomarkers There is increasing evidence
that dementia, especially Alzheimer's disease, can be detected
premorbidly, long before overt symptoms of any kind (including MCI) are
present. The category of preclinical Alzheimer's disease, or at-risk for
Alzheimer's disease, has been introduced to describe people with
evidence of Alzheimer's pathology (from biomarker studies, discussed
below) but who are cognitively intact. Features and biomarkers of the
preclinical and prodromal phase of Alzheimer's disease are listed in
Table 14.4. Longitudinal studies show that there are selective and
characteristic neuropsychological impairments detectable up to 20 years
before the onset of symptoms. Olfactory deficits are also a simple and

361

362

362

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
valuable marker (Devenand et al., 2015). Imaging and CSF biomarkers are
also positive well in advance of clinical disease. The most sensitive
and specific biomarkers are provided by the PET imaging and CSF protein
markers, but the availability of these in clinical practice is limited.
Hippocampal atrophy, either determined visually or quantitatively, using
CT or MRI, is a more feasible imaging biomarker. The occurrence of these
various biomarkers is consistent with the realization that the
neuropathological changes begin, and progress, decades before the onset
of Alzheimer's disease dementia (Braak and Del Tredici, 2015). For
review of biomarkers in preclinical and early dementia, see Jack et
al.Â (2013) and Scheltens et al. (2016). The use of biomarkers in the
differential diagnosis of established dementia was considered earlier.

Alzheimer's disease In 1907, Alois Alzheimer reported the case of
Auguste D, a woman with presenile dementia whose brain exhibited unusual
neuropathological features. It was Alzheimer's colleague, Emil
Kraepelin, who named the disease (Maurer et al., 1997). For many years
the disease was thought to be rare and limited to presenile forms of
dementia, but classic studies by Roth and colleagues (Blessed et al.,
1968) suggested that it is the commonest cause of senile dementia, a
conclusion that has been confirmed by many subsequent studies. About 60%
of dementia is attributable to Alzheimer's disease (Neuropathology Group
of the Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study,
2001), occurring either in isolation or together with features of
vascular dementia and other neurodegenerative disorders. The rate of
Alzheimer's disease doubles every 5 years in the elderly, with an
overall prevalence in those aged 60 or older of 5--7%. See Chapter 19,
page 000 for the epidemiology of Alzheimer's disease. For reviews of
Alzheimer's disease, see Lovestone (2009a) and Scheltens et al.Â (2016).

Clinical features The main features of dementia have been described
above, and Box 14.10 summarizes the clinical features of Alzheimer's
disease (strictly, 'dementia of the Alzheimer type', since formal
diagnosis awaits neuropathology) (see also Lovestone, 2009a). The first
evidence of the condition is often minor forgetfulness, which may be
difficult to distinguish from normal ageing. The condition progresses
gradually for the first 2--4 years, with increasing memory disturbance

Table 14.4 Possible biomarkers of preclinical Alzheimer's disease
Clinical

Comments

Neuropsychological deficits

E.g. in verbal episodic memory

Olfactory deficits Biochemical Cerebrospinal fluid Amyloid AÎ²42

Correlates with cortical amyloid deposition

Total tau

Correlates with intensity of neurodegeneration

Phosphorylated tau

Correlates with neurofibrillary changes

Brain imaging Structural Hippocampal atrophy

More apparent and progressive than in controls

Functional Fluorodeoxyglucose PET Normal scan has high negative
predictive value Amyloid PET

Normal scan has high negative predictive value

Tau PET

Not yet in clinical use

and lack of spontaneity. Memory is lost for recent events first.
Language is usually affected early on, with difficulty in finding words
or naming objects, and impairments in the ability to construct fluent
and informative sentences. Visuospatial skills may be affected, with
difficulties in tasks such as copying pictures or learning the way round
unfamiliar environments (e.g.Â when on holiday or in an unfamiliar
house). Disorientation in time gives rise to poorly kept appointments
and changes in the diurnal pattern of activity.

Depression The relationship between Alzheimer's disease and depression
is complex. Depression is a probable risk factor for the disease, may be
confused with it, or may occur as part of the syndrome. Regarding the
latter point, major depression occurs in about 10% of cases, with less
marked episodes and symptoms occurring in

36

Dementia

Box 14.10 Key clinical features of Alzheimer's disease Core features
Memory impairment (amnesia), with gradual onset and continuing decline
Aphasia Apraxia Agnosia Anosmia Disturbance in executive functioning
(e.g.Â planning, reasoning)

Other features Depression Psychosis Behavioural symptoms
(e.g.Â agitation, wandering) Personality change

over 50% of cases. Patients who experience depression have greater
decreases in serotonin and noradrenergic markers than other patients
with Alzheimer's disease.

Psychotic symptoms Delusions and hallucinations occur in a significant
minority of patients at some stage in the illness. Their prevalence is
unclear, as many studies did not distinguish Alzheimer's disease from
dementia with Lewy bodies (see below). Recent estimates suggest rates of
10-- 50% for delusions and 10--25% for hallucinations. The commonest
delusions are persecutory, concerning theft (however, as this idea often
arises from the patient's forgetfulness, it is questionable whether it
is helpful to regard this as a true delusion).

Behaviour Changes in behaviour are common, and are of particular concern
to carers. The patient may be restless and wake at night, disorientated,
and perplexed. Motor activity may increase in the evening
('sundowning'), and eventually the sleep--wake cycle may become
completely disorganized. Aggression (both verbal and physical) is
common, and often takes the form of resistance to help with personal
care. Serious physical violence towards others is rare. Both increases
and reductions in level of activity are common, involving varying
degrees of purposefulness. Wandering can refer to a variety of different

behaviours, but patients may place themselves at risk by going into
unsafe environments. Patients with dementia may undereat or overeat,
with associated changes in weight and nutritional state. Changes in
sexual behaviour occur, usually with a reduction in drive, although
sexual disinhibition occasionally occurs. Self-care and social behaviour
decline, although some patients maintain a good social facade despite
severe cognitive impairment, particularly if carers are able to assist
with these functions.

Course In the early stages of Alzheimer's disease, the clinical features
are modified by the patient's premorbid personality, and their traits
tend to be exaggerated. In the middle and later stages of the illness,
the cognitive impairments increasingly predominate, together with the
neurological and behavioural features noted above. Incidental physical
illness may cause a superimposed delirium, resulting in a sudden
deterioration in cognitive function. Median survival from diagnosis is
5--7 years, and is slightly less in men than in women. Shorter survival
is also associated with an older age of onset, and a rapid rate of
cognitive decline.

Investigations The investigation of suspected Alzheimer's disease
follows the same principles as the investigation of dementia in general,
outlined above. In addition, a comment on genetic testing is warranted.
Such testing is indicated in the very rare cases of familial early-onset
Alzheimer's disease, for which three causative genes are known (see
below). Although the apoE4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene is a
major risk factor in all forms of Alzheimer's disease (see below and Box
5.4), routine testing for this variant in the differential diagnosis of
dementia is not recommended, and there is no place for genetic screening
of healthy subjects to predict future dementia. The scientific and
ethical issues involved have been discussed by Loy et al.Â (2014).

Neuropathology On gross examination the brain is shrunken, with widened
sulci and enlarged ventricles. Brain weight is reduced. On microscopic
examination, the cardinal diagnostic features are neurofibrillary
tangles and senile plaques (also called amyloid plaques) in the cerebral
cortex and many subcortical regions. The diagnostic criteria are based
upon the abundance and distribution of plaques and tangles---the
Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD)
criteria (Mirra et al., 1991).

363

364

364

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
However, it should be noted that these features are also seen, to some
extent, in some non-demented elderly people, and the relationship
between clinical dementia and neuropathology is more complex than is
sometimes assumed to be the case. In addition to the tangles and
plaques, there is selective loss of neurons in the hippocampus and
entorhinal cortex, proliferation of astrocytes (gliosis), and loss of
synapses. The latter is the strongest neuropathological correlate of
cognitive impairment. Other histological findings include amyloid
deposits in blood vessel walls (so-called vascular amyloid or
congophilic angiopathy), Hirano bodies (intracellular crystalline
deposits) and granulovacuolar accumulation (vacuoles or 'holes' within
neurons). For a review of the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease, see
Duyckaerts et al.Â (2009).

Progression of neuropathology The disease process starts in the
entorhinal cortex, before spreading to the hippocampus, association
areas of the parietal lobe, and some subcortical nuclei. Six
neuropathological stages based upon Î²-amyloid deposition are recognized,
called Braak stages, which correlate with clinical severity (Braak and
Braak, 1991), and which complement the evidence noted earlier that the
onset of neuropathology long precedes the symptoms of dementia (Braak
and Del Tredici, 2015). The spread of pathology along cortico-cortical
projections leads to an effective 'disconnection' between affected
regions.

Senile (amyloid) plaques Senile plaques are deposits of insoluble
proteins, together with degenerating neurites (neuronal processes) and
glia. They occur in the space between neurons (the neuropil). Both
neuritic and diffuse plaques are recognized, depending on their
appearance using silver stains; neuritic plaques have a dense-staining
core, whereas diffuse plaques have been likened to cotton wool. The
neuritic plaques are pathologically more significant. The protein at the
heart of all senile plaques is Î²-amyloid (also called amyloid-Î², AÎ², or
Î²A4), a 39--42-amino acid peptide. This molecule and its encoding gene
are central to the aetiology of the disease (see below).

Neurofibrillary tangles Neurofibrillary tangles occur within the cell
body of neurons, especially pyramidal neurons of the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus. They are formed of paired helical filaments, which are
comprised of the microtubuleassociated protein tau. The normal function
of tau is

in axonal transport and maintenance of the neuronal cytoskeleton.
Tangles are thought to occur because tau becomes hyperphosphorylated,
rendering it insoluble. The presence of a tangle causes dysfunction and
death of the neuron.

Aetiology and pathogenesis Genes In rare families, usually those with an
early onset of illness (before the age of 60 years), there is an
autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Causative mutations have been
identified in three genes---amyloid precursor protein (APP, on
chromosome 21), presenilin 1 (PSEN1, on chromosome 14), and presenilin 2
(PSEN2, on chromosome 1). Discovery of APP as the first 'Alzheimer gene'
was a seminal event (see Box 14.11). These three genes together account
for most familial cases of the disease, but at least one other gene is
likely to exist. Different mutations are known in each gene, and the age
of onset, features, and progression of disease vary depending on the
causative mutation. Despite the importance of these findings, the vast
majority of Alzheimer's disease is not inherited in a Mendelian fashion,
and it is often termed 'sporadic'. However, first-degree relatives of
patients with late-onset Alzheimer's disease have an elevated risk of
developing the disorder, and a genetic predisposition is now confirmed
by the unequivocal association between polymorphisms in the
apolipoprotein E (apoE) gene and all forms of Alzheimer's disease. As
discussed in Box 5.4, the apoE4 variant of this gene accounts for about
50% of the vulnerability to late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Its main
effect is to promote an earlier onset of disease, by about a decade.
ApoE4 heterozygotes have a threefold greater risk, and homozygotes have
an eightfold greater risk of the disease. Other data suggest that
apoE4-positive cases may show some differences from apoE4-negative cases
in terms of pathology, course, and response to medication. In
Caucasians, the apoE2 variant reduces the risk of Alzheimer's disease
(compared with the commonest apoE3 form), but this does not hold in all
other ethnic groups. The (lack of a) role of genetic testing for apoE4
was mentioned above. It is stressed that apoE4 is not a determinant of
disease; at least one-third of patients with Alzheimer's disease are
apoE4-negative, and many apoE4 homozygotes never develop the disease. It
is not known how apoE4 elevates the risk of Alzheimer's disease, but it
is likely to reflect its interaction with Î²-amyloid metabolism and
clearance from the brain, cholesterol metabolism, and other cellular
functions (Liu et al., 2013).

365

Dementia

Box 14.11 Discovery of APP gene mutations in familial Alzheimer's
disease In 1984, the protein that accumulates in senile plaques,
cerebral vasculature, and meninges in Alzheimer's disease was discovered
to be the Î²-amyloid peptide. Knowledge of its amino acid sequence
allowed the encoding gene, called amyloid precursor protein (APP), to be
identified and localized to chromosome 21. It was already known that
there was a relationship between Alzheimer's disease and Down's syndrome
(trisomy 21), suggesting that APP was a 'candidate gene' for Alzheimer's
disease. Researchers collected DNA from families with autosomal dominant
Alzheimer's disease to test this hypothesis. The work culminated in the
landmark discovery in 1991 of an APP mutation (a point mutation changing
valine to isoleucine at position 717), which caused Alzheimer's disease
(Goate et al., 1991). Since then, different APP mutations have been
found in other families. Any doubt that the APP mutations are causative
for the disease was removed by the demonstration that transgenic mice
containing a mutated APP gene become cognitively impaired and deposit
Î²-amyloid (Games et al., 1995). APP mutations are pathogenic primarily
because they affect metabolism of APP, promoting the formation of
Î²-amyloid. The other two genes causing familial Alzheimer's disease are
the presenilins (PSEN1 and PSEN2). They provide the catalytic subunit
for the enzyme that cleaves APP, called Î³-secretase, and hence all three
genes share a common influence on APP processing. APP and PSEN mutations
explain most cases of familial Alzheimer's disease, but only a tiny
fraction (\<0.1%) of all cases of Alzheimer's disease. However,
mis-metabolism of APP and Î²-amyloid, caused by a range of other factors,
is involved in all forms of Alzheimer's disease, as described in the
text.

There is now statistically convincing evidence for about 20 other
susceptibility genes for Alzheimer's disease. Many of these contain
common variants with small effects on disease risk (e.g.Â CLU, PICALM),
while a few genes (e.g.Â TREM2) have rarer variants with larger effect
sizes. All are of much lesser importance, epidemiologically speaking,
than apoE4. They implicate pathways involved in immune function,
inflammatory responses, and lipid recycling.

For review of Alzheimer's disease genetics, see Karch and Goate (2015).

Environmental factors Various environmental factors are associated with
an altered risk of developing dementia in general, or Alzheimer's
disease in particular (see Box 14.12). However, for many of them, it is
not clear to what extent they are causal, act independently, or interact
with genetic predisposition. The most powerful studies are those in
which people have been followed up since early adulthood or middle age.
These have revealed that a number of 'lifestyle' factors, such as
diabetes, and physical and mental inactivity, as well as indices of
vascular health, present at or before middle age, predict later onset of
dementia, especially Alzheimer's disease. This relationship indicates
the potential for primary prevention, but this has yet to be fully
explored (Norton et al., 2014). The robust finding that higher levels of
educational attainment, as well as cognitive activity, are protective
against Alzheimer's disease, supports a 'use it or lose it' hypothesis,
whereby such attributes are thought to increase cerebral reserve. The
relationship between body mass index in middle age and dementia is
unclear; several studies report an association with obesity, but a large
UK population database found that low body mass index in middle age
predicted later dementia (Qizilibash et al., 2015). With regard to
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), hormone replacement
therapy (HRT), and statins, there is considerable evidence that people
who have used these drugs have a decreased rate of dementia and
Alzheimer's disease (Wong et al., 2013b). For each class of drug there
is also a plausible biological explanation for this effect. On the other
hand, randomized trials have failed to find any beneficial effect of
these drugs in treating or preventing dementia. The significance of the
observational data is therefore unclear. Aluminium exposure has been
implicated, but the evidence is weak, and it is not an established risk
factor for Alzheimer's disease.

The amyloid cascade hypothesis The APP research summarized in Box 14.11
led to the 'amyloid cascade hypothesis', originated by Hardy and Higgins
(1992), which became the dominant molecular model for the disorder. It
proposes that the central, pathogenic event is increased formation and
deposition of Î²-amyloid, particularly the 42-amino acid variant. APP is
a transmembrane protein, which can be cleaved by one of three enzymes,
called secretases. Normally, Î±-secretase

365

36

366

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Box 14.12 Risk factors for nonfamilial Alzheimer's disease Demographic
factors Increasing age Family history Down's syndrome

Genetic factors ApoE4 Other genetic polymorphisms

Environmental and medical risk factors Low educational attainment Head
injury Cerebrovascular disease History of depression History of dementia
High homocysteine levels Diabetes mellitus Herpes simplex virus

Protective factors Cognitive and physical activity in mid-life
Mediterranean diet ?Use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) ?Use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) ?Use of statins

activity predominates, and this does not give rise to Î²amyloid. However,
in Alzheimer's disease, more APP is processed via Î²- and Î³-secretase
pathways, leading to increased Î²-amyloid formation. The increased
production of Î²-amyloid leads to disease because it tends to aggregate,
becomes insoluble, and is toxic to synapses and neurons. Decreased
removal of Î²-amyloid from the brain also contributes. The other
pathological changes of Alzheimer's disease, including neurofibrillary
tangles and the involvement of tau, are all seen as downstream in the
causal process. Although the amyloid cascade hypothesis is a convincing
explanation of familial Alzheimer's disease, its relevance to sporadic
forms of the disease remains controversial (Harrison and Owen, 2016).
For example, PET imaging has shown that cortical Î²-amyloid pathology is
common in cognitively healthy elderly individuals,

suggesting that additional factors are required for development of
dementia (Jansen et al., 2015). It is currently thought that Î²-amyloid
is only one component of a more complex, non-linear, process, which also
involves tau protein, and a range of other molecules and events (Jack et
al., 2013; Krstic and Knuesel, 2013). In one formulation, Î²-amyloid is a
necessary, but not sufficient, cause for Alzheimer's disease (Musiek and
Holtzman, 2015).

Inflammatory mechanisms Inflammation, including microglial activation,
is a well-known component of the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease,
but until recently was generally considered to be a response to the
ongoing neurodegeneration. However, inflammatory, and immune, factors
are now thought to be an important part of the disease process itself
(Krstic and Knuesel, 2013). The evidence is diverse. It includes
interactions with Î²amyloid, and the fact that TREM2, one of the risk
genes for Alzheimer's disease mentioned above, is a microglial receptor
involved in Î²-amyloid clearance. For review, see Heppner et al.Â (2015).

The cholinergic hypothesis Prior to the amyloid hypothesis, the
prevailing view was the cholinergic hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease,
based on findings in the 1970s that there is a severe and widespread
loss of acetylcholine in the cerebral cortex. The loss occurs because of
pathology and atrophy in the cells of origin, in the nucleus basalis of
Meynert. The findings led to the development of the current cholinergic
therapies for the disease. However, although cholinergic deficits may
well explain some of the symptoms, they do not appear to have a primary
causal role. Cholinergic pathology may in fact be of more relevance in
dementia with Lewy bodies, and it is possible that the earlier studies
of Alzheimer's disease included patients in this category.

Vascular dementia The dementia caused by cerebrovascular disease was in
the past referred to as 'atherosclerotic psychosis'. Following the
separation of distinct syndromes of psychiatric disorder in late life
(Roth, 1955), it became apparent that dementia was often associated with
multiple infarcts, and Hachinski et al.Â (1974) suggested the term
multi-infarct dementia. Subsequent research has shown that these
patients are in fact a small subgroup of those with cognitive impairment
due to cerebrovascular disease, and the umbrella term of vascular
dementia

376

Dementia (or vascular cognitive impairment) is now preferred, within
which a range of subtypes is recognized (see Box 14.13). Small-vessel
disease affecting subcortical regions is now considered the commonest
form of vascular dementia. However, the neuropathological findings of
vascular dementia are very varied, and include embolus, vasculitis,
angiopathy, and haemorrhage, as well as infarcts. For review, see Series
and Esiri (2012) and O'Brien and Thomas (2015). Vascular dementia is
usually said to be the second commonest cause of dementia after
Alzheimer's disease, of comparable prevalence to dementia with Lewy
bodies. However, there is considerable uncertainty over these figures,
because of the pathological heterogeneity of vascular changes, the
absence of accepted neuropathological criteria for vascular dementia,
and their frequent coexistence with Alzheimer-type pathology, which
makes it difficult to know the causal contribution of vascular
pathology. Recent estimates suggest that 'pure' cerebrovascular disease
is a relatively rare cause of dementia (O'Brien and Thomas, 2015).

Clinical features Onset is usually in the late sixties or the seventies.
With large-vessel disease, onset is often relatively acute and follows a
stroke, in which case the term post-stroke dementia is sometimes used.
Emotional and personality changes may appear first, followed by
impairments of memory and intellect that characteristically progress in
stages. Depression is frequent, and episodes of emotional lability and
confusion are common, especially at night. Transient ischaemic attacks
or mild strokes may recur from time to time. Insight is often maintained
until a late stage. Apathy, behavioural retardation, and anxiety are
more common than in Alzheimer's disease, but

Box 14.13 Subtypes of vascular dementia Multi-infarct dementia (cortical
vascular dementia) Small-vessel dementia (subcortical vascular dementia;
includes Binswanger's disease) Hypoperfusion dementia Haemorrhagic
dementia Hereditary vascular dementia (CADASIL: cerebral autosomal
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leucoencephalopathy)

cognitive impairment itself is more variable and often of lesser degree.
Attention, information processing, and executive function are typically
most affected, and tests that focus on these domains (such as the
Montreal cognitive assessment scale \[MoCA\] or vascular dementia
assessment scale \[VADAS-cog\]) are more likely to identify deficits
than the MMSE. The course of vascular dementia is classically a stepwise
progression, with periods of deterioration that are sometimes followed
by partial recovery for a few months. About 50% of patients die from
ischaemic heart disease, and others from cerebral infarction. From the
time of diagnosis the lifespan varies widely. However, most studies show
somewhat shorter survival than in Alzheimer's disease. The diagnosis is
difficult to make with confidence unless there is a clear history of
strokes or localizing neurological signs. Suggestive features are patchy
psychological deficits, erratic progression, and relative preservation
of the personality. On physical examination there may be signs of
hypertension and of arteriosclerosis in peripheral and retinal vessels,
and there may be neurological signs such as pseudobulbar palsy,
rigidity, akinesia, and brisk reflexes. CT or MRI imaging are valuable
to demonstrate the nature and severity of vascular pathology. CT is
sufficient to show established infarcts and large areas of white matter
damage, but MRI is more sensitive in revealing the full profile of
involvement.

Aetiology It is assumed that vascular dementia results from the neuronal
dysfunction and death, and the damage to white matter tracts, that
follow from the cumulative focal areas of ischaemia and necrosis
(Iadecola, 2013). About 10% of people develop dementia after a first
stroke, and more than one-third after recurrent stroke (Pendlebury and
Rothwell, 2009). The risk factors for vascular dementia are essentially
those of cerebrovascular disease (Box 14.14). Prevention and optimal
management of these risk factors is predicted to reduce the incidence of
vascular dementia, but this has yet to demonstrated. The overlap of
these risk factors with those posing risk for Alzheimer's disease is
consistent with the frequent co-occurrence of the two pathologies and
the emerging concept of mixed dementia (see below). The main genetic
form of vascular dementia is the rare autosomal dominant disorder
CADASIL, caused by a mutation in the Notch gene on chromosome 19 (Box
14.13). There are no other well-established genetic

367

368

368

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Box 14.14 Risk factors for vascular dementia History of stroke---risk
related to number, location, and size Increasing age---risk doubles
every 5 years Low education Hypertension Orthostatic hypotension
Evidence of vascular disease (e.g.Â carotid bruit, cardiac disease)
Vascular risk factors (e.g.Â smoking, hyperlipidaemia, obesity) High
blood homocysteine Late-life depression

risk factors for vascular dementia, although apoE and MTHFR (a gene
involved in homocysteine metabolism) have been implicated.

Dementia with Lewy bodies A hitherto unrecognized type of dementia with
a relatively distinct pathology and clinical course was described in the
late 1980s using various terms, including cortical Lewy body disease,
diffuse Lewy body disease, and Lewy body variant of Alzheimer's disease.
Dementia with Lewy bodies is now the consensus term. Box 14.15
summarizes some relevant terminology. The disorder accounts for 4--25%
of cases of dementia; the wide range of estimates (and the belated
'discovery' of dementia with Lewy bodies) probably reflects sampling
bias in some studies (e.g.Â underrepresentation in patients coming to
autopsy) and the fact that cortical Lewy bodies are difficult to see
using routine neuropathological stains. For a review, see Walker et
al.Â (2015).

Clinical features The core clinical features, which form the recognized
criteria for diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies, are summarized in
Box 14.16 (McKeith et al., 2017). The fluctuating level of dementia with
recurrent delirium-like phases, together with visual hallucinations and
parkinsonism, is characteristic, although the motor features are not
always apparent. Use of these criteria allows dementia with Lewy bodies
to be diagnosed with good specificity and sensitivity, but it remains
underdiagnosed

Box 14.15 Terminology of dementia involving Lewy bodies Dementia with
Lewy bodies. Dementia occurring before or concurrently with, or within a
year of the onset of, parkinsonism. However, not all patients develop
parkinsonism Parkinson's disease dementia. Dementia occurring a year or
more after the onset of established Parkinson's disease Lewy body
dementias. Umbrella term that includes both the above categories Lewy
body disease. A pathological diagnosis, based on the presence and
distribution of Lewy body-type pathology Adapted from Lancet,
386(10004), Walker Z et al., Lewy body dementias, pp.Â 1683- 1697,
Copyright (2015), with permission from Elsevier.

in routine clinical practice. The average survival is 5--7 years.

Neuropathology The characteristic histopathological feature of dementia
with Lewy bodies is the presence of Lewy bodies in the cerebral cortex.
Lewy neurites are also seen. As in Parkinson's disease, these features
are also seen in the substantia nigra, and their biochemical composition
is the same in both diseases. Lewy bodies are intraneuronal inclusions,
composed mainly of abnormal aggregations of a protein called
Î±-synuclein. They also contain other proteins, including ubiquitin,
detection of which is widely used in the routine detection of Lewy
bodies. There is also a significant neuropathological overlap with
Alzheimer's disease, with dementia with Lewy bodies often exhibiting
abundant senile plaques and widespread reductions in choline
acetyltransferase in the neocortex; however, neurofibrillary tangles are
rare. Brain atrophy is less marked than in Alzheimer's disease,
especially in the hippocampus. For a review, see Irwin et al.Â (2013).

Aetiology Dementia with Lewy bodies is closely related to Parkinson's
disease, and both are characterized as 'synucleinopathies', reflecting
the abnormal aggregation of

369

Dementia

Box 14.16 Abbreviated clinical criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies
Key features Progressive cognitive decline, especially in attention and
visuospatial ability Pronounced fluctuations in cognition and attention
Recurrent visual hallucinations, usually well formed and detailed Motor
features of parkinsonism

Supportive features Repeated falls Syncope Transient loss of
consciousness Systematized delusions Non-visual hallucinations Adverse
reactions to antipsychotics

Diagnosis made less likely in the presence of Evidence of
cerebrovascular disease or stroke Evidence of other disorder sufficient
to account for the clinical picture

Î±-synuclein protein present in Lewy bodies. There is a modest familial
aggregation for dementia with Lewy bodies, and there are associations
with some of the genes implicated in Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's
disease (Loy et al., 2014). However, neither genetic nor environmental
risk factors for dementia with Lewy bodies have been well established.

Frontotemporal dementias Frontotemporal dementias are the second most
common form of presenile dementia, and also underlie about 7% of
late-life dementias. The term was proposed in 1994 when the
Lund--Manchester criteria were developed to better classify Pick's
disease (see below) and related disorders, based upon their shared
clinical features and regional neuropathology, as described below. For
current diagnostic criteria, see Galimbeti et al.Â (2015). The term
frontotemporal lobar degeneration is the neuropathological counterpart
(Mackenzie et al., 2010).

For review of frontotemporal dementia, see Bang et al.Â (2015).

Clinical features and subtypes Frontotemporal dementia encompasses a
range of neurodegenerative diseases affecting the frontal and temporal
lobes and which are characterized clinically by progressive deficits in
behaviour, language, and memory. Compared to most other dementias,
cognitive impairment is a relatively minor feature, with behavioural,
psychiatric, and linguistic aspects being more prominent. There is a
significant clinical and aetiological overlap with motor neuron disease,
and with parkinsonian syndromes (Baizabal-Carvallo and Jankovic, 2016).
The diagnostic terminology is complicated because of the clinical,
neuropathological, and genetic heterogeneity; Box 14.17 lists some of
the older terms, including Pick's disease, which are now subsumed within
the category of frontotemporal dementia (but note that ICD-10 still uses
'dementia in Pick's disease'). Based upon the clinical profile, two
major subtypes of frontotemporal dementia are now recognized:
behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia and primary progressive
aphasia. The latter is then divided into semantic-variant and non-fluent
variant forms. All forms can exhibit the features shown in Box 14.18,
but the clinical features that characterize each subtype are summarized
in Box 14.19. About one in eight patients

Box 14.17 Diagnostic categories subsumed within frontotemporal dementia
Pick's disease Lobar atrophy Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer
type Dementia lacking distinctive histology Semantic dementia Motor
neuron disease with dementia Progressive non-fluent aphasia Progressive
aphasic syndrome Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism Corticobasal
degeneration *Progressive supranuclear palsy* Parkinsonism--dementia
complex of Guam ** Not always included.

369

370

370

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Box 14.18 Clinical features of frontotemporal dementias

Box 14.19 Features characteristic of the three clinical subtypes of
frontotemporal dementia

Behavioural features Insidious onset, slow progression Early loss of
insight Early signs of disinhibition and lack of judgement Mental
inflexibility Stereotyped and imitative behaviour Hyperorality
(e.g.Â craving for sweet foods) Distractibility and impulsivity

Behavioural-variant

Language and speech features

Personality change Disinhibition Apathy Selfishness Self-neglect
Overeating Behavioural stereotypies Mental rigidity

Progressive decrease in speech output Perseveration Echolalia

Semantic-variant primary progressive aphasia

Affective features Depression Apathy Emotional blunting Hypochondriasis

Physical signs Early primitive reflexes Early incontinence Late
parkinsonism Low and labile blood pressure

with frontotemporal dementia develop motor neuron disease, and another
20--30% exhibit features of parkinsonism. As discussed below, the
presence of these additional neurological elements is related to the
neuropathological features and, in familial cases, to the causal gene.
Frontotemporal dementia is difficult to diagnose, since in the early
stages it can easily be mistaken for depression or psychosis, and hard
to distinguish from other forms of dementia. The history should
concentrate on the past psychiatric history, family history, and
premorbid personality and functioning. The assessment should also
include a careful evaluation of the behavioural features and language
abilities. Physical examination of the motor system, looking for
muscular weakness and parkinsonism, is also important.

Anomia (especially for nouns) Word-finding difficulties Impaired verbal
comprehension Increased pain responses Prosopagnosia Irritability

Non-fluent variant primary progressive aphasia Slow, laboured speech
Misuse of grammar Speech sound errors Anomia (especially for verbs)
Irritability Adapted from Lancet, 386(10004), Bang J, Spina S and Miller
BL, Frontotemporal dementia, pp.Â 1672-1682, Copyright (2015), with
permission from Elsevier.

Structural brain imaging can play a useful role, with MRI or CT showing
focal, often asymmetrical, atrophy of the temporal and frontal poles
(behavioural and language symptoms being associated with right and left
hemisphere involvement, respectively). Functional imaging shows
disproportionate hypometabolism and hypoperfusion in these regions. The
average survival of frontotemporal dementia is 6--11 years from symptom
onset (and about 2--6 years from diagnosis); patients with concurrent
motor neuron disease have the worst prognosis.

371

Dementia

Pick's disease Arnold Pick described the disease that bears his name in
1892. Pick's disease remains the archetypal frontotemporal dementia, and
is sometimes referred to synonymously with it but, if defined properly
(including the neuropathological features), it explains only a small
proportion of cases. The clinical features that he noted were of aphasia
with dementia, such that the case would probably be diagnosed today as a
primary progressive aphasia. The pathological findings of Pick's
original case were reported by Alzheimer, and were striking, with focal
'knife-blade' atrophy of the frontal and temporal poles, with ballooned
neurons (Pick cells) that contained inclusions called Pick bodies. Pick
bodies also occur in other areas, notably the hippocampus. They are
composed of tau, ubiquitin, and other proteins.

Neuropathology The classic features of Pick's disease have been
summarized above. Other forms of frontotemporal dementia also show gross
atrophy of the temporal and frontal lobes, with neuronal loss, gliosis,
microvacuolar changes, and often ballooned cells. Different
neuropathological subtypes of frontotemporal dementia are now
recognized, based primarily upon the identity of the protein which is
aberrantly deposited: tau, TDP-43, or FUS. However, there is only a
modest correspondence between clinical and pathological subtypes of
frontotemporal dementia (Bang et al., 2015).

Aetiology About 10% of cases are caused by autosomal dominant mutations,
with three genes (C9orf72, MAPT \[which encodes tau\], and GRN)
accounting for the majority of these cases (Loy et al., 2014). In
Caucasian populations, C9orf72 is the commonest cause, particularly for
frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease (Rohrer et al., 2015).
The C9orf72 mutations are due to hexanucleotide repeats (a repeated
sequence of six nucleotides, which occurs up to 20 times in the normal
gene, but hundreds of times in those with disease). The GRN mutations
are null, preventing production of the encoded protein; the MAPT
mutations disrupt the expression and structure of tau. Each of the three
genes is closely associated with a particular neuropathological profile
(for example, C9orf72 cases have TDP-43 neuropathology), but less
strongly with the clinical picture

(Bang et al., 2015). The pathogenic mechanisms by which the gene
mutations cause neurodegeneration are uncertain, and may be different
for each gene. Genetic testing is now available and should be considered
for all patients with frontotemporal dementia with a family history
suggestive of autosomal dominant inheritance of neurodegenerative
disorders. For review, see Loy et al.Â (2014). The causes of the commoner
non-familial forms of frontotemporal dementia are not known.

Prion diseases Prion diseases are a unique category of neurodegenerative
disorders, grouped together because of the central causal role of a
specific protein, called prion protein (PrP). They also share
neuropathological features, including diffuse spongiosis (hence the
older term, 'spongiform encephalopathy'), neuronal loss, gliosis, and,
in many cases, amyloid plaques. They can be inherited, or acquired
infectiously or iatrogenically, while other cases are sporadic and
idiopathic. Because of these properties, their interest and importance
are out of all proportion to their rarity (about 100 cases per year in
the UK). In the UK, all cases of suspected prion disease should be
referred to the National Surveillance Centre in Edinburgh. For reviews
of prion diseases, see Collinge (2009) and Prusiner (2013).

Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease (CJD) is the main
prion disease, with an approximate annual incidence of one case per
million. A small number of cases are inherited as an autosomal dominant
disorder due to mutations in the PrP gene (see below). Other cases have
been transmitted iatrogenically, via pituitary-derived growth hormone,
contaminated neurosurgical instruments or graft material, and possibly
by blood transfusion. The incubation time in these cases can exceed 20
years. Because of the potential infectivity, no patients with dementia
should be organ donors. Sporadic CJD affects both sexes equally. Onset
is typically between 50 and 65 years of age. It is usually heralded by
memory impairment, which may be accompanied by prominent behavioural
abnormalities or personality change, prompting initial referral to a
psychiatrist (Thompson et al., 2014). Visual hallucinations, cerebellar
signs, involuntary movements, myoclonic

371

372

372

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
jerks, and other motor features are frequent. Seizures occur later in
the course. There is usually a relentless and rapid progression to
death, often within 6 months. The EEG classically shows a triphasic 1--2
Hz discharge which, together with the history and rapid course, is
diagnostically characteristic. The biochemical profile of the CSF,
notably the presence of '14-3-3 proteins', is also suggestive. However,
definitive diagnosis in life requires a brain biopsy.

Variant Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease Intense interest in prion disease
followed the description of variant Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease (vCJD),
which was first identified in the UK in 1996. This was linked with
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), which was epidemic in British
dairy herds at that time. BSE and vCJD are, in effect, the same disease
(see below), and it is beyond reasonable doubt that vCJD occurred as a
result of eating contaminated bovine products. The incidence of vCJD
peaked around the year 2000, with only one new case diagnosed since
2013. A total of 177 cases had been identified by January 2016. It is
now considered highly unlikely that a human epidemic will occur;
however, abnormal PrP has been found in about 1 in 200 appendixes in a
large UK survey, suggesting a vCJD 'carrier state' (Gill et al., 2013).
There is a common polymorphism at codon 129 of the PrP gene that encodes
either methionine or valine; all vCJD patients except one have been
homozygous for methionine (compared with 40% in the population), which
suggests that this genetic subgroup is more susceptible to development
of vCJD. Compared with other forms of CJD, vCJD has an earlier onset,
slower course, and usually presents with psychiatric symptoms, notably
depression and personality change (Thompson et al., 2014). EEG
abnormalities are less common. The 'pulvinar' sign on MRI
(hyperintensity over the posterior thalamus) is a useful and noninvasive
diagnostic sign.

Other prion diseases Kuru, described in the Fore tribe of New Guinea
highlanders, was transmitted by ritual cannibalism; the disease has
disappeared since this practice was abolished in the 1950s. Transmission
of kuru to monkeys in 1970 was the first experimental proof of the
infectivity of prion disease. Other inherited prion diseases are
Gerstmann-- StrÃ¤ussler-Scheinker syndrome and fatal familial insomnia.
Like familial CJD, both of these are caused by

autosomal dominant mutations of the prion protein gene. Both are
extremely rare.

Aetiology The name 'prion' denotes proteinaceous infectious particles.
It was coined in 1982 by Prusiner, who received the 1999 Nobel Prize for
Medicine. Prion protein (PrP) is encoded by a gene on chromosome 20. The
functions of 'normal' PrP (denoted PrPC) are unknown, but it is
expressed by neurons and may serve as a receptor and influence synaptic
properties. Prion diseases are caused when PrPC takes on an abnormal
conformation, called PrPSc (named after scrapie, the prion disease that
affects sheep). PrPSc is both the core molecular marker and presumed
causative agent of prion diseases. Compared with PrPC, PrPSc is
resistant to breakdown by proteases, and tends to self-aggregate and be
deposited in the brain. PrPSc can spread trans-synaptically from neuron
to neuron, thereby promoting synaptic and neuronal loss and gliosis, and
producing the resulting spongiform appearance of the brain. In familial
cases, the mutated PrP is assumed to be intrinsically more likely to
self-aggregate. In forms that are acquired (either iatrogenically or
through diet), it is postulated that the normal PrPC becomes 'corrupted'
by the acquired PrPSc, which changes the conformation of PrPC into
PrPSc, thus propagating ever more PrPSc. The molecular details of this
remarkable process remain obscure. In the case of peripheral
acquisition, PrPSc may spread via the nerves, lymphatics, and blood to
reach the brain. Different PrP conformations and modifications
(glycosylation patterns) give rise to various disease 'strains'. The
aetiology of 'sporadic' prion disease is not known. It may result from
spontaneous mutation or conversion of PrPC to PrPSc, or it may arise
from occult environmental sources. It is not known why PrPSc is
infectious, when other misfolded, amyloidogenic proteins (such as
Î²-amyloid and Î±-synuclein) do not appear to be. Prion diseases are not
caused by 'slow viruses', as was formerly believed. For review, see
Prusiner (2013).

Dementia due to HIV disease See Chapter 22.

Dementia due to alcohol misuse See Chapter 20.

37

Movement disorders

Emerging concepts of dementia Classification and clinical practice are
based on the dementia syndromes described above. However,
epidemiological and biological research is increasingly calling current
diagnostic concepts into question.

Mixed dementia The frequency and importance of 'mixed dementia' are
becoming apparent, particularly the coexistence of Alzheimer's disease
and vascular dementia. This occurs in at least 20% of cases (and in the
majority of cases if lower thresholds for cerebrovascular disease are
used). Indeed, in the over 80s, mixed dementia 'is the norm not the
exception' (O'Brien and Thomas, 2015). The coexistence of Alzheimer's
disease with cerebrovascular disease worsens the severity of dementia
(Toledo et al., 2013). The clinical overlap is now complemented by the
increasing evidence that risk factors and disease mechanisms for
Alzheimer's disease overlap with those for vascular dementia (Saito and
Ihara, 2016).

Molecular classification of neurodegenerative diseases There is further
blurring of diagnostic boundaries at the molecular level, in that the
same core biochemical processes---misfolding and accumulation of
specific proteins, and their spread along neuronal pathways in the
brain---appears to be central to many neurodegenerative disorders,
including Î²-amyloid in Alzheimer's disease, PrP in prion disease, and
Î±-synuclein in Parkinson's disease (Hardy and Revesz, 2012; Arnold et
al., 2013). Equally, it is apparent that there is not a one-to-one
correspondence between protein and syndrome, as exemplified by the
involvement of tau in both Alzheimer's disease and some forms of
frontotemporal dementia (Iqbal et al., 2016). These factors are leading
to the molecular reclassification of dementias as 'tauopathies',
'synucleinopathies', etc. These issues are likely to influence
diagnostic and clinical practice as their prognostic and treatment
implications become clear.

Movement disorders Parkinson's disease, and other disorders in which
movement and coordination are the cardinal features, are usually managed
by neurologists. However, they usually also include prominent and
clinically significant psychiatric features, including cognitive
impairment, psychosis, and mood disorders. It is the psychiatric aspects
that will be considered here.

Parkinson's disease Clinical features The cardinal triad of idiopathic
Parkinson's disease is a rest tremor, cog-wheel rigidity, and
bradykinesia. The main psychiatric consequences are cognitive
impairment, depression, psychosis, and behavioural problems (Aarsland et
al., 2009; Box 14.20). Impaired olfaction is a neglected feature, and
can pre-date other symptoms by several years (Doty, 2012); constipation,
sleep disturbances, and depression are also common well before the onset
of motor symptoms. The differential diagnosis includes other
parkinsonian syndromes, and, of particular relevance to psychiatrists,
the parkinsonian side effects of antipsychotic drugs. In
clinicopathological terms, Parkinson's disease is part of the spectrum
of Lewy body disease, discussed earlier.

For review of Parkinson's disease, see Kalia and Lang (2015).

Dementia The prevalence of cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease
is about 30%, with up to 80% of patients eventually developing dementia.
The diagnosis is 'Parkinson's disease dementia' if the dementia begins
more than 1 year after the onset of established Parkinson's disease; if
dementia occurs less than a year after Parkinson's disease, the
diagnosis is dementia with Lewy bodies (see page 000) (Box 14.15).
Dementia is more common in later-onset cases and those in whom
bradykinesia is more prominent than tremor. The clinical picture is of a
subcortical dementia (see page 000), although other profiles of
cognitive impairment are seen in Parkinson's disease, notably a
'dysexecutive syndrome' in which planning and working memory are
especially affected (Kehagia et al., 2010). For treatment of dementia in
Parkinson's disease see Chapter 19.

Depression The association of Parkinson's disease with depression is
well established; clinically significant depressive symptoms (including
apathy) are present in 35% of cases, and a major depressive disorder in
about

373

374

374

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Box 14.20 Psychiatric manifestations in Parkinson's disease Delirium,
stupor (especially due to drugs, or intercurrent infection) Cognitive
decline (subcortical dementia, dysexecutive syndrome) Depression,
apathy, mania Hallucinations (chiefly visual) Delusions Sleep attacks,
REM sleep behaviour disorder Sexual disorders Impulse control disorders,
e.g.Â gambling (largely medication-related)

20%. Depression is most common in the early and the very advanced stages
of the disease. The mechanism is uncertain; depression correlates poorly
with degree of disability and disease duration, and may be related to
frontal lobe abnormalities and disturbed dopaminergic mechanisms.
Antidepressants must be used with care to avoid exacerbation of
cognitive impairment or induction of delirium. SSRIs and
newer-generation agents, which have less anticholinergic activity, are
preferable to tricyclic antidepressants. Pramipexole is also used.

Psychotic symptoms Psychotic symptoms occur at some stage in around 20%
of patients. Visual hallucinations are associated with dopaminergic
medication, increasing age, disease duration and severity, depression,
cognitive impairment, and reduced visual acuity. Delusions are less
frequent and are usually paranoid in content. Anti-parkinsonian drugs
have been implicated as causes, and whenever possible these should be
reduced. If antipsychotic medication is necessary, clozapine or
quetiapine should be used.

Other neuropsychiatric manifestations Excessive somnolence, a disordered
sleep--wake cycle, sleep attacks, and REM sleep behaviour disorder are
more common in (and before the onset of) Parkinson's disease. As a
result, patients with Parkinson's disease must be counselled about the
risks of driving, even in the absence of dementia. Pathological gambling
and other impulsive behaviours are also a recognized and

sometimes problematic feature, especially in patients treated with
dopamine agonists such as pramipexole.

Aetiology Idiopathic Parkinson's disease is usually a disorder of later
life, occurring in around 1% of the population over the age of 55 years,
and rising rapidly with age thereafter. It is more common in men than
women, with a ratio of 3:2. The disease results primarily from
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the zona compacta of the
substantia nigra, although the first site of pathology is in the IX/X
cranial nerve nuclei, and it later extends to other regions and
pathways. The pathological hallmark is Lewy bodies (Î±-synuclein
inclusions within dopaminergic neurons), as described for Lewy body
dementia. The dementia of Parkinson's disease involves more widespread
pathology, and involves Î²-amyloid and tau as well as Î±-synuclein (Irwin
et al., 2013). Risk factors for Parkinson's disease are summarized in
Box 14.21. Rarely, cases are inherited as autosomal dominant or
autosomal recessive disorders, caused by mutations in several genes,
including the SCNA gene, which encodes Î±-synuclein. However, the large
majority of cases are sporadic, reflecting a combination of a complex
genetic predisposition and a range of environmental factors. Of these
risk genes, variation in GBA is the most important, conferring an odds
ratio of more than 5; GBA encodes Î²-glucocerebrosidase, the lysosomal
enzyme that is deficient in Gaucher's disease. The environmental risk
factors include a range of toxins and drugs. Tobacco smoking is
associated with a decreased risk of Parkinson's disease, but this
appears to be due to people who develop the disease being more able to
quit smoking, rather than a true protective effect of nicotine.
Pathophysiologically, the disease process is thought to be due to
impairment of mitochondrial and synaptic functioning, and oxidative
stress. Neuroinflammation may also play a role. For review, see Schapiro
et al.Â (2014).

Huntington's disease This autosomal dominant disease, also called
Huntington's chorea, was described by the New England physician George
Huntington in 1872. It has a worldwide distribution, with an estimated
prevalence of 4--7 per 100,000. Onset is typically in middle life,
although adolescent cases are well recognized. The clinical features of
Huntington's disease are shown in Box 14.22. They comprise a triad of
movement abnormalities, cognitive impairment, and psychiatric features.
The classical choreiform movement

375

Movement disorders

Box 14.21 Risk factors for Parkinson's disease

Box 14.22 Features of Huntington's disease

Genetic

Motor abnormalities

Autosomal dominant: SCNA; LRRK2; VIP35; EIF4G1; DNAJC13; CHCHD2
Autosomal recessive: Parkin, PINK1, Dj-1 Risk polymorphisms: GBA;
INPP5F; and many others

Involuntary movements Chorea Fidgeting

Environmental risk factors Pesticide exposure Head injury Rural living
Drinking well water Agricultural occupation Use of beta-blockers

Environmental protective factors Tobacco smoking Coffee drinking Use of
NSAIDs Use of calcium channel blockers Alcohol Adapted from Lancet,
386(9996), Kalia LV and Lang AE, Parkinson's disease, pp.Â 896-912,
Copyright (2015), with permission from Elsevier.

abnormality is required for diagnosis, but significant cognitive
impairment and psychiatric symptoms frequently occur in the decade
before chorea appears (the 'prodrome' of Huntington's disease), and
individuals may therefore present to psychiatrists during this time
(Epping et al., 2016). Apathy is commonly the first psychiatric
manifestation. Most subjects will be aware of their family history, and
many will have had predictive genetic testing (see below), and so the
psychiatrist will need to deal with the resulting implications and
concerns (MacLeod et al., 2013). After presentation, the motor and
cognitive symptoms are invariable and progress inexorably, whereas the
psychiatric symptoms are much more variable. Depression is seen in over
50% of cases at some stage, and irritability and apathy are also common.
Psychotic symptoms, both schizophrenia-like and affective in nature,
occur in about 10% of cases.

Impairment of voluntary movements Incoordination Gaze apraxia Failure to
sustain tongue protrusion ('serpentine tongue') Bradykinesia Rigidity

Cognitive impairment Cognitive slowing Decreased attention Reduced
mental flexibility and planning Impaired emotional recognition Poor
visuospatial function

Psychiatric and behavioural features Depression Irritability Apathy
Delusions and hallucinations Early loss of insight

For review of Huntington's disease, see Ross et al. (2014). For review
of treatment of the psychiatric features, see Chapter 19 and Videnovic
(2013).

Neuropathology The pathological changes mainly affect the caudate
nucleus and frontal lobes. The basal ganglia, especially the caudate
nucleus, is markedly atrophic and gliotic. The shrinkage of the caudate
can be seen using MRI; it begins many years before diagnosis and its
extent correlates strongly with the motor and cognitive impairments
(Ross et al., 2014). There is also some involvement of the frontal
cortex, with thinning of the grey matter and pyramidal neuronal loss.
Polyglutamine nuclear inclusions are present within some cells,
reflecting the causative gene mutation described below. Neurochemically,

375

376

376

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
there are decreased concentrations of the inhibitory transmitter
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the caudate nucleus.

Aetiology Huntington's disease is one of the few single gene, autosomal
dominant disorders in psychiatry. The gene, on chromosome 4p, is called
huntingtin (HTT). The mutation, identified in 1993, is a multiple repeat
of the codon CAG, which codes for glutamine. It is therefore known as a
'triplet repeat', 'trinucleotide repeat' or 'CAG repeat' mutation,
giving rise to a 'polyglutamine' sequence in the HTT protein. Normal
individuals have less than 30 CAG repeats in the gene; disease occurs in
those who have more than 36 copies, with full penetrance (i.e.Â all
carriers of the mutation develop the disease) at 40 copies or more. New
mutations are very rare; most apparently sporadic cases reflect an
incomplete family history, or lack of knowledge of true paternity. The
expansion tends to increase in succeeding generations, leading to an
earlier age of onset, a feature called anticipation, which is
characteristic of trinucleotide repeat diseases. The normal function of
huntingtin, and the pathogenic mechanism by which the mutation causes
disease, remain unclear, but a range of molecular pathways leading to
cellular dysfunction and death are implicated (Ross et al., 2014).
Diagnostic and predictive genetic testing is widely available. Because
of the devastating implications for the sufferer and their descendants,
genetic counselling is required (MacLeod et al., 2013).

Dystonias Dystonias are uncontrolled focal muscle spasms that lead to
involuntary movements of the eyelids, face, neck, jaw, shoulders,
larynx, hands, and (rarely) other parts of the body. The aetiology is
uncertain. In the past, dystonias were regarded as conversion phenomena.
However, there is now strong evidence that some cases are caused by gene
mutations, whilst others are due to infection, brain injury,
neurotoxicity, drugs, and a range of other causes (Albanese et al.,
2013), and that psychogenic cases are rare. However, psychiatric factors
may exacerbate symptoms and disability. Clinical types include
blepharospasm, torticollis, writer's cramp, and laryngeal dystonia. The
most effective treatment is the injection of botulinum toxin directly
into the affected muscles. Deep brain stimulation is also being used.
Psychiatric symptoms secondary to the physical disorder can be treated
with antidepressants or behavioural therapy. For review, see Henderson
and Mellers (2009).

Occupational dystonia Muscular problems are common among musicians, and
may threaten to end their careers. There are many causes, including
overuse injury, pressure on peripheral nerves, and focal dystonias.
These problems should be assessed by a physician with experience in the
field. Performance anxiety is also frequent, and may impair or prevent
performance. Beta-blockers alleviate this symptom and are used by many
musicians, sometimes without medical supervision. Anxiety management is
effective in some cases. Other occupations also have characteristic
dystonias (e.g.Â golfers' 'yips').

Tics Tics are purposeless, stereotyped, and repetitive jerking movements
that most commonly occur in the face and neck. They are much more common
in childhood than in adulthood, although a few cases begin at up to 40
years of age. The peak of onset is about 7 years, and onset often occurs
at a time of emotional disturbance. Tics are especially common in boys.
Most sufferers have just one kind of abnormal movement, but a few people
have more than one (multiple tics). Like almost all involuntary
movements, tics are worsened by anxiety. Unlike dystonias, they can be
controlled briefly by voluntary effort, but this results in an
increasing unpleasant feeling of tension. Many tics that occur in
childhood last for only a few weeks, and 80--90% of cases improve within
5 years. Tics in children are associated with a range of psychiatric
disorders, notably obsessive--compulsive disorder, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, and anxiety disorders. For review, see Knight et
al.Â (2012). Tics are treated primarily with behavioural interventions,
including exposure and response prevention, and habit reversal therapy.
Occasionally, atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone, or alpha-2
adrenergic agonists, are used (Roessner et al., 2013).

Tourette syndrome This condition was first described by Jean Itard in
1825 and subsequently by Georges Gilles de la Tourette in 1885. It is
the most common tic disorder. The syndrome is defined by the onset in
childhood of both motor and vocal tics (grunting, snarling, and similar
ejaculations), lasting for at least a year. Up to a third of affected
individuals exhibit coprolalia (involuntary uttering of obscenities).
Around 10--40% exhibit echolalia or echopraxia. There may be stereotyped
movements, such as jumping and dancing. The tics are often preceded by
premonitory sensations. Associated

37

Cerebrovascular disorders features include overactivity, difficulties in
learning, emotional disturbances, and social problems. Comorbidity with
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and obsessive--compulsive
disorder occurs in over 50% of cases. The prevalence in children is
estimated at 0.5--1%. The disorder is three to four times more common in
males than in females. There is a substantial genetic contribution to
the syndrome and an overlap with the genetic predisposition to
obsessive--compulsive disorder. Prenatal maternal smoking, perinatal
hypoxia, and autoimmune abnormalities are also implicated. The neural

basis of the syndrome is thought to involve altered dopamine function
and aberrant cortico-striatal connectivity. For review see Paschou
(2013). Mild cases may not require specific treatment. The tics are
treated as described above (Roessner et al., 2013), together with
treatment of any comorbid psychiatric disorders. There are few good
outcome data. Clinical experience suggests that two-thirds of patients
can expect an improvement or lasting remission by early adulthood, but
the outcome is frequently poor. For a review of Tourette syndrome, see
Cohen et al. (2013).

Cerebrovascular disorders Stroke Cognitive deficits Strokes may lead to
vascular dementia, as described earlier. However, they have other
neuropsychiatric implications, too. Overt strokes usually present as a
neurological emergency, with hemiparesis, dysphasias, and other focal
symptoms and signs. Subsequently, survivors may be left with these and
other impairments, in addition to a range of psychiatric symptoms, which
depend largely on the site and size of the vascular event. For review,
see Fleminger (2009).

Personality change Irritability, apathy, lability of mood, and
occasionally aggressiveness may occur. Inflexibility in coping with
problems is common, and may be observed in extreme form as a
catastrophic reaction. These behavioural changes are often as disabling,
and as distressing to carers, as residual hemiplegia or dysphasia. They
are probably due more to associated widespread arteriosclerotic vascular
disease than to a single stroke, and they may continue to worsen even
when the focal signs of a stroke are improving. After a stroke, some
people become abnormally emotional, with mixtures of spontaneous
laughter and crying, and the emotional display is frequently at odds
with the patient's apparent mood. Antidepressants are considered to be
helpful.

Post-stroke depression Depressed mood is common after stroke and may
contribute to the apparent intellectual impairment or

impede rehabilitation. The prevalence of depression is about 30% and
remains stable for up to 10 years poststroke; there is a cumulative
incidence of about 45% for depression within 5 years of a stroke (Ayerbe
et al., 2012). The main risk factors are the extent of post-stroke
impairment in activities of daily living, the degree of cognitive
impairment, and a past history of depression (Ayerbe et al., 2012).
Suggestions that the risk of depression is related to the location of
the stroke (being greater following a left frontal or left basal ganglia
stroke) have not been well confirmed. Post-stroke depression is
associated with a reduced quality of life, and increased disability and
mortality compared to non-depressed stroke survivors. Treatment of
post-stroke depression depends in part on active rehabilitation.
Antidepressants, especially SSRIs, are effective, and they may also
enhance recovery after stroke independent of their effects on mood.
Medication should, however, be used cautiously in this population, as
side effects are frequent and patients are at risk of further
cerebrovascular events. For review of post-stroke depression, see
Robinson and Jorge (2016).

Subarachnoid haemorrhage In the survivors of subarachnoid haemorrhage,
cognitive impairment, personality change, and anxiety and depression are
all common. The long-term outcome is poor, and psychosocial problems are
often prominent. There are also anecdotal reports that a subarachnoid
haemorrhage can be precipitated by emotionally stressful events. For
review, see Fleminger (2009).

377

378

378

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders

Subdural haematoma Subdural haematoma may follow a fall in elderly
patients, especially in those with a history of alcoholism. However, a
history of head trauma is commonly lacking. Acute haematomas may cause
coma or fluctuating impairment of consciousness, associated with
hemiparesis and oculomotor signs. The psychiatrist is more

likely to see the chronic syndromes, in which patients present with
headache, poor concentration, vague physical complaints, and fluctuating
consciousness, but often with few localizing neurological signs. It is
particularly important to consider this possibility as a cause of
accelerated deterioration in patients with a neurodegenerative dementia.
Treatment is by surgical evacuation, which may reverse the symptoms.

Head injury The psychiatrist is likely to see two main groups of
patients who have suffered a head injury: â

a relatively small group with persistent, serious cognitive and
behavioural sequelae

â

a larger group with emotional symptoms and personality change.

The severity of non-penetrating (closed) head injury is best assessed by
the duration of post-traumatic amnesia (PTA)---that is, the interval
between the injury and the return of normal day-to-day memory. This
measure has the advantage of being reasonably accurate even when
assessed retrospectively (i.e.Â by asking the patient several months
later what they remember of the immediate post-injury period). A PTA of
less than 1 week is associated with a reasonable outcome (e.g.Â return to
work) in the majority of cases, but a PTA of more than 1 month often
results in failure to return to work. Retrograde amnesia (i.e.Â loss of
memory of events prior to the injury) is much less predictive of
outcome. An MRI scan is useful for defining the extent of brain injury,
but a normal MRI scan does not preclude some degree of brain damage. The
vast majority of closed head injuries are due to acceleration and
deceleration forces. When loss of consciousness occurs for a few seconds
it is thought to be due to disruption of cholinergic transmission in the
brainstem. With more severe injuries, haemorrhagic areas of damage and
diffuse axonal injury and shearing in white matter are the two main
pathological events (Blennow et al., 2012). Both contribute to coma
duration. Other complications include extradural and subdural
haemorrhage and anoxia. Deposition of Î²amyloid occurs in some cases,
which may explain the link between head injury and later development of
Alzheimer's disease, and with dementia pugilistica (see below).
Apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4) genotype may

increase the risk of death or cognitive deficits after head injury. For
review of the psychiatric aspects of head injury, see Fleminger (2009)
and Bryant et al.Â (2010).

Acute psychological effects After severe injury, a phase of delirium may
follow awakening from coma. Prolonged delirium may be accompanied by a
transient confabulatory state. Occasionally, delusional
misidentification or reduplicative paramnesia (see page 000) is
observed---for example, ward staff may be identified as old friends, or
the ward may be identified as a duplicate in a distant town. Agitation
and disinhibition (often sexual) are often present, and may take days or
weeks to resolve.

Chronic psychological effects Both primary and secondary (due to the
effects of brain swelling and raised intracranial pressure) damage
determine the neurological and cognitive deficits. The long-term outcome
is also influenced by premorbid personality traits, occupational
attainment, availability of social support, and compensation issues.
Post-traumatic epilepsy may be a further significant complicating factor
in more serious injuries. The risk of suicide is increased threefold
after head injury.

Post-concussional syndrome After mild head injury, 15--30% of patients
describe a group of symptoms known as the post-concussional syndrome
(Hou et al., 2012). The main features are anxiety, depression, and
irritability, accompanied by headache, dizziness, fatigue, poor
concentration, and insomnia. The duration and severity of these symptoms
are highly variable. Most cases resolve without specific medical
intervention.

379

Epilepsy

Lasting cognitive impairment The particular vulnerability of frontal and
temporal lobes to closed head injury hints at the usual pattern of
neuropsychological deficits, with memory and executive function being
most affected. The patient may show significant impairments in these
domains (e.g.Â organizing and planning activities) without an overall
decline in performance in terms of IQ.

Personality change Personality change is common after severe injuries,
particularly if there is frontal lobe damage, when there may be
irritability, apathy, loss of spontaneity and drive, disinhibition, and
occasionally reduced control of aggressive impulses. ICD-10 has a
category of 'organic personality disorder' to describe this group.
Management is difficult, demanding considerable social support and, in
some cases, prolonged rehabilitation. Such resources are scarce and
often unavailable. Head injury has been associated with an increased
rate of violence (Fazel et al., 2009b) and of violent crime and suicide
(Fazel et al., 2014b).

Depression and emotional disorder Depression, anxiety, and emotional
lability are very common after brain damage, although estimates of
prevalence vary widely (Rapoport, 2012). Post-head-injury mania is much
less common, and can be mistaken for personality change.

Psychosis Transient psychotic symptoms are common during the delirium
after head injury. However, it is unclear whether there is an increased
risk of schizophrenia-like psychosis after this phase has passed. A
famous study by Davison and Bagley (1969) reported a twofold to
threefold greater risk of schizophrenia in survivors of war injuries.
However, later studies do not support such an association (David and
Prince, 2005).

Boxing and head injury In 1969, Roberts drew attention to the tendency
for professional boxers to develop a chronic traumatic

encephalopathy, sometimes called punch-drunk syndrome or dementia
pugilistica (Roberts, 1969), related to the cumulative extent of head
injuries suffered during their boxing careers. The principal early
features are executive dysfunction, bradyphrenia, mild dysarthria, and
incoordination. The fully developed syndrome may consist of a range of
motor features, cognitive deficits, and a variety of behavioural
manifestations. Neuropathologically, there is loss of neurons in the
cortex, substantia nigra, and cerebellum, together with neurofibrillary
tangles and diffuse amyloid plaques (Fleminger, 2009). Changes to the
rules of boxing, and more careful medical assessments, have reduced the
risks, but similar concerns are now being raised with other activities
involving regular head trauma (Smith et al., 2013).

Treatment of head injury Early assessment of the extent of neurological
signs provides a useful guide to the likely pattern of long-term
physical disability. Neuropsychiatric problems should be assessed and
their impact anticipated, and a comprehensive social assessment is
crucial. The clinical psychologist can sometimes contribute behavioural
and cognitive techniques. Practical support is needed for the patient's
family and carers. Issues of compensation and litigation should be
settled as quickly as possible. Medication is often used to treat
aggression, depression, apathy, psychosis, or concentration problems,
but evidence (as for psychological treatments) is lacking. If drugs are
considered to be necessary, always start with a low dose and choose
agents that have less potential for seizure generation and
anticholinergic or extrapyramidal side effects. For review of the
management of head injury, see Fleminger (2009). Most improvement after
a head injury occurs within the first year. Late deterioration should
raise suspicion of a progressive or second event, such as a subdural
haematoma or hydrocephalus, epilepsy, the development of a psychiatric
disorder (e.g.Â depression), or drug toxicity.

Epilepsy Epilepsy is the tendency to recurrent seizures, where a seizure
consists of a paroxysmal electrical discharge in the brain and its
clinical sequelae. The tendency to

recurrent seizures, which defines epilepsy, must be distinguished from
isolated seizures that may be provoked by many factors, including drugs,
hypoglycaemia, and

379

380

380

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
intercurrent illnesses. Epilepsy is managed primarily by neurologists,
and for a full description the reader is advised to refer to a neurology
textbook. However, epilepsy also has several important psychiatric
aspects, reflecting its description as the 'bridge' between psychiatry
and neurology: â

â

the differential diagnosis of episodic disturbances of behaviour
(particularly 'atypical' attacks, aggressive behaviour, sleep problems,
and 'pseudoseizures') the treatment of the psychiatric and social
complications of epilepsy

â

seizures caused by psychotropic medication

â

the psychological side effects of anticonvulsant drugs.

Types of seizures The current classification of seizures was proposed by
the International League Against Epilepsy (1989). A simplified outline
is shown in Box 14.23. The principal distinction is between seizures
which are generalized from the start and those with a focal onset,
called partial seizures. Since focal-onset seizures may become
generalized, an accurate description of the onset is essential. It is
also necessary to distinguish between types of epilepsy and types of
seizure. Older terms such as 'petit mal' and 'grand mal' are ambiguous,
and are best avoided. It should be remembered that an 'aura' is

in fact a partial seizure; most so-called 'absences' and 'petit mal' are
actually complex partial seizures, implying a focal rather than
generalized disturbance, as in true absences. A brief clinical
description of the more common types of seizure follows.

Simple partial seizures The content depends upon the site of the focus.
Simple partial seizures include Jacksonian motor seizures and a variety
of sensory seizures in which the phenomena are relatively unformed.
Awareness is not impaired. Focal neurological or cognitive dysfunction
may persist for a variable period following the seizure.

Complex partial seizures Complex partial seizures are characterized by
altered awareness of self and the environment, and include a wide range
of 'psychiatric' features (see Table 14.5), hence the earlier term
'psychomotor epilepsy'---making them the form of epilepsy of most
importance to psychiatrists, and frequently forming part of the
differential diagnosis. Consciousness is not lost, unless secondary
generalization occurs. However, during this period subjects appear out
of touch with their surroundings, and often have great difficulty in
describing their experiences later.

Table 14.5 Clinical features of complex partial seizures

Box 14.23 Simplified classification of seizures Seizures beginning
focally Simple motor or sensory (without impaired consciousness) Complex
partial (with impaired consciousness) Partial seizures with secondary
generalization

Domain

Features

Consciousness

Altered

Autonomic and visceral

'Epigastric aura', dizziness, flushing, tachycardia, and other bodily
sensations

Perceptual

Distorted perceptions, dÃ©jÃ  vu, jamais vu, visual, auditory, olfactory,
gustatory, somatic hallucinations

Cognitive

Disturbances of speech, thought, and memory, derealization,
depersonalization

Affective

Fear and anxiety; occasionally, euphoric or ecstatic states

Psychomotor

Automatisms, grimacing, and other bodily movements; repetitive or more
complex stereotyped behaviours

Generalized seizures without focal onset Tonic--clonic Myoclonic Atonic
Absence

Unclassified

381

Epilepsy The seizures arise most commonly in the temporal lobe,
reflecting the additional former term 'temporal lobe epilepsy'. However,
that is not an appropriate term, as complex partial seizures can also
begin in the frontal lobes and other sites. Seizures that originate in
the latter region are particularly likely to be misdiagnosed as
functional, as they are frequently accompanied by bizarre posturing and
other semi-purposeful, complex motor behaviours. Complex partial
seizures of temporal lobe origin are often heralded by an aura, which
may take the form of olfactory, gustatory, auditory, visual, or somatic
hallucinations. Particularly common is the 'epigastric aura'---a
sensation of churning in the stomach that rises towards the neck. The
patient may also experience odd disturbances of thought or emotion,
including an intense sense of familiarity (dÃ©jÃ  vu) or unfamiliarity
(jamais vu), depersonalization, or derealization, or, rarely, vivid
hallucinations of past experiences ('experiential phenomena'). The
sequence of events during the seizure tends to be stereotyped in the
individual patient, which is an important diagnostic aid. The whole
ictal phase usually lasts for up to 1--2 minutes. After recovery, only
the aura may be recalled. Non-convulsive status epilepticus may take the
form of a prolonged single seizure, or a rapid succession of brief
seizures. In such cases, a protracted period of automatic behaviour may
be mistaken for a dissociative fugue or other psychiatric disorder.

Absences The key feature of an absence attack is loss of awareness that
starts suddenly, without an aura, lasts for seconds, and ends abruptly.
Simple automatisms (e.g.Â eyelid fluttering) often accompany the attack.
There are no postictal abnormalities. For the purposes of diagnosis and
treatment, it is essential to distinguish between absence seizures and
complex partial seizures. The latter last longer, automatisms during the
episode are more complex, recovery occurs more slowly, and the patient
may subsequently recall an aura. Absence attacks in children were
previously called 'petit mal', and are classically associated with 3 per
second 'spike-and-wave' EEG discharges.

Generalized tonic--clonic seizures This is the familiar epileptic
convulsion with a sudden onset, tonic and clonic phases, and a
succeeding period of variable duration (up to many hours) in which the
patient may be unrousable, sleepy, or disorientated. Incontinence and
tongue-biting or other injuries may occur during the seizure. During the
post-ictal phase the patient may present with delirium, which may

cause diagnostic uncertainty if the convulsion was not witnessed.
Generalized tonic--clonic seizures may be initiated by a partial
seizure, implying localized brain disease, which is often overlooked.
This is an issue of importance, as primary and secondary generalized
seizures differ in significance and management.

Myoclonic, atonic, and other seizure types There are several types of
seizures with predominantly motor symptoms, including myoclonic jerks
and drop attacks with loss of postural tone. They are unlikely to
present to the psychiatrist.

Epidemiology In the UK, general practice data indicate that the
prevalence of epilepsy in adults is about 7 per 1000. About 1 in 30
people have a seizure at some stage. The inception rate is highest in
early childhood, and there are further peaks in adolescence and over the
age of 65 years. Epilepsy is usually of short duration, and only becomes
a chronic condition in about 20% of subjects. This means that regular
attenders at specialist clinics are a minority of all those with
epilepsy, and who are especially likely to suffer from its medical and
social complications. There is psychiatric comorbidity in 20--40% of
people with epilepsy (Agrawal and Govender, 2011), and there are
particular psychiatric and cognitive implications for children with
epilepsy (Lin et al., 2012).

Aetiology Age at onset is an important clue to aetiology. For example,
in the newborn, birth injury, congenital brain malformations, and
metabolic disorders are common causes. Infantile febrile convulsions,
especially status epilepticus, are classically associated with later
complex partial epilepsy, via damage to the hippocampus (hippocampal
sclerosis). About 30% of epilepsy is thought to have a primarily genetic
basis. However, although many individual genetic mutations and copy
number variants are being identified, to date they account for only a
small proportion of cases. In adults, identifiable causes include
cerebrovascular disease, brain tumours, head injury, autoimmune
disorders, and neurodegenerative disorders. Patterns of alcohol and
other drug use should always be established, particularly in young
adults. Seizure threshold may be lowered by drug therapy, including
antipsychotics, tricyclic antidepressants, and bupropion. Sudden
withdrawal of substantial doses of any drug with

381

382

382

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
anticonvulsant properties, most commonly diazepam or alcohol, can
precipitate seizures. For review, see Moshe et al.Â (2015).

Making the diagnosis Epilepsy is essentially a clinical diagnosis that
depends upon detailed accounts of the attacks provided by witnesses as
well as by the patient. The background history, physical examination,
and special investigations are directed towards establishing the
aetiology. The extent of investigation is guided by the initial
findings, the type of attack, and the patient's age. Only an outline can
be given here; for a full account the reader is advised to refer to a
neurology or epilepsy textbook. An EEG can confirm but cannot exclude
the diagnosis. It is more useful for determining the type of epilepsy
and site of origin. The standard EEG recording may be supplemented by
sleep recording, ambulatory monitoring, and splitscreen video
(telemetry) techniques. Although neuroimaging has an increasing clinical
role, no specific brain abnormality (or other cause) is found in the
majority of patients with epilepsy. Epilepsy can be erroneously
diagnosed as the cause of paroxysmal neurological and psychiatric
symptoms, and it is important to keep in mind the extensive differential
diagnosis (see Box 14.5). A clear description of the circumstances
surrounding the episode and the mode of onset is fundamental. The most
important differential diagnoses of generalized seizures are vasovagal
syncope (commonly associated with involuntary movements, a fact not
always appreciated) and cardiac arrhythmias. Hyperventilation (of which
the patient is often unaware) and panic attacks frequently produce
symptoms similar to complex partial seizures, and may lead to actual
loss of consciousness if prolonged. Sudden changes in motor activity,
affect, and cognition can occur in schizophrenia. Factors that together
suggest a seizure include abrupt onset, a stereotyped course lasting
from many seconds to a few minutes, tongue-biting, urinary incontinence,
cyanosis, sustaining injury during the attack, and prolonged post-ictal
drowsiness or confusion. However, none of these alone is necessary or
sufficient to make the diagnosis. Some forms of frontal lobe epilepsy
are particularly likely to be misdiagnosed as psychogenic. If the
diagnosis remains uncertain, and attacks are frequent, close observation
in hospital, including video recording and EEG telemetry and ambulatory
monitoring, may be worthwhile.

Functional non-epileptic attacks (pseudoseizures) Paroxysmal attacks
that can be mistaken for epilepsy but which are not caused by seizures
or epileptiform activity in the brain are called pseudoseizures or
functional non-epileptic attacks (Agrawal and Govender, 2011). They can
be very difficult to distinguish from epilepsy, and make up about 20% of
referrals to epilepsy services. Features that suggest non-epileptic
episodes include identifiable psychosocial precipitants, a past history
of physical or sexual abuse, a history of psychiatric disorder, an
unusual or variable pattern of attacks, occurrence either only in public
or only while alone, and the absence of autonomic signs or change in
colour during 'generalized' attacks. The patient may be suggestible or
betray other evidence of retained awareness during the episode. Complex,
purposeful behaviour is more often seen in dissociative states. Video
recordings of the attacks (e.g.Â from smart phones) and ambulatory EEG
may be helpful. However, some types of seizure may not be reflected in
the surface EEG and, conversely, EEG abnormalities occur in perhaps 3%
of healthy individuals. Post-ictal serum prolactin levels are useful in
a minority of cases (they are elevated after a generalized seizure), but
should not be relied upon to make the distinction.

Psychiatric aspects of epilepsy Psychiatric comorbidity is common in
people with epilepsy, with overall rates increased by at least twofold,
and higher among those in specialist care. Many different types of
psychiatric disorder are associated with epilepsy, including cognitive,
affective, emotional, and behavioural disturbances. They are usually
classified according to whether they occur before, during, after, or
between seizures (see Box 14.24). Psychiatric comorbidity is a major
determinant of quality of life for people with epilepsy, and plays an
important part in their risk of premature death (Fazel et al., 2013).
The relationship between epilepsy and psychiatric disorder may reflect
any of the following factors: â

a shared aetiology or pathophysiology---for example, temporal lobe
pathology appears to predispose to epilepsy and to psychosis

â

the stigma and psychosocial impairments associated with epilepsy

â

the side effects of antiepileptic drugs.

38

Epilepsy

Box 14.24 Associations between epilepsy and psychological disturbance
Psychiatric and cognitive disorders associated with the underlying cause
Behavioural disturbances associated with seizures Pre-ictal: prodromal
states and mood disturbance Ictal: complex partial seizures (affective
disturbances, hallucinations, experiential phenomena, automatisms);
absence seizures (altered awareness, automatisms) Post-ictal: impaired
consciousness; delirium; psychosis; Todd's paresis (hemiparesis,
dysphasia, other focal signs) Epileptic pseudodementia (non-convulsive
status)

Inter-ictal disorders Cognitive Psychoses Sexual behaviour Depression
and emotional disorder Suicide and deliberate self-harm Crime and other
antisocial behaviour Personality change

Psychosis may occur as an ictal phenomenon. Clues to this possibility
include sudden onset and termination of psychiatric disturbance,
olfactory or gustatory hallucinations (especially with partial
seizures), a relative lack of first-rank symptoms, and amnesia for the
period of the disturbance. Ictal violence is extremely rare, and crimes
committed during epileptic automatisms are probably even rarer, an
important medicolegal consideration (Treiman, 1999; see also Chapter
18).

Post-ictal disturbances Psychiatric disturbances may occur during the
hours following a seizure. Psychotic symptoms are seen in 2% of cases
(Clancy et al., 2014), and are associated with bilateral and
extratemporal seizure foci, long duration of epilepsy, and structural
brain lesions. These transient psychoses are distinct from the
inter-ictal psychoses described below. Diverse motor, sensory,
cognitive, and autonomic dysfunction can also occur and, as with the
psychoses, may occur as part of a delirium, or in clear consciousness.
Post-ictal violence is rare, although it is more common than violence
during the seizure, and may be secondary to psychotic experiences.
Extreme post-ictal violence may be recurrent, stereotyped, and more
likely to occur in men, after a cluster of seizures. There is usually
amnesia for the episode.

Inter-ictal disturbances Cognitive impairments

For reviews of the psychiatric aspects of epilepsy, see Agrawal and
Govender (2011) and Lin et al.Â (2012). For review of management, see
Kanner (2016).

Pre-ictal disturbances Increasing tension, irritability, and anxiety and
depression are sometimes apparent as prodromata for several hours or
even days before a seizure, generally increasing in intensity as the
seizure approaches.

Ictal disturbances Ictal psychiatric disturbances (i.e.Â those directly
related to seizure activity) are common and diverse, as noted above.
During seizures, transient confusional states, affective disturbances,
anxiety, automatisms, and other abnormal behaviours often occur
(especially in partial seizures). On occasion, an abnormal mental state
may be the only sign of non-convulsive (complex partial or absence)
status epilepticus, and the diagnosis is easily overlooked.

In the nineteenth century it was widely believed, based on experience
with institutionalized populations, that epilepsy was associated with an
inevitable decline in intellectual functioning. However, it is now
established that relatively few people with epilepsy show cognitive
changes. When these do occur, they are likely to reflect concurrent
brain damage, unrecognized non-convulsive seizures, or the effects of
antiepileptic drugs. A few patients with epilepsy show a progressive
decline in cognitive function. In such cases, careful investigation is
required to exclude an underlying progressive neurological disorder;
this is a particular concern in paediatric practice. For review, see
Lodhi and Agrawal (2012).

Personality The historical concept of an 'epileptic personality',
characterized by egocentricity, irritability, religiosity,
quarrelsomeness, and 'sticky' thought processes, has been discarded.
Community surveys indicate that only a minority of patients have serious
personality difficulties, and these probably reflect the adverse effects
of brain

383

384

384

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders
damage on education, employment, and social life, rather than a specific
association with epilepsy. It has been suggested that behavioural
abnormalities (including hypergraphia) are particularly associated with
medial temporal lobe lesions. For a discussion of this subject, see
Mellers (2009).

Depression and emotional disorders Depression and anxiety are common in
people with epilepsy, for both biological and psychosocial reasons. The
rate of depression is increased almost threefold, with a prevalence of
over 20% (Fiest et al., 2013). Many subjects meet the criteria for
dysthymia rather than major depression, and the term inter-ictal
dsyphoric disorder is sometimes used. The risk factors for depression in
epilepsy are summarized in Box 14.25. The relationship between epilepsy
and depression is bidirectional, with depression preceding epilepsy as
well as vice versa, and reflecting common pathogenic factors for the two
conditions. For review of depression in epilepsy, see Hoppe and Elger
(2011).

Inter-ictal psychosis The nature and prevalence of inter-ictal psychosis
has long been controversial, including the fundamental

question as to whether the two coexist more or less often than expected.
Following the important study by Slater et al.Â (1963), the evidence now
supports the view that epilepsy is associated with an increased risk of
psychosis, especially a schizophrenia-like presentation. A recent
meta-analysis reported a rate of inter-ictal psychosis of 5.2% (Clancy
et al., 2014). Religious and paranoid delusions appear to be
particularly common, and affect tends to be preserved. Risk factors
include complex partial seizures, especially with the focus in the
mesial temporal or frontal lobe, a lesion which is prenatal in origin,
and possibly in the left hemisphere more than the right one. For review,
see Mellers (2009).

Suicide Suicide and deliberate self-harm are more common among people
with epilepsy than in the general population. Although estimates vary
markedly, a meta-analysis found an adjusted odds ratio of 3.7 (Fazel et
al., 2013). The rate appears to be higher in those with temporal lobe
epilepsy, and after surgical treatment for epilepsy (Harris and
Barraclough, 1997). Suicide risk factors in epilepsy encompass the same
range of risk factors as in the general population (see Chapter 21).

Social aspects of epilepsy Box 14.25 Risk factors for depression in
epilepsy Biological Family history of mood disorder Focus in temporal or
frontal lobe Left-sided focus

Psychosocial Perceived stigma Fear of seizures Pessimistic attributional
style Decreased social support Unemployment

Iatrogenic Epilepsy surgery Antiepileptic drugs, especially polypharmacy
and high serum levels

The consequences for quality of life correlate with the severity of the
seizure disorder, the presence of structural brain pathology, and with
any psychiatric comorbidity. The social implications and stigma attached
to a diagnosis of epilepsy can be far-reaching, as is the
unpredictability of seizure occurrence. When counselling patients and
their families, it is important to be sensitive to these issues and to
allay groundless fears and misconceptions. Restrictions on driving are a
major burden for many patients, whose livelihood may be at stake. To
obtain a UK driving licence, the patient must have had at least 1 year
with no seizures while awake, whether or not they are still taking
antiepileptic drugs. Those who have seizures only while asleep may hold
a licence if this pattern has been stable for at least 3 years. Sexual
dysfunction with reduced libido and impaired performance is common in
patients with epilepsy, especially where there is a temporal lobe focus.
This is thought to be mainly due to antiepileptic medication, although
psychosocial factors are also important, and rarely there may be a
direct link to the cause of the seizures. Epilepsy has been said to be
associated with crime and violence. However, there is little evidence
for either assertion. In meta-analyses, rates of epilepsy among
prisoners

385

Intracranial infections most drugs are safe at therapeutic doses.
Indeed, commonly used antidepressants may in fact be anticonvulsant,
contrary to common belief (Kanner, 2016). However, antidepressants can
cause seizures at toxic doses. Amongst antipsychotics, first-generation
drugs such as haloperidol and fluphenazine have a lower seizure
propensity than olanzapine, quetiapine, or clozapine.

were not increased (Fazel et al., 2002), nor was the risk of violence
higher in people with epilepsy (Fazel et al., 2009b). The latter result
emphasizes that ictal and postictal violence, mentioned earlier, are
both very rare events.

Treatment of epilepsy The drug treatment of epilepsy is usually
undertaken by general practitioners and neurologists. Here the
discussion will be restricted to some key points of psychiatric
relevance. â

â

â

It is important to distinguish between peri-ictal and inter-ictal
psychiatric disorders when planning treatment. For peri-ictal disorders,
treatment is aimed at control of the seizures. Treatment of inter-ictal
psychiatric disorders is usually similar to that in non-epileptic
patients, but there are relatively few data demonstrating the efficacy
of pharmacological or psychological therapies in this population. The
potential for psychotropic drugs to worsen the seizure disorder should
always be considered, though

â

Some antiepileptic drugs can cause a variety of cognitive and
psychiatric symptoms, whilst others (such as lamotrigine) are
increasingly being used to treat psychiatric disorders.

â

There are pharmacokinetic interactions between antiepileptic,
psychotropic, and other drugs that can lead to toxicity or
subtherapeutic levels. The potential for such interactions should always
be checked before prescribing (or withdrawing) medication.

Given these considerations, close liaison between neurologist,
psychiatrist, and general practitioner is recommended. For review of
drug treatment of psychiatric disorders in epilepsy, see Kanner (2016).
For psychosocial aspects of treatment, see Mittan (2009).

Intracranial infections Many intracranial infections cause cognitive
impairment, and effective treatment is available for the majority of
them. Unusual infections should always be considered as a cause of
otherwise unexplained cognitive and psychiatric symptoms. Encephalitis
is described later in this chapter; HIV infection is considered in
Chapter 22. For a review, see Dilley and Fleminger (2009).

Neurosyphilis Neurosyphilis, a manifestation of the tertiary stage of
infection with the spirochaete Treponema pallidum, is now rare in
western countries. However, increasing numbers of cases have been
reported in Eastern Europe and in association with HIV. Because of its
protean manifestations, the possibility of neurosyphilis should be
considered in all 'neuropsychiatric' patients, especially those with
delirium or dementia, and appropriate blood or CSF serological tests
ordered. Prior treatment with antibiotics may produce partial and
atypical syndromes.

An asymptomatic stage precedes clinical disease with variable latency.
Symptomatic neurosyphilis takes three forms. â

Meningovascular syphilis appears within 5 years of primary infection. It
presents with strokes, or with personality changes, emotional lability,
and headache. Dementia may occur subsequently, accompanied by psychotic
symptoms.

â

General paresis (also called general paralysis of the insane, or
dementia paralytica) starts to develop about 20 years after infection.
Presentation is with dementia, personality change, dysarthria, and motor
symptoms and signs. Affective and psychotic symptoms may be florid,
classically with euphoria and grandiose delusions. Discovery of the
cause of general paresis was an important landmark in the history of
psychiatry, stimulating a search for organic causes of other psychiatric
syndromes.

â

Tabes dorsalis is a degeneration of spinal cord pathways, and is
unlikely to present to psychiatrists.

385

386

386

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders In
the early stages, treatment with penicillin reverses the condition, and
halts progression later in the illness. If

the clinical disease is left untreated, death usually occurs within 5
years.

Brain tumours Many brain tumours cause psychological symptoms at some
stage in their course, and a significant proportion present with such
symptoms. Psychiatrists are likely to see patients with slow-growing
tumours in 'silent' (especially frontal) areas. These produce
psychological effects, but few neurological signs---for example, a
frontal meningioma or glioma of the corpus callosum. The nature of the
psychological symptoms is influenced by the global effects of raised
intracranial pressure, in addition to the tumour location. The rate of
tumour growth is also important; rapidly expanding tumours with raised
intracranial pressure can present as delirium, whereas slower-growing
tumours are more likely to cause chronic cognitive deficits. Focal
lesions give rise to a variety of specific neuropsychiatric syndromes;
those near the frontal poles typically manifest initially as personality
change. Craniopharyngiomas and other tumours

around the hypothalamus are also often associated with personality
changes and apathy. Cognitive impairment after treatment of brain
tumours in children is particularly problematic, especially in those who
have received radiotherapy. For a review, see Mellado-Calvo and
Fleminger (2009).

Cognitive impairments in cancer In addition to the direct effects of
brain tumours, neoplasms anywhere in the body can impair cognition via a
range of mechanisms (see Box 14.26). Occasionally, such complications
are the presenting feature, but usually they arise during treatment, at
which time the psychiatrist may be asked for a diagnostic and
therapeutic opinion. For a review, see Khasraw and Posner (2010).

Box 14.26 Some causes of cognitive impairment in patients with cancer
Mass effects Primary and metastatic brain tumours Haemorrhagic change
(especially melanoma, renal-cell carcinoma, choriocarcinoma)

Acidosis Hypoglycaemia

Radiotherapy

Gliomatosis cerebri Carcinomatous and lymphomatous meningitis En plaque
meningioma

Acute and subacute radionecrosis Radiation thromboangiopathy Accelerated
cerebral atherosclerosis Radiation leucodystrophy Second malignancies
(especially glioma, meningioma)

Paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis

Chemotherapy

Anti-NMDA-receptor and other autoantibodies

Metabolic encephalopathies Opportunistic infections secondary to
immunosuppression (herpes zoster, progressive multifocal
leucoencephalopathy)

Diffuse infiltration

Metabolic derangements Hypercalcaemia Hyponatraemia

378

Other neuropsychiatric syndromes

Other neuropsychiatric syndromes Multiple sclerosis Multiple sclerosis
is the most common cause of chronic neurological disability in young
adults in developed countries. Its consequences for work and
relationships may be profound. The disease may be difficult to diagnose
early in the course, and physical symptoms are sometimes misinterpreted
as psychiatric. Psychiatric symptoms are rarely the presenting feature,
but the majority of patients will experience them at some stage,
especially fatigue, depression, cognitive impairment, and euphoria (Box
14.27). Such symptoms probably result both directly from the disease
process and from the disabilities associated with it. There is a
several-fold increase in the risk of suicide. Depression is more common
in multiple sclerosis than in other neurological disorders, with a
lifetime risk of 50%. It does not appear to be closely related to the
severity of the clinical syndrome or the site of lesions. It is also a
side effect of beta-interferon, which is used to treat multiple
sclerosis (Feinstein et al., 2014). Both antidepressant and cognitive
behaviour therapy approaches can be effective. Cognitive impairment is
present in at least 40% of patients from community samples. It may be an
early manifestation of the illness, and occasionally

Box 14.27 Psychiatric features of multiple sclerosis Common Fatigue
Depression Cognitive impairment

Less common Euphoria Pseudobulbar affect Psychosis Bipolar disorder
Source: data from Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 19(5), Wong EKO,
Krishnadas R and Cavanagh J, The interface between neurology and
psychiatry: the case of multiple sclerosis, pp.Â 370-377, Copyright
(2013a), The Royal College of Psychiatrists.

a rapidly progressive dementia occurs. In most cases, however,
intellectual deterioration begins later, is less severe, and progresses
slowly. Well-practised verbal skills are often preserved despite
deficits in problem-solving, abstraction, memory, and learning.
Cognitive impairment correlates with total lesion load and degree of
callosal atrophy on MRI, and probably reflects axonal loss rather than
demyelination per se. For a review of psychiatric aspects of multiple
sclerosis, see Wong et al.Â (2013a).

Encephalitis Encephalitis is inflammation of the brain parenchyma. The
term is sometimes used to apply specifically to a primary viral
infection, although encephalitic involvement can also occur as a
complication of bacterial meningitis (meningoencephalitis) or a cerebral
abscess. Moreover, it is now clear that many cases of encephalitis are
not due to infection but have an autoimmune basis, as described below.
The commonest viral cause of encephalitis is Herpes simplex (Sabah et
al., 2012). Without treatment, it was often fatal or left devastating
consequences. Although intravenous aciclovir provides an effective
treatment, it remains a serious condition. In the acute stage, headache,
vomiting, and impaired consciousness are usual, and seizures are common.
Presentation may be with delirium. The psychiatrist may be involved in
initial diagnosis, but is more likely to see chronic complications,
which include prolonged anxiety and depression, a profound amnesic
syndrome, personality change, or complex partial epilepsy. Other
significant types of encephalitis in adults include those produced by
arthropod-borne viruses and, especially in the immune compromised,
varicella zoster. For review of viral encephalitis, see Dilley and
Fleminger (2009). A major recent development is the realization that
many cases of encephalitis are not in fact viral, but are autoimmune in
origin. In particular, autoantibodies against various neuronal proteins
(especially NMDA glutamate receptors and potassium channels) are now
recognized as being a relatively common cause of limbic encephalitis,
and often present floridly with delirium and psychosis, as well as with
epilepsy and other neurological features (Vincent et al., 2011). Hence
they may present to psychiatrists, and liaison psychiatrists

387

38

388

Chapter 14 Dementia, delirium, and other neuropsychiatric disorders may
also be involved in their management (Barry et al., 2015). These
antibodies not only underlie the encephalitis of paraneoplastic
syndromes but also occur in the absence of cancer or other known cause.
They can also be triggered by Herpes simplex, blurring the distinction
between viral and autoimmune forms of the illness. Screening for
autoantibodies is now routine in investigation of suspected
encephalitis, and positive cases are treated using immunosuppression.
Whether antineuronal antibodies can produce psychiatric syndromes
(especially a schizophrenia-like psychosis, or narcolepsy) without other
evidence of encephalitis remains controversial (see Chapter 11). An
outbreak of encephalitis lethargica (also called postencephalitic
parkinsonism) was reported in Vienna in 1917 by Von Economo. The
condition reached epidemic proportions in the 1920s, and was thought to
be related to the influenza pandemic of the time. By the 1930s it had
largely disappeared. Parkinsonism was the most disabling complication;
personality change with antisocial behaviour, and psychosis, also
occurred. In his famous 1973 book Awakenings, Sacks gave a vivid
description of such cases, and the striking but temporary 'awakening'
brought about in some by l-dopa. Current speculation is that the
condition may have been caused by anti-NMDA receptor antibodies.

Normal pressure hydrocephalus The characteristic clinical triad in this
condition (Adams et al., 1965) consists of a striking 'gait apraxia' (a
broadbased, small-stepped gait with difficulty in initiation) on which
supervenes a progressive frontal subcortical syndrome with bradyphrenia
and, later, urinary incontinence. Frank dementia is rare. The prevalence
is uncertain, but is reported to be 0--6% of cases of late-life dementia
in published series. The condition is more common in the elderly, but
sometimes occurs in middle life, and in children with congenital
abnormalities. The pathogenesis has been thought to be a block to CSF
flow within the ventricular system owing to aqueduct stenosis, or in the
subarachnoid space. However, often no cause can be discovered.
Ventricular pressure is generally normal or low, although episodes of
raised pressure may also occur. Ventricular enlargement out of
proportion to the degree of cortical atrophy, often with periventricular
signal change, is the hallmark finding on brain imaging. It is important
to differentiate this condition from a degenerative dementia, and from
depression with

pseudodementia. Cases with a short history and prominent gait
disturbance with relative sparing of intellect may be amenable to a
neurosurgical shunt procedure to improve the circulation of CSF.
However, the outcome is variable and difficult to predict. The presence
of hippocampal atrophy on imaging suggests associated Alzheimer's
disease, and predicts a poor response to shunting. For a review, see
Finney (2009).

Anoxia, hypoglycaemia, and carbon monoxide poisoning Anoxia (e.g.Â due to
cardiac arrest), hypoglycaemia, and carbon monoxide poisoning produce
similar patterns of brain injury. Cerebral and cerebellar atrophy may
occur, and the hippocampus and globus pallidus are particularly
vulnerable. Clinical experience suggests that the recovery trajectory is
relatively brief compared with traumatic brain injury, and that
neurological sequelae are less disabling. Parkinsonism is not infrequent
after a latent interval. The commonest cognitive impairment is poor
memory. For a review, see Auer (2004). Carbon monoxide poisoning usually
arises from deliberate self-harm by car exhaust fumes, and, more
recently, from burning charcoal in the Far East. However, it can also
occur accidentally as a result of badly ventilated gas boilers or fires.
The prevalence of complications after carbon monoxide poisoning is
unclear, with a wide range of figures reported. It is also unclear
whether residual symptoms ever occur if the poisoning was insufficient
to cause loss of consciousness, although complaints of problems with
memory, concentration, fatigue, and headache are common (Ho et al.,
2012).

Systemic lupus erythematosus Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) has
neuropsychiatric manifestations in about 10% of patients at time of
first presentation, and in 20--75% of patients at some stage of the
illness. The commonest feature is cognitive dysfunction, affecting all
domains of memory, as well as poor attention and concentration, and
reduced psychomotor speed. Mood disorder is also common, and psychosis
affects up to 8% of cases. SLE is an autoimmune disorder, and anti-NMDA
receptor, antiphospholipid, and other antibodies are implicated,
together with an inflammatory component. For a review of
neuropsychiatric SLE and its treatment, see Hanly (2014).

389

Further reading

Secondary or symptomatic neuropsychiatric syndromes All of the disorders
discussed in this chapter so far are either defined by their underlying
pathology (e.g.Â the dementias) or have an undisputed biological basis
(e.g. epilepsy). However, by convention, neuropsychiatry also includes
disorders that are not usually included in this category (i.e.Â are
'functional' or idiopathic), but which can on occasion be explained in
the same fashion. They are described as secondary, symptomatic, or
organic. ICD-10 and DSM-5 code these disorders in different ways and use
differing terminologies (see Table 14.1). As noted earlier, in this book
we cover psychiatric disorders secondary to brain diseases in this
chapter, whereas those resulting from systemic diseases are covered in
Chapter 22. Examples of secondary neuropsychiatric disorders are listed
in Table 14.6. See also Lovestone (2009b). The clinical features of
these secondary disorders are generally indistinguishable from those in
the equivalent primary psychiatric disorder. Thus recognition of a
secondary syndrome depends on the associated features. The following
suggest that the disorder is secondary to a physical condition: â

Evidence of cerebral disease, damage, or dysfunction, or of physical
disease, known to be associated with one of the listed syndromes.

â

A temporal relationship (of weeks or a few months) between the
development of the underlying disease and the onset of the psychiatric
syndrome.

â

Recovery from the psychiatric disorder following removal or improvement
of the presumed cause.

Table 14.6 Some causes of symptomatic or secondary psychiatric syndromes

â

Syndrome

Causes

Psychosis

Temporal lobe disorders, Huntington's disease, basal ganglia lesions,
dementias, endocrinopathies, metabolic disorders, cerebral vasculitides,
neurosyphilis, limbic encephalitis

Mood disorder

Alzheimer's disease, stroke, head trauma, Parkinson's disease, multiple
sclerosis, Huntington's disease, endocrinopathies, metabolic disorders
(especially hypercalcaemia), neurosyphilis

Personality change

Frontotemporal dementias, frontal lesions, Huntington's disease, focal
basal ganglia lesions, neurosyphilis, prion disease, paraneoplastic
limbic encephalitis

Obsessive-- compulsive behaviours

Frontotemporal dementias, complex partial seizures, basal ganglia
disorders, Rett syndrome

Absence of evidence suggesting an alternative 'psychological' cause of
the psychiatric disorder (e.g.Â in the case of depression, no evidence of
a family history of mood disorder, relevant personality traits, previous
episodes of mood disorder, recent life events, etc.).

Further reading Bang J et al.Â (2015). Frontotemporal dementia. Lancet,
386, 1672--82. David AS et al.Â (2009). Lishman's Organic Psychiatry, 4th
edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. (The definitive textbook on
neuropsychiatry---an essential reference.)

Yudofsky SC and Hales RE (2010). Essentials of Neuropsychiatry and
Behavioural Neurosciences, 2nd edn. American Psychiatric Press,
Washington, DC. (A shorter American equivalent to 'Lishman'. Includes
chapters on the underlying neuroscience.)

389

390

391

CHAPTER 15

Personality and personality disorder Personality 391 Personality types
392

Rates of personality disorder in the clinic and the general population
404

The origins of personality 393

Aetiology 405

The assessment of personality 394

The course of personality disorder 407

Personality disorder 395

Treatment 408

The historical development of ideas about

The management of personality disorders 409

abnormal personality 396 The classification of abnormal personalities
396 Descriptions and diagnostic criteria 398

The management of Cluster A and C disorders 410 Ethical problems 412

Personality The term personality refers to those enduring qualities of
an individual that are shown in their ways of behaving in a wide variety
of circumstances. We use it to distinguish between people. Personality
differs from mental disorder. The behaviours that define it have been
present throughout adult life, whereas the behaviours that define mental
disorder differ from the person's previous behaviour. When we say that
mentally ill persons are 'not their normal selves', we are drawing on
our understanding of their personality and usual behaviour. The
distinction is easy to make when behaviour changes markedly over a short
period of time (as in a manic disorder), but can be difficult when the
changes occur very gradually (as in some cases of schizophrenia).

The importance of personality Gaining an understanding of and
familiarity with a patient's personality is important in psychiatry for
a number of reasons. Different personalities predispose

to some psychiatric disorders, and they may colour the presentation
('pathoplastic' factors). They may also influence how a patient
approaches treatment, and dictate different strategies for establishing
and maintaining a successful therapeutic relationship.

Personality as predisposition Personality can predispose to psychiatric
disorder by modifying an individual's response to stressful events. For
example, adverse circumstances are more likely to induce an anxiety
disorder in a person who has always worried about minor problems.

Personality as a pathoplastic factor Personality can contribute to
unusual features of a disorder, particularly when personality traits
become exaggerated with illness. For example, rumination and inhibition
may be the presentation of depression in an individual with an
obsessional personality. The underlying diagnosis can be obscured if the
psychiatrist has not made an accurate assessment of personality.

392

392

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder

Personality in relation to treatment Personality is an important
determinant of a person's approach to treatment. For example, people
with obsessional traits may become frustrated and resistant if treatment
does not follow their expectations, and anxiety-prone people may
discontinue medication prematurely because of concerns about minimal
side effects. Some people with a severe disorder of personality,
particularly so-called Cluster B disorders (antisocial, borderline,
impulsive, histrionic, and narcissistic personality disorders; see
below) have often been effectively excluded from services because of the
difficult relationships they form with clinicians (see Lewis and

Appleby, 1988). This is a significant problem, as there is strong
evidence that personality disorder is common in clinical populations,
and that people with personality disorders have an increased risk for a
range of mental illnesses (Moran, 2002). There has been a concerted move
to remedy this, addressed later in this chapter and in Chapter 24.
Patients are often aware of their personalities---they know if they are
'emotional' or 'conscientious' or 'anxious'. Acknowledging this
diplomatically (making sure to note the positive aspects as well as the
negative ones) and discussing how it may interact with their treatment
(and with their life more generally) can be an effective tool in
maintaining treatment.

Personality types A first step in understanding personality is to
identify some basic types. Clinicians have generally derived these from
a mixture of clinical and common-sense collective experience with
several generally recognizable categories, such as a sociable and
outgoing type, a solitary and self-conscious type, and an anxious and
timid type. Psychologists have adopted a more rigorous scientific
approach using personality tests to measure aspects of personality
('traits') such as anxiety, energy, flexibility, hostility,
impulsiveness, moodiness, orderliness, and self-reliance. These are then
subject to statistical investigations to discover how they cluster into
'factors'. Although these statistical procedures appear very scientific,
their results are determined by the investigators' original hypotheses
(which traits they considered important and included in their analyses,
and the order in which they included them, etc.). Like diagnoses, these
are essentially working hypotheses, which are continuously evolving and
should not be treated with too much reverence---their value lies in
their utility. Different investigators have derived different
personality factors from such traits. Cattell (1963) identified five
factors, whereas Eysenck (1970a) originally proposed only two
'dimensions' (high-level factors), which he labelled
extraversion--introversion and neuroticism. Subsequently he added a
third dimension, 'psychoticism '(Eysenck and Eysenck, 1976), but his use
of the term is rather misleading, denoting coldness, aggressivity,
cruelty, and antisocial behaviour. A five-factor formulation for
personality has persisted, although the terms used for the factors have
varied. They can be identified as openness to experience

(or novelty-seeking), conscientiousness, extraversion-- introversion,
agreeableness (or affiliation), and neuroticism. Cloninger (Cloninger et
al., 1993) developed an alternative scheme with three 'basic behavioural
dispositions' expressed as four basic temperaments (a seven-factor
model). The behavioural dispositions are behavioural activation,
behavioural inhibition, and behavioural maintenance. Cloninger
considered behavioural activation to be associated with the basic
temperament of novelty-seeking, behavioural inhibition with harm
avoidance, and behavioural maintenance with reward dependence. The
fourth basic temperament is persistence. Cloninger's scheme also
includes three character traits, namely self-directedness,
cooperativeness, and transcendence. The various types of personality and
personality disorder are constructed from these four basic temperaments
and three character traits. Cloninger's scheme includes both inherited
differences in brain function and the effects of experience. These
factor schemes of personality have survived despite sustained criticism
that they are largely dependent on what was included in the original
factor analyses. Zuckerman (2005) has also criticized these theories
because they assume an alignment between personality traits and brain
systems. In recent years there has been some refinement, with greater
emphasis on cognitive factors. A cognitive--adaptive theory has been
proposed (Penke and Denissen, 2007), and Mischel has emphasized the
dynamic nature of personality in his cognitive-- affective system
(Mischel et al., 2004). Current texts on personality theory (for
example, Matthews and Deary,

39

The origins of personality 2009) are weighty tomes, and those interested
in deepening their understanding might be best advised to start by
consulting a clinical psychology colleague. Despite these scientific
approaches, clinicians continue to use everyday words to describe the
positive and

negative features of normal personality. Positive attributes include
'outgoing', 'self-confident', 'stable', and 'adaptable'. Negative
attributes include 'sensitive', 'jealous', 'irritable', 'impulsive',
'self-centred', 'rigid', and 'aggressive'.

The origins of personality The biological basis of personality types
Genetic influences Everyday observation suggests that children often
resemble their parents in personality. Such similarities could be either
inherited or acquired through social learning. Three kinds of scientific
study have been used to study the inheritance of personality. Studies of
body shape and personality. Different personalities have been linked to
body shape ('beware of Brutus, he has a lean and hungry look'). If this
were true, the link could be genetic. Kretschmer (1936) described three
types of body build---pyknic (stocky and rounded), athletic (muscular),
and asthenic (lean and narrow). He suggested that the pyknic body build
was linked to the cyclothymic personality type (sociable with variable
moods), whereas the asthenic build was related to the 'schizotypal'
personality type (cold, aloof, and selfsufficient). Kretschmer's ideas
were based on subjective judgements, and were influenced by experience
of the 'associated' psychotic disorders (manic-depressive disorder and
schizophrenia). Quantitative methods to assess physique and more
objective ratings of personality fail to support the link (Sheldon et
al., 1940). Studies of twins. More direct evidence has been obtained
from personality tests of monozygotic and dizygotic twins. These suggest
that the heritability for traits of extraversion and neuroticism is
35--50% (McGuffin and Thapar, 1992). The heritability of other
personality traits is broadly similar. Molecular genetic studies.
Genetic linkage and association studies have revealed a number of loci
and genes contributing to personality traits, but the findings remain
preliminary (Balestri et al., 2014). It is clear that the genetic
predisposition to personality (and its disorders) arises from the
cumulative effect of multiple genes, each of very small effect. Some of
these genetic influences are shared with those underlying psychiatric
disorders, and this overlap likely explains much of the

association between them (such as neuroticism with depression).

Childhood temperament and adult personality Young infants differ
enormously in patterns of sleeping and waking, approach or withdrawal
from new situations, intensity of emotional responses, and span of
attention. These differences, which are described in more detail in
Chapter 16, could form the basis for personality development. They do
persist into later childhood, but their relationship to adult
personality has been difficult to establish.

Childhood experience and personality development Everyday experience
suggests that childhood experience shapes personality (society is built
on this premise), but it is not easy to demonstrate it. Experiences that
seem relevant are difficult to quantify or even to record reliably, and
it is extremely difficult and expensive to conduct prospective studies
that span the time period from childhood events to adult personality,
although some ongoing studies, such as the Dunedin cohort study in New
Zealand, are able to link confirmed early experience and adult states
(Poulton et al., 2015). Retrospective studies are easier to arrange, but
recall of childhood experiences is unreliable. While scientific data on
personality development are sparse, psychodynamic and infant development
theories retain considerable influence. The Freudian theory of
personality development emphasizes events during the first 5 years of
life. Freud proposed that crucial stages of libido development must be
accomplished successfully for healthy personality development. Failure
or fixation at particular stages explained certain features of adult
personality. Freud's explanation is excessively comprehensive and
flexible. It can be made to explain almost all personality variation in
terms of infantile experience, but its very flexibility makes it
impossible to test scientifically. However,

393

394

394

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder it retains enormous
intuitive appeal and is widely used both within and outside of
psychiatry. Jung considered personality development to be a lifelong
process, with 'individuation' as its aim. His theories are particularly
valued in disorders of later life. He introduced the terms 'introvert'
and 'extrovert'. Later analysts rejected Freud's exclusive focus on
libido development. Adler emphasized a struggle for mastery (overcoming
the 'inferiority complex'). The 'neo-Freudians' increasingly emphasized
social and peergroup factors in personality development. Erikson
extended Freud's schema, using less offputting terms, for the individual
developmental challenges. Erikson's eight developmental stages continued
right into late adult life and each was presented as a conflict, such as
'trust versus mistrust', 'autonomy versus doubt', that had to be
resolved. Erikson emphasizes the importance of adolescence.

Attachment theory Attachment theory derives from the work of John
Bowlby. Although a psychoanalyst, Bowlby's work is based on observation
and simple processes that are being subjected to structured testing.
Bowlby emphasized the importance of maternal deprivation in the
development of personality in orphan children just after the second
World War. He proposed that a close, reliable relationship was needed
for effective attachment and that a 'secure attachment' promoted health.
Alternatives were 'insecure' or 'anxious' attachments, which could lead
to later problems in forming relationships (Bowlby, 1951). Despite
critical examination (Rutter, 1991), attachment theory commands
extensive respect, and structured instruments for establishing styles of
attachment have been developed, such as the Adult Attachment Interview
(van Ijzendoorn, 1995).

The assessment of personality The assessment of personality is discussed
in Chapter 3, but two points need to be emphasized. The first is that
the assessment of personality used in everyday life cannot be applied
reliably in clinical practice. Normally we assume that current behaviour
reflects the person's habitual ways of behaving (their personality), and
in general this assumption is correct. This is not the case when we
assess patients, because their current behaviour reflects the effects of
their illness as well as their personality. A patient's personality can
only be judged confidently from reliable accounts of past behaviour,
which have been obtained wherever possible from informants as well as
from the patient. Secondly, the assessment instruments developed for
personality mentioned earlier (see page 392), although more reliable in
healthy individuals, can be misleading in the presence of mental
disorder. In addition, they rarely measure the traits that are most
relevant to clinical practice. Personality tests, although useful in
research, are seldom used in clinical practice. For a review of
personality assessment methods, see Clark and Harrison (2001).

The importance of personality assessment The assessment of personality
is important when making decisions about aetiology, diagnosis, and
treatment. In aetiology, knowledge of personality helps to explain why
certain events are stressful to that patient. In diagnosis, an
understanding of personality may explain the presence of unusual
features in a disorder that might otherwise cause uncertainty. In
treatment, an assessment of personality helps to explain the patient's
reaction to their illness and its treatment, and aids the establishment
of an effective therapeutic relationship. Personality assessment should
be an integral part of every formulation, and not just reserved for
those where a personality disorder is suspected. It is best to record a
series of descriptive terms chosen from the features of accepted
personality disorders, because the more theoretical personality factors
are too general to help the clinician. Examples would be 'sensitive',
'lacking in self-confidence', and 'prone to worry'. Such descriptions
help to construct a picture of the unique features of each patient,
which is a fundamental element of good clinical practice.

395

Personality disorder

Personality disorder The concept of abnormal personality Some
personalities are obviously abnormal---for example, paranoid
personalities characterized by extreme suspiciousness, sensitivity, and
mistrust. However, it is impossible to draw a sharp dividing line
between normal and abnormal personalities. Abnormal personalities are in
practice recognized because of the pattern of their characteristics, but
our current classificatory processes in psychiatry demand that we
identify criteria for inclusion. However, precisely which criteria
should be used to make this distinction remain controversial. Two types
of criteria have been suggested, namely statistical and social.
According to the statistical criterion, abnormal personalities are
quantitative variations from the normal, and the dividing line is
decided by a cut-off score on an appropriate measure. This approach is
attractive, as it parallels that used successfully when defining
abnormalities of intelligence, it appears non-judgemental, and it has
obvious value in research. However, its usefulness in clinical practice
is uncertain. According to the social criterion, abnormal personalities
are those that cause the individual to suffer, or to cause suffering to
other people. For example, an abnormally sensitive and gloomy
personality causes suffering for the individual who has it, and an
emotionally cold and aggressive personality causes suffering for others.
These criteria are subjective and lack the precision of the first
approach, but they serve the needs of clinical practice better and they
have been widely adopted. It is not surprising that it is difficult to
frame a satisfactory definition of abnormal personality. The ICD-9
described personality disorders as follows: Severe disturbances in the
personality and behavioural tendencies of the individual, not directly
resulting from disease, damage or other insult to the brain, or from
another psychiatric disorder. They usually involve several areas of the
personality and are nearly always associated with considerable personal
distress and social disruption. They are usually manifest since
childhood or adolescence and continue throughout adulthood.

ICD-10 emphasizes enduring patterns of behaviour, but the ICD-9
definition is more concise, and still valuable.

The 'personal distress' referred to in ICD-9 may sometimes only become
apparent late in life (e.g.Â when a longstanding supportive relationship
is lost). There are usually, although not always, significant problems
in occupational and social performance. It is important to recognize
that people with abnormal personalities generally also have favourable
traits, which the clinician should always assess. For example, those
with obsessional traits are often dependable and trustworthy. Management
plans that play to an individual's strengths are more likely to be
helpful for them.

Personality change In some circumstances during adult life there may be
a profound and enduring change in personality that is distinct from the
temporary changes that may accompany stressful events or illness. This
lasting change may result from: â

Injury to or organic disease of the brain.

â

Severe mental disorder, especially schizophrenia.

â

Exceptionally severe stressful experiences (e.g.Â those experienced by
hostages or by prisoners undergoing torture).

ICD-10 contains categories for each type of change. 'Change in
personality due to organic disease of the brain' is classified with the
organic mental disorders in section F00, and includes the changes that
occur following encephalitis and head injury. In DSM-5 this condition is
diagnosed as personality change due to another medical condition. In
ICD-10 the other two forms of personality change listed above are
classified in section F60, disorders of adult personality and behaviour.
To diagnose 'enduring personality change after psychiatric illness', the
change of personality must have lasted for at least 2 years, be clearly
related to the experience of the illness, and not have been present
before it. 'Enduring personality change after a catastrophic experience'
must also have lasted for at least 2 years and have followed a stressful
experience that was extreme (e.g.Â prolonged kidnapping, a terrorist
attack, or torture). Victims are commonly hostile, irritable,
distrustful, socially withdrawn, and on edge. The condition may follow
post-traumatic stress disorder, but is considered distinct from it.

395

396

396

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder

The historical development of ideas about abnormal personality The
concept of abnormal personality is recognized from psychiatry's
beginnings at the start of the nineteenth century. The French
psychiatrist Philippe Pinel used manie sans dÃ©lire for patients prone to
outbursts of rage and violence, but who were not deluded. J. C.
Prichard, senior physician to the Bristol Infirmary, suggested a new
term, moral insanity, which he defined as a: morbid perversion of the
natural feelings, affections, inclinations, temper, habits, moral
dispositions and natural impulses, without any remarkable disorder or
defect of the intellect or knowing or reasoning faculties, and in
particular without any insane delusion or hallucination. (Prichard,
1835)

Prichard's moral insanity included conditions that we would now diagnose
as personality disorder. The term 'moral' was then equivalent to our
'social'. The 'moral treatment' developed by the Tuke family in the York
Retreat in the 1790s embodied socialization not ethical instruction.
Henry Maudsley used the term more as we would understand an antisocial
personality disorder: having no capacity for true moral feeling---all
his impulses and desires, to which he yields without check, are
egoistic, his conduct appears to be governed by immoral motives, which
are cherished and obeyed without any evident desire to resist them.
(Maudsley, 1885)

Julius Koch introduced the term 'psychopathic inferiority', subsequently
replaced by personality (Koch, 1891). Emil Kraepelin was at first
uncertain how to classify these people, and only adopted the term
'psychopathic personality' in the eighth edition of his textbook, where
finally he devoted a whole chapter to it. Kurt Schneider broadened the
concept in 1923 to include markedly depressive or insecure characters.
He used 'psychopathic' to cover the whole range of

abnormal personality, not just antisocial personality. The term came to
have two meanings---a wider meaning of abnormal personality of all
kinds, and a narrower meaning of antisocial personality---which has led
to subsequent confusion. In the 1959 Mental Health Act for England and
Wales, psychopathic disorder was interpreted narrowly, and in the 1983
Act it was defined as: a persistent disorder or disability of mind
(whether or not including significant impairment of intelligence) which
results in abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on
the part of the person concerned.

This narrow concept, which emphasized aggressive or irresponsible
behaviour, made its inclusion in the original 1959 Act controversial.
Consequently, the requirement of 'treatability' as a condition of
detention was added exclusively to it, out of all the mental disorders.
This distinction was abandoned in the 2007 amendment to the 1983 Mental
Health Act (see Chapter 4) because it was perceived to present a barrier
to effective treatment. A recent short-lived development in the United
Kingdom was the administrative category of 'dangerous and severe
personality disorder (DSPD)'. This refers mainly to men with antisocial
personality disorder and a history of serious violent or sexual
offending which can be linked to their personality disorder. The
evolution of effective treatments for this group has proved elusive and,
in any event, changes in the law to permit indeterminate sentences for
prisoners who pose persisting serious risks have made the category
redundant. Because the term 'psychopathic personality' is ambiguous, the
preferred terms are personality disorder and antisocial personality
disorder to denote the wide and narrow senses, respectively.

The classification of abnormal personalities General issues The use of
categories Personality traits are continuously distributed, but the
classification of psychiatric disorders uses categories and requires
definitions and boundaries. However, the criterion for inclusion
(distress to the person or to others) is very

imprecise, so cases that fall just short of it (subthreshold cases) are
frequent. These subthreshold cases often present clinical problems that
are similar to those of definite cases.

Comorbidity It is not only the boundary between normal and abnormal
personality that is imprecise and arbitrary; the

379

The classification of abnormal personalities boundaries between the
different types of personality are also ill defined. This leads to an
important divergence of practice between clinical psychiatrists and
researchers and some psychologists. Many patients have features
contained in the criteria for more than one personality disorder (Fyer
et al., 1988). Structured instruments for measuring personality
disorder, such as the International Personality Disorder Examination
(Loranger et al., 1997), are often used by researchers and
psychologists. They permit more than one personality diagnosis to be
made in a single patient, and the term 'comorbidity' is used. From a
clinical perspective it seems more likely that the patient has a single
personality disorder that has features which overlap two of the
arbitrary sets of criteria used in the current systems of diagnosis. We
would usually diagnose the single personality disorder that best fits
the mixed picture and is most useful in understanding and helping the
patient in front of us. Comorbidity is used when a patient has both a
mental illness and a personality disorder (or more often a mental
illness and substance abuse), but makes little clinical sense for
personality disorder alone.

Conditions related to personality disorder and classified elsewhere
Cyclothymia and schizotypal disorder were previously classified as
personality disorders. In ICD-10 both of these conditions have been
removed from the personality disorders and classified instead with the
mental disorders (cyclothymia with affective disorders, and schizotypal
disorder with schizophrenia). This reflects the fact that these two
conditions may begin in adult life and, in the case of schizotypal
disorder, evidence from family studies that links it genetically to
schizophrenia (see page 399). In DSM-5, cyclothymic disorder is
classified with bipolar and related disorders, but schizotypal disorder
is retained as a personality disorder. In both classifications, multiple
personality disorder is classified with dissociative disorders.

Classification of personality disorders in ICD-10 and DSM-5 In Table
15.1 the classification of personality disorders in ICD-10 is compared
with that in DSM-5. The two schemes are broadly similar, but there are
some differences. In DSM-IV, personality disorders were classified on a
different 'axis' (Axis II) from mental disorders (which are classified
on Axis I). This has been abandoned in DSM-5,

which has a single axis. ICD-10 did not have a separate axis. The
personality should still be assessed, and if no personality disorder is
present this should be recorded in the formulation.

Grouping into clusters In DSM-5, but not in ICD-10, personality
disorders are grouped into three 'clusters': 1. Cluster A: paranoid,
schizoid, and schizotypal. 2. Cluster B: antisocial, borderline,
histrionic, and narcissistic. 3. Cluster C: avoidant, dependent, and
obsessive-- compulsive. This convention is adopted later in this
chapter.

Different names for the same personality disorder The individual names
for personality disorders differ somewhat between the two
classifications. This reflects the real uncertainty about their
boundaries and also an attempt through renaming to de-stigmatize some
disorders. In ICD-10 the term 'dissocial' is used, whereas in DSM-5 the
term 'antisocial' (the term used in this book) is used. In ICD-10, the
term 'anankastic' is used, whereas 'obsessive--compulsive' is used in
DSM-5. In ICD-10, the term 'anxious' is used, whereas 'avoidant' is used
in DSM-5.

Conditions that are present in one classification but not the other
Emotionally unstable impulsive personality disorder and enduring
personality change not attributable to brain damage or disease are found
in ICD-10 but not in DSM-5. Narcissistic personality disorder is
included in DSM-5 but not in ICD-10. As noted above, schizotypal
personality disorder is classified with schizophrenia in ICD-10 (and
named schizotypal disorder), whereas in DSM-5 it is classified as a
personality disorder.

Two new radically different approaches to classification Despite their
intuitive appeal and enduring utility the traditional 10 personality
diagnoses are criticized for their lack of theoretical underpinning and
their unreliability. Two radically different approaches have been
proposed to alter this and introduce a more dimensional component to
diagnosis (Tyrer et al., 2015). DSM-5 trialled an assessment based on
severity of impairments and a range of traits. This involved a reduction
from ten to six categories---borderline, obsessive--compulsive,

397

398

398

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder avoidant, schizotypal,
antisocial, and narcissistic personality disorders. The approach was
found to be impractical by clinicians, and so this hybrid model was
omitted from the main DSM-5, but is included in section III, 'Emerging
Measures and Models'. For ICD-11 a proposal is being considered to
abandon the clinical categories and replace it with the

diagnosis of personality disorder (present or absent) with different
degrees of severity defined. It is not known whether this proposal will
be adopted. Only time will tell whether either of these attempts to
shift the focus from categories to dimensions will be adopted by
clinicians. On past experience it seems unlikely.

Descriptions and diagnostic criteria This section contains an account of
the abnormal personalities listed in ICD-10 and DSM-5 (see Table 15.1).
The criteria for diagnosis are lengthy, and differ in wording and
emphasis in the two systems. The main common features from the two sets
of definitions are given, simplified, or paraphrased where appropriate
to give a more general description. All personality disorder diagnoses
must meet the basic criteria for personality disorder summarized from
the ICD-10 criteria for research as follows: â

â

The characteristic and enduring patterns of behaviour differ markedly
from the cultural norm and in more than one of the following areas:
cognition, affectivity, control of impulses and gratification, and ways
of relating to others. The behaviour is inflexible, and maladaptive or
dysfunctional in a broad range of situations.

fault. They take offence easily and see criticism where none was
intended. Suspicious ideas can be so intense that they are mistaken for
persecutory delusions. These sensitive ideas of reference are considered
further in Chapter 12. Paranoid individuals can be resentful and bear
grudges, engaging in litigation, often against all advice.

Table 15.1 Classification of personality disorders

Cluster A

ICD-10

DSM-5

Paranoid

Paranoid

â

Personal distress is caused to others and/or to self.

Schizoid

Schizoid

â

The presentation is stable and longlasting, usually beginning by late
childhood or adolescence.

(Schizotypal; see text)

Schizotypal

â

The behaviour is not caused by another mental disorder, or by brain
injury, disease, or dysfunction.

Dissocial

Antisocial

Emotionally unstable

Borderline

Cluster B

There are several diagnostic instruments for personality disorder, but
they are mainly of value in research.

Impulsive type Borderline type

Cluster A personality disorders

Histrionic

Histrionic

Paranoid personality disorder

---

Narcissistic

Such people are suspicious and sensitive (see Box 15.1). They have a
marked sense of self-importance, but easily feel shame and humiliation.
They are suspicious and constantly on the lookout for attempts by others
to deceive or exploit them, which makes them difficult for others to get
on with. They have difficulty making friends and avoid involvement in
groups. They are usually mistrustful and often jealous. They may appear
secretive and self-sufficient to a

Cluster C

Anankastic Obsessive-- (obsessive--compulsive) compulsive Anxious
(avoidant)

Avoidant

Dependent

Dependent

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

39

Descriptions and diagnostic criteria

Box 15.1 Features of paranoid personality disorder Suspicious
Mistrustful Jealous Sensitive Resentful Bears grudges Self-important

Schizoid personality disorder The term 'schizoid' was suggested by
Kretschmer (1936), who believed that this type of personality is related
to schizophrenia. People with this disorder are emotionally cold,
detached and aloof, introspective, and prone to engage in excessive
fantasy (see Box 15.2). They are unable to express either tender
feelings or anger, and show little interest in sexual relationships.
When the disorder is extreme they may appear callous. They are generally
ill at ease in company, do not form intimate relationships, and show
little family feeling. They are seclusive, following a solitary course
through life, and often remain unmarried. They show little sense of
enjoyment or pleasure in the activities that most people enjoy, which
contributes to their separation from others. Introspective and prone to
fantasy, they are interested in intellectual matters, and have a complex
inner world of fantasy, albeit without emotional content.

Schizotypal personality disorder Schizotypal individuals are socially
anxious and behave eccentrically. They can experience cognitive and
perceptual distortions, and have oddities of speech and inappropriate
emotional responses. This personality

Box 15.2 Features of schizoid personality disorder Emotionally cold
Detached Aloof Lacking enjoyment Introspective

disorder appears to be related to schizophrenia, so it is not classified
as a personality disorder in ICD-10 (as is the case in DSM-5), but is
placed with schizophrenia and called schizotypal disorder (see Chapter
11). Schizotypal individuals experience social anxiety in company, so
have difficulty in forming relationships and lack friends and
confidants. They feel different from other people and do not fit in.
(This is in contrast to schizoid individuals, who are quite content with
this situation.) Their cognitive and perceptual distortions include
ideas of reference (but not delusions), suspicious ideas, odd beliefs,
and magical thinking (e.g.Â belief in clairvoyance, mind reading, and
telepathy), and unusual perceptual experiences (e.g.Â awareness of a
'presence', or experiences bordering on hallucinations). They also show
oddities of speech, such as unusual constructions, words, and phrasing,
as well as vagueness, and a tendency to digression. Their affective
responses are unusual, and they appear stiff, odd, and constricted in
their emotions. Their behaviour is eccentric, with odd mannerisms,
unusual choices of clothing, disregard of conventions, and awkward
social behaviour.

Cluster B personality disorders This is the group of personality
disorders that looms largest in current psychiatric practice. Whereas
most personality disorders 'colour' the presentation and management of
patients, individuals with cluster B disorders are often referred
specifically with a request for treatment of the personality disorder
itself.

Antisocial (dissocial) personality disorder The term 'antisocial' is
used in DSM-5 and in this book, whereas 'dissocial' is the term used in
ICD-10. Antisocial personality disorder is not simply another term for
delinquency. People with this disorder show a callous lack of concern
for the feelings of others. They disregard the rights of others, act
impulsively, lack guilt, and fail to learn from adverse experiences (see
Box 15.3). Often their abnormal behaviour is made worse by the abuse of
alcohol or drugs. Hervey Cleckley's 1941 book The Mask of Sanity
(Cleckley, 1964) is a vivid and influential description of this type of
personality. The criteria for diagnosis differ slightly in the two
classifications; the following criteria are taken from ICD10. The DSM-5
criteria include the requirement of conduct disorder before the age of
15 years. A central feature is a callous lack of concern for others.
People with antisocial personality disorder may be

399

40

400

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder

Box 15.3 Features of antisocial personality disorder Callous Transient
relationships Irresponsible Impulsive and irritable Lacking guilt and
remorse Failure to accept responsibility

exploitative and even violent, and their sexual activity lacks
tenderness. They may inflict cruel or degrading acts on other people,
and their partners may be physically or sexually abused. They may have a
superficial charm, but their relationships are shallow and short-lived.
They are irresponsible and depart from social norms. They do not obey
rules and may repeatedly break the law, often committing violent
offences. Their offending typically begins in adolescence. Such
individuals are impulsive, rarely plan ahead, and typically have an
unstable work record. They take risks, disregarding their own safety and
that of other people. They are irritable, and when angry sometimes
assault others in a violent way. These features of personality are
accompanied by a striking lack of guilt or remorse and a failure to
change their behaviour in response to punishment or other adverse
outcomes. They avoid responsibility, transferring blame on to other
people and rationalizing their own failures. They are often deceitful
and irresponsible about finances. The concept of 'psychopathy' overlaps
with antisocial personality disorder. Although it has been dropped from
the diagnostic classification, it is still in use in psychology
(particularly forensic psychology) and the prison service, and has a
very specific meaning. It is generally considered to be a character
trait, and is usually assessed using the Hare Psychopathy
ChecklistRevised (PCL-R) (Hare, 1991). This distinguishes two
factors---violent and impulsive behaviour, and charm and exploitation.
The terms 'psychopathy' and 'antisocial personality disorder' are often
unhelpfully interchanged, and psychopathy is probably best avoided by
general psychiatrists.

Borderline personality disorder The term 'borderline personality
disorder' is a confusing and unsatisfactory one, which reflects its
complex history. It was originally used in psychodynamic circles

to describe people with a marked 'instability' of presentation, as
opposed to a steady neurotic state. The proposed 'border' at that time
was with psychosis. Kernberg (1975) described it as involving: 1. Ego
weakness with poor control of impulses. 2. 'Primary process'
(i.e.Â irrational) thinking despite intact reality testing. 3. Use of
less 'mature' defence mechanisms, such as projection and denial. 4.
Diffuse personal identity. People with borderline personality disorder
experience their lives as being dominated by strong and fluctuating
emotions that often overwhelm them. They strive for affection and
intimacy but are regularly disappointed, and may exhaust their partners
with the intensity of their emotional demands. They are themselves
confused by the strength and unpredictability of their moods as they
plunge into anger or despair. They are often insecure in their personal
identity and need reassurance and stability, which they may then find
constricting and irritating. Self-harm is common (either suicidal
attempts, or cutting to release tension). Such self-destructive
behaviour can be extreme and may dominate the relationship with care
services. Alcohol and drug abuse are also common, as they attempt to
blunt their distressing emotions. Clinical populations are dominated by
relatively young women, although the epidemiological studies challenge
this distribution. When this type of personality disorder was introduced
into the classification systems, more objective criteria were developed,
but it remains unsatisfactory. The diagnosis was (and still is) almost
exclusively applied to young women. This raised the question of whether
it was a more culturally determined expression of mood disorder
(i.e.Â depression) filtered through a histrionic (at that time referred
to as 'hysterical') personality. The suggestion that it may respond (at
least partially) to antidepressants has fuelled this controversy, as has
the greater degree of variation over time than in other personality
disorders, and the observation that in most patients it seems to
resolve. Not surprisingly, with such uncertainty different names have
been adopted in the two classifications--- borderline personality
disorder in DSM-5 and emotionally unstable personality disorder in
ICD-10. The latter is divided into a 'borderline type' and an 'impulsive
type'. The diagnostic criteria (slightly abbreviated) are shown in Table
15.2. Several features of the ICD-10 impulsive type are among the
criteria for borderline personality disorder in DSM-5.

401

Descriptions and diagnostic criteria Borderline personality disorder
remains a controversial and contested diagnosis. It was originally
entered into DSM-III only after a protracted debate and on the grounds
that its utility would be researched. Many people who meet the criteria
for borderline personality disorder in DSM-5 also meet the criteria for
histrionic, narcissistic, and antisocial personality disorder (Skodol et
al., 2002a); the overlap with bipolar disorder is also controversial and
can be clinically problematic.

Impulsive personality disorder This disorder is recognized in ICD-10 as
a subtype of emotionally labile personality disorder. It is not included
separately in DSM-5, although several of its features match the criteria
for borderline personality disorder. The diagnostic criteria are listed
in Table 15.2, and three criteria must be met for the diagnosis. People
with impulsive personality disorder cannot control their emotions
adequately, and are liable to outbursts of sudden unrestrained anger
which they subsequently regret. They may use physical violence
occasionally, causing serious harm. Unlike people with antisocial
personality disorder, they do not generally have other difficulties in
relationships.

Histrionic personality disorder Histrionic personality disorder is
included in both ICD10 and DSM-5, but the criteria are somewhat
different. Box 15.4 lists the features that are diagnostic criteria in
ICD-10, and also notes the criteria that differ between the two systems.
Self-dramatization is a striking feature, and may include 'emotional
blackmail', angry scenes, and demonstrative suicide attempts. These
individuals are suggestible and easily influenced by others, especially
by figures of authority. They seek attention and excitement, are easily
bored, and have short-lived enthusiasms. They have a shallow labile
affect. Their emotional life is dramatic and may exhaust others.
However, they recover quickly and often cannot understand why others are
still upset. They seek intimacy and can be inappropriately seductive.
Histrionic individuals are often insecure about their value, and
consequently may be over-concerned with physical attractiveness. They
can appear self-centred and vain. They may also have a marked capacity
for selfdeception, being convinced by their own fabrications--- however
elaborate and improbable these may be---even when other people have seen
through them. In its most extreme form, histrionic personality disorder
is observed in 'pathological liars' and swindlers. Blanche DuBois in
Tennessee Williams' A Streetcar Named Desire poignantly portrays the
disastrous consequences that such

Table 15.2 Abbreviated criteria for emotionally unstable and borderline
personality disorders ICD-10

DSM-5

Emotionally unstable personality disorder, borderline type

Borderline personality disorder

Disturbed or uncertain self-image

Identity disturbance

Intense and unstable relationships

Intense and unstable relationships

Efforts to avoid abandonment

Efforts to avoid abandonment

Recurrent threats or acts of self-harm

Recurrent suicidal behaviour

Chronic feelings of emptiness

Chronic feelings of emptiness

---

Transient stress-related paranoid ideation

Impulsive type Impulsive

Impulsive

Liability to anger and violence

Difficulty controlling anger

Unstable capricious mood Affective instability Quarrelsome

---

Difficulty maintaining a course of action

---

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

a personality can have both for the individual and for those around
them.

Narcissistic personality disorder This personality disorder is listed in
DSM-5 but not in ICD-10, where it is one of the disorders coded in the
residual category 'Other specific personality disorder'. The DSM-5
criteria are summarized and paraphrased in Box 15.5. People with this
disorder have a grandiose sense of self-importance and are boastful and
pretentious. They are preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success,
power, beauty, or intellectual brilliance. They consider themselves
special, and expect others to admire them and offer them special
services and favours. They feel entitled to the best, and seek to
associate with people of

401

402

402

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder

Cluster C personality disorders Box 15.4 Features of histrionic
personality disorder Self-dramatization Suggestibility Shallow labile
affect Seeks attention and excitement Inappropriately seductive
Over-concern with physical attractiveness

Note: DSM-5 has two additional criteria: â â

Speech excessively impressionistic Considers relationships to be more
intimate than they are

high status. They exploit others and do not empathize with or show
concern for their feelings. They envy the possessions and achievements
of others, and expect that those individuals will envy them in the same
way. They appear arrogant, disdainful, and haughty, and behave in a
patronizing or condescending way. Narcissistic personality disorder
carries probably the most pejorative overtones of any of the personality
disorder diagnoses. It should be reserved for only the most undeniable
examples, and only after you have made sure that the diagnosis is not
coloured by personal dislike. On balance it is probably a term to avoid
if at all possible, like some older personality terms such as 'immature
personality' or 'inadequate personality', which have no place in modern
mental healthcare.

Box 15.5 Features of narcissistic personality disorder Grandiose sense
of self-importance Fantasizes about unlimited success, power, etc.
Believes himself or herself to be special Requires excessive admiration
Sense of entitlement to favours and compliance Exploits others Lacks
empathy Envious of others, and believes that others envy him or her
Arrogant and haughty

Avoidant (anxious) personality disorder DSM-5 uses the term 'avoidant'
and in ICD-10 the term 'anxious' is preferred, with 'avoidant' as an
accepted alternative. The diagnostic criteria in the two classifications
are listed in Box 15.6. Liability to tension is a criterion only in
ICD-10. People with this disorder are persistently tense. They feel
insecure and lack self-esteem. They feel socially inferior, unappealing,
and socially inept. They are preoccupied with the possibility of
rejection, disapproval, or criticism, and worry that they will be
embarrassed or ridiculed. They are cautious about new experiences, avoid
risk, and avoid social activity. They have few close friends, but they
are not emotionally cold, and indeed crave the social relationships that
they cannot manage to attain.

Dependent personality disorder Box 15.7 lists the diagnostic criteria in
ICD-10 and DSM-5. People with this disorder allow others to take
responsibility for important decisions in their lives. They are unduly
compliant, but are unwilling to make direct demands on other people.
They lack vigour and feel unable to care for themselves. Lacking
self-reliance, they avoid responsibility, and may need excessive help to
make decisions. They are often protected by support from a more
energetic and determined partner, and may only come to medical attention
when the partner leaves or dies.

Box 15.6 Features of avoidant (anxious) personality disorder Feels
socially inferior Preoccupied with rejection Avoids involvement Avoids
risk Avoids social activity

Note: DSM-5 has two additional criteria: Restraint in intimate
relationships, due to fear of being shamed or ridiculed

403

Descriptions and diagnostic criteria

Box 15.7 Features of dependent personality disorder Allows others to
take responsibility Unduly compliant Unwilling to make reasonable
demands Feels unable to care for himself or herself Fear of being left
to care for himself or herself Needs excessive help to make decisions

Note: Three additional criteria are used in DSM-5. They can be
summarized as follows: Experiences difficulty in initiating projects
Goes to excessive lengths to obtain support â Urgently seeks a
supportive relationship â â

Obsessive--compulsive personality disorder DSM-5 uses the term
'obsessive--compulsive personality disorder' whereas ICD-10 uses the
term 'anankastic' (originated by Kahn, 1928). Kahn used this term to
avoid the implication that this personality disorder is linked to
obsessive--compulsive disorder. Box 15.8 lists the diagnostic criteria
in ICD-10 and DSM-5. These individuals are preoccupied with details and
rules, order, and schedules. They have an inhibiting perfectionism that
makes ordinary work a burden as they are immersed in endless detail.
They may lack imagination and fail to take advantage of opportunities.
However, they usually have high moral standards, are often excessively
conscientious, and may be rather judgemental. They can appear humourless
and ill at ease when others are enjoying themselves. These people lack
adaptability to new situations. They are generally rigid and inflexible,
avoiding change and preferring a familiar routine. They can be stubborn
and controlling and generally thrifty, sometimes to the point of being
miserly. They may hoard objects and money. They may be pedantic and
unduly concerned with social conventions. They can also be particularly
troubled by excessive doubt and caution, leading to indecision.

Affective personality disorders Some people have lifelong disorders of
mood regulation. They may be persistently gloomy (depressive personality
disorder) or habitually in a state of inappropriate elation (hyperthymic
personality disorder). A third group

Box 15.8 Features of obsessive-- compulsive (anankastic) personality
disorder Preoccupied with details, rules, etc. Inhibited by
perfectionism Over-conscientious and scrupulous Excessively concerned
with work and productivity Over-conscientious, scrupulous, and
inflexible in ethics and morals Unable to discard worthless objects
Reluctant to delegate tasks or work with others Miserly Rigidity and
stubbornness

alternates between these two extremes (cycloid or cyclothymic
personality disorder). These types of personality have been described
for many years, and are readily recognized in clinical practice. In both
ICD-10 and DSM-5 they are classified under disorders of mood and not
under disorders of personality. In ICD-10 they are classified under
'persistent mood (affective) states' (cyclothymia or dysthymia), and in
DSM-5 under bipolar and related disorders. Nevertheless, it is useful to
describe them briefly here. People with depressive personality disorder
always seem to be in low spirits. They have a persistently gloomy and
pessimistic view of life, and may brood about their misfortunes and
worry unduly. They have little capacity for enjoyment and are
dissatisfied with their lives. Some are irritable and bad-tempered.
People with hyperthymic personality disorder are habitually cheerful and
optimistic, and exhibit a striking zest for living. If they have these
traits to a moderate degree, they are often highly effective and
successful individuals whom we envy. However, if the traits are more
pronounced they can show poor judgement and irritate those around them.
People with cyclothymic personality disorder alternate between the
extremes of depressive and hyperthymic states described above. This
instability of mood is much more disruptive than either of the
persisting conditions. People with this disorder are periodically
extremely cheerful, active, and productive, at which times they take on
additional commitments in their work and social lives. When their mood
changes they become gloomy and defeatist, and with reduced energy levels
they now find their newly acquired obligations a burden.

403

40

404

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder

Rates of personality disorder in the clinic and the general population
Clinical population rates

disorder is powerfully affected by the existence of a comorbid mental
illness (Kessler et al., 1999).

For a psychiatrist, the more important question is how frequently
personality disorder will be encountered in their clinical practice.
Prevalence rates vary more for personality disorder than for mental
illnesses both in clinic and in population surveys because of diagnostic
uncertainty. A series of studies have investigated this, and the 16
largest and most rigorous studies were summarized by Zimmerman et
al.Â (2008). Zimmerman's review showed that much higher rates were found
in structured assessments, at around 40%. Rates of personality disorder
in those in contact with mental health services have been estimated at
40% for UK community mental health teams (CMHTs; Newton-Howes et al.,
2010) or 50% internationally for outpatient attendees (Beckwith et al.,
2014). Rates are even higher for prison populations (Fazel and Danesh,
2002). Among primary care consultations in the UK, the rate is as high
as 30% (Moran et al., 2000). However, we know that rates in the clinic
and rates in the general population are likely to be very different.
Treatment seeking by individuals with personality

General population rates Epidemiological research into personality
disorders in the general population began with the development of
standardized instruments using DSM-III criteria. Studies require large
samples because the prevalence rates of some personality disorders are
low. It is also difficult to identify personality disorder reliably in
community surveys without access to informants. Data come mainly from
studies in the USA, the UK, and Germany, and from a recent World Health
Organization (WHO) mental health survey review (Huang et al., 2009). The
most extensive data come from 10 epidemiological studies in the USA and
four in Europe cited by Huang et al.Â (2009). The prevalence rates for
any personality disorder from these studies range from 4% to 16%. Only
one survey was international, sampling seven countries across five
continents (Huang et al., 2009). This found a point prevalence of 6.1%,
lowest in Europe (2.4%) and highest in North and South America (7.6%
USA, 7.9%

Table 15.3 Median prevalence rates of personality disorders in
epidemiological surveys Personality cluster

Personality disorder category

Number of studies (n)

Median prevalence rate (%)

Cluster A

Paranoid

13

1.6

Schizoid

13

0.8

Schizotypal

13

0.7

Antisocial

24

1.5

Borderline

15

1.6

Histrionic

12

1.8

Narcissistic

10

0.2

Obsessive--compulsive

13

2.0

Avoidant

13

1.3

Dependent

12

0.9

Passive--aggressive

8

1.7

Cluster B

Cluster C

Source: data from Guzzetta F and de Girolamo G, Epidemiology of
personality disorders. In: Gelder M et al, eds.Â New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, 2nd edn, pp.Â 881--6, Copyright (2009), Oxford University
Press.

405

Aetiology Colombia). In contrast to clinic populations, personality
disorder is at least as common in men as women (Coid et al., 2006) and
it is as common in ethnic minority as in host populations (Crawford et
al., 2012). Rates appear to be higher in urban populations (Torgesen et
al., 2001). Estimates of the prevalence of the various types of
personality disorder from the review by Guzzetta and de Girolamo (2009)
are shown in Table 15.3. In these studies, sample sizes ranged from 200
to 1600. Some of these estimates have a substantial range, reflecting
among other sources of variation the use of different assessment
instruments. The rates of some disorders vary between men and women.
Antisocial personality disorder is more common among men (estimated
ratios range between 2.1 and 7.1). Although borderline and

histrionic personality disorders are clinically reported more frequently
in women, this was not consistently confirmed in epidemiological
studies. Structured assessment instruments have high reliability but may
have more questionable validity. Certainly they seem to generate more
positives than most clinicians would expect, and the absolute rates
should be treated with some caution. However, the relatively primitive
state of personality disorder theory and assessment may explain much of
this variation. The surprising findings of remarkably high rates of
remission in personality disorder when using these instruments may
indicate that they should be treated cautiously. However, there is a
growing belief among personality disorder researchers that their
lifelong nature has been overstated (Tyrer, 2015; Newton-Howes et al.,
2015).

Aetiology General issues The causes of personality disorder are
uncertain, and this is an area in which hypotheses are many and research
findings varied. The two major areas are genetic factors and various
kinds of early life experience. Some personality disorders have been
linked aetiologically with the psychiatric disorders that they resemble.
The state of evidence for each of these three general issues will be
considered with the individual personality disorders. The study of the
influence of early life experiences is made difficult by the long
interval between these experiences and the diagnosis of personality
disorder in adult life. Psychodynamic theories linking childhood
experience and personality are hard to test, but have been influential.
Most clinicians accept that there are causal links between childhood
experience, personality, and personality disorder. It is agreed good
practice to assess childhood experiences and to use common-sense
judgement to decide whether any of these may have influenced the
personality. For example, extreme and repeated rejection by the parents
may explain low self-esteem in adult life. Retrospective studies present
obvious problems, but prospective studies are now becoming available.
For example, independently documented gross physical neglect or abuse or
sexual abuse in childhood has been shown to be associated with cluster B
personality disorders (Johnson et al., 1999). Different causes have been
suggested for the various personality disorders so they

will be considered separately. Important, representative research
evidence is cited below but the reader should not lose sight of the
overall picture that aetiology in this group of disorders is very
unclear.

Antisocial personality disorder Genetic causes The much quoted early
twin studies by Lange (1931) and Rosanoff et al.Â (1934) were concerned
with probands with repeated conviction for criminal offences rather than
antisocial personality disorder as such, so their relevance is
uncertain. More recent twin studies have confirmed the heritability of
antisocial behaviour in adults, and have shown that genetic factors are
more important in adults than in antisocial children or adolescents
where the shared environmental factors dominate (Lyons et al., 1995).
One gene contributing to antisocial behaviour is monoamine oxidase A
(MAOA); a common low-activity MAOA genetic variant predisposes to adult
antisocial behaviour in men, especially in those who experienced early
adversity---an example of a gene--environment interaction (Byrd and
Manuck, 2014). Cadoret (1978) found that adoptees separated at birth
from a parent who had displayed persistent antisocial behaviour had
higher rates of antisocial personality disorder than did adoptees whose
biological parents were not antisocial. Antisocial personality disorder
was

405

406

406

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder diagnosed more often in
men than in women, although the women had an increased rate of what was
then diagnosed as hysteria (and is probably closer to the current
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder). Cadoret suggested that
hysteria (borderline personality disorder) is an expression in women of
the same genetic endowment that causes antisocial personality disorder
in men. Similar findings were reported in an earlier study by Crowe
(1974). Data linkage studies from Sweden confirm the genetic
contribution to sexual offending by demonstrating the association
between rates and degree of relationship (LÃ¥ngstrÃ¶m et al., 2015).

Cerebral pathology and cerebral maturation As some brain-injured
patients show aggressive behaviour, minor degrees of brain injury have
been sought as a cause of antisocial personality. However, there is no
convincing evidence to support this idea. MRI studies have found reduced
prefrontal grey matter (Raine et al., 2000), and reduced amygdala volume
may be linked to the characteristic lack of empathy (Blair, 2003).

5-Hydroxytryptamine and aggression Abnormalities in brain
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) neurotransmission have been reported in
patients with impulsive and aggressive behaviour, and low levels of the
5-HT metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) have been found in
the cerebrospinal fluid of subjects who have committed acts of
unpremeditated violence (Linnoila and Virkkunen, 1992). In addition,
more recent studies have found abnormalities in 5-HTmediated
neuroendocrine function and brain 5-HT2Areceptor availability in vivo in
people with high trait aggressiveness (Coccaro et al., 2010; Rosell et
al., 2010). It has been suggested that the same abnormalities may be
relevant to personality disorders that are characterized by impulsive
behaviour, particularly in the presence of prefrontal deficits (Dolan et
al., 2002; New et al., 2004).

Developmental theories Separation. In a much-quoted early study, Bowlby
(1944) studied 44 'juvenile thieves' and concluded that separation of a
young child from their mother could lead to antisocial behaviour and
failure to form close relationships. This work stimulated much research
into the effects of separating children from their mothers (see page
425), introduced radical changes into aspects of social and paediatric
care, and has given rise to attachment theory. Not all separated
children are affected adversely, and the effects of separation depend on
many factors, including the child's age, the previous relationship with
the mother and father, and the reasons for

separation. Rutter (1972) showed that parental marital disharmony partly
accounts for the association between separation and antisocial disorder
in sons. Social learning in childhood. Scott (1960) proposed four ways
in which antisocial behaviour could develop through social learning: 1.
Growing up in an antisocial family. 2. Lack of consistent rules in the
family. 3. Overcoming other problems (e.g.Â aggressive behaviour to hide
feelings of inferiority). 4. Poor ability to sustain attention, and
other impediments to learning. There is evidence for some of these
factors. Antisocial personality disorder is associated with physical
abuse and with violent parenting without consistently applied rules
(Pollock et al., 1990), and with low IQ and large family of origin
(Farrington et al., 1988). The main value of Scott's proposal is in
providing a framework for the assessment. Childhood behaviour problems
and antisocial personality. A 30-year follow-up study of children
attending a child guidance clinic found an association between behaviour
problems in childhood and antisocial personality disorder in adult life
(Robins, 1966). Only a minority of those even with serious antisocial
behaviour in childhood became persistently antisocial in adult life, but
most of the adults with antisocial personality disorder had behaviour
problems in childhood. The association was stronger if in childhood
there was more than one kind of antisocial behaviour, and if antisocial
acts were repeated. Stealing among boys and sexual delinquency among
girls were especially likely to be followed by antisocial behaviour in
adult life. Early conduct problems have been shown to predict antisocial
personality independently of associated adverse family and social
factors (Hill, 2003), hence the requirement for a history of conduct
disorder for the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder in DSM-5.

Paranoid personality disorder Little is known about the causes of this
disorder. Some investigators have reported that paranoid personality
disorder is more frequent among first-degree relatives of probands with
schizophrenia than among the general population (Kendler et al., 1985),
but others have not confirmed this finding (see Chapter 11).

Schizoid personality disorder The cause of this disorder is unknown. It
does not appear to be closely related genetically to schizophrenia

470

The course of personality disorder (Fulton and Winokur, 1993). The
psychoanalyst Melanie Klein outlined what she called the
'paranoid--schizoid position' (Klein, 1952). This was an early
developmental phase before infants could sustain a clear understanding
of their mother as an individual who came and went (the 'depressive
position', so called because the infant could then miss the mother).
Klein's views were not intended to explain either paranoid or schizoid
disorders, although they are often quoted as such, but rather to
emphasize the importance of the mother--child relationship more than she
thought Freud had done.

Schizotypal personality disorder This is more frequent among biological
relatives of individuals with schizophrenia than among adopted relatives
or controls (Kendler et al., 1981). A review of 17 structural imaging
studies of people with this personality disorder found brain
abnormalities that were similar in most ways to those in people with
schizophrenia (Dickey et al., 2002). Similarly, there is strong evidence
for a genetic contribution, with heritability scores of 0.35--0.81 in
twin studies (Ji et al., 2006; Kendler et al., 2006, 2007). These
findings suggest that this personality disorder may be a milder form of
schizophrenia, or that the two are related in some other way.

Borderline personality disorder There is now an impressive volume of
research into biological factors in borderline personality disorder (New
et al., 2008), and some evidence for the importance of genetic factors.
Twin studies show heritability scores of 0.65--0.76 (Torgersen et al.,
2000; Ji et al., 2006). Firstdegree relatives of patients with
borderline personality disorder are 10 times more likely to be treated
for borderline personality disorder or 'similar personality disorder'
(Loranger et al., 1982). Some of the genes and loci associated have
begun to be identified (Lubke et al., 2014). A wide range of imaging
studies have implicated subtle grey matter changes in prefrontal and
limbic regions, as well as functional dysregulation of the
cortico-limbic circuitry involved in emotional regulation (Ruocco et
al.,

2013). A recent ligand binding and PET imaging study has suggested that
there are abnormalities in opioid regulation in the same brain regions
(Prossin et al., 2010). It is becoming accepted that it may be more
fruitful to study the genetics of personality traits (e.g.Â dysregulation
of affect and poor impulse control) than the personality disorders
themselves (Siever et al., 2002). Psychodynamic theories propose a
disturbed relationship with the mother at the stage of individuation of
the child (Kernberg, 1975), and people with a borderline personality are
more likely to report that they experienced physical and sexual abuse in
childhood (Berelowicz and Tarnopolsky, 1993).

Histrionic personality disorder There have been few objective studies of
the causes of this personality disorder. The genetics have not been
studied with standardized methods of assessment, and the few reported
investigations have yielded inconsistent findings (McGuffin and Thapar,
1992). Freud's views of the role of the Oedipus complex and the failure
of mature intimacy leading to oversexualized relationships are
impossible to test, but may help when dealing with histrionic
individuals.

Obsessional personality disorder Obsessional personality appears to have
a substantial genetic aetiology (Murray and Reveley, 1981), although its
nature is unknown. Psychoanalytic explanations were initially
influential, but have now faded even within psychotherapy circles.

Anxious--avoidant, dependent, and passive--aggressive personality
disorders The genetics of these personality disorders have not been
specifically studied, and their causes remain unknown at present.

The course of personality disorder Personality disorders are defined as
lifelong conditions, so little change would be expected with time. There
is little reliable evidence about their outcome, other than

for borderline personality disorder and, to a lesser extent, antisocial
personality disorder. The results of those studies that have been
conducted make surprising reading.

407

408

408

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder Much of the influential
work comes from the USA and uses repeated assessment according to DSM-IV
criteria for personality disorder diagnosis or for personality disorder
traits. Overall, this work indicates that personality disorder is much
less stable than had previously been believed. Skodol (2008) concludes
that, of studies conducted in the DSM-III era, over 50% of patients
subsequently failed to meet personality disorder criteria over time. In
this review of four large naturalistic studies, two reported changes in
personality traits and two reported changes in diagnoses. All of them
showed marked improvements; for example, a 48% reduction in personality
disorder traits between 15 and 22 years of age (Cohen et al., 2005) and
a reduction in the number of individuals continuing to meet the
diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder are outlined
below. Newton-Howes et al.Â (2015) cite several studies of change in
personality and personality disorder in adult and even late-adult age.
However, in the face of such figures it is difficult not to question the
validity of the measures. A judgement has to be made as to whether they
are genuinely measuring what we understand by personality. Borderline
personality disorder. The outcome is very varied, suggesting that it may
not be a single entity, or could in fact be a questionable one (Skodol
et al., 2002b). In the most influential outcome study, the McLean
Hospital follow-up (Zanarini et al., 2006), 290 patients with borderline
personality disorder were interviewed using the SCID II (First et al.,
1997) every 2 years for 10 years. A total of 88% achieved 'remission'
over this time period, 39% by 2 years, a further 22% by 4 years, a
further 22% by 6 years, and so on. Those who still showed a borderline
personality disorder more often had comorbid substance abuse or a
history of childhood sexual abuse. A high rate of suicide has been found
in some studies (8.5% in the study by Stone et al., 1987), raising the
suspicion of an atypical affective disorder. Aggressive and antisocial
personality disorders. Clinical impressions indicate that minor
improvement may

take place slowly, especially in aggressive and antisocial behaviour
('psychopathy burns out'). In the study by Robins and Regier (1991),
about one-third of people with persistent antisocial behaviour in early
adult life improved later, as judged by the number of arrests and
contacts with social agencies. However, they still had problems in
relationships, as shown by hostility towards partners and neighbours, as
well as an increased rate of suicide. There is a problem of circularity
here in that criminality is one of the features of antisocial
personality disorder in DSM-5 (although not in ICD-10), and not all
antisocial personality disorder patients identified in community studies
(Regier et al., 1990) have problems with the law, and not all criminals
meet the criteria for antisocial personality disorder (Hare, 1983; Coid
and Ullrich, 2010). Whether antisocial personality disorder improves
significantly over time is the subject of conflicting evidence. Robins
and Regier (1991) reported a high rate of remission in the third and
fourth decades of life, whereas Rutter and Rutter (1993) emphasized its
stability. The view that such patients 'burn out' may reflect a
reduction in help-seeking rather than late maturing. Much less is known
about the longer-term outcome in the other personality disorders. The
overwhelming clinical impression is that borderline personality disorder
is distinguished from the other disorders by its apparent variability.
However, in the longitudinal studies using structured assessments there
is also a high level of remission for other personality disorders. For
instance, in a collaborative multi-site study of 668 DSM-IV-diagnosed
personality disorder patients in the USA (Skodol et al., 2005),
remission occurred in 38% of those with obsessive--compulsive
personality and 23% of those with schizotypal personality disorder
within 2 years. Mehlum et al.Â (1991) reported a 3- to 5-year followup of
schizotypal personality disorder in which the outcome was worse than
borderline personality disorder. 'Cluster C' personality disorders (see
page 402) seem to have a better outcome than the other groups.

Treatment There is little hard evidence on the treatment of personality
disorder (Bateman et al., 2015) and most of the available data are
concentrated on the two dominant cluster B disorders, borderline and
antisocial, and the latter mainly conducted with incarcerated offenders.
It is not surprising that research is limited. This is a

patient group that is hard to engage in either treatment or research;
the core features, such as functional disability and disturbed
relationships, are much harder to operationalize and measure than
traditional symptoms; comorbidity complicating the picture is the norm
rather than the exception.

409

The management of personality disorders Most of the studies that have
been conducted utilize the epiphenomena of the disorders as outcome. In
borderline personality disorder self-harm and readmissions to hospital,
while in antisocial personality disorder most commonly reduced
aggression in the short term and reduced offending in the longer term
are used as outcome measures. Despite (or perhaps because of) the
variation in the manifestations of personality disorder reported in
studies using structured assessments (Skodol et al., 2005), no trials
have demonstrated changes to core features such as social functioning or
sense of identity. If treatments reduce some of the disruptive and
distressing aspects of these disorders that is an important and
worthwhile achievement.

Despite the poverty of evidence, national guidelines have been published
in the UK for the management of both these disorders (NICE, 2009b;
Gabbard, 2007) and the emphasis is firmly on psychosocial interventions
with the use of drugs restricted to symptomatic management of crises.
For the practising psychiatrist this focus on cluster B disorders makes
sense. Cluster A disorders--- the schizoid, eccentric, and often
socially withdrawn group---rarely seek help, and the cluster C
disorders--- the anxious and obsessional---seek help for comorbidity,
rarely for the direct consequences of their personality disorder.

The management of personality disorders Assessment As well as
establishing a diagnosis of personality disorder, the strengths and
weaknesses of the individual should be assessed. Strengths are
important, because treatment should build on favourable features as well
as attempting to modify unfavourable ones. The patient's circumstances
should be assessed. One of the most important services that a
psychiatrist can provide for a personality-disordered patient is an
honest yet diplomatic sharing of their understanding of what is going
on. Most patients have recognized that they have a problem of some kind
and may be quite realistic about what psychiatrists have to offer. They
may only have come to the psychiatric services because others have
suggested it. An opportunity to talk through the strengths and
weaknesses of their habitual responses can help an individual to put
their characteristic behaviour patterns in perspective and perhaps find
less damaging strategies for dealing with difficulties. It can also
avoid the development of unrealistic expectations of what others can do,
which could otherwise lead to unproductive dependency. Regular
attendance at outpatient clinics when there is in reality nothing that
can be done can seem benign and compassionate, but it carries a strong
misleading message both for the patient and for others who relate to
them.

Supportive therapy Psychological support has been the mainstay of
treatment of people with personality disorder. For some,

modest but useful progress can be achieved by having a secure point of
reference and a sense of being taken seriously over a period of months
or, sometimes, years. Support may be provided by a member of the
psychiatric team or, if the person has broken the law, by a probation
officer. The dangers of this rather 'paternalistic' approach are
increasingly being recognized, and supportive psychotherapy is probably
best restricted to fairly senior staff, as it is difficult to do well
and has a number of pitfalls.

General aims of management Although there has been some progress in the
treatment of personality disorders, management still consists largely of
helping people to find a way of life that conflicts less with their
character. Whatever approach is used, the aims should be modest and
considerable time should be allowed to achieve them. A trusting and
confiding relationship is the basis of treatment. However, care should
be exercised to avoid excessive dependency. Group treatment can
sometimes be a way of lessening dependency and increasing social
learning. Often more than one professional is involved in the care of
these patients. This can be risky, and close collaboration is needed to
avoid inconsistencies of approach. Many of these patients react badly to
changes in staff, which may re-enact painful losses, rejections, or
separations in their earlier life. One consistent, albeit limited
relationship, may be a much better learning experience than a range of
contacts, no matter how skilled they are.

409

410

410

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder The overall plan should
include attempts to help the patient to have less contact with
situations that provoke difficulties, and more opportunity to develop
assets in their personality. They should be encouraged to take an active
part in planning their care, and the reasons for decisions should be
explained clearly and discussed fully. Helping them to avoid adding to
their problems by misusing drugs or alcohol is essential. Even if no
major improvement is achieved, this approach may stabilize the situation
until some fortuitous change in the patient's life brings about
improvement. Choice of psychotherapy. Psychodynamic or cognitive
psychotherapy may be explored when the patient is well motivated and
enough stability has been achieved to enable them to focus on the
treatment. The approach will depend on the type of personality disorder,
on local availability, and on the patient's own preference. Choice of
medication. Medication plays only a small part in the treatment of
personality disorders. It should not be the first choice, and when it is
prescribed it should be part of a wider plan that embraces psychological
and social care. Anxiolytic medication should be used with special
caution because of the risk of dependency. Antidepressants are used
mainly for associated mood disorder---a common reason for the worsening
of the emotional and behavioural problems associated with the
personality disorder. The use of antidepressants in borderline
personality disorder is discussed below. Antipsychotics are occasionally
useful to reduce aggressive behaviour. Organization of services. People
with personality disorder can be cared for by a single practitioner, who

integrates the psychological, pharmacological, and social aspects of
treatment, calling on specialist help when needed. This makes it easier
for the practitioner to understand and help with relationship problems,
and it emphasizes the essential unity of the person's diverse problems.
However, it can be difficult to sustain when the personality disorder is
severe. Alternatively, care can be provided by a community team, with a
key worker who coordinates the contributions of other team members.
Since the publication of the Department of Health paper, Personality
Disorder: No Longer a Diagnosis of Exclusion (National Institute for
Mental Health in England, 2003) in the UK, specialist teams have been
established specifically for the treatment of personality disorder.
Their configuration varies enormously, but a form of therapeutic day
programme based on therapeutic community principles (Bateman, 1999), and
often incorporating principles of mentalization, is commonly the central
feature (Bateman and Fonagy, 2009). For a review of services for
patients with personality disorder, see Bateman and Tyrer (2004b).

Progress Progress is often achieved as a series of small steps by which
the person gradually moves closer to a satisfactory adjustment. Setbacks
are common, but they can be used constructively, as it is at these times
that the patient is most likely to be willing to confront their
problems. Although therapists should try long and hard to help patients
with personality disorder, they should recognize that some people may
not benefit.

The management of Cluster A and C disorders The type of personality
disorder is not always a good guide to the choice of effective
treatment. Nevertheless, some associations have been described, mainly
on the basis of clinical experience, and these will be considered here
before outlining the approach to borderline and antisocial disorders.
Patients with paranoid personality disorder do not engage well with
treatment because they are touchy and suspicious. Patients with schizoid
personality disorder avoid close personal contact, and often drop out
after a few sessions of treatment. If they can be persuaded to continue
they tend to intellectualize their problems and question the value of
their treatment. The therapist should try to help these people to become
more

aware of their problems and respond to them in ways that cause fewer
difficulties. For both disorders progress is slow and the results are
limited. Exploratory psychotherapy is unlikely to succeed, and
medication is generally unhelpful. Paranoid personality traits and
experiences have become the focus of recent research into the
possibility of intervening early in psychosis. Studies in virtual
reality laboratories have been used to identify them and tailored forms
of cognitive behaviour therapy are being tested as possible approaches
(Freeman and Garety, 2014). Patients with obsessional personality
disorder do not respond well to psychotherapy. Unskilled treatment can

41

The management of Cluster A and C disorders lead to excessive morbid
introspection, which leaves the person feeling worse rather than better.
Treatment should be directed towards avoiding situations that increase
difficulties, and developing better ways of coping with stressful
situations. Patients often seek help during an associated depressive
disorder, and it is important to identify and treat this comorbid
condition. Patients with avoidant (anxious) personality disorder
generally have low self-esteem, and fear disapproval and criticism. They
can be helped by a therapeutic relationship in which they feel valued
and able to reconsider their perception of themselves. As with
obsessional personality disorder, the possibility of a comorbid
depressive disorder that requires treatment should be considered.
Patients with dependent personality disorder are usually helped more by
problem-solving counselling, in which they are encouraged to take
increasingly more responsibility for themselves. Medication should be
avoided unless there is an associated depressive disorder.

Borderline personality disorder Little is achieved by arguing about the
nosological coherence of borderline personality disorder---its contested
history and boundaries and, least of all, its misleading name.
Borderline is the personality disorder that calls for a response from
psychiatry and psychiatrists. It is in the nature of the disorder that
management has to be negotiated---patients will inevitably exert a
considerable influence on the choice of treatment, and all
psychiatrists, irrespective of their interests, are likely to have to
manage them. While the main body of research is into sophisticated
daycare units based on either mentalization or dialectic behaviour
therapy (DBT; see below), not all patients can have access to these nor
will all of them accept this approach. As a consequence, virtually every
form of psychotherapy or social therapy has responded with adaptations
and strategies (Bateman et al., 2015). In many parts of the world
psychoanalytical approaches are still pursued in outpatient or
office-based practice, although focused more firmly on transference
issues (Clarkin et al., 1999). Cognitive behaviour therapists focus more
on schemas (the underlying assumptions patients make rather than
exclusively on automatic thoughts) (Davidson, 2000). Short-term
integrative therapies such as cognitive analytical therapy (Clarke et
al., 2013) have specified adaptations for borderline patients. The two
most influential adaptations have been in behaviour therapy, with the
development of dialectical behaviour therapy (Linehan 1993; Linehan et
al., 1991), and in psychodynamic therapy, with

mentalization (Bateman and Fonagy, 2004; Bateman and Fonagy, 2009).

Dialectical behaviour therapy DBT is an intense form of psychotherapy
that includes individual sessions, group sessions, and, optimally,
daycare. It was developed by the psychologist Marsha Linehan to help
people reduce harmful behaviours, such as self-harm, suicidal thinking,
and substance abuse. The approach aims to increase emotional and
cognitive regulation by awareness of triggers and assessing coping
skills to apply. Linehan has more recently acknowledged that her life
was dominated by such behaviours and that finding some effective
treatment was vital for her own functioning. It includes an eclectic mix
of therapies, with cognitive behaviour therapy to increase emotional
regulation plus mindfulness to increase awareness, and some pretty blunt
confrontation. The treatment is outlined in Chapter 24.

Mentalization The residential therapeutic communities developed after
the second World War to help individuals with personality disorder were
aimed at those with antisocial personality disorder but contained many
with what would now be recognized as borderline personality disorder.
They are described in Chapter 24 and, because of an absence of evidence
for their effectiveness and their cost, are no longer a feature of
mental health care (although they are still influential in prisons and
drug treatment units). However, day units based broadly on therapeutic
community principles have evolved for the treatment of borderline
personality disorder. What distinguishes them is their focus on
'mentalization' (Bateman and Fonagy, 2004; Bateman and Fonagy, 2009).
Essentially, this involves helping the patient become more fully aware
of their thoughts and feelings rather than acting on them without
reflection. Mentalization day hospitals vary, but all usually include
both individual and group work, and their approach is summarized in Box
15.9. For the many patients unable or unwilling to attend such units,
principles of 'generalist' management have evolved (Gunderson and Links,
2014; Bateman and Krawitz, 2013), and are summarized in Box 15.10.

Antisocial personality disorder Most treatment programmes are delivered
by forensic psychologists in the prison service and comprise
schema-based cognitive behaviour therapy, often in groups. Few
psychiatrists feel they have much to offer in

411

412

412

Chapter 15 Personality and personality disorder

Box 15.9 Five common characteristics of evidence-based treatments for
borderline personality disorder 1. Structured (manual-directed)
approaches to prototypic borderline personality disorder problems 2.
Patients are encouraged to assume control of themselves (i.e.Â sense of
agency) 3. Therapists help connections of feelings to events and actions
4. Therapists are active, responsive, and validating 5. Therapists
discuss cases, including personal reactions, with others

the treatment of antisocial personality disorder beyond identifying it
and exploring its consequences with the patient and family.

Pharmacotherapy NICE guidance (2009b) advises against the use of
medication unless a clear comorbid disorder (e.g.Â major depression) is
present, whereas the American Psychiatric Association has considered
targeted pharmacotherapy an important adjunct (Oldham et al., 2001).
This is not always possible in practice, and a meta-analytical review by
Lieb et al.Â (2010) concluded that there was

Box 15.10 Proposed characteristics for a generalist approach to treating
borderline personality disorder 1. Treatment providers have previous
experience with borderline personality disorder 2. Supportive
(i.e.Â encouraging, advisory, and educational) 3. Focus on managing life
situations (not on the intherapy interactions) 4. Non-intensive
(i.e.Â once per week, with additional sessions as needed) 5.
Interruptions are expected; consistent regular appointments are optional
6. Psychopharmacological interventions are integrated; group or family
interventions are encouraged when necessary

some evidence, albeit limited, that antipsychotic drugs and
anticonvulsant mood stabillizers could have beneficial effects on
aspects of borderline personality disorder, such as affective
instability, impulsive dyscontrol, and cognitive perceptual symptoms.
Nevertheless, it does not appear likely that current drug treatments are
able to modify core borderline symptomatology, including fear of
abandonment, feelings of emptiness, and identity disturbance.

Ethical problems Stigma and patient involvement From the early ideas of
moral insanity to the present time, the concept of personality disorder
has been linked to a moral judgement. People who are told that they have
a disordered personality believe there is something inadequate about who
they are. This can be entrenched by some professionals' attitudes, and
by the difficulty that people with personality disorder experience in
accessing psychiatric and other services. Once the diagnosis has been
made it tends to stick and to affect the person's subsequent care, as
well as the way that other people think of them over the longer term.
For this reason, many clinicians are reluctant to make the diagnosis.
This situation is changing, and the policy document, Personality
Disorder: No Longer a Diagnosis of Exclusion

(National Institute for Mental Health in England, 2003), highlighted the
need for all psychiatrists to engage with personality-disordered
individuals. The existence of a personality disorder is associated with
increased rates of other psychiatric disorders. Even if psychiatrists do
not believe that they can change the patient's personality, that is no
reason not to treat the associated problems. This renewed interest has
also led to the establishment of specific psychotherapeutic teams and
services for personality-disordered patients. These services are very
varied in their form (reflecting the absence of strong evidence for
specific treatments), but, as mentioned above, many of them are centred
around a psychodynamic day service (Bateman and Krawitz, 2013).

413

Further reading

Further reading Gelder MG et al.Â (eds) (2009). Section 4.12: Personality
disorders. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr and JR Geddes
(eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. (The seven chapters in this section provide a comprehensive
review of personality disorder.)

Schneider K (1950) Psychopathic Personalities (trans. MW Hamilton).
Cassell, London. (A classic text of great importance in the development
of ideas about personality disorder.)

413

41

451

CHAPTER 16

Child psychiatry Introduction 415

Physical examination 431

Normal development 416

Psychiatric treatment for children and

Classification of psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents 419
Epidemiology 419

their families 432 Review of syndromes 437 Ethical and legal problems in
child and

Aetiology 423 Psychiatric assessment of children and their

adolescent psychiatry 481 Appendix: Basic elements in child and
adolescent

families 428

psychiatric assessments 483

Introduction A significant proportion of 'adult' mental illness starts
before the age of 18 years. There are also specific psychiatric
disorders of childhood. These factors attest to the importance of
properly assessing child development, identifying early signs of mental
illness, and instituting effective treatment. The period of childhood is
relatively brief, yet the developmental tasks a child needs to perform
are considerable, including learning a broad range of skills, developing
physically and cognitively, and managing the social and peer environment
with adequate communication skills and emotional control. Mental illness
can impact on the developmental tasks of childhood and potentially
negatively impact on a child's developmental trajectory for the rest of
their life, if, for example, it means that a child might have such low
selfesteem that they are not able to make friends at school or perform
badly in school achievement tests and not pursue higher education. The
practice of child psychiatry differs from that of adult psychiatry in a
number of important ways. â

Children are usually dependent on an adult to help them access services.
They seldom initiate the consultation

and are usually brought by a parent, or another adult, who has concerns
about some aspect of the child's cognitive, emotional, or behavioural
development. Whether a referral is sought depends on the attitudes and
tolerance of these adults, and how they perceive the child's behaviour.
Healthy children may be brought to the doctor by overanxious and
solicitous parents or teachers, while in other circumstances severely
disturbed children may be left to themselves. â

The child's difficulties may reflect the problems of other people---for
example, parental physical or mental illness.

â

The child's stage of physical and cognitive development must be
considered when deciding what is abnormal. For example, repeated
bedwetting may be normal in a 3-year-old child but is abnormal in a
7-year-old. In addition, the child's response to life events changes
with age. Thus separation from a parent will affect children in
different ways across their childhood.

â

Children are generally less able to express themselves in words. For
this reason, evidence of disturbance often comes from observations of
behaviour made by

416

416

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry parents, teachers, and others. These
informants may give differing accounts, in part because children's
behaviour varies with their circumstances, and in part because the
various informants will likely have different beliefs about the
parameters of normal and abnormal behaviour. For this reason, informants
should be asked for specific examples of any problem they describe, and
asked about the circumstances in which it has been observed. â

â

The vast majority of children attend schools which are found across the
world with variable sizes, resources, philosophies, and impacts. They
can play an important role in the overall development of children and
can also be areas of great academic and social stress for children.
Furthermore, schools offer a location for accessing children for
prevention and treatment of mental illness. The emphasis of treatment is
different. Medication is used considerably less in the treatment of
children than in the treatment of adults, and is usually started by a
specialist rather than the family doctor. Instead, there is more
emphasis on psychological interventions, working with the parents and
the whole family, reassuring and retraining children, and coordinating
the efforts of others who can help children, especially at school. Thus
multidisciplinary working is even

more important in child psychiatry than in adult psychiatry.
Consequently, treatment is usually provided by a team that includes at
least a psychiatrist, psychiatric nurses, a psychologist, and
potentially also those trained in other therapies, social care, or
occupational therapy. â

Ethical considerations can make participation of children in research
complicated, and so the evidence base, particularly on pharmacological
interventions, is limited for children.

The first part of this chapter is concerned with a number of general
issues concerning psychiatric disorder in childhood, including its
frequency, causes, assessment, and management. The second part of the
chapter contains information about the principal syndromes encountered
in the practice of child and adolescent psychiatry. The chapter does not
provide a comprehensive account of child psychiatry. It is an
introduction to the main themes for psychiatrists who are undertaking
specialist general training. It is expected that they will follow it by
reading a specialist text such as one of those listed under Further
reading on page 484. Intellectual disability among children is
considered in Chapter 17, but the reader should remember that many
aspects of the study and care of children with intellectual disability
are similar to those described in this chapter.

Normal development The practice of child psychiatry calls for some
knowledge of the normal process of development from a helpless infant
into an independent adult. To judge whether any observed emotional,
social, or intellectual functioning is abnormal, it has to be compared
with the corresponding normal range for the age group. This section
gives a brief and simplified account of the main aspects of development
that concern the psychiatrist. A textbook of paediatrics should be
consulted for details of these developmental phases (for example, see
Kliegman et al., 2015).

The first year of life This is a period of rapid motor, sensory, and
social development, and includes the first stages of language
development. Three weeks after birth, the baby smiles at faces,
selective smiling appears by 6 months, fear of strangers by 8 months,
and anxiety on separation from the mother shortly thereafter.

Bowlby (1980) emphasized the importance of a general process of
attachment of the infant to the parents, and of more selective emotional
bonding. Although bonding to the mother is most significant, important
attachments are also made to the father and other people who are close
to the infant. Other studies have shown the reciprocal nature of this
process and the role of early contacts between the mother (or other
carers) and the newborn infant in initiating bonding. Attachment and
bonding are discussed further on page 425. By the end of the first year,
the child should have formed a close and secure relationship with the
mother or other close carer. There should be an ordered pattern of
sleeping and feeding, and weaning onto solid food has usually been
accomplished. Infants will be able to point at objects and things they
want. Children will have begun to learn about objects outside
themselves, simple causal relationships, and spatial relationships. By
the end of the first year, they enjoy making sounds and may say 'mama',
'dada', and perhaps one or two other words.

471

Normal development

Year two This too is a period of rapid development. Children begin to
wish to please their parents, and appear anxious when they disapprove.
They explore their environment more through play and with increasing
mobility, as most will be walking by the time they are 18 months. They
also begin to learn to control their behaviour. By now, attachment
behaviour should be well established. Temper tantrums occur,
particularly if exploratory wishes are frustrated. These tantrums do not
last long, and should lessen as the child learns to accept constraints.
They learn to point at things that they want others to observe out of
interest. By the end of the second year the child should be able to put
two or three words together as a simple sentence.

Preschool years (2--5 years) This phase brings a further increase in
intellectual abilities, especially in the complexity of language. Social
development occurs as children learn to live within the family. They
begin to identify with the parents and adopt their standards in matters
of conscience. Social life develops rapidly as they learn to interact
with siblings, other children, and adults. Temper tantrums continue, but
diminish and should disappear before the child starts school. Attention
span and concentration increase steadily. At this age, children are very
curious about the environment and ask many questions. In children aged
2--5 years, fantasy life is rich and vivid. It can form a temporary
substitute for the real world, enabling desires to be fulfilled
regardless of reality. Special 'transitional' objects such as teddy
bears or pieces of blanket can become important to the child. They
appear to comfort and reassure the child, and help them to sleep.
Children begin to learn about their own identity. They realize the
differences between males and females in appearance, clothes, behaviour,
and anatomy. Sexual play and exploration are common at this stage.
According to psychodynamic theory, at this stage defence mechanisms
develop to enable the child to cope with anxiety arising from
intolerable emotions. These defence mechanisms have been described on
page 137. During these years the most common mental health presentations
to primary care services include difficulties in feeding and sleeping,
as well as clinging to the parents (separation anxiety), temper
tantrums, oppositional behaviour, and minor degrees of aggression. As
described below, these should be referred to mental health services if
they are persistent and interfere

with the child's ability to develop physically or interact socially in
their family or with peers.

Middle childhood By the age of 5 years, children should have a clearer
understanding of their identity, and their position in the family. They
learn to cope with school, and to read, write, and begin to acquire
numerical concepts. The teacher becomes an important person in
children's lives. At this stage children gradually learn what they can
achieve and what their limitations are. Conscience and standards of
social behaviour develop further. According to psychoanalytical theory,
defence mechanisms develop further while psychosexual development is
quiescent (the latent period).

Common problems in middle childhood The common problems in this age
group include fears, nightmares, minor difficulties in relationships
with peers, disobedience, and fighting.

Adolescence Adolescence is the growing-up period between childhood and
maturity, and is also a sensitive period in the development of the
brain. Adolescence is a time of significant neuroplasticity---where the
nervous system adapts its structure and function in response to
environmental demands, experiences, and physiological changes (Fuhrmann
et al., 2015). Among the most obvious features are the physical changes
of puberty. The age at which these changes occur is quite variable,
usually taking place between 11 and 13 years in girls, and 13 and 17
years in boys. The production of sex hormones precedes these changes,
starting in both sexes between the ages of 8 and 10 years. An adolescent
has increased awareness of personal identity and individual
characteristics. At this age, young people become self-aware, are
concerned to know who they are, and begin to consider where they want to
go in life. They can look ahead, consider alternatives for the future,
and feel hope and despair. Some experience emotional turmoil and feel
alienated from their family, but such experiences are not universal.
Peer group influences become more prominent, and close friendships often
develop, especially among girls. Membership of a group is common, and
this can help the adolescent in moving towards autonomy. Adolescence
brings a marked increase in sexual interest and activity. At first,
tentative approaches are made to the opposite sex. Gradually these
become more direct and confident.

417

418

418

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry How far and in what way sexual feelings are
expressed depends greatly on the standards of society, the behaviour of
the peer group, and the attitudes of the family.

Common problems in later childhood and early adolescence Common problems
among children aged from 12 to 16 years include fluctuating mood and
also persistent low mood, a range of different anxiety problems,
difficulties in relationships with peers, disobedience and rebellion,
including truancy, experimenting with illicit substances, fighting, and
stealing. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder may have their onset in
this age group, but are uncommon.

Developmental psychopathology In child psychiatry it is important to
adopt a developmental approach for three reasons. â

The stage of development determines whether behaviour is normal or
pathological. For example, as noted above, bedwetting is normal at the
age of 3 years but abnormal at the age of 7 years.

â

The effects of life events differ as the child develops. For example,
infants aged under 6 months can move to a new carer with little
disturbance, but children aged 6 months to 3 years of age show great
distress when separated from a familiar carer, because an attachment
relationship has been formed. After the age of 3 years, attachment bonds
are still strong but the child's ability to understand and to use
language can reduce the effect of a change of care-taker provided that
it is arranged sensitively.

â

Psychopathology may change as the child grows older. Anxiety disorders
in childhood tend to improve as the child develops, depressive disorders
often recur and continue into adult life, conduct disorders can continue
into adolescence as aggressive and delinquent behaviour, and also
commonly as substance abuse--- a problem that is less common in younger
children. These changes and continuities are sometimes related as much
to changes in the environment as to developmental changes in the child.

The psychopathology of individual disorders will be discussed later in
the chapter. Here some general issues regarding childhood
psychopathology are summarized. The influence of genes. Susceptibility
genes have been identified for a few disorders, namely autism,
attentiondeficit disorder (ADHD), and specific reading disorder.

However, for most disorders, the amount of variance explained by
identified genes is not great, suggesting multiple genes of small
effect. The importance of epigenetics and interactions between genes and
the environment also plays a key role as many neurodevelopmental
disorders display remarkable syndromal overlap despite large genetic
differences (heterogeneity) (Kiser et al., 2015). The influence of the
environment. Factors in the environment may predispose to or precipitate
disorders, and they may maintain them. They may also protect from the
effects of other causative agents---for example, the risk of depression
in adulthood as a consequence of poor parental care in childhood is
reduced by the experience of a caring relationship with another person.
This experience is not protective against all causative factors---for
example, a caring relationship does not reduce the risk of depression in
adulthood following child abuse (Hill et al., 2001). Furthermore,
genetic and environmental factors interact, making certain exposures
more likely to occur, or affecting their expression. For example, genes
influence the personality traits of irritability and impulsiveness that
lead to the repeated breakdown of relationships. The dividing line
between normal and abnormal. The common childhood disorders are at the
extreme end of a continuum with normal behaviour. Despite this, we study
them using a categorical system because decisions about treatment
require 'yes or no' answers. To form a category, a cut-off point has to
be decided, and this is often arbitrary. Children who fall just below
the cut-off point---and hence outside the diagnostic group---can
nevertheless have problems and need help. For example, some adolescents
who fall below the threshold for depressive disorder have significant
psychosocial impairment, and even mild depressive symptomatology can be
associated with poor academic performance (Pickles et al., 2001).
Continuities and discontinuities. Some symptoms and behaviour problems
in childhood are associated with problems in adulthood, and might make
an adult up to six times more likely to have adverse outcomes; for
example, with increased prevalence of substance misuse and suicidality
when they become young adults (Copeland et al., 2015). In addition,
overactivity and difficulties in behavioural management at the age of 3
years are associated with offending in adult life. Parent-- child
interactions. Maternal behaviour affects the child, but children also
elicit behaviours from their parents. For example, a mother is likely to
be less responsive to an infant who does not respond to cuddling and
play than to a sibling who

419

Epidemiology is responsive to her. Her lack of responsiveness may then
affect the infant, thus increasing the difficulty with attachment.

Most of these issues are also relevant to psychopathology in adults, and
are considered further in Chapter 5.

Classification of psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents Both
DSM-5 and ICD-10 contain a scheme for classifying the psychiatric
disorders of childhood. Disorders of adolescence are classified partly
with this scheme, and partly with the categories used in adult
psychiatry. Seven main groups of childhood psychiatric disorders are
generally recognized by clinicians. The terms used in this book for the
seven groups are listed below, with some alternatives shown in
parentheses: â

adjustment reactions

â

autism spectrum disorders (ASD)

â

specific developmental disorders

â

conduct (antisocial or externalizing) disorders

â

attention-deficit hyperactivity disorders

â

emotional (internalizing) disorders

â

symptomatic disorders.

Many child psychiatric disorders cannot be classified in a satisfactory
way by allocating them to a single category. Therefore multiaxial
systems have been proposed. ICD-10 has six axes: 1. Clinical psychiatric
syndromes. 2. Specific delays in development. 3. Intellectual level. 4.
Medical conditions. 5. Abnormal social situations. 6. Level of adaptive
functioning. DSM-5 has removed the multiaxial component of diagnosis
used in DSM-IV and instead places emphasis on both diagnostic criteria
and clinical case formulation. In the latter, a clinical summary of the
social,

psychological, and biological factors that contribute to the development
of a mental disorder is incorporated, as well as a measure of clinical
significance, which is a proxy for individual distress and/or impairment
(Harris 2014). The DSM-5 and ICD-10 classifications for child
psychiatric disorders are shown in Table 16.1. (In this book,
intellectual (learning) disability in childhood is considered in Chapter
17.) Both schemes are complicated, so only the main categories are shown
in Table 16.1. In DSM-5 many of the disorders of childhood have been
removed from a more generic 'infancy, childhood and adolescence section'
present in DSM-IV and integrated into the chapter relevant to that
specific disorder. The chapters are then organized and presented in
chronological fashion, with diagnoses most applicable to infancy and
childhood listed first. The disorders are similar in the two diagnostic
systems, but the changes in DSM-5 mean that the overlap is less than was
previously the case. Furthermore, DSM-5 has included two new disorders:
social communication disorder (SCD) and disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder (DMDD). For more information on the DSM-5 classification of
neurodevelopmental disorders see Harris (2014). Several DSM-IV
categories are now are subsumed into larger lifespan chapters in DSM-5,
including 'Feeding and eating disorders', 'Elimination disorders', and
'Disruptive, impulse-control and conduct disorders'. In ICD-10, eating
and elimination disorders are classified with sleep disorders under
'Other behavioural and emotional disorders'. For further information
about classification in child psychiatry, see Scott (2009a).

Epidemiology Behavioural and emotional disorders are common in
childhood. Estimates vary according to the diagnostic criteria and other
methods used, but it appears that rates

in different developed countries are similar. Moreover, the rates of
emotional and behavioural disorders in low- and middle-income countries
are similar to those

419

420

420

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Table 16.1 Classification of main childhood psychiatric disorders DSM-5

ICD-10

Neurodevelopmental disorders with onset in the developmental period
Autism spectrum disorders Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorders
Intellectual disability/intellectual developmental disorder

F8 Disorders of psychological development Pervasive developmental
disorders Specific developmental disorders of scholastic skills

Communication disorders

Specific developmental disorders of speech and language

Motor disorders Tic disorders

Specific developmental disorder of motor function F9 Behavioural and
emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in childhood and
adolescence Hyperkinetic disorders Conduct disorders Mixed disorders of
conduct and emotions Emotional disorders with onset specific to
childhood Tic disorders

Other disorders of infancy, childhood, and adolescence

Other behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually in
childhood and adolescence (includes elimination disorders and feeding
disorders)

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

in high-income ones. In the UK, the prevalence of child psychiatric
disorder in ethnic minority groups has usually been found to be similar
to that in the rest of the population. The few exceptions are mentioned
later in this chapter. A landmark study was carried out more than 40
years ago on the Isle of Wight in the UK. The study was concerned with
the health, intelligence, education, and psychological difficulties in
all the 10- and 11-year-olds attending state schools on the island---a
total of 2193 children (Rutter et al., 1970a). In the first stage of the
enquiry, screening questionnaires were completed by parents and
teachers. Children identified in this way were given psychological and
educational tests and their parents were interviewed. The 1-year
prevalence rate of psychiatric disorder was about 7%, with the rate in
boys being twice that in girls. The rate of emotional disorders was
2.5%, and the combined rate of conduct disorders together with mixed
conduct and emotional disorders was 4%. Conduct disorders were four
times more frequent among boys than girls, whereas emotional disorders
were more frequent in girls, in a ratio of almost 1.5:1.

There was no correlation between psychiatric disorder and social class,
but prevalence increased as intelligence decreased. It was also
associated with physical disability and especially with evidence of
brain damage. In addition, there was a strong association between
reading difficulties and conduct disorder. A subsequent study using the
same methods was conducted in an inner London borough (Rutter et al.,
1975). Here the rates of all types of disorder were twice those in the
Isle of Wight. Overall rates of psychiatric disorder. The results of
these early studies have been broadly confirmed in subsequent
investigations, using standard diagnostic criteria, conducted in the UK
(Meltzer et al., 2000), in New Zealand (Fergusson et al., 1993), and in
the Great Smoky Mountains in the USA (Costello et al., 1996). For
example, in the UK study, ICD-10 disorders were present in about 10% of
the over 10,000 children aged 5--15 years assessed. The most common
problem was conduct disorder (5%), closely followed by emotional
disorders (4%), while 1% were rated as hyperactive. The less common
disorders (autism, tic disorders, and eating disorders) were present in
about 0.5% of the population.

421

Epidemiology A systematic review and meta-analysis of worldwide
prevalence of mental disorders in children and adolescents reported a
pooled prevalence of mental disorders worldwide of 13% (Polanczyk et
al., 2015). The prevalence of anxiety disorder was 7%, depressive
disorder was 3%, ADHD 3%, and any disruptive disorder (including conduct
disorder and oppositional defiant disorder) was 6% (Figure 16.1). Rates
in adolescence. Evidence about adolescence was provided originally by a
4-year follow-up of the Isle of Wight study (Rutter et al., 1976b). At
the age of 14 years, the 1-year prevalence rate of significant
psychiatric disorder was about 20%. Prevalence estimates in subsequent
studies vary somewhat, but most broadly confirm the original findings,
with rates between 15% and 20%. However, there are some minor
differences over time. In the UK, for example, there is evidence of a
substantial increase in conduct and emotional problems in adolescents
over the past two decades (Collishaw et al., 2004, 2010). The most
recent National Comorbidity Study in US adolescents showed that, for
adolescents, anxiety disorders are the most common condition (31%),
followed by behaviour disorders (19%), mood disorders (14%), and
substance use disorders (11%) (Merikangas et al., 2010). The overall
prevalence of disorders with severe impairment and/or distress was 22%
(11% mood; 8% anxiety; 9% behaviour). The median age of onset for
disorders was earliest for anxiety (6 years) followed by

N studies

Sample size

Any anxiety disorder

41

63130

Any depressive disorder

23

59492

MDD

22

68382

ADHD

33

77297

Any disruptive behaviour disorder 19

38324

ODD

28

69799

CD

28

73679

Any mental disorder

41

87742

Outcome

0%

11 years for behaviour, 13 years for mood, and 15 years for substance
use disorders. Variations with gender and age. Before puberty, disorders
are more frequent overall among males than among females; after puberty,
disorders are more frequent among females. Particular disorders also
vary in frequency according to gender and age (see Table 16.2). Other
sources of variation. In the middle years of childhood, rates of
psychiatric problems differ between areas of residence, being twice as
high in urban areas (about 25%) as in rural areas (about 12%) (Rutter,
1975). Subsequent studies have confirmed these earlier findings and
helped to categorize risk factors that increase the likelihood of
mental, emotional, and behavioural disorders into six domains (Greenberg
et al., 2015): 1. Child: e.g.Â self-regulation problems. 2. Family:
quality of parent--child attachment. 3. Peer: isolation. 4. Demographic:
family income and family structure/ parental relationship. 5. School:
school climate. 6. Community/policy: neighbourhood policy and crime
rates.

Comorbidity. Studies using DSM criteria find high rates of comorbidity
between childhood disorders. For example, in the National Comorbidity
study, 40%

2%

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

14%

16%

Figure 16.1 Worldwide pooled prevalence estimates of mental disorder in
childhood and adolescence. MDD, Major depressive disorder; ADHD,
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder; ODD, oppositional defiant
disorder; CD, conduct disorder. Reproduced from J Child Psychol
Psychiatry, 56(3), Polanczyk GV et al., Annual Research Review: A
meta-analysis of the worldwide prevalence of mental disorders in
children and adolescents, pp.Â 345-65, Copyright (2015), with permission
from John Wiley & Sons.

421

42

422

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Table 16.2 Comparative frequency of childhood psychiatric disorders in
males and females More frequent in males

Equal

More frequent in females

Autism spectrum disorders

Depression before puberty

Depression (postpubertal)

Specific developmental disorders

School refusal

Anxiety disordersSpecific phobia

ADHD

Selective mutism

Eating disorders

- 

Oppositional and conduct disorders

Deliberate self-harm

Juvenile delinquency *Nocturnal enuresis---in older children Tic
disorders Suicide Disorders which usually begin after puberty:
Depressive disorders, mania, psychosis, agoraphobia and panic disorder,
eating disorders, substance abuse, deliberate selfharm and suicide, and
juvenile delinquency* Juvenile delinquency and school refusal are
descriptive terms, not diagnoses.

of those with a disorder had a comorbid condition (Merikangas et al.,
2010). As in adulthood, this could be because one disorder predisposes
to another, or because they have common predisposing factors, or because
the classification system has gone too far in identifying, as distinct
disorders, patterns of behaviour that can occur in more than one
condition. For a review of the psychiatric epidemiology of childhood and
adolescence, see Costello and Angold (2009).

Outcomes of child and adolescent mental illness Mild symptoms and
behavioural or developmental problems are usually short-lived. However,
conditions severe enough to be diagnosed as psychiatric disorders often
persist for years. Thus in the Isle of Wight study, 75% of children with
conduct disorder and 50% of those with emotional disorders at age 10
years were still affected by these problems 4 years later (Rutter et
al., 1976b). The prognosis for adult life of psychiatric disorder in
childhood has been investigated in a number of longitudinal studies.
Whilst separation anxiety rarely persists into adulthood, many of the
other anxiety disorders do persist into adulthood, and rates of full
remission for generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder are both
low (Costello and Maughan, 2015). Social anxiety disorder and
agoraphobia, which rarely has onset before adolescence, can persist for
many years and have low

remission rates if left untreated. The course of depression can present
with a persistent pattern and, because there seems to be significant
overlap with anxiety disorders, longitudinal studies often place both
anxiety and depression together as 'emotional disorders'. Studies have
shown that children who have early episodes of emotional disorders are
at increased risk into adulthood and that about half of those with
depression in youth will have an adult episode of a depressive or
anxiety disorder (Costello and Maughan, 2015). For example, in a study
in the US, child or adolescent depression doubled the risk of depression
in early adulthood, and those most at risk in adulthood had multiple
adolescent episodes (Rohde et al., 2013). A family history of emotional
disorders and the presence of comorbid difficulties are associated with
risk of recurrence, while a positive emotional style, family bonding and
good parent--child relationships may be protective against the
likelihood of developing adult depressive disorders (Costello and
Maughan, 2015). A substantial proportion of children with ADHD remain
relatively impaired into adulthood. In one study of participants
followed from the age of 6--12 years into their forties, 22% continued
to meet full diagnostic criteria for ADHD and a further 10% met reduced
symptom criteria (Klein et al., 2012). However, most conduct disorder
remits into adult life, although a small proportion of children with
disruptive behaviour problems go on to show severe antisocial
difficulties well into adult life. For adolescents with substance use
disorders, the

423

Aetiology consensus is that 75% will perform fairly normally as
adults---with completion of secondary school and supportive psychosocial
environments being the best predictors of more positive outcomes
(Costello and Maughan, 2015). These examples show that continuities in
psychiatric disorder between childhood and adulthood can be homotypic
(where the same disorder persists over

time) or heterotypic (where later disorders are of an apparently
different kind). Although half of those who have had a diagnosable
disorder in childhood will be free of their initial child difficulties
by adulthood, they are still more likely to be in the more impaired
groups on measures of later physical health, education and income,
social and family functioning, and avoidance of crime.

Aetiology In discussing the causes of child psychiatric disorders, the
principles are similar to those described in Chapter 5 on the aetiology
of adult disorders. Most childhood disorders are likely to emerge from a
complex interaction between emerging neurodevelopmental vulnerabilities
and aspects of the child's prenatal and postnatal environment (Johnson
et al., 2015). There is also a developmental aspect; children mature
psychologically and socially as they grow up, and their disorders
reflect this maturation. In the following paragraphs, four interacting
groups of factors will be considered briefly. These are heredity,
temperament, physical impairment with special reference to brain damage,
and environmental factors in the family and society. All aspects of
aetiology are discussed more fully in Thapar et al.Â (2015).

Genetic factors Children with psychiatric problems often have parents
who suffer from a psychiatric disorder. Environmental factors account
for a substantial part of this association. However, population-based
twin studies indicate that there is a significant genetic contribution
to some psychiatric disorders, especially to ASD, hyperactivity, and
anxiety disorders (with a heritability of around 40%). Genetic studies
are considered further when the aetiology of particular childhood
psychiatric disorders is described later in this chapter. Here, we
consider some general matters concerned with the interpretation of the
results of genetic studies. Methods of genetic investigation are
discussed on page 102. Examples of genetic findings in child psychiatry
are given at relevant points in this chapter, especially in the sections
on autism and hyperactivity, where genetic research has produced some
relevant findings (see page 446). Some general points about the
interpretation of genetic studies are shown in Box 16.1.

Temperament and individual differences Many years ago, Thomas et
al.Â (1968) conducted an influential longitudinal study in New York. They
found that certain temperamental factors detected before the age of 2
years predisposed to later psychiatric disorder. In the first 2 years,
one group of children ('difficult children') tended to respond to new
environmental stimuli by withdrawal, slow adaptation, and an intense
behavioural response. Another group ('easy children') responded to new
stimuli with a positive approach, rapid adaptation, and a mild
behavioural response. This second group was less likely than the first
to develop behavioural disorders later in childhood. The investigators
thought that these early temperamental differences were determined both
genetically and by environmental factors. More recent studies have
confirmed an association between temperamental styles and subsequent
childhood psychopathology. For example, behavioural inhibition predicts
later anxiety disorders, while low positive affect has been linked to
the development of depression. Perhaps unsurprisingly, children
characterized by difficulties with self-control and high levels of
irritability are more likely to be diagnosed subsequently with
disruptive behaviour problems, including conduct disorder (Caspi and
Shiner, 2008).

Brain disorders Although serious physical disease of any kind can
predispose to psychological problems in childhood, those affecting the
brain, such as traumatic injury, epilepsy, infections, tumours,
neurodegenerative, or other conditions, are the most important risk
factors. This relationship was first noted in the original Isle of Wight
study (see above), with about 7% of physically healthy

423

42

424

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Box 16.1 Interpreting the results of genetic studies of childhood
psychiatric disorders Phenotype and genotype. Although standard
diagnostic criteria are valuable in research, the results of this
research show that diagnostic categories generally do not map closely
onto the genetic factors in aetiology. For example, the phenotype of
autism spectrum disorders includes some kinds of developmental language
disorder, while the phenotype of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (Chapter
14) seems to extend to obsessional thinking and behaviour. Comorbidity.
Many children have symptoms that qualify for more than one psychiatric
diagnosis---for example, depressive disorder and conduct disorder, or
depressive disorder and eating disorder. It is not clear whether this
overlap arises because one disorder predisposes to another, or because
they are two manifestations of the same genetic predisposition.
Polygenic effects and environmental influences. The hereditary factors
of importance in child psychiatry are largely polygenic. As in
adulthood, these multiple genes interact with psychosocial factors, and
genetic investigations may include estimates of environmental factors.
Indirect effects. Genes may exert their effects through factors such as
intelligence and temperament, which in part determine whether certain
situations are experienced as stressful. Shared and non-shared
environment. Analyses of population genetic data divide the variance
into genetic, shared environmental, and non-shared environmental factors
(see page 102). Twins, full siblings, and half-siblings are increasingly
used as comparison groups in studies and, although these sibling
comparison groups are assumed to be similar in many aspects of 'shared'
environment, this assumption has limitations, especially in the
interpretations of the impact of the non-shared environment. For
example, a shared environment can affect different children in different
ways, and this effect then appears in the analyses as 'non-shared
environment'.

children aged 10--11 years classified as having psychiatric problems,
compared with about 12% of physically ill children of the same age, and
34% of children with brain disorders (Rutter et al., 1976b). The high

prevalence in the latter group was not explained by the adverse social
factors known to be associated with the risk of brain disorder. Many
other studies have since confirmed that psychiatric problems are more
likely to result from 'brain disorders' than physical disorders that do
not include the brain. Children with brain injury are more likely to
develop psychiatric disorder if they encounter adverse psychosocial
influences of the kind that provoke psychiatric disorder in children
without brain damage.

Maturational changes and delayed effects The effects of brain lesions
are more complex in childhood than in adult life because the brain is
still developing. This has two consequences: â

Greater capacity to compensate. The immature brain is more able than the
adult brain to compensate for localized damage---it has greater
plasticity. For example, even complete destruction of the left
hemisphere in early childhood can be followed by normal development of
language.

â

Delayed effects. Early damage may not be manifested as a disorder until
a later stage of development when the damaged area takes up some key
function. It is well established that brain injury at birth may not
result in seizures until many years later. It has been suggested that
there may be similar delays in the behavioural consequences of brain
injury.

The consequences of head injury in childhood Head injury is a common
cause of neurological damage in childhood. The form of the consequent
disorder is not very specific, partly because the effects of head injury
are seldom localized to one area of the brain. Common consequences of
severe injury are intellectual impairment and behaviour disorder. The
former is proportional to the severity of the injury, but the
relationship of behaviour disorder to the injury is less direct.

Epilepsy as a cause of childhood psychiatric disorder The relationship
between epilepsy and psychiatric disorder in adults is considered on
page 379. In childhood there is a strong association between recurrent
seizures and psychiatric disorder. As in adult life, the causal
relationship may be of four kinds: â

The brain lesion causing the epilepsy may also cause the psychiatric
disorder.

â

The psychological and social consequences of recurrent seizures may
cause the disorder.

425

Aetiology â

The effects of epilepsy on school performance may cause the disorder.

â

The drugs used to treat epilepsy may cause the disorder through their
side effects.

The site and the type of epilepsy appear to be generally less important,
apart from the fact that temporal lobe epilepsy seems to be associated
with psychological disorder. The age of onset of seizures also
determines the child's response to epilepsy. For a review of the
influence of brain injury and epilepsy on psychopathology, see Heyman et
al.Â (2015).

Environmental factors The effect of life events The concept of life
events (see page 98) is useful in child psychiatry as well as adult
psychiatry. Life events may predispose to or provoke a disorder, or
protect against it. Events can be classified by their severity, their
social characteristics (e.g.Â family problems, or the death of a parent),
or their general significance---for example, exit events
(i.e.Â separations) or entrance events (i.e.Â additions to a family by the
birth of a sibling). The way in which stressful life events contribute
to childhood psychiatric disorders is not well understood but, as in
adults, the psychological impact of such events is influenced by factors
such as temperament, cognitive style, and previous life experience. It
is important to note that life events often occur in a setting of
chronic stress, which may itself play a causal role in the precipitation
of psychiatric disorder. Also, in children, as in adults, there are
important differences in the liability of individuals to experience
negative life events. This may be a reflection of societal factors such
as poverty and discrimination, but the behaviour of individuals can also
shape life experience in important ways. For example, children with
conduct disorder have a substantially increased risk of experiencing
negative life events (Scott et al., 2015a).

Family influences As children progress from complete dependence on
others to independence, they need a stable and secure family background
with a consistent pattern of emotional warmth, acceptance, help, and
constructive discipline. Prolonged separation from or loss of parents
can have a profound effect on psychological development in infancy and
childhood. Poor relationships in the family may have similar adverse
effects, and overt conflict between the parents seems to be especially
important.

Maternal deprivation and attachment The much quoted work of Bowlby
(1951) led to widespread concern about the effects of 'maternal
deprivation'. Bowlby suggested that prolonged separation from the mother
was a major cause of juvenile delinquency. Although this suggestion has
not been confirmed, it was an important step towards his idea that
attachment is a crucial stage of early psychological development.
Attachments are formed in the second 6 months of life, and adaptive
attachments are characterized by an appropriate balance between security
and exploration. Bowlby proposed that infants derive, from their
experiences of attachment, internal models of themselves, of other
people, and of their relationships with others. He proposed further that
these internal models persist through later childhood into adult life,
and that they influence selfconcept and relationships. Thus children
whose caregivers are loving, sensitive to their child's needs, and
consistent in their responses are likely to grow up with self-esteem and
able to form loving and trusting relationships. Bowlby's ideas have been
generally supported by studies in which attachment has been measured in
infancy and in later years. Attachment has usually been measured at
around 6--18 months of age using the Strange Situation Procedure
(Ainsworth et al., 1978), which evaluates the infant's response to
separation from, and subsequent reunion with, the mother or other
attachment figure. In this test, the response to the initial separation
appears to be determined more by temperament than by attachment, and it
is the response to reunion that is used to measure attachment. Other
measures of attachment have been developed for older children. Using
such tests, attachments have been divided into one secure and three
insecure types: â

Secure: present in about 60% of infants, and associated with caregiving
that is sensitive and responsive to the child's needs.

â

Avoidant: present in about 15%, and associated with caregiving that is
rejecting or intrusive.

â

Disorganized: present in about 15%, and associated with caregiving that
is unpredictable or frightening.

â

Resistant--ambivalent: present in about 10%, and associated with
caregiving that is inconsistent or lacking.

Studies of older children indicate that the type of attachment develops
early in life and tends to be stable thereafter, although it is modified
to some extent by changing life circumstances. Securely attached
children generally do better than those with insecure attachments.
Insecure attachments are associated not only with the factors mentioned
above, but also with maternal depression, maternal

425

426

426

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry alcoholism, and child abuse. Of the three
types of insecure attachment, the disorganized type is the best
predictor of future difficulties, especially externalizing problems. The
effect of separation. Bowlby's original studies of the effects of
separation on young infants have been broadly confirmed, but it has
become clear that the effects depend on many factors, including:

childcare does not appear to be a major risk factor for psychiatric
disorder, although multiple features of the nature of care need to be
assessed. For example, highquality care with sufficient individual
attention can result in improved development of cognitive, social, and
language skills. Generally, however, exposure to a large amount of
alternative care correlates with increased levels of behavioural
problems reported subsequently by teachers (Belsky et al., 2007).

â

the age of the child at the time of separation

â

the previous relationship with the carers

â

the reasons for the separation

Effects of parental mental disorder

â

how the separation was managed

â

the quality of care during the separation.

Some disorders are especially common in adults during the childbearing
years, such as depression, anxiety, eating disorders, and alcoholism,
and these are associated with an increased risk of psychological
disturbances in children. The impacts are likely to be different
depending on the developmental stage of the child. Perinatal mental
illness in particular has been shown to have long-term effects reaching
into early adulthood, and may manifest as emotional or behavioural
difficulties, insecure or disorganized attachment, lower levels of
cognitive development, as well as impaired physical growth and
development (Stein, 2014). Antenatal depression and anxiety have also
been associated with later childhood disturbances. Whether these arise
through genetic confounds, through exposure to mental health disorders
in the postnatal period, or through direct effects on fetal development
remains unclear (see Chapter 22). Children of parents with depression or
anxiety have a markedly increased rate of behaviour problems (such as
conduct disorder at school age), and are at increased risk of depression
and anxiety disorders. Paternal depression in particular has been shown
to be associated with increased risk of behavioural problems in the
early years of life. The causes are complex and are likely to be both
genetic and environmental. An important mediator of the effect of
parental depression on children is parenting. For example, this has been
demonstrated for depressed mothers, where attachment to the infant is
impaired by lower levels of warmth and responsiveness. Importantly, the
effects of parental mental health disorders on children are not
inevitable and are moderated by socioeconomic status, education, and the
chronicity of the parental disorder. Mothers who misuse alcohol or
drugs. Children of such mothers suffer from a series of disadvantages,
which are related not only to the effects of drug taking on the
development of the fetus and the mother's care of the child, but also to
features of the mother's personality that led her to take drugs, and to
social problems associated with the substance misuse. For a review, see
Greenfield et al.Â (2010).

The impact of adverse caregiving environments: the more extreme
caregiving abnormalities include a severe lack of stimulation and
interaction with the infant/child, inconsistent experiences of the
caregiver by the child, and a lack of emotionally invested caregiving.
In DSM-5 two separate disorders are described relating to children who
have experienced adverse caregiving. These are reactive attachment
disorder (RAD) and disinhibited social engagement disorder (DSED), and
are discussed below on page 439.

Family risk factors Family risk factors for psychiatric disorder in
childhood are multiple and cumulative. The risk increases in children of
families with severe marital or other relationship conflict, low social
status, large size or overcrowding, paternal criminality, and parental
psychiatric disorder. The risk is also increased in children who are
placed in care away from the family.

Protective factors Protective factors reduce the rate of psychiatric
disorder associated with a given level of risk factors. Protective
factors include good parenting, strong affectionate ties within the
family, including good sibling relationships, sociability, and the
capacity for problem-solving in the child, and support outside the
family from individuals, or from the school or church (Jenkins et al.,
2015).

Child-rearing practices Some patterns of child-rearing are clearly
related to psychiatric disturbance in the child, particularly those that
involve verbal or physical abuse and scapegoating. Sexual abuse is
another important risk factor (Glaser et al., 2015).

Effects of alternative childcare Working parents entrust part of the
care of their children to other people. In general, the use of
alternative

472

Aetiology

Effects of parental separation There are often two main effects of
childhood parental separation (including divorce): economic difficulties
and exposure to interpersonal conflict. The children of divorced parents
have more psychological problems than the children of parents who are
not divorced, but it is not certain how far these problems precede the
divorce and are related to conflict between the parents, the behaviour
of one or both parents that contributed to the decision to divorce, and
the changes in family relationships that accompany remarriage or
cohabitation following the divorce. Distress and dysfunction in the
children are greatest in the year after the divorce; after 2 years these
problems are still present but are generally less severe than those of
children who remain in conflictual marriages. In a review, parental
divorce was associated with multiple negative outcomes among children
and, although evidence for a causal effect of divorce on children was
reasonably strong, effect sizes were small in magnitude. Children showed
a substantial degree of variability in outcomes following parental
divorce, with some children declining, others improving, and most not
changing at all (Amato and Anthony, 2014).

Death of a parent In children, the response to the death of a parent
varies with age, but data from two large cohorts show that parental
death is associated with multiple negative outcomes in children (Amato
and Anthony, 2014). Children aged below 4--5 years do not have a
complete concept of death as causing permanent separation. Such children
react with despair, anxiety, and regression to separation, however
caused, and their reaction to bereavement is no different. Children aged
5--11 years have an increasing understanding of death. They usually
become depressed and overactive, and may show disorders of conduct. Some
have suicidal thoughts and ideas that death would unite them with the
lost parent. Suicidal actions are infrequent. In children over the age
of 11 years, the response is increasingly similar to that of adults (see
page 427). Bereavement may have long-term effects on development,
especially if the child was young at the time of the parent's death, and
if the death was sudden or violent. Outcomes probably depend largely on
the effects of the bereavement on the surviving parent. Most studies of
bereavement in children have been concerned with the death of a parent;
few have concerned the death of a sibling. For a review, see Black and
Trickey (2009).

Social and cultural factors Although the family is undoubtedly the part
of children's environment that has most effect on their development,
wider social influences are also important, particularly as a cause of
conduct disorder. In the early years of childhood, these social factors
act indirectly through their influence on the patterns of family life.
As the child grows older and spends more time outside the family, they
have a direct effect as well. These factors have been studied by
examining the associations between psychiatric disorder and type of
neighbourhood and school.

Effects of neighbourhood Rates of childhood psychiatric disorder are
higher in areas of social disadvantage. For example, as already noted
above (see page 420), the rates of both emotional and conduct disorder
were found to be higher in a poor inner-London borough than on the Isle
of Wight. The important features of inner-city life may include lack of
play space, inadequate social amenities for older children and
teenagers, exposure to violence, overcrowded living conditions, and lack
of community involvement.

Effects of school Children spend more time in school than in any other
institutional structure, and the importance of the school environment
has long been recognized in child development and promoting mental
health in the children and teachers at a school (Fazel et al., 2014a).
Schools can play an important role in a number of areas for the child---
from academic attainment to social and peer relationships, as well as
physical and moral development. It has long been known that rates of
child psychiatric referral and delinquency vary between schools. These
differences persist when allowance is made for differences in the
neighbourhoods in which the children live. It seems that children are
less likely to develop psychiatric problems in a school in which
teachers praise, encourage, and give responsibility to their pupils, set
high standards, and organize their teaching well. Factors that do not
seem to affect rates of psychiatric disorder include the size of the
school and the age of its buildings. There are some school-specific
factors that can impact on children's mental health that will be
discussed below: bullying and teacher--pupil relationships. Bullying
often takes place within the school context and is prevalent across
schools in both high-, low-, and middle-income countries---a UK survey
showed that over 45% of children have been bullied and experienced peer
victimization. Both bullies and victims of bullying

427

428

428

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry are at risk for psychiatric problems in
childhood and beyond. Olweus (2013) uses three key criteria
(intentionality, some repetitiveness, and imbalance of power) to define
bullying or peer victimization: a student is exposed, repeatedly and
over time, to negative actions on the part of one or more other
students. This definition emphasizes intentionally negative or
aggressive acts that are carried out repeatedly and over time. It also
assumes a certain imbalance of power or strength, with students who are
exposed to negative actions having difficulty defending themselves. With
the advent of cyberbullying these criteria remain broadly similar. A
number of meta-analyses have shown convincingly that being involved in
bullying, either as a bully, a victim, or a bully--victim, with some
regularity is not a harmless and passing school problem. Rather, such
involvement can result in serious long-term consequences and adjustment
problems for all groups; these are of a different nature, manifesting as
depression and other internalizing problems for the victims and as
criminality/antisocial behaviour and other externalizing problems for
the bullies (Olweus, 2013). It seems that around 2--8% of children are
bullied once or more a week. They may be divided into a passive group,
who are insecure and anxious and withdraw when attacked, and a
provocative group, who are themselves aggressive either directly or by
getting others into trouble. The bullies are more often boys than girls;
boys are more likely to be physically aggressive, whereas girls are more
likely to exclude their victims or campaign against them. Children who
were bullied around the age of 5 years were found to exhibit a greater
risk of emotional

problems and disruptive behaviours at 2-year follow-up (Arseneault et
al., 2006). Bullying in older children has important associations with
self-harm, violent behaviour, and psychotic symptoms (Arseneault et al.,
2010). Adult psychiatric outcomes of school-aged bullying have been
reported in the Great Smoky Mountain study. This showed that both
victims and those who were bullies and victims had elevated rates of
young adult psychiatric disorders and family hardships (Copeland et al.,
2013). Victims had a higher prevalence of agoraphobia, generalized
anxiety, and panic disorder. Bully--victims were at increased risk of
young adult depression, panic disorder, and suicidality in males.
Bullies were also at risk for antisocial personality disorder. It must
also be noted that many interpersonal challenges with peers are
exacerbated by social media contact, and cyber-bullying that takes place
through social media has been reported as a significant new method
through which to victimize other peers (Kowalski et al., 2014). Its use
and effects should be explored with young people, although many victims
of cyber-bullying also experience traditional bullying within the school
context, and levels of cyber-bullying are seen to reduce following
strategies to reduce traditional bullying. Relationship with teachers:
poor relationships between students and teachers are a predictor of the
onset of childhood psychiatric disorder and of low attainment (Fazel et
al., 2014a). Furthermore, difficulties with behavioural management can
negatively affect teacher-- pupil relationships and the classroom
environment, and might impact on the mental health of both teacher and
child.

Psychiatric assessment of children and their families The aims of
assessment are to obtain a clear account of the presenting problem, to
find out how this problem is related to the child's past development and
present life in its psychological and social context, and to plan
treatment for the child and the family. The psychiatric assessment of
children differs in several ways from that of adults, which was
described in Chapter 3.

â

A more flexible approach. With children it is often difficult to follow
a set routine, so a flexible approach to interviewing is required,
although it is still important that information and observations are
recorded systematically.

â

Interviewing of family members. Parents or other carers should be asked
to attend the assessment interview, and it is often helpful to have
other siblings present.

â

Information from schools. Time can be saved by asking permission to
obtain information from teachers before the child attends the clinic.
This information should be concerned with the child's behaviour in both
structured and unstructured settings at school and their educational
attainments.

Child psychiatrists vary in their methods of assessment. All agree that
it is important to see the family together at some stage to observe how
they interact. Some psychiatrists do this before seeing the patient
alone, while others do it afterwards. It might be easier

429

Psychiatric assessment of children and their families to better engage
some adolescents if initially seen on their own, but this might not help
with other adolescents and so must be decided on a case by case basis.
With younger children the main informants are usually the parents, but
children over the age of 6 years should usually be seen on their own at
some stage. In the special case of suspected child abuse, the interview
with the child is particularly important. Whatever the problem, the
parents should be made to feel that the interview is supportive and does
not undermine their confidence.

Interviewing the parents Parents are likely to be anxious, and some fear
that they may be blamed for their child's problems. Time should be taken
to put them at ease and explain the purpose of the interview. They
should then be encouraged to talk spontaneously about the problems
before systematic questions are asked. The methods of interviewing are
similar to those used in adult psychiatry (see Chapter 3). The items to
be included in the history are listed in the Appendix to this chapter.
As in adult psychiatry, an experienced interviewer will keep the
complete list in mind, while focusing on those items that are relevant
to the particular case. It is important to obtain some developmental
history, specific examples of general problems, to elicit factual
information, and to assess feelings and attitudes.

Interviewing and observing the child Younger children may not be able or
willing to express their ideas and feelings in words, therefore
observations of their behaviour and interactions during the interview
are especially important. With very young children, drawing and the use
of toys may be helpful. With older children, it may be possible to
follow a procedure similar to that used with adults, provided that care
is taken to use words and concepts appropriate to the child's age and
background. Standardized methods of observation and interviewing have
been developed mainly for research purposes. Starting the interview. It
is essential to begin by establishing a friendly atmosphere and winning
the child's confidence, and asking what they like to be called. It is
usually appropriate to begin with a discussion of neutral topics such as
pets, favourite games, or birthdays, or current school
information---such as which class they are in and which subjects they
like---before turning to the presenting problem.

Techniques of interviewing. When a friendly relationship has been
established, the child can be asked about the problem, their likes and
dislikes, and their hopes for the future. It is often informative to ask
what they would request if they were given three wishes or, with older
children, to ask them for three goals they would like to achieve
following their contact with mental health services. Younger children
may be given the opportunity to express their concerns and feelings in
paintings or play. Children can generally recall events accurately,
although not always in the correct sequence. They are more suggestible
than adults, and, when asked a question, are used to trying to give the
answer that the adult has in mind---as they might, for example, in
school. Therefore it is particularly important not to use leading
questions when interviewing, and not to suggest actions or
interpretations to a child who is being observed while painting or at
play. Behaviour and mental state. The items to be noted are listed in
the Appendix to this chapter (see page 483). Children who are brought to
see a psychiatrist may appear silent and withdrawn at the first meeting;
this behaviour should not be misinterpreted as evidence of depression.
Developmental assessments. By the end of the interview an assessment
should have been made of the child's stage of development relative to
other children of the same age. For further information and advice about
interviewing and communicating with children, see Bostic and Martin
(2009).

Interviewing the family A family interview can contribute to the
assessment of the interactions between family members, but it is not
necessarily a good way to obtain factual information. The latter is
generally more effectively obtained in interviews with the parents or
other family members on their own. Of the various aspects of family
interaction, the psychiatrist will usually be most interested in discord
and disorganization, which are the features most closely associated with
the development of psychiatric disorder. Patterns of communication
between family members are also important. It is usually best to see the
family at the first assessment or soon after this, before the
interviewer has formed a close relationship with the young patient, or
with one of the parents, as this may make it more difficult to interview
the other family members or could jeopardize the early therapeutic
relationship between the therapist and child.

429

430

430

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry The interviewer could begin by asking 'Who
would be the best person to tell me about why we are here/ your
difficulties?' If one family member monopolizes the interview, another
member should be asked to comment on what has been said. A useful
question to stimulate discussion is 'How do you think that your partner
(daughter, son) would see the problem?' The interviewer can then ask the
partner (daughter, son) how they in fact see the problem. As an
alternative, family members who are present can be asked what they think
an absent member would think about the issues. While observing the
family's ways of responding to these and other questions, the
interviewer should consider the following: â

Who is the spokesperson for the family?

â

Who seems most worried about the problem?

â

What are the alliances within the family?

â

What is the hierarchy in the family? For example, who is most dominant?

â

How well do the family members communicate with one another?

â

How do they seem to deal with conflict?

Psychological assessment Measures of intelligence and educational
achievement are often valuable. If mental development and achievement
are inconsistent with chronological or mental age, or with the
expectations of parents or teachers, this may indicate a generalized or
specific disorder of development or may indicate a source of stress in
disorders of other kinds. Some of the more commonly used procedures are
listed in Table 16.3. For further information, see Charman et
al.Â (2008).

Other information The most important additional informants are the
primary care practitioners and the child's teachers. Teachers can
describe classroom behaviour, educational achievements, and
relationships with other children. They may also make useful comments
about the child's family and home circumstances. It is often helpful for
a member of the mental health team to observe the child at school as
well as visit the home. This visit can provide useful information about
material circumstances in the home, the relationship of family members,
and the pattern of their life together.

Table 16.3 Notes on some psychological measures in use with children
Intelligence tests Stanford-Binet test, 5th edition

Tests verbal and non-verbal intelligence from 2 years to adulthood

Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC IV)

Provides a profile of specific verbal and performance ability as well as
IQ for children aged 6--14 years; widely used and well standardized;
cannot be used for IQ below 40. Translated into several languages

Wechsler Pre-School and Primary Scale of Intelligence

A version of WISC for use with children aged 3--7 years

British ability scales

One for age 2--6 years, the other for age 6--18 years, covering six
areas: speed of information processing; reasoning; spatial imagery;
perceptual matching; short-term memory; and retrieval and application of
knowledge. Analysis can be general or specific

Social development assessments Bayley scales of infant and toddler
development, 3rd edition

Standard tasks scored on mental, motor, and behaviour scales and
compared with normsUseful measure of infant development from ages 1
month to 3Â½ years

Other developmental assessment Denver developmental screening test, 2nd
edition

General developmental screening test from birth to 6Â½ years. Identifies
delays in personal and social development, fine and gross motor
development, and language skills. For use only as a screen to identify
those needing further assessment

431

Physical examination

Physical examination If the child has not been examined recently by the
general practitioner, an appropriate physical examination may be needed
to complete the assessment. What is appropriate depends on the nature of
the problem, but it will often be concerned with evidence of conditions
that might affect the brain. Therefore the first step is to observe the
child's appearance, coordination, and gait, at rest and during play. A
basic physical examination may follow, with emphasis on the nervous
system. If abnormalities are found or suspected, the opinion of a
paediatrician or paediatric neurologist may be needed.

Ending the assessment At the end of the assessment the psychiatrist
should explain to the parents---and to the child, in terms appropriate
to their age---the result of the assessment; they could at this point
agree goals for any treatment plan. Psychiatrists should explain how
they propose to inform and work with the general practitioner, and seek
consent to contact other people involved with the child, such as
teachers or social workers. Throughout, the psychiatrist should
encourage questions and discussion.

Formulation A formulation can be helpful when summarizing key issues. It
usually starts with a brief statement of the current problem. The
diagnosis and differential diagnosis are discussed next. The diagnosis
can be recorded as per the ICD-10 within a multiaxial framework,
ensuring that broader developmental and environmental factors are
recorded (as discussed above). Aetiology is then considered, with
attention to predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors. The
developmental stages of the child should be noted (if this has not
already been done in the multiaxial diagnostic system), as well as any
particular strengths and achievements. An assessment of the problems and
the strengths of the family is also recorded. Any further assessments
should be specified, a treatment plan drawn up, and the expected outcome
recorded.

Court reports Psychiatrists may be asked to prepare court reports in
relation to children. These reports are usually undertaken by
specialists in child psychiatry; therefore only an outline will be given
here. If general psychiatrists are

required to prepare such a report, they should ensure that they are
thoroughly aware of the relevant legislation, ask advice from a
colleague with relevant special experience, and read a more detailed
account of the requirements for court reports. Courts concerned with
children obtain evidence from several sources, including social workers,
probation officers, community nurses, psychologists, and psychiatrists.
In their reports, psychiatrists should focus on matters within their
expertise, including: â

The child's age, stage of development, and temperament, and the
relevance of these to the case.

â

Whether the child has a psychiatric disorder.

â

The child's own wishes about their future, considered in relation to
their age and understanding.

â

The parenting skills of the carers, how far they can meet the child's
needs, and other relevant aspects of the family.

While focusing on these matters, the psychiatrist should also be
prepared to provide information about the following issues: â

The child's physical, emotional, and educational needs.

â

The likely effect on the child of any possible change of circumstances
(e.g.Â removal from home, or living with one or other parent after a
divorce).

â

Any harm that the child has suffered or is likely to suffer.

The wishes of the child should be considered in relation to their age
and ability to understand the present situation and possible future
arrangements, and to relevant factors in the present situation---for
example, some abused children can maintain strong attachments to the
abuser. Parenting skills are judged partly on the basis of the history
and reports of other people. They are also judged on direct observations
of the interactions between the parents and the child, including the
parents' attachment to the child, their sensitivity to cues from the
child, and their ability to meet the child's needs. The report is
similar in structure to a court report for an adult, and is presented
under the headings shown in Box 16.2.

Children as witnesses A child's evidence is important in cases of
suspected abuse, and occasionally in other kinds of case, such as

431

432

432

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry witnessed assault on another family member.
When seeking such evidence, the interviewer should be aware of certain
points about children's memory and the factors that can influence their
accounts. Memory varies with age, as do the verbal skills required to
describe what has been remembered. Children below the age of 3 years
seldom have the cognitive and other capacities to produce an account
that can be presented in a court of law. Children above the age of 3
years can produce detailed and accurate memories, although they may not
be able to describe them clearly without some prompting. Most children
above the age of 6 years can use straightforward grammar and syntax
adequately, but their vocabulary is limited and they may be confused by
complicated questions. Also, children of this age may expect that an
adult who asks a question already knows the right answer, as this is how
they learn (e.g.Â 'How many flowers did you see in the picture?')
Consequently, they may agree with leading questions asked by an adult
or, when they cannot remember, make up an answer in the hope that it
will be the one that is wanted by the questioner. A further problem is
that young children do not have an accurate sense of the sequencing and
timing of events. Finally, the events that children are asked to recall
when they are questioned as witnesses are usually frightening and
experienced in a state of emotional arousal. Memories of such events are
often incomplete, although the recalled fragments may be detailed and
vivid.

Box 16.2 Topics to be addressed in a court report about a child The
qualifications of the writer Who commissioned the report, and what
questions were asked â What written information was available, and who
was interviewed â A summary of the findings from the interview (it is
not necessary to repeat information contained in social enquiry reports)
â The writer's interpretation of the information from the interviews and
written material â In the light of the findings, comments on the options
before the court, remembering always that it is for the court and not
the psychiatrist to determine which option is selected Thompson and
Pearce (2009) suggest the use of the following principles when evidence
is obtained from a child: â Allow the child to talk freely, asking as
few questions as possible. â Obtain the evidence as soon as possible
after the event, and whenever possible before any counselling has taken
place. â Try to complete the account on the first occasion, as
subsequent accounts are likely to be less accurate. â Be aware that the
greater the pressure to remember, the less accurate the account is
likely to be. â â

Psychiatric treatment for children and their families This section is
concerned with the general features of treatment for children. Aspects
of treatment that are specific to individual disorders are discussed
later in the sections concerned with those disorders.

The role of the primary care team General practitioners and other
members of the primary care team spend much of their time in advising
parents about children, but they refer only a small proportion of these
children to a child psychiatrist or a paediatrician. General
practitioners are more likely to refer children with the following to a
paediatrician, some of whom will be working in teams with psychological
support:

â

developmental difficulties

â

physical symptoms with a probable psychological cause

â

psychological complications of physical illness.

They are more likely to refer emotional, attentional, and conduct
disorders to a child psychiatrist. Most of the disorders that are
referred are similar to those that they already manage but often with a
greater element of functional or educational impairment or are impacting
on family and peer relationships. Often these referrals will be
precipitated by parents or school involvement.

The psychiatric team Way of working. Although psychiatrists,
psychologists, psychotherapists, family therapists, nurses, occupational

43

Psychiatric treatment for children and their families therapists, and
social workers have special skills, when working in a child psychiatry
team they do not confine themselves to their traditional professional
role. Instead, they adopt whatever role is most likely to be helpful in
the particular case, as they do when working in a community team caring
for adults. The team usually adopts a family-centred approach, and it
liaises closely with other professionals involved with the child or the
family. These professionals include paediatricians, members of child
health and social services, teachers, and other school-based
professionals. Since many childhood problems are evident at school, or
lead to educational difficulties, the child's teachers usually need to
be involved in some way. They may need advice about the best way to
support the child or manage disturbed behaviour in the classroom,
changes that may be needed in the child's school timetable, or remedial
teaching that may be required. Occasionally a change of school is
indicated. In the following sections, brief accounts are given of the
main kinds of treatment. In the second part of the chapter, information
is given about the management of specific disorders. Additional
information about treatment in child psychiatry can be obtained from one
of the textbooks listed at the end of this chapter.

Medication Drugs have a limited place in child psychiatry, primarily
because of the potential effects that medication might have on the
developing brain but also because the evidence base for pharmacological
therapies is particularly limited. The main indications for medication
are in the treatment of depression, severe anxiety disorders, ADHD,
sleep disorders, psychosis, obsessional disorders, and tic disorders. In
all cases, dosages should be checked carefully in the manufacturer's
literature or a standard reference book, making sure that the dose is
correct for the child's age and body weight.

Psychological treatment Psychological aspects of management Whatever the
plan of management, children benefit from a warm, secure, and accepting
relationship with the therapist. The security of this relationship helps
the child to express their feelings and to find alternative ways of
behaving. For younger children, play with toys can help to establish the
relationship and provide a medium through which they can express their
problems and feelings more effectively than they can with words.

At first, children often perceive the therapist as an agent of the
parents, and might expect the therapist to share their attitudes.
Children should feel accepted in their own right, and not criticized.
However, they should not be allowed to feel that anything they do will
be approved. It is often advisable to delay discussion of the presenting
problems until the child's confidence has been gained by talking about
neutral subjects that interest them. More commonly utilized
psychological treatments in psychiatric clinics include behavioural
interventions, cognitive behaviour therapy, systemic family therapy, and
psychodynamic psychotherapy, although the evidence base for all of these
is poor for pre-adolescents (Forti-Buratti et al., 2016).

Cognitive behaviour therapy Behavioural methods have several
applications in child psychiatry. They can be used to encourage new
behaviour by positive reinforcement and modelling. This is often done by
first rewarding behaviour that approximates to the desired behaviour
(shaping), and then giving reinforcement in a more discriminating way.
For example, in children with ASD, shaping has been used for behavioural
problems such as temper tantrums and refusal to go to bed- by
reinforcing behaviours that are more closely aligned with the desired
behaviour. Punishment is not used in shaping behaviour because its
effects are temporary and it is ethically unacceptable. Instead, efforts
are made to identify and remove any factors in the child's environment
that are reinforcing unwanted behaviour. It is often found that
undesired behaviour is being reinforced unwittingly by extra attention
given to the child when the behaviour occurs. If the child is ignored at
such times and attended to when their behaviour is more normal,
beneficial changes often take place. More specific forms of behaviour
therapy are available for enuresis (see page 468) and phobias (see page
179). Social skills training in a group or in individual sessions may be
used for children who have difficulty in relationships with other
children and adults. The methods generally resemble those used with
adults (see Chapter 24: Psychological Treatments). Cognitive therapy is
useful for older children, who can describe and learn to control the
ways of thinking that give rise to symptoms and problem behaviours.
Older children and adolescents with anxiety disorders, depressive
disorders, and eating disorders can be treated with the techniques
originally devised for adults. Special techniques have been developed
for children with aggressive behaviour (see page 458).

433

43

434

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry For a review of the efficacy of cognitive
behaviour therapy in childhood and adolescent anxiety and depression,
see James et al.Â (2013) and Graham (2009).

Psychodynamic therapies Most psychodynamic approaches for children are
based on the methods of Anna Freud and Melanie Klein. Reviews have
generally concluded that, although many outcome studies have
methodological flaws, the better investigations indicate that dynamic
psychotherapy is rather more effective than no treatment across a range
of common mental disorders (Abbass et al., 2013). However, psychodynamic
therapy has not been shown to produce better results than those of
counselling or cognitive behaviour therapy. Consequently, long-term,
analytically based, psychodynamic therapies are now used infrequently in
the UK, although group therapy and creative therapies (e.g.Â play therapy
and art therapy) continue to be provided for selected children with
severe and enduring difficulties. For a more positive assessment of the
value of psychodynamic therapies for children, see Fonagy and Target
(2009).

Parent training Parent training is used for a range of child psychiatric
problems, and includes improving the skills of parents who have some
difficulties and want help with parenting skills, as well as those who
abuse or neglect their children and those with low intelligence. It is
also used to assist parents of children with behaviour problems that
require special parenting skills---for example, the parents of children
with conduct disorder or ADHD. Most research has been with parents of
children who are oppositional or defiant or have conduct disorders.
Parent training can be carried out with an educational approach, in
which skills of general importance are taught, or with a behavioural
approach, in which the specific problems of the particular parent and
child are analysed and corrected. In the behavioural approach, use may
be made of video-recorded vignettes showing desirable and undesirable
parental responses to children's behaviour. These responses are
discussed with the parents of a particular child, or with a group of
parents. Whatever approach is adopted, it is important to take account
of the stage of development of the child, and of the changing needs of
children of different ages. Studies of the behavioural training of
parents have now firmly established the effectiveness of this approach
in improving parenting skills and parent--child relationships, and
reducing antisocial behaviour in children. For example, for groups often
considered as 'hard to treat'

for reasons of social disadvantage or psychopathology, parenting
interventions can improve child behaviour. For families with very
complex needs, such as those in the child protection system, the
evidence is more promising than for other interventions. Parenting
programmes delivered as part of school-based programmes tend to have
small effects on children's behaviour in school. Research is now
focusing on which families can benefit and the long-term effects. For a
review of parent training programmes, see Scott et al.Â (2015b).

Family therapy This is a specific form of treatment to be distinguished
from the general family approach to treatment described above. In family
therapy, the symptoms of the child or adolescent are viewed as an
expression of malfunctioning of the family, which is the primary focus
of treatment. Several approaches have been used, based on behavioural or
psychoanalytical, interpersonal or structural theories. These kinds of
therapy are described on page 703. In practice, most therapists adopt an
eclectic approach. The indications for family therapy are still debated,
but there is general agreement that it can be used appropriately when: â

the child's symptoms are judged to be part of a disturbance of the whole
family

â

individual therapy is not proving effective

â

family difficulties have arisen during another kind of treatment.

The contraindications to family therapy are that the parents'
relationship is breaking up, or the child's problems do not seem to be
closely related to family function. The best evidence for effectiveness
is for structural and behavioural forms of family therapy, where
benefits have been shown in youth offending, substance misuse, and
eating disorders. For a comprehensive review of family interventions,
see Eisler et al.Â (2015).

Internet-based therapies In recent years there has been a rise in
different technologies that children and adolescents can access through
home computers and tablets or smartphones that can either supplement or
provide treatment for a range of mental disorders. There has been a rise
in 'applications' or 'apps' that can be utilized via a variety of
interfaces. Internet-based or computerized cognitive behaviour therapy
has shown some positive effects for symptoms of depression and anxiety
for those over the age

435

Psychiatric treatment for children and their families of 12 years, but
not in younger populations (Pennant et al., 2015).

Social work Social workers play an important role in the care of
children with psychiatric disorders, and of their families. In the UK
they have statutory duties with regard to the protection and
safeguarding of children who are at risk within the family, and who
require special care or special supervision. They help parents to
improve their skills in caring for their children, and to solve problems
with finances or accommodation. Social workers carry out family
assessments and family therapy, and may also provide individual
counselling for the child and members of the family. They can play a key
role when the relationships around an adolescent break down and the
adolescent might need to find alternative accommodation and/or
educational provision.

Occupational therapy Occupational therapists can play a valuable part in
assessment of the child's development, in psychological treatment, and
in devising measures to improve parent--child interaction. They work
both in day-patient and inpatient units, and in the community. They work
closely with teachers in both assessing and providing therapeutic
activities for children, in particular those with neurodevelopmental
disorders.

Special education Children who are attending outpatient clinics, and the
much smaller number who are day-patients or inpatients, often benefit
from additional educational arrangements. Special teaching may be needed
to restore confidence, and to remedy delays in writing, reading, and
arithmetic, which is common among children with conduct disorders as
well as those with specific developmental disorders. For further
information about special education and the issue of integration with
'mainstream' teaching, see Howlin (2008).

Substitute care Residential care There are two main reasons for
residential care in children. The first is for those with profound
intellectual and neurodevelopmental disorders, to provide for their
physical, social, and educational needs; the second is

for children who have been maltreated or have significant emotional and
behavioural problems with symptoms that result from, or are maintained
by, a severely unstable home environment or extreme parental rejection.
The rest of this section will discuss the needs of this second group.
For this second group, residential care has a long history in the
provision of services and is an umbrella term, capturing various forms
of residentially based living arrangements, from small group homes to
large institutions, across three service systems---social services/child
welfare, mental health, and juvenile justice. These care settings can
provide therapeutically planned behavioural health interventions to
unrelated youth with a wide range of problems in a 24-hour structured
and multidisciplinary care environment. Children who are considered for
residential placement often present with severely disordered behaviour
and might have a number of psychiatric diagnoses, including conduct
disorders and emerging personality disorders as well as breakdown in
their educational provision. Removal of a child from their primary
caregivers should be considered only after every practical effort has
been made to improve the circumstances of the family. Residential care
may be provided in a foster home, a children's home (in which a group of
about 10 children live in circumstances as close as possible to those of
a large family), or a residential school. Residential care, other than
fostering, is seldom arranged for children under 5 years of age, because
of the need to try and ensure attachment to a primary caregiver. In
general, children in residential care are a population particularly
vulnerable to physical and sexual abuse. They have high rates of
psychosocial problems in later childhood and in adult life, hence there
is international consensus about the need to avoid prolonged stays in
residential care. Residential care is associated with adult criminal
convictions, depression, and low self-efficacy. Evidence of the abuse of
children placed within care provides a reminder of the need to ensure
good training and supervision of the staff of children's homes and
residential schools. For a review of residential care, see Ijzendoorn et
al. (2015).

Fostering and adoption Foster care may be of three kinds: â

Short-term emergency care---for example, when a caregiver is ill or when
the parents of an autistic child need respite.

â

Medium-term care, which may be followed by a return home---for example,
if the caregiver is receiving

435

436

436

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry treatment for problems that led to neglect
or abuse of the child. â

Long-term care, in which the child remains until they are adopted or
able to live independently.

Children in foster care have better outcomes than those in residential
care, but children in long-term foster care have more problems than
children who have been adopted. It is difficult to determine to what
extent these problems are related to experiences before fostering, and
to what extent they are due to the lesser security of fostering as
opposed to adoption. Problems seem to be greater when the fostered child
has experienced prenatal exposure to substances, is older, and when
children in the fostering family are of the same age as the fostered
child. Children in foster care usually retain some contact with their
biological parents, but it is not helpful to the child to have sporadic
and distressing contacts. For a review of fostering, see Ijzendoorn et
al.Â (2015). Adoption is the process whereby the parenting of a child is
transferred from that person's biological or legal parent/s to another
person, and it is usually intended to mark a permanent change in status,
legally recognized as such. Adoption practices can be open or closed. If
open, then there remains an opportunity for contact with biological
parents; closed adoption is when the identities of the biological
parents, biological kins, and adoptee identities are not disclosed,
although the transmittal of non-identifying information such as medical
history can be allowed. It is generally understood that a lack of
openness can be detrimental to the psychological wellbeing of adoptees
and so closed apotion is becoming less prevalent. Adoptions can occur
between related family members or unrelated individuals. Unrelated
adoptions may occur through the following routes: â

â

Private domestic adoptions: under this arrangement, charities and other
organizations bring together, from within the same country, prospective
adoptive parents and children to be placed.

â

Foster care adoption: this is an adoption of a child who is initially
placed in foster care.

â

International adoption: this is the placing of a child for adoption
outside that child's country of birth. Different countries have
different laws regarding international adoptions. Research following
international adoptions from severely deprived institutional settings
has helped to elucidate the long-effects of early deprivation and to try
to address the emotional, cognitive, social, and physical sequelae. For
a review of international adoption, see Julian (2013) and Kumsta (2015).

Embryo adoption: this is the donation of embryos (usually remaining
after another couple have completed in vitro fertilization (IVF)
treatments) to another individual or couple, followed by the placement
of those embryos in the woman's uterus to facilitate pregnancy.

Given the range of different types of adoption and also the different
reasons leading to a child being adopted as well as experiences prior to
and the child's age at adoption, the psychological impacts of adoption
can either be minimal or widespread. The areas most commonly raised are
those around loss and grief for biological parents, identity development
(which can be more difficult for an adopted child), and poor
self-esteem. For a review of adoption in children and its psychological
impact, see Cohen et al.Â (2015).

Intensive treatments Intensive community services and inpatient care are
essential components of the provision of child psychiatry, particularly
for those children more severely disturbed and at risk of self-harm,
suicide, or at risk of causing harm to others. Intensive community
services form an increasingly important level of care between outpatient
and inpatient services. Child psychiatric inpatient units require easy
access to paediatric advice, adequate space for play, easy access to
schooling, and an informal design that still allows close observation.
There should be some provision for mothers to stay with their younger
children. Admission for inpatient treatment is usually arranged for any
of three reasons: â

Severity: when the disorder is too severe to treat in any other
way---for example, more violent behaviours, extreme mood disorders (both
depression and mania), difficult-to-treat psychosis, severe pervasive
developmental disorder, and life-threatening anorexia nervosa.

â

Observation: when the diagnosis is uncertain.

â

Separation: inpatient treatment can provide a necessary period away from
a severely disturbing home environment and an assessment of the child is
needed outside of this environment.

The high financial costs of inpatient units have contributed to
expansion of other types of intensive services, but whether these can
improve clinical outcomes and reduce numbers of admissions, length of
stay, and costs still needs to be determined. Day-hospital treatment for
children provides many of the advantages of inpatient care without
removing them from home. Unless there is any danger that the child may
be abused, remaining at home

473

Review of syndromes has the advantage that relationships with other
family members are maintained. Daycare can relieve the family from some
of the stressful effects of managing a child with severe behavioural
disturbance or eating problems. Increasingly, intensive community-based
support is provided for children and adolescents with severe

problems. Such support requires a well-staffed and experienced team of
professionals with an 'assertive-outreach' approach (see page 785).
Although such services are valuable, they do not remove the need for
inpatient provision. For a review of the provision of intensive
treatments in child and adolescent psychiatry, see James et al.Â (2015).

Review of syndromes The review of syndromes begins with the problems
encountered in preschool children. Specific and pervasive developmental
disorders are described next. An account is then given of the main
psychiatric disorders of childhood, in the order in which they appear in
the major systems of classification. Other psychiatric disorders of
childhood are described next, before a brief account of the disorders of
adolescence (which are generally similar to those of either childhood or
adulthood). The chapter ends with a discussion of child abuse.

Problems of preschool children and their families It has already been
noted that in the preschool years children are learning several kinds of
social behaviour, although it should be noted that children are also
shaped by culturally regulated customs, child-rearing practices, and
belief systems. Preschool children are acquiring sphincter control. They
are learning how to behave at mealtimes, to go to bed at an appropriate
time, and to control angry feelings. They are also becoming less
dependent. Most of these behaviours are learned within the family. The
psychiatric problems of preschool children centre around these
behaviours, and they often reflect factors in the family and caregiving
environment as well as factors in the child. Many psychological problems
at this age are brief, and can be thought of as variants in normal
development. Most are treated in primary care and by paediatricians. The
more serious problems may be referred to child mental health teams.

Prevalence In a much quoted study, Richman et al.Â (1982) studied 705
families with a 3-year-old child in a London borough. The most frequent
abnormalities of behaviour in these children were bedwetting at least
three times a week (present in 37%), wetting by day at least once a week
(17%), overactivity (14%), soiling at least once a week (13%),
difficulty in settling at night (13%), fears

(13%), disobedience (11%), attention-seeking (10%), and temper tantrums
(5%). Whether these behaviours are reported as problems depends on the
attitudes of the parents as well as on the nature, severity, and
frequency of the behaviour. Richman et al.Â overcame this difficulty by
making their own ratings of the extent of problems. They based this
assessment on the effects on the child's wellbeing and the consequences
for the other members of the family. They used common-sense criteria to
decide whether the problems were mild, moderate, or severe. In total, 7%
of 3-year-olds in their survey had behaviour problems of marked severity
and 15% had mild behaviour problems. The behaviours most often rated as
problems were temper tantrums, attention-seeking, and disobedience.
Subsequent epidemiological surveys employing more modern diagnostic
criteria have also found significant rates of psychological problems in
preschool children. Pooling a number of predominantly US epidemiological
surveys, Egger and Angold (2006) concluded that about 15% of preschool
children had a psychiatric problem. More recent surveys with samples
from outside the US have lower prevalence rates of around 7%, with ADHD
and depressive disorders more common in boys than girls. More emotional
and behavioural disorders were seen in children whose parents did not
live together and in those of low socioeconomic status. The most common
disorders are ADHD, oppositional disorders, emotional disorders, and
anxiety disorders; comorbidity among disorders is common (WichstrÃ¸m et
al., 2012).

Some common problems of preschool children Temper tantrums and
disruptive behaviours Temper tantrums are among the most common
childhood behaviour problems and approximately 5--7% of children between
1 and 3 years of age have temper tantrums lasting at least 15 minutes
three or more times per week. They are extreme episodes of frustration
or anger, with mood and behaviour returning to normal

437

438

438

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry between tantrums. Only persistent or very
severe tantrums are abnormal. Children often have temper tantrums to get
something they want, to avoid something they do not want to do, or to
seek parental attention. They are more likely to occur when the child is
tired, hungry, ill, or frustrated. The immediate effect can be an
unwitting reinforcement by excessive attention and inconsistent
discipline on the part of the parents. Tantrums may persist if parents
have emotional problems of their own, or because the relationship
between them is unsatisfactory. Temper tantrums can be difficult to stop
once they start, and so identifying triggers and potential causes and
preventing tantrums is important. During a tantrum it is usually best to
try and remain calm and to respond kindly with firm and consistent
setting of limits. In treatment it is first necessary to discover why
the parents have been unable to set limits in this way. They might need
to be helped with any problems of their own and advised how to respond
to the tantrums.

Sleep problems The most common sleep difficulty is wakefulness at night,
which is most frequent between the ages of 1 and 4 years and is reported
by around 20--30% of parents. About 20% of children of this age take at
least an hour to get to sleep or are wakeful for long periods during the
night. Bedtime struggles and middle of the night wakings are not only a
source of sleep disruption for children and their parents, but can also
be a source of conflict and negative emotion among family members. When
wakefulness is an isolated problem and not very distressing to the
family, it is enough to reassure the parents that it is likely to
improve. If sleep disturbances are severe or persistent, two possible
causes should be considered. First, the problems may have been made
worse by various comorbidities (emotional disorders, autism, ADHD) or
physical illness. Secondly, they may have been exacerbated by the
parents' excessive concern and inability to reassure the child. If no
medical or psychiatric disorder is detected, the reasons for the
parents' concerns should be sought and dealt with as far as possible.
Some parents overstimulate their child in the evening, or unwittingly
reinforce crying in the night by taking the child into their own bed. A
behavioural approach to these problems is generally helpful. Other sleep
problems, such as nightmares and night terrors, are common among healthy
toddlers, but they seldom persist for long. They are discussed on page
329. For a review of sleep problems and interventions in children, see
Harvey et al.Â (2015).

Feeding problems Normal feeding and eating depends on the successful
integration of a range of physical functions and interpersonal
relationships during early development, therefore a minor disruption in
one or more of these areas can result in a feeding problem in infants
and early childhood. Common disturbances include delayed development of
feeding/eating skills, difficulty managing or tolerating foodstuffs, and
reluctance or refusal to eat based on taste, texture, and other sensory
factors. Minor food fads and food refusal are common in preschool
children, but do not usually last long. In a minority, however, the
behaviour is severe or persistent, although not accompanied by signs of
poor nourishment. When this happens it might be because the parents are
overattentive and this might unwittingly reinforce the child's
behaviour. Feeding problems become 'Feeding disorders of infancy and
childhood' when the problems are persistent (over 1 month in duration)
and are associated with significant failure to gain weight
(Bryant-Waugh, 2010). Treatment is directed to the parents' management
of the problem. They should be encouraged to ignore the feeding problem
and refrain from offering the child special foods or otherwise
attempting to do anything unusual to persuade him or her to eat.
Instead, the child should be offered a normal meal and left to decide
whether to eat it or not.

Pica Pica is the diagnostic term for the eating of items that are
generally regarded as inedible, such as soil, paint, or paper. It is
often associated with other behaviour problems and is inappropriate to
the child's developmental level. Cases should be investigated carefully
because some are due to brain damage, autism, or intellectual
disability. It can also co-occur with other mental disorders, such as
schizophrenia, but for a diagnosis of pica it must present as severe
enough to warrant independent clinical attention. Otherwise, treatment
consists of common-sense precautions to keep the abnormal items of diet
away from the child. Pica usually diminishes as the child grows older.
For further discussion see Pica section in Chapter 13.

Disorders associated with adverse caregiving As explained above,
children's attachments to their parents vary in their security, and they
may vary between caregivers---for example, being insecure with one
parent but secure with the other. Attachment disorders are more extreme
variations from the norm, and do not correspond exactly to any of the
types of insecure attachment described earlier (see page 425). They are

439

Review of syndromes pervasive, affecting all relationships. They start
before the age of 5 years and are associated with grossly abnormal
caregiving. In DSM-5 two separate disorders are described relating to
children who have experienced adverse caregiving. The first is reactive
attachment disorder (RAD), where there is an absence of attachment
behaviour secondary to social neglect. These children have the
developmental capacity to form attachments, and these disorders are very
responsive to enhanced caregiving. For example, in children from
Romanian orphanages who had experienced extreme deprivation, the signs
of RAD diminished or disappeared once children were placed in families
and received adequate care---with best outcomes if they were removed
before 2 years of age (Zeanah et al., 2015). The second disorder is
disinhibited social engagement disorder (DSED), in which the child lacks
appropriate reticence with unfamiliar adults and violates socially
sanctioned boundaries. Compared with RAD, children with DSED are usually
more functionally impaired, have difficulties with close relationships
and more need for special education, and have a poorer outcome.

Assessment and treatment of the problems of preschool children
Assessment. Usually the information is largely obtained from the
parents. The assessor seeks to discover whether the problem is primarily
in the child or related to difficulties in the primary caregiver, other
potential attachment figures, or the entire family. The problem
behaviour is assessed, together with the child's general level of
development, and the functioning of the family. Treatment. Apart from
the particular points already mentioned under the specific disorders,
treatment includes advice for the parents (and, if necessary, for other
family members) about relevant aspects of childrearing. There is little
systematic evidence about the value of treatment, although parenting
interventions are the best established approaches, and have some benefit
even where the underlying condition has a strong genetic basis. It may
be helpful to arrange for the child to spend part of the day away from
the family in a playgroup or nursery school, provided that the care
offered is of high quality. Specially adapted cognitive approaches can
be helpful for emotional and anxiety disorders.

Specific developmental disorders DSM-5 and ICD-10 both contain
categories for specific developmental disorders, which are circumscribed
developmental delays that are not attributable to another disorder or to
lack of opportunity to learn (see Table 16.4).

It is debatable whether these conditions should be classified as mental
disorders at all, since many children who meet the criteria have no
other signs of psychopathology. Developmental learning, communication,
and motor problems can affect children throughout development,
influencing their lives and personalities, and can therefore have
long-term implications for children's emotional and regulatory
development, affecting their transitions into adulthood. Some of these
disorders, when detected and treated early, can be remediated
successfully. Others are chronic, and compensatory skills must be
taught. In ICD-10, these developmental disorders are divided into
specific developmental disorders of scholastic skills, speech and
language, and motor function. In DSM-5, the same disorders are called
learning disorder, communication disorders, and motor skill disorder,
respectively. Specific developmental disorders of scholastic skills are
divided further into specific reading disorder, specific spelling
disorder, and specific arithmetic disorder.

Specific learning disorders Reading disorder In DSM-5, reading disorder
is grouped with other learning disorders. Previously, the disorders of
reading, writing, or arithmetic were considered selective or specific
impairments, but it is increasingly apparent that they can frequently
co-occur with each other and with other communication impairments,
attention disorder, and developmental coordination disorders.
Significant advances have been made in understanding the nature and
causes of children's reading difficulties, especially through better
elucidation of the cognitive models involved. There are two different,
but commonly occurring, reading disorders in children: dyslexia and
reading comprehension disorder.

Dyslexia Dyslexia refers to a difficulty in learning to decode, leading
to poor appreciation of the spelling patterns of words and their
pronunciation. Therefore, children with dyslexia can have difficulties
accurately reading aloud and with spelling. It is usually diagnosed
because the child has serious delay in learning to read, evident from
the early years of schooling, which is sometimes preceded by delayed
acquisition of basic language skills. Writing and spelling are impaired,
and in older children these problems may be more obvious than the
reading problems. Errors in reading and spelling include omissions,
substitutions, or distortions of words, slow reading, long hesitations,
and reversals of words or letters. There may

439

40

440

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Table 16.4 Specific learning disorders DSM-5

ICD--10

Specific learning disorder

Specific developmental disorders of scholastic skills

Reading disorder

Specific reading disorder

Disorder of written expression

Specific spelling disorder

Mathematics disorder

Specific disorder of arithmetic skills

Those with specific reading difficulties are more often male and are
more likely to have minor neurological abnormalities, and to come from
socially disadvantaged homes. Sensory impairments are common; for
example, some auditory processing tasks, especially frequency
discrimination, present in up to 30--40% of children with dyslexia. For
a review of dyslexia, see Peterson and Pennington (2015).

Reading comprehension impairment

Learning disorder not otherwise specified

Mixed disorder of scholastic skills

Communication disorders

Specific developmental disorders of speech and language

Speech sound disorder

Specific speech articulation disorder

Language disorder

Expressive language disorder

Children with reading comprehension impairment show a contrasting
pattern, where they are able to read aloud accurately but have
difficulty understanding what they have read. These children present
less frequently to services as they often go unnoticed. It might be
quite common, as some studies have suggested up to 5% of secondary
school pupils have this disorder. They might experience higher-level
language difficulties, including problems with inferencing and with
figurative language use. Much of the clinical profile has similarities
with that seen in ADHD.

Receptive language disorder

Aetiology of reading disorders

Acquired aphasia with epilepsy Child-onset fluency disorder Social
(pragmatic) communication disorder

Stuttering (coded under behavioural disorders)

Motor disorders Developmental coordination disorder

Specific developmental disorder of motor function

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

be associated emotional problems, but development in other areas is not
affected. Of note: the DSM-5 uses the term specific learning disorder
(SLD) to describe a number of different disorders of language and not
the term dyslexia; the SLDs are considered a type of neurodevelopmental
disorder. Estimates of the presence of dyslexia in Englishspeaking
countries range from 3% to 10% in schoolaged children, with more boys
referred than girls and higher numbers in urban versus rural populations
and in those with English as a second language. Typically the spelling
difficulties in people with dyslexia are more resistant to remediation
than their reading difficulties.

Reading is a complex skill that depends on more than one psychological
process and is learned in several stages; its aetiology is varied and
depends on genetic and environmental factors. It is not surprising,
therefore, that no single cause has been identified for reading
disorders. The predominant cognitive explanation of dyslexia is that it
arises from a phonological deficit---a problem in processing the speech
sounds of spoken words. Phonological skills provide the support for
verbal short-term memory and, more broadly, the learning of verbal
information. This theory does not necessarily account for all the
reading problems encountered in dyslexia. Another theory focuses on
naming speed measured by rapid automatized naming tests (RAN), where
tasks involve the rapid naming of familiar objects, colours, etc.
Performance in RAN can be a good marker of those who will go on to have
reading problems. RAN might link into the verbal mapping that is
critical to learning how to read. A model that can be useful in clinical
practice is one that explains how children first use visual methods when
learning to read; they learn the appearance of whole words, and cannot
decipher new words. The next stage of learning is alphabetical; children
become able to decode new words from the sounds associated with the
letters. In the final stage, reading becomes automatic and flexible in
combining visual and alphabetical methods. Genetic causes. The frequent
occurrence of reading disorder in other family members suggests a
genetic

41

Review of syndromes cause, and the family patterning suggests that there
is not a single mode of inheritance but a range of genetic and molecular
mechanisms contributing to the different disorders. For example, rare
protein-coding mutations in the FOXP2 transcription factor gene can
cause severe problems with sequencing sounds, while risk variants of
small-effect sizes in many genes (e.g. CNTNAP1, ATP2C2, and CMIP) are
associated with commoner forms of language impairment (Graham and
Fisher, 2013). Neurological causes. Although the majority of children do
not show any structural brain abnormalities, early neurodevelopmental
abnormalities appear to be involved. Right prefrontal brain mechanisms
seem to be involved and may be critical for reading improvement in
dyslexia. Children with cerebral palsy and epilepsy have increased rates
of specific reading disorder. Another suggestion is that there is a
disorder of brain maturation affecting one or more of the skills
required in reading. This explanation is consistent with the following
findings: difficulty in visual scanning, confusion between right and
left, and general improvement with age. Social factors. The environment
plays a critical role in shaping a child's reading development, and
parental educational level and range of vocabulary at home may reflect
differences in amount and quality of literacyrelated activities
delivered to children at home. For example, parental teaching of print
concepts has been shown to be associated with better reading outcomes.

Assessment and treatment Children with reading disorders are rarely
referred to a child psychiatrist unless such difficulties have
contributed to emotional and behavioural difficulties. However, it is
easy to miss a disorder in a child with mental health problems. It is
important to identify the disorder early. Assessment is carried out by
an educational or clinical psychologist using an individually
administered standardized test of reading accuracy and comprehension.
Treatment is predominantly in educational methods, and there is strong
evidence to support the effectiveness of phonological interventions
(developing phonological awareness, alphabet knowledge, early decoding
skills). There is less evidence for interventions to help reading
fluency problems that might persist once the basic decoding skills are
mastered in children, but repeated oral reading programmes can help to
improve reading fluency. There is less evidence for reading
comprehension impairment; however, many sessions of individual teaching
or small group teaching can help. If there are additional medical or
behavioural problems, these will require separate intervention. If there
are behavioural

problems secondary to frustration caused by the reading difficulty, they
may lessen as reading improves; others may need separate attention. For
more information on educational interventions for children's specific
learning difficulties, see Hulme et al.Â (2015).

Prognosis The prognosis varies with the severity of the condition. Even
among children with a mild problem in midchildhood, only about 25%
achieve normal reading skills by adolescence. Very few with severe
problems in midchildhood overcome them by adolescence. Although there is
insufficient evidence to be certain what happens to these people as
adults, those with substantial difficulties in adolescence seem likely
to retain them. Specific reading difficulties are common in adults with
antisocial behaviour. For a review of reading disorders, see Snowling et
al. (2015).

Mathematics disorder (specific arithmetic disorder) Mathematics disorder
is a DSM-5 term that is under the category of specific learning
disorders, whilst specific arithmetic disorder is used in ICD-10. It is
also known as dyscalculia. Mathematics disorder has typically been
defined as a difficulty in learning mathematics that is out of line with
other aspects of a child's development (particularly IQ). Problems
include failure to understand simple mathematical concepts, failure to
recognize numerical symbols or mathematical signs, difficulty in
carrying out arithmetic manipulations, and inability to learn higher
level mathematical skills such as geometry and algebra. These problems
are not due simply to lack of opportunities to learn, and are evident
from the time of the child's first attempts to learn to count. Although
it causes less severe difficulties in everyday life than reading
difficulties, mathematics disorder can lead to secondary emotional
difficulties when the child is at school. Epidemiology. The incidence
reported in several studies lies between 1.3% and 6%, and the disorder
frequently co-occurs with specific reading difficulties (Snowling et
al., 2015). Aetiology. This is less well understood than reading
difficulties as less is known about the mechanisms of mathematical
skills and their development. Mathematical skills depend on a complex
interplay between non-verbal and verbal cognitive systems, and are
likely to result from a number of cognitive deficits, including
impairments in an abstract approximate number sense system located in
the parietal brain areas and

441

42

442

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry verbal systems that interact with this
system. Twin studies suggest a significant genetic influence.
Assessment. This is usually based on the arithmetic subtests of the
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC) and the Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale (WAIS), and on specific tests. Treatment. There is a
growing evidence base for interventions, but these remain much fewer
than for reading deficits. The studies suggest that elements, including
remedial intensive teaching utilizing a variety of techniques and
concrete materials, and practice in counting and number skills, can
greatly benefit children with these deficits. Without treatment the
condition appears to persist over several years of follow-up. For a
review, see Hulme et al.Â (2015).

Disorders of communication, speech, and language Communication is the
transmission of information (a message) using a common signalling
system, and language is a form of communication that humans have
developed to assist in communication. Language is a complex formal
system that makes use of sounds and words in rule-governed ways to
convey an infinite number of meanings. Language can take a variety of
forms---it can be written or conveyed using manual signs---however, the
most widely used form for expressing language is through speech (Norbury
et al., 2015). The process by which language is acquired is complex, and
is still not fully understood. Children vary widely in their achievement
of speech and language. Half of all children use words with meanings by
about 12 months of age, and 97% do so by 21 months. Half of all children
form words into simple sentences by 23 months. Vocabulary and complexity
of language develop rapidly during the preschool years. Specific
language impairment appears to be a relatively common disorder, with
estimates of around 7% in kindergarten children; there are high levels
of comorbidity with reading disorders, motor coordination, general
learning disorders, and ADHD. It is also associated with psychiatric
problems because it can be a sign of a common brain abnormality and also
because language disorder impairs social interaction and education.

Causes of speech and language disorder The causes of language impairment
remain poorly understood. Children appear to have pronounced problems in
word learning (vocabulary knowledge), grammar learning, and phonology. A
minority might have another

primary disorder, such as is intellectual disability, hearing problems,
cerebral palsy, and ASD; it is important to detect whether another
primary disorder is also present. Social deprivation can cause mild
delays in speaking or add to the effects of the other causes. There is a
genetic contribution, with mutations in a gene called FOXP2 causing some
cases of severe language disorder (Peterson, 2015).

Classification The classification differs in some ways between ICD-10
and DSM-5. ICD-10 uses the title 'specific developmental disorders of
speech and language', whereas DSM-5 has the wider title 'communication
disorders'. Three disorders appear in both classifications, although
with some differences in nomenclature. â

Speech sound disorder (in DSM-5) or specific speech articulation
disorder (in ICD-10).

â

Language disorder (DSM-5) or expressive language disorder and receptive
language disorder (ICD-10).

â

Childhood onset fluency disorder (DSM-5) or stuttering (coded under
behavioural disorders in ICD-10).

ICD-10 (but not DSM-5) has a fourth category of 'Acquired aphasia with
epilepsy', and DSM-5 has a new category of 'Social (pragmatic)
communication disorder' (see Table 16.4).

Speech sound disorder (specific speech articulation disorder) In this
condition, accuracy in the use of speech sound is below the level
appropriate for the child's mental age, but language skills are normal.
Errors in making speech sounds (phonemes) are normal in children up to
the age of about 4 years, but by the age of 7 years most speech sounds
should be normal. By age 12 years nearly all speech sounds should be
made normally. Children with specific speech articulation disorder make
errors of articulation so severe that it is difficult for others to
understand their speech. Speech sounds may be omitted or distorted, or
other sounds substituted. When assessing speech production, appropriate
allowance should be made for regional accents and dialects. The sounds
most often affected are those that develop later in the normal sequence
of development (l, r, s, z, th, and ch for English speakers).
Prevalence. This depends on the criteria used to determine when speech
production is abnormal; a rate of 2--3% has been cited among 6- to
7-year-olds, reducing with older age to approximately 1% in all
school-aged children (Norbury et al., 2015). Aetiology and treatment.
Because the disorder tends to run in families, a genetic influence has
been

43

Review of syndromes assumed, but for the majority no specific cause is
identified. The best prognosis is for those who receive intervention in
the preschool or primary grades, with most being able to achieve speech
normalization by age 8 years. Speech therapy can be helpful if the
articulation disorder problem is an isolated problem without, for
example, associated hearing loss or cognitive impairment.

Language disorder Language disorders are persistent difficulties in the
acquisition and use of language across modalities, and may involve
comprehension or production deficits in one or more of the following: 1)
vocabulary (word knowledge and use); 2) sentence structure (the ability
to put words and word endings together to form sentences based on rules
of grammar); and 3) discourse (the ability to use vocabulary and connect
sentences to explain or describe a topic or have a conversation). The
disorders in language therefore follow these three areas. â

Disorders of vocabulary. These children are slow to acquire their first
words and they often have limited vocabulary. They tend to rely on
non-specific words such as 'thingie' and have difficulty learning words
with multiple or abstract meanings.

â

Grammar and morphology. Language development varies considerably among
normal children, but the absence of single words by 2 years of age, and
use of word combinations delayed from 2Â½--4 years of age signifies
abnormality. Signs at later ages include restricted vocabulary, shorter
utterances, and immature grammatical usage. For example, in English
children might have difficulty adding endings to words to denote a
different tense (helped). Non-verbal communication, if impaired, is not
affected as severely as spoken language, and the child makes efforts to
communicate.

â

Discourse. Some children speak rapidly and with an erratic rhythm such
that the grouping of words does not reflect the grammatical structure of
their speech. This abnormality, which is known as cluttering, is
classified in ICD-10 (with stammering) among other behavioural disorders
of childhood but is not included in DSM-5.

Prevalence. The prevalence of language disorder depends on the method of
assessment; a rate of 1--5% of children has been proposed (Norbury et
al., 2015). Prognosis. Children with language comprehension deficits can
be resistant to change and are likely to require ongoing support for
their language. It is

reported that about 50% of the children who meet the DSM-5 criteria
develop normal speech by adulthood, while the rest have longlasting
difficulties. The prognosis is worse when the language disorder is
severe, and when there is a comorbid condition, such as conduct
disorder. Treatment. This mainly involves specialist speech and language
therapists and special education provision; for example, focusing on
developing vocabulary and narrative skills. Psychiatrists may be
involved when there is a comorbid disorder, and may need to advise the
parents about the child's rights for special education. For a review of
language disorder, see Norbury et al. (2015).

Acquired epileptic aphasia (Landau Kleffner syndrome) In this rare
disorder, a child whose language has so far developed normally loses
both receptive and expressive language but retains general intelligence.
There are associated EEG abnormalities, nearly always bilateral and
temporal, and often with more widespread disturbances. Most of the
affected children develop seizures either before or after the change in
expressive language. The disorder generally starts between 3 and 9 years
of age, usually over a period of several months but sometimes more
rapidly. About 20% of cases are caused by mutations in the GRIN2A gene,
which codes for a subunit of the NMDA glutamate receptor (Lesca et al.,
2013). The prognosis is variable; about two-thirds of children are left
with a receptive language deficit, but the other third recover
completely. Treatment of the seizures does not always lead to
improvement in language.

Assessment of speech and language disorders Early investigation is
essential both to determine the nature and severity of the speech and
language disorder and to exclude mental retardation, deafness, cerebral
palsy, and pervasive developmental disorder. The speech-producing organs
should be examined. It is particularly important to detect deafness at
an early stage. Parents can give some indication of the child's speech
and language skills, especially if they complete a standardized
inventory. With younger children it may be necessary to rely on this
information, but children from the age of about 3 years can be tested by
a standard test of language appropriate to the child's age. If possible,
such a test should be carried out by a speech therapist or a
psychologist specializing in the subject.

443

4

444

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Motor learning disorder Some children have delayed motor development,
which results in clumsiness in school work or play. In ICD-10, this
condition is called specific developmental disorder of motor function.
It is also known as clumsy child syndrome or specific motor dyspraxia.
The child can carry out all normal movements, but coordination is poor.
Children are late in developing skills such as dressing, walking, and
feeding. They tend to break things and are poor at handicrafts and
organized games. They may also have difficulty in writing, drawing, and
copying. IQ testing usually shows good verbal but poor performance
scores. These children are sometimes referred to a psychiatrist because
of secondary emotional disorder. An explanation of the nature of the
problem should be given to the child, the family, and the teachers.
Special teaching may improve confidence. It may be necessary to exempt
the child from organized games or other school activities that involve
motor coordination. There is usually some improvement with time. For
further information, see Hulme et al.Â (2015).

Social (pragmatic) communication disorder The introduction of this
category of disorder in DSM-5 is predominantly as a result of changes to
the diagnostic criteria for ASD (see below). This category is used for
children with persistent difficulties in the social use of verbal and
non-verbal communication. Four key areas of deficit need to be present
for a diagnosis: using communication for social purposes (greetings);
changing communication to match context or needs of the listener;
following rules for conversation (turn-taking); and understanding what
is not explicitly stated and non-literal or ambiguous meanings. These
children must not meet diagnostic criteria for ASD (no repetitive
behaviours and restrictive interests), although similarities might be
evident between the two groups; they also must not have intellectual and
language impairments that cause these deficits (Norbury et al., 2015).
As this is a new disorder, there is not yet clear evidence for
interventions, although speech and language therapy focusing on
communication needs is the usual intervention provided.

Autism spectrum disorders ASD, or the ICD-10 term pervasive
developmental disorder, refers to a group of disorders characterized by
abnormalities in communication and social interaction and by restricted
repetitive activities and interests. These abnormalities occur in a wide
range of situations. Usually development is abnormal from infancy, and
most cases are manifested before the age of 5 years.

Six conditions are included under this rubric in ICD10 (see Table 16.5),
whilst DSM-5 has made a new class of ASD, uniting four previously
separate conditions to reflect scientific consensus that there is
probably a single condition with different levels of symptom severity in
two core domains; this will be utilized in this section as the main
descriptive category unless stated otherwise. ASD now encompasses the
previous DSM-IV and current ICD-10 autistic disorder, Asperger syndrome,
childhood disintegrative disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder
not otherwise specified. ASD is characterized by: 1) deficits in social
communication and social interaction; and 2) restricted repetitive
behaviours, interests, and activities (RRBs). As both components are
required for diagnosis of ASD, social communication disorder is
diagnosed if no RRBs are present (see above). Furthermore, two other
disorders are classified in ICD10: atypical autism and overactive
disorder with mental retardation and stereotyped movements, whilst
Rett's syndrome has been removed from DSM-5 but remains in ICD-10. The
information for this section has been drawn from Le Couteur et
al.Â (2015).

Clinical characteristics ASD is used to denote impairments in reciprocal
social communication and a tendency to engage in repetitive stereotyped
patterns of behaviours, interests, and activities. ASD is a
neurodevelopmental disorder that arises from atypical brain development,
so core features are often present in early childhood, although they may
not always be apparent. In both DSM-5 and ICD-10, three main categories
of abnormality are important for diagnosis. They reflect the features
highlighted in Kanner (1943), who first described the syndrome: â

abnormalities of social development

â

abnormalities of communication

â

restriction of interests and behaviour.

The clinical presentation is remarkably diverse and is variable both
between individuals and in the same individual at different ages (see
Box 16.3). In childhood many individuals have an apparent history of
early regression or lack of progress. Some of the earliest social
communication symptoms are difficulties in joint attention, eye contact,
lack of intention to communicate with others, lack of socially imitative
play, and fascination with sensory stimuli. Abnormalities of social
development. The child is unable to form warm emotional relationships
with people (autistic aloneness) and might not respond to their parents'

45

Review of syndromes

Table 16.5 Autism spectrum disorders DSM-5 Autism spectrum disorder

ICD-10 Pervasive developmental disorder

Autism spectrum disorder

Childhood autism Rett's syndrome Other childhood disintegrative disorder
Overactive disorder with mental retardation and stereotyped movements

insist on eating the same food repeatedly, on wearing the same clothes,
or on engaging in repetitive games. Some are fascinated by spinning
toys. Odd behaviour and mannerisms are common. Some children carry out
odd motor behaviours such as whirling round and round, twiddling their
fingers repeatedly, flapping their hands, or rocking. Others do not
differ obviously in motor behaviour from normal children. Other
features. Children with ASD may suddenly show anger or fear without
apparent reason. They may be overactive and distractible, sleep badly,
or soil or wet themselves. Some injure themselves deliberately. About

Asperger syndrome Social communication disorder

Atypical autism Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

affectionate behaviour by smiling or cuddling. Instead, they appear to
dislike being picked up or kissed. They are sometimes no more responsive
to their parents than to strangers, and do not show interest in other
children. There can be little difference in their behaviour towards
people and inanimate objects. A characteristic sign is gaze
avoidance---that is, the absence of eye-to-eye contact. Abnormalities of
communication. Speech may develop late or never appear. Occasionally, it
develops normally until about the age of 2 years and then disappears in
part or completely. This lack of speech is a manifestation of a severe
cognitive defect. As children with ASD grow up, about 50% acquire some
useful speech, although serious impairments usually remain, such as the
misuse of pronouns and the inappropriate repeating of words spoken by
other people (echolalia). Some children are talkative, but their speech
can be repetitive monologue rather than a conversation with another
person. The cognitive defect also affects non-verbal communication and
play, as the child might not take part in the imitative games of the
first year of life, and later they do not use toys in an appropriate
way. They show little imagination or creative play. Restriction of
interests and behaviour. Obsessive desire for sameness is a term often
applied to children with ASD stereotyped behaviour, and to their
distress if there is a change in the environment. For example, some
children

Box 16.3 Clinical clues for autistic spectrum disorders In preschool
children: â delay or absence of spoken language â not responsive to
other people's feelings â lack of pretend play or social play â unable
to share pleasure â does not point out objects to another person â
unusual or repetitive hand and finger mannerisms â unusual reactions to
sensory stimuli In school-age children: â persistent echolalia â
reference to self as 'you', 'she', or 'he' beyond 3 years â unusual
vocabulary for child's age â tendency to talk freely only about specific
topics â inability to join in play of other children (occasionally
disruptive) â easily overwhelmed by social and other stimulation â
extreme reactions to invasion of personal space â difficulty managing
change In adolescent children: â socially 'naÃ¯ve', not as independent as
peers â speech peculiarities â difficulty making and maintaining peer
friendships â preference for highly specific, narrow interests or
hobbies, or may enjoy collecting, numbering, or listing â strong
preferences for familiar routines â problems using imagination
Reproduced from Progress in Neurology and Psychiatry, 19(6),
Ellison-Wright Z and Boardman C, Diagnosis and management of ASD in
children and adolescents, pp.Â 28-32, Copyright (2015), with permission
from John Wiley & Sons.

445

46

446

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry 25% of autistic children develop seizures,
usually about the time of adolescence. Intelligence level. Cognitive
difficulties are very common, and some form of intellectual disability
is identified in 25--50% of individuals with ASD, with the most common
pattern being poor language and social comprehension but with relative
strengths---'splinter skills'---in visuospatial abilities. Among high
functioning individuals (those likely to fall under the ICD-10
Asperger's syndrome), the opposite pattern may occur, or there may be
pragmatic difficulties with the social use of communication. Some
children show areas of ability despite impairment of other intellectual
functions, and in some cases they have exceptional but restricted powers
of memory or mathematical skill. Some children with higher functioning
often develop intense circumscribed interests that can be seen in
typically developing children but are pursued in a solitary, non-social
manner. Although there is a tendency for core behaviours to improve over
time, some may persist and cause difficulties in the long term. Those
affected can have difficulties with independent living, motor
coordination, sensory sensitivities, sleep and eating problems, mental
health difficulties, and behaviours that place themselves and others at
risk.

Epidemiology A prevalence rate for ASD of around 1% in high-income and
lower in low- and middle-income countries has been reported in
systematic reviews (Le Couteur et al., 2015). It is unclear if there has
been a true increase in prevalence or if the increase in rates is as a
result of recent increase in public awareness of ASD, broadening of the
diagnostic criteria, and more clinicians having a better understanding
of the disorder. Whilst previously, classification systems had
discouraged diagnoses of comorbid disorders, now ASD can be diagnosed
alongside ADHD, Down syndrome or fragile X syndrome. A rapid increase in
prevalence was observed when legislation determined that children with
ASD could access special schools, and there is some increase in
'diagnostic substitution', with children with 'intellectual disability'
now being diagnosed with ASD. The prevalence of ASD is much higher in
boys than in girls, with a ratio as high as 5--6 to 1, but it is unclear
if ASD is under recognized in higher functioning females. A large
surveillance study across the US (Baio, 2012) showed that approximately
1 in 42 boys and 1 in 189 girls had ASD, with non-Hispanic white
children the group with highest prevalence. Of children with ASD, 31%
were classified as having IQ scores in the range of intellectual
disability (IQ â¤70), 23% in the borderline range (IQ = 71--85), and

46% in the average or above average range of intellectual ability (IQ
\>85). The proportion of children classified in the range of
intellectual disability differed by race/ethnicity, with, for example,
significantly greater prevalence among non-Hispanic white children than
non-Hispanic black children.

Risk factors and possible aetiology ASD has a strong genetic basis. The
heritability of ASD in the population is around 90%. The rate of ASD is
about 25 times higher in siblings of affected children than in the
general population. The genetic architecture of ASD is complex. Like
most psychiatric syndromes, the genetic predisposition in many cases
results from the combination of multiple common polymorphisms of small
effect. There are also copy number variants (CNVs) that are rare but
confer a larger risk, and some cases that are caused by specific gene
mutations or chromosomal abnormalities (Box 16.4). These cases can be
identified by genetic testing (Ellison-Wright and Boardman, 2015).
Evidence is steadily accumulating that the highly heterogenous and
functionally diverse set of ASD genes identified so far converges on a
smaller set of specific molecular pathways or brain circuits---possibly
contributing to aberrant synaptic pruning. For a review of the genetics
of ASD, see de la Torre-Ubieta et al.Â (2016). Neuroimaging studies have
also provided useful insights into the neural substrates underlying ASD
and the pathological changes that occur in the brain. They indicate that
the brain matures along an atypical trajectory. This leads to
differences in neuroanatomy, functioning, and connectivity within the
wider neural systems that probably mediate autistic symptoms and traits
(Ecker et al., 2015). Various risk factors have been identified; for
example, a sibling with autism (reflecting a genetic predisposition),
birth defects, including cerebral palsy, gestational age less than 35
weeks, and maternal use of valproate in pregnancy. As noted earlier, ASD
can also occur in a range of genetic disorders such as fragile X,
muscular dystrophy, neurofibromatosis, and tuberous sclerosis; since
autistic features are not invariable in these conditions, they may also
be viewed as being as risk factors for ASD rather than specific genetic
causes of it. Other potential risk factors include obstetric
complications---although it is not clear whether these are a true risk
factor or represent an outcome associated with a primary abnormality in
the fetus. Other environmental causes being explored include immune
dysfunction, with studies showing a variety of peripheral and central
immune changes, including T cell dysfunction and microglial and
astroglial activation. Altered

47

Review of syndromes gene expression is also implicated, with differences
in two modules of coexpressed genes being observed in the brain in
autism. The first module, related to synaptic function and neuronal
projection, was underexpressed, whereas the second module, which was
enriched for immune genes and glial markers, was overexpressed. These
data support the view that synaptic dysfunction as well as immune
dysregulation are important in the pathogenesis of ASD. Socioeconomic
status might influence ASD, as risk is increased for children with
mothers born abroad, with the risk for low-functioning autism peaking
when migration occurred around the time of pregnancy. Different
mechanisms can be proposed to explain these results, such as the high
level of maternal stress or low immunity regarding common infections.
Four reviews have suggested that both maternal and paternal age are risk
factors for autism, with paternal age perhaps playing a more significant
role---this might be because of a high frequency of point mutations,
gene imprinting effects, genetic changes in sperm cells, de novo CNVs,
or epigenetic influences that may increase risk of autism in the
offspring (Le Couteur et al., 2015). Exposure to drugs and toxins may
increase autism risk. Prenatal exposure to valproate is a recognized
risk factor for ASD, especially in the first trimester of pregnancy;
children exposed in utero to valproate have an eightfold increased risk
for ASD (Christensen et al., 2013). Use of selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) during pregnancy has also been suggested to modestly
increase the risk of ASD, but data are weak. Lastly, exposure to toxins,
especially pesticides, may increase ASD risk (for review, see Rossignol
et al., 2014). Finally, there have been a number of other associations
by the public, media, and scientific community proposed about possible
causes of ASD, involving speculation about mechanisms, including
immunological causes (infections or vaccinations such as MMR), and
exposure to mercury in tooth fillings. There is, however, a lack of
scientifically valid evidence to support any of these theories. A
proposed association between increased rates of autism in children whose
mothers took SSRIs in pregnancy is likely to be confounded by the more
general association between depression in mothers and increased rates of
autism in their children. For a summary of risk factors for ASD, see
Chaste and Leboyer (2012).

Cognitive and emotional processes Identifying and understanding the
cognitive profile of ASD is likely to play an important role in

Box 16.4 Genetic architecture of autism spectrum disorders In terms of
inheritance pattern Complex---additive risk from multiple genes
Autosomal recessive (e.g.Â Smith--Lemli--Opitz syndrome) Autosomal
dominant (e.g.Â Timothy syndrome; tuberous sclerosis complex) X-linked
(e.g.Â fragile X syndrome; Duchenne muscular dystrophy)

In terms of mechanism Single nucleotide polymorphisms Copy number
variation (CNV; e.g.Â 16p11.2 duplication; NRXN1 deletion) Chromosomal
translocation (e.g.Â Phelan--McDermid syndrome) Trinucleotide repeat
expansion (e.g.Â fragile X syndrome) Adapted from Nature, 22(4), de la
Torre-Ubieta L et al., Advancing the understanding of autism disease
mechanisms through genetics, pp.Â 345-361, Copyright (2016), with
permission from Nature Publishing Group.

understanding the underlying brain systems and structures involved in
this very heterogenous disorder. The more prominent theoretical models
include: theory of mind (ToM) executive dysfunction and weak central
coherence (WCC). Theory of mind. This theory attempts to identify a
basic psychological disorder in ASD. By the age of 4 years, normal
children are able to form an idea of what others are thinking. As an
example, consider a normal child who watches while another normal child
is first shown the location of a hidden object and is then sent out of
the room while the object is moved to a new hiding place. The child who
has remained in the room will conclude that the child who left
temporarily will expect the object to be in the original position when
he returns to the room. A child with ASD tends to lack this appreciation
of what another child is likely to be thinking. In the example, a child
with ASD is likely to say that the child who left the room will think
that the object has been moved to its new place. It is not certain how
specific to ASD is this difficulty in appreciating what others know and
expect, nor how central it is to the psychopathology. In any case, its
cause is not known.

447

48

448

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry Impairment of frontal lobe executive
functions involved in planning and organization, resulting in
perseveration and poor self-regulation, and impaired ability to extract
high-level meaning from diverse sources of information, has been
hypothesized to contribute to the ASD profile, but this might be more
related to atypical cognitions in ASD rather than executive function
deficits. The weak central coherence (WCC) theory tries to explain how,
in autism, a 'local processing bias' explains the enhanced performance
of children with autism on some neurocognitive tasks and could explain
the 'islets of ability' that are commonly observed in individuals with
ASD. For a review of cognitive phenotypes in autism, see Charman et
al.Â (2010) and Le Couteur et al.Â (2015).

Differential diagnosis ASD represents a broad phenotype with differing
levels of impairment, but the presentation must be distinguished from
the following: â

Neurodevelopmental disorders).

â

Communication disorder, which differs from ASD in that the child usually
responds normally to people and has good non-verbal communication.

â

Intellectual disability, in which responses to other people are more
'normal' than those of a child with ASD. A child with ASD has more
impairment of language relative to other skills than is found in an
intellectually disabled child of the same age.

â

Mental and behavioural disorders (similar to those comorbid with ADHD;
see below).

â

Conditions in which there is developmental regression (Rett syndrome).

â

cognitive level

â

language ability

Deafness, which can be excluded by appropriate tests of hearing.

â

communication skills, social skills, and play

â

repetitive or otherwise abnormal behaviour

Furthermore, it is important to be aware that certain disorders are more
likely to occur with ASD, such as ADHD, depression, anxiety, and conduct
disorder/challenging behaviours. For a review of differential diagnosis
and comorbidity in ASD, see Matson and Williams (2013).

â

stage of social development in relation to age, mental age, and stage of
language development

â

associated medical conditions (e.g.Â comorbid epilepsy)

â

psychosocial factors, including the needs of the family.

â

disorders

(e.g.

language

having a very good outcome from childhood to adult. For example, around
10--20% of children with childhood autism begin to improve between the
ages of about 4 and 6 years, and are eventually able to attend an
ordinary school and obtain work. A further 10--20% can live at home, but
cannot work and need to attend a special school or training centre, and
remain very dependent on their families and/or support services. The
remainder, at least 60%, improve little and are unable to lead an
independent life; many need long-term residential care. Those who
improve may continue to show language problems, emotional coldness, and
odd behaviour. As noted already, a substantial minority develop epilepsy
in adolescence. Overall, for many individuals there is gradual reduction
in autistic symptoms and improvement in adaptive ability over time but
there is marked variability in individual outcomes. The major predictors
of better outcomes are higher IQ and presence of useful speech at age 5
years. Periods of transition can be particularly difficult, such as
becoming an adolescent and then becoming an adult, where at times
functioning can be seen to deteriorate. This may coincide with
development of comorbid anxiety and mood disorders.

Prognosis Longitudinal studies have found ASD to be a stable diagnosis.
However, at follow-up, usually a couple of years later, a systematic
review has demonstrated the diagnostic stability of ASD diagnosis
ranging from 53% to 100% of children studied (Woolfenden et al., 2012).
There is wide variation in outcome, with between \<5% and 25%

Assessment Assessment should be concerned with more than the diagnosis
of autism. Therefore an ASD-specific developmental history, ASD
observational assessments, and standardized individual assessments
should be undertaken. The following additional factors need to be
considered:

Individual ASD assessments (through direct interaction and observation)
often use an ASD-specific tool such as the Autism Diagnostic Observation
Schedule (ADOS), the Diagnostic Interview for Social and Communication
Disorders (DISCO), the Development, Dimensional and Diagnostic Interview
(3di), or the Child Autism Rating Scale (CARS). For a review of the
diagnosis and assessment of autism, see Le Couteur et al.Â (2015).

49

Review of syndromes

Management The key aspect of management for a child with ASD is to have
an individualized approach informed by the specific strengths and
difficulties of the child, which also manages the changing developmental
needs and goals of the child. The management will often need to consider
a number of key areas, which include reducing the core symptoms and
behaviours of ASD, enabling individuals to achieve their potential,
treating comorbid or cooccurring problems, including difficulties
encountered by caregivers, and supporting the family through education
and specific evidence-based approaches. These are summarized below, but
see Le Couteur et al.Â (2015) for a more detailed description. Management
of abnormal behaviour: psychosocial and behavioural interventions: early
intensive behavioural intervention (EIBI) is the most studied preschool
intervention and along, with a number of other, predominantly
behaviourally informed interventions, has been shown to improve
short-term outcomes for preschool children (Tonge et al., 2014). These
interventions include strategies for parents, teachers, and carers to
improve joint attention skills and reciprocal communication, often
through interactive play and action routines. There are fewer studies on
older children, and the quality of evidence is poorer, but social skills
training and peermediated social communication interventions show some
promise. Overall, the social communication programmes may help address
social isolation (Kendall et al., 2013), but there is little evidence,
to date, for interventions to treat the core features of restricted,
repetitive behaviours or sensory sensitivities. Other interventions: it
is important to note that many different therapeutic interventions have
been tried, but, as with those addressing the core features above, there
is insufficient evidence to support their use at present. These include
sensory integration therapy, auditory integration therapy, visual
therapies, music therapies, and restricted diets or dietary
supplementation. For example, the gluten-free casein-free diet (GFCFD)
is the most frequently implemented restrictive dietary intervention, but
there remains a lack of evidence for its use. There is, however, some
evidence that vocational programmes can increase employment success for
some individuals with ASD. There are no drugs licensed to treat the core
ASD syndrome. Potential treatments based on the underlying genetic and
neural mechanisms are under active investigation (Sahin and Sur, 2015).
Identification and treatment of co-occurring mental health problems: as
described above, children with ASD have higher rates of other mental
health problems, including ADHD, oppositional defiant disorder,
obsessive--compulsive

disorder (OCD), anxiety disorders, and mood disorders. Most clinical
guidelines recommend implementing evidence-based interventions for these
disorders, with necessary modifications to meet the needs of the person
with ASD. For example, cognitive behaviour therapy for children with
anxiety disorders can help if they have good verbal and cognitive
capacity, as can family and school-based interventions for those with
ADHD. The response rate for stimulant medication for ADHD is, however,
lower for a child with ASD when compared to a child without ASD.
Similarly, there is little good evidence to support the use of SSRIs for
OCD, mood, and anxiety disorders, although these might be commonly used
in practice. There is some evidence to support the use of antipsychotic
medication to ameliorate associated symptoms of aggression and
irritability, but these should be used with caution, starting at low
doses and used for short periods only. As with most management of
psychological problems, focusing on the factors that can increase risk
of developing problems is likely to be important. For children with ASD
these will include understanding sensory sensitivities, changing
circumstances, physical or mental illness, exploitations, and bullying
at school. Educational issues: depending on the level of cognitive and
verbal skills of the child, there has been a move across the globe to
try and include children with ASD within mainstream schools, although
some children with ASD will require special educational environments
and, if the difficulties are so severe that the child cannot stay in the
family, residential schooling is necessary. In some cases, the
educational and residential needs of children with ASD can be provided
through the services for the intellectually disabled. Older adolescents
may need vocational training. There is no evidence for the effectiveness
of different educational environments but, for those children with
better functioning, education will need to ensure that both culturally
valued skills are learned as well as specific skills and social
understanding. Family support: the family of a child with ASD may
experience increased parental and family stress, psychological
difficulties, and poorer quality of life. There are, however, few
evidence-based interventions that have been shown to help, and the
general principles of interventions should be the management of
behaviours that challenge (National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence, 2013c). The family might need prompt assessment of their
child's needs and easy access to appropriate educational and other
provisions. Although doctors may be able to do little specifically to
help the child, they must not withdraw from the family, who need
continuing support as well as support for their efforts to help

449

450

450

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry the child and to obtain help from
educational and social services. Some parents request genetic
counselling, and it seems that the risk of a further child with ASD is
about 3%. Many parents find it helpful to join a voluntary organization
in which they can meet other parents of children with ASD and discuss
common problems.

Rett syndrome Rett's disorder (or Rett's syndrome) is a rare X-linked
condition that occurs almost exclusively in girls. The reported
prevalence is about 1 per 10,000 girls. After a period of normal
development in the first months of life, head growth slows and over the
next 2 years there is arrest of cognitive development and loss of
purposive skilled hand movements. Stereotyped movements develop, with
hand-clapping and hand-wringing movements. Ataxia of the legs and trunk
may develop. Interest in the social environment diminishes in the first
few years of the disorder, but may increase again later. Expressive and
receptive language development is severely impaired and there is
psychomotor retardation. Some patients develop severe intellectual
disability. The disorder is caused by sporadic mutations in the MeCP2
gene, located on the X chromosome. These mutations interfere with the
normal roles of MeCP2 in epigenetic regulation of brain development. For
a review, see Lyst and Bird (2015).

Childhood disintegrative disorder Childhood disintegrative disorder
(ICD-10; also known as Heller's disease) is a rare condition that begins
after a period of normal development usually lasting for more than 2
years. It is unclear how far this is distinct from childhood autism and
hence it is included in the DSM-5 under ASD. There is a marked loss of
cognitive functions, abnormalities of social behaviour and
communication, and unfavourable outcome. The child loses motor skills
and bowel or bladder control. The condition may arrest after a time, or
progress to a severe neurological condition with worsening symptoms.

Asperger syndrome, atypical autism, and pervasive developmental disorder
not otherwise specified Asperger syndrome remains in the ICD-10 but not
in DSM-5. It denotes a group of children with ASD who have no cognitive
or language retardation although speech may be stilted. They are
therefore often able to attend mainstream schools as their functioning
within education can be good, although social and communication
difficulties can persist as per other children with

ASD. The term atypical autism (in ICD-10) denotes a residual category
for pervasive developmental disorders that resemble ASD but do not meet
the diagnostic criteria for any of the syndromes within this group. The
prevalence of these cases varies according to the criteria adopted, but
most investigations show that they are more common than the ICD-10
diagnosis of autism itself (Fombonne, 2009). The relationship between
these cases and those that meet the criteria for the other syndromes
within the group of pervasive developmental disorders is poorly
understood. For review of Asperger syndrome, see BarahonaCorrÃªa and
Filipe (2016),

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder ADHD is the second most common
psychiatric disorder of childhood. Although about one-third of children
are described by their parents as overactive, and 5--20% of school
children are so described by teachers, these reports encompass a
continuum of behaviour ranging from normal high spirits to a severe and
persistent disorder. This overactivity often varies in different
situations. The norms of childhood behaviour therefore encompass a
spectrum of behaviour that is often culturally determined and therefore
it is important to ensure that ADHD denotes the functionally impairing,
persistent end of the spectrum. ADHD is the term that is most commonly
used and comes from the DSM-5 criteria, where symptoms need to be
present from the main categories of inattention and hyperactivity and
impulsivity. The term hyperkinetic disorder denotes a more severe form
of the disorder and is used in ICD-10 (as below). For a summary of ADHD,
see Verkuijl et al.Â (2015).

Clinical features The core features of ADHD are inattention,
hyperactivity, and impulsivity. These features are pervasive, occurring
across situations, although they can vary somewhat in different
circumstances, so that parents and teachers may give rather different
accounts of the child's behaviour. Children with the disorder are often
reckless and prone to accidents. They may have learning difficulties,
which result in part from poor attention and lack of persistence with
tasks. Many develop minor forms of antisocial behaviour as the condition
continues, particularly disobedience, temper tantrums, and aggression.
These children are often socially disinhibited and can cause disruption
both at home and in the classroom. They can

451

Review of syndromes be susceptible to bullying or can be easily
influenced to do 'silly' things. Mood fluctuates, but low self-esteem
and depressive mood are common. Restlessness, overactivity, and related
symptoms often start before school age. Sometimes the child was
overactive as a baby, but more often significant problems begin when the
child starts to walk; they are constantly on the move, interfering with
objects and exhausting their parents.

Diagnostic criteria In both ICD-10 (hyperkinetic disorder) and DSM-5
(ADHD) the cardinal features for the diagnosis of the disorder are
impaired attention, hyperactivity, and impulsiveness starting in
childhood and lasting for at least 6 months to a degree that is
maladaptive and inconsistent with the developmental level of the child.
However, the two systems differ in the details of the criteria for
diagnosis and there is a greater emphasis on symptoms rather than
impairment in the DSM-5 categorization. DSM-5 also has more information
on diagnoses in older children and, for example, if over 16 years, then
fewer symptoms are required for a diagnosis. â

ICD-10 requires that the symptoms started before 6 years of age, whereas
DSM-5 specifies that they started before 12 years of age.

â

ICD-10 requires both hyperactivity and impaired attention, whereas DSM-5
requires either inattention, or hyperactivity and impulsiveness.

The result of these differences is that children who meet the ICD-10
criteria are more severely impaired than those who meet the DSM-5
criteria. In ICD-10 the disorder can be further classified as a
disturbance of activity and attention, or as hyperkinetic conduct
disorder. The latter term is used when criteria for both hyperkinetic
disorder and conduct disorder are met. (The provision is made because
the presence of associated aggression, delinquency, or antisocial
behaviour is associated with a poorer outcome; see below.) Comorbidity
and associated conditions. About 50% of children with ADHD meet
diagnostic criteria for other conditions as well, principally
oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder, depressive disorder, or
anxiety disorder. Specific learning difficulties and poor motor
coordination are also commonly present. Estimations vary substantially
for prevalence rates of ASD in children with ADHD, but have been
estimated at 20--50%.

Epidemiology Estimates of the prevalence of ADHD vary according to the
criteria for diagnosis.

The 2010 Global Burden of Disease Study found that worldwide point
prevalence rates of childhood ADHD were 2.2% in males and 0.7% in
females (Erskine et al., 2013). However, the diagnosis rates of and
treatment approaches to ADHD vary worldwide, For example, two studies,
from the US and UK, explored parent-reported ADHD diagnosis 'ever' made.
The US study reported a 42% increase in ADHD diagnoses from 2003 to
2011, with 8.8% having a current diagnosis of ADHD. The UK study
reported a prevalence of 1.7%, with no evidence of an increase between
1999 and 2009. Overall, 6.1% of children in the US receive drugs for
ADHD, in contrast with an estimated 0.7% in the UK (Verkuijl et al.,
2015).

Aetiology ADHD is due to both heritable and non-heritable factors, and
there is much evidence suggesting a disorder of higher cognitive
executive function related to abnormalities of neurotransmission in the
prefrontal cortex and associated subcortical structures. Neurological
findings. Signs suggesting neurodevelopmental impairment or delay are
found in children with hyperkinetic disorder---for example, clumsiness,
language delay, and abnormalities of speech. Although these signs are
generally associated with birth complications, they could result from
factors acting at an earlier stage of development of the brain. The
disorder can also occur as a consequence of severe traumatic brain
injury. Neuroimaging studies. Recent studies have shown a reduction in
volume and cortical thickness in certain areas of the brain, especially
the grey matter of the basal ganglia. These changes are associated with
ADHD and are possibly related to a delay in brain maturation (Rubia,
2012). Other studies have shown functional and structural abnormalities
in areas involved in selforganization, including the prefrontal and
striatal regions, as well as the cerebellum. There is also evidence for
white matter disruption and disordered anatomical and functional
connectivity between these various brain regions. For a review, see Hart
et al.Â (2014). Genetic studies. Investigations of family members, twins,
adopted children, and monozygotic and dizygotic twins all suggest that
genetic factors are important, with heritability estimates of about
70--80%. Compared with controls, probands with ADHD have more
first-degree relatives with the same disorder. There is also a much
higher concordance for monozygotic than for dizygotic pairs. Adoption
studies show that the biological parents of children with ADHD are more
likely to have had the same or a related disorder than are the adoptive
parents. Molecular genetic studies have made limited progress in

451

452

452

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry revealing the risk genes. Both common and
rare variants are implicated, and genes affecting the dopamine system
have been identified in some studies. Some of the genetic risk likely
interacts with environmental factors, such as maternal smoking, to
influence ADHD risk. For review, see Martin et al.Â (2015). Other
factors. A number of other factors have been shown to be associated with
ADHD; these include early psychosocial adversity (demonstrated by
studies of children raised in extreme deprivation), maternal alcohol and
substance misuse during pregnancy, low birth weight, prematurity,
nutritional deficiencies, and exposure to environmental toxins.

Prognosis Inattention and impulsiveness often persist into adult life
whilst overactivity usually lessens gradually as the child grows older,
especially when it is mild and not present in every situation; it often
ceases by puberty. About 50% of the cases diagnosed in childhood retain
the full diagnosis in adolescence. The prognosis for any associated
learning difficulties is less good, whilst antisocial behaviour has the
worst outcome. When the overactivity is severe, and is accompanied by
learning failure or low intelligence, the prognosis is poor and the
condition may persist into adulthood, as antisocial disorder and drug
misuse rather than as continued hyperactivity. By adulthood most
patients will no longer meet the full criteria for ADHD or hyperkinetic
syndrome, but the majority will retain some functional impairment.
Although this would suggest that the incidence of the disorder should be
low in adulthood, surveys have indicated rates of about 4%, suggesting
the presence of additional cases that were not detected during childhood
or might commence in adulthood---a late-onset ADHD. Furthermore, the
diagnostic criteria in DSM-5 has reduced the number of symptoms required
for adults, potentially increasing the rate of detection of ADHD in
adults. Adults with ADHD can experience more opportunities to 'live
with' the disorder as they no longer need to attend school with its
associated institutional demands and can potentially choose career paths
more suited to their work patterns and needs. However, many describe
procrastination, poor motivation, and mood lability, while irritability,
inattention, and poor organization can lead to problems with both work
and social relationships. Comorbid mood disorders and substance misuse
are common. Studies of psychostimulants and atomoxetine show a similar
clinical response to that seen in children. For a review of ADHD in
young adulthood, see Agnew-Blais et al.Â (2016) and for the assessment
and treatment of adults with ADHD, see Janakiraman and Benning (2010).

Treatment Psychosocial interventions. Overactive children exhaust their
parents, who often need support as they might have had feelings of being
judged by other parents or teachers for not being able to control their
child's behaviour for a number of years. Educational interventions to
support teachers are also important, and special education provision may
be needed. Psychosocial interventions are often recommended in
guidelines as a first step but with more severe cases this is usually
combined with stimulant medication. Although the evidence base for most
psychosocial interventions is limited, parent training, social skills
training, cognitive training, and specific classroom interventions have
all been studied. Behavioural interventions often include parent, child,
and school-based elements, and seem to be most effective in combination
with medication. Parent training for ADHD is commonly utilized, although
it has a weak evidence base. It is usually group-based and focuses on
making unwanted behaviours for the child explicit, clarifying family
rules, and anticipating potentially difficult times in the day, such as
transition times. Cognitive behavioural training for children with ADHD
might have some benefit for those with comorbid anxiety or depressive
disorders. Interventions to assist children with ADHD in the classroom,
including advice for teachers, can provide some positive effects.
Dietary advice. A minority of children with ADHD might benefit from free
fatty acid supplementation, and some parents who suspect their
children's behaviour is affected by the food they eat have observed
improvements following the elimination of certain foods after following
a strict elimination diet. The restriction of artificial food colourants
can also help a minority of children with ADHD. Medication. Drugs can
improve the three core symptoms of inattention, overactivity, and
impulsivity, and should be tried if there is severe restlessness and
attention deficit, and where parent training and psychological
approaches have not proved effective. There are two main groups of
clinically effective drugs for ADHD: stimulants and others. Stimulant
drugs increase available central dopamine and noradrenaline, and it is
thought that these actions underlie their therapeutic effects. The most
commonly prescribed medication is methylphenidate, which can be
prescribed in short- or long-acting preparations. Dexamphetamine is also
used. The dosage should be related to body weight, following the
manufacturers' instructions and advice about contraindications.

453

Review of syndromes The potential short-term benefits of stimulant
treatment are decreased restlessness, reduced aggressiveness, and,
sometimes, improved attention. These effects do not usually diminish
with time, but it has not been shown that they are associated with
better long-term outcome. The side effects include irritability,
depression, insomnia, and poor appetite, with resultant height and
weight impacts. Tics may be made worse. As medication may be needed for
many months, and some children take it for years, careful monitoring is
essential. Some parents are understandably reluctant to agree to
longterm drug treatment for their children. In such cases it can be
helpful to give the drugs for a trial period so that the benefits and
disadvantages can be assessed for a particular child. The drug may be
stopped from time to time in an attempt to minimize side effects and to
confirm that medication is still needed. The noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitor, atomoxetine, has also been licensed for the treatment of
hyperkinetic syndrome and ADHD. Common adverse effects of atomoxetine
include nausea, abdominal pain, loss of appetite, and sleep disturbance.
Rarely (about 1 in 50,000 patients treated), severe liver damage can
occur. Although atomoxetine has the theoretical advantage of lacking
psychostimulant properties, experience with its use is necessarily
limited compared with that for methylphenidate and studies show that,
although it is effective, methylphenidate has better outcomes. It may be
more suitable in patients with comorbid tic disorders, which are often
worsened by stimulant treatment. It can also be used in those who have
not responded to stimulant treatment, or who are poorly tolerant of it.
In clinical trials, short-term symptomatic and functional benefits of
stimulants have been shown in about two-thirds of children, although the
long-term benefits are uncertain. It therefore seems best to reserve
drug treatment for more severe cases that have not responded to other
treatment. For recent clinical guidelines for drug treatment of ADHD,
see Bolea-AlamaÃ±ac et al.Â (2014). For a review of the assessment and
treatment of children with ADHD, see Sonuga-Barke et al.Â (2015), and for
guidance in both children and adults, see the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (2016).

Oppositional and conduct disorders Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)
and conduct disorders (CDs) are characterized by antisocial behaviours
outside of socially acceptable norms and often intrude

on other people's expectations or rights. They form the largest single
group of psychiatric disorders in older children and adolescents. For
review, see Blair et al.Â (2014).

Clinical features The essential feature of both ODD and CD is persistent
abnormal conduct that is more serious than ordinary childhood mischief.
The abnormal behaviours centre around defiance, aggression, and
antisocial acts. The upset, disruption, and costs inflicted on the
family, peer group, schools, and wider society can be considerable. In
the preschool period, oppositional defiant behaviour usually manifests
as defiant and aggressive behaviour in the home, often with
overactivity. The behaviours include disobedience, temper tantrums,
physical aggression towards siblings or adults, and destructiveness. In
later childhood, CD is manifested in the home as stealing, lying, and
disobedience, together with verbal or physical aggression. Later, the
disturbance often becomes evident outside as well as inside the home,
especially at school, as truanting, delinquency, vandalism, and reckless
behaviour, or as alcohol or drug abuse. Antisocial behaviour among
teenage girls includes spitefulness, emotional bullying of peers, and
running away. In children older than 7 years, persistent stealing is
abnormal. Below that age, children seldom have a real appreciation of
other people's property. Many children steal occasionally, so that minor
or isolated instances need not be taken seriously. A small proportion of
children with CD present with sexual behaviour that incurs the
disapproval of adults. In younger children, masturbation and sexual
curiosity may be frequent and obtrusive. Frequent unprotected sex and
pregnancy may be a particular problem in adolescent girls. Fire-setting
is rare, but is obviously dangerous (see page 520). To constitute ODD
and CDs, these behaviours have to be more persistent than a reaction to
changing circumstances, such as adjusting to the arrival in the family
of a new step-parent. There is no sharp dividing line between these
disorders and ordinary bad behaviour; instead there is a continuum on
which diagnostic criteria define a cut-off point. The cut-off defines
the most severe cases that have the worst outcome and are most in need
of help. Much of this help is social or educational, but psychiatrists
have an important role in identifying comorbid disorders and arranging
multidisciplinary care.

Classification Both ICD-10 and DSM-5 include ODD/CD, which are
characterized by a repetitive pattern of antisocial behaviour. In ICD-10
ODD is a subtype of CD, whilst in DSM-5 it is a separate entity. ODD is
usually a diagnosis given

453

45

454

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry to younger children, whilst CD is typically
given to older children and teenagers. The criteria are almost identical
in the two systems. ODD requires four from a list of eight symptoms to
be present for at least 6 months and CD requires the presence of three
symptoms from a list of 15, with a duration of at least 12 months. The
criteria are closely similar in the two systems of classification. CDs
vary widely in their clinical features, and so ICD10 has four
subdivisions of CD---socialized conduct disorder, unsocialized conduct
disorder, CDs confined to the family context, and ODD. Of note, DSM-5
has two other disorders that may overlap: intermittent explosive
disorder (which can only be diagnosed after age 6), and a new disorder,
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (DMDD). Although DMDD has been
explicitly introduced to prevent overdiagnosis and medication for
bipolar disorder, it appears to have considerable overlap with ODD.

Prevalence The overall prevalence of ODD and CD together varies between
5% and 10%, with much variability attributed to diagnostic criteria and
methods utilized in studies. ODD/CD makes up about half of all child and
adolescent psychopathology, and ODD is commoner in younger children
whilst CD is commoner in adolescents. There is fairly good agreement on
rates of 5--8% in general longitudinal surveys where multiple informants
have been used (Scott et al., 2015b). ODD is about twice as common in
boys than in girls but this ratio rises for CD, with rates that are 3--7
times more common in boys than in girls. There is also a strong
socioeconomic contributor to prevalence, with those having the lowest
socioeconomic status experiencing five times greater prevalence than
those in the highest groups. Rates are also highest in children that
have been maltreated, brought up in residential care, transferred to
foster care, and in those with intellectual disability. Furthermore,
prevalence has shown to have increased considerably over the second half
of the twentieth century.

Aetiology Many different factors influence the development of ODD/CD
and, although some risks are intercorrelated, being subject to more risk
factors has a cumulative effect, worsening outcomes. The importance of
the parenting/ family environment and the complex interplay this might
have with individual temperaments and differential responses to
environments and interventions is an area of interesting current
research. The aetiological factors can be divided into individual-level
influences and family-level influences, although, as indicated above,
the relationship between the two can be close.

Individual-level influences Genetic factors. It has become clear that,
for some subtypes, there is a strong genetic contribution to CD/ODD. CD
clusters in families. There is a highly heritable trait of liability to
externalizing disorders in general (CD, ODD, and ADHD), but shared
environmental factors are also important in the aetiology of CD. For
example, genetic contribution is higher for antisocial behaviour in the
presence of inattention and hyperactivity, callous unemotional traits,
or high levels of physical aggression, but where these factors are
absent, the genetic contribution is low. There is evidence that a
variant of the monoamine oxidase-A (MAOA) gene predisposes to CD, but
only when combined with adverse factors in the child's environment such
as child maltreatment. If genetic factors are involved, it is not known
whether they exert their effect by influencing temperament or in some
other way. For review, see Kendler et al.Â (2013). Pregnancy and
perinatal complications: maternal alcoholism during pregnancy has been
associated with CD, but this might be mainly because of the effect on
the developing child's IQ. Temperament: several studies have shown
associations between early temperament and later conduct problems, with
traits such as negative emotionality, poor emotional regulation,
inattention, and restlessness usually identified. It seems likely that a
'difficult' temperament becomes more likely to lead to disruptive
behaviour problems when it interacts with a harsh and inconsistent
parenting style (Bornovalova et al., 2014). Brain functioning: there is
some evidence of abnormalities in the paralimbic system involved in
motivation and affect, with limbic structures and the amygdala as well
as the lateral orbital and ventromedial prefrontal cortices affected.
Furthermore, children with conduct problems have been consistently shown
to have poor executive functions---compromising their ability to achieve
goals successfully through appropriate, effective actions. Children with
brain damage and epilepsy are more prone to CD, as they are to other
psychiatric disorders. Language, IQ, and educational attainment: low IQ
and low school achievement are important predictors of ODD/CD and
delinquency. In a study of twins aged 13 years, low IQ of the child
predicted conduct problems independent of social class and the IQ of the
parents (Goodman, 1995). Children who struggle to assert themselves
verbally may attempt to gain control of social exchanges using
aggression. Low IQ can contribute to academic difficulties, which can
impact on selfesteem and there is a higher likelihood of school being
perceived as an unrewarding environment. This low

45

Review of syndromes school attainment then adds to the probability of
ODD/ CD developing.

Family-level influences These are important, as quality of parenting,
along with gender, is the strongest predictor of antisocial behaviour in
most studies CDs are commonly found in children from unstable, insecure,
and rejecting families living in deprived areas. Antisocial behaviour is
frequent among children from broken homes, those from homes in which
family relationships are poor, and those who have been in residential
care in their early childhood. CDs are also related to adverse factors
in the wider social environment of the neighbourhood and school (Scott
et al., 2015b). Child-rearing practices and attachment: there is ample
evidence that ODD/CD is associated with less than optimal parenting
practices, characterized by harsh, inconsistent discipline, low warmth
and involvement, and high criticism (Scott et al., 2015b). The reasons
and processes by which these behaviours develop have been postulated and
include the negative reinforcement trap---where a parent responds to
mildly oppositional behaviour with a prohibition that might then cause
the child's behaviour to escalate until the parent backs off, teaching
the child that if he becomes more aggressive then he is more likely to
get his way. Of note, insecure attachment, particularly of the
disorganized type, is strongly associated with antisocial behaviour.
Children with ODD/CD come in disproportionate numbers from poor
families, and this might be because poor circumstances can affect
parenting quality, which in turn affects child behaviour. Child
maltreatment and exposure to interparental conflict and violence:
associations between physical abuse and conduct problems are well
established and, although some child conduct presentations might
increase the likelihood of experiencing corporal punishment (smacking,
spanking), when it comes to injurious physical maltreatment of children,
the effects this has on their later likelihood of CD are strong. In
addition, children exposed to domestic violence between adults are more
likely themselves to become aggressive. Other influences beyond the
family: there are important peer influences---with studies showing how
children with ODD/CD have more negative interchanges with other
children. They are more likely to be rejected by peers, making it more
likely that they associate with deviant peers. Peer influences to
antisocial behaviour are most evident in adolescence. There are also
important school effects, as children with ODD/CD are more likely to
attend schools with high delinquency rates, at

which there are high levels of distrust between teachers and students,
low pupil commitment to school, and unclear rules. Not only, as
mentioned above, do children with ODD/CD come disproportionately from
poor families but they also come from neighbourhoods that are more
likely to be inner-city areas with high disorganization and high
residential mobility. For a review of the aetiology of conduct disorder,
see Scott et al.Â (2015b).

Prognosis The long-term outcome of CD varies considerably with the
nature and extent of the disorder. In an important study, Robins (1966)
found that almost 50% of people who had attended a child guidance clinic
for CD in adolescence showed some form of antisocial behaviour in
adulthood. Subsequent studies have shown that this is most likely to be
violent offending, heavy drug usage, teenage pregnancy, leaving school
without qualifications, and receiving state benefits. No cases of
sociopathic disorder were found in adulthood among those with diagnoses
other than CD in adolescence. Follow-up of conduct-disordered children
cared for in children's homes and of controls led to similar
conclusions. About 40% of the conduct-disordered children had antisocial
personality disorder in their twenties, and many of the rest had
persistent and widespread social difficulties below the threshold for
diagnosis of a personality disorder. Where CDs first present in
adolescence, the prognosis is better, with about 80% no longer
demonstrating significant antisocial behaviour in adulthood (Scott et
al.Â (2015b) (see Box 16.5). As individuals get older their offending
does reduce considerably, especially by the time they are in their
forties, but their overall 'life failure' rates---as determined by
multiple indices, remains high. Their general health outcomes are also
worse.

Management Mild CDs often subside without treatment other than
common-sense advice to the parents. For more severe disorders, treatment
for the child is often combined with treatment and social support for
the family. Any coexisting disorders (e.g.Â ADHD, depression) should be
treated. There is no convincing evidence that any treatment affects the
overall long-term prognosis. Nevertheless, some short-term benefits can
often be achieved, and in some cases adverse family factors can be
modified in a way that could improve prognosis. Some families are
difficult to help by any means, especially where there is material
deprivation, with chaotic relationships, and poorly educated parents.

455

456

456

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry Parent training programmes. These programmes
are the mainstay of treatment of ODD/CD and use behavioural principles
(see page 434). Parents are taught how the child's antisocial behaviour
may be reinforced unintentionally by their attention to it, and how it
may be provoked by interactions with members of the family. Parents are
also taught how to reinforce normal behaviour by praise or rewards, and
how to set limits on abnormal behaviour---for example, by removing the
child's privileges, such as an hour less time to play a game. Parents in
some programmes are also trained how to read with their children, thus
tackling other influences for the child's behaviour. As aids to
learning, parents are provided with written information and video
recordings showing other parents applying behavioural procedures. For a
review of parent training programmes, see Scott et al.Â (2015a). Anger
management. Young people who are habitually aggressive have been shown
to misperceive hostile intentions in other people who are not in fact
hostile. They also tend to underestimate the level of their own
aggressive behaviour, and choose inappropriate behaviours rather than
more appropriate verbal responses. Anger management programmes seek to
correct these ideas by teaching how to inhibit sudden inappropriate
responses to angry feelings---for example, children say to themselves
'Stop! What should I do?' They also learn how to reappraise the
intentions of other people and use socially acceptable forms of
self-assertion. Other methods. Remedial teaching should be arranged if
there are associated reading difficulties. Medication is of value if
there is a comorbid disorder such as ADHD. There is increasing use of
atypical antipsychotics to target reactive aggression; however, the
evidence that this is effective is modest and might best be considered
when there is poor emotional regulation characterized by prolonged
rages. If used, they should only be considered as a short-term
intervention. Interventions in school. There is growing interest in how
schools can try and develop interventions to help address the effects of
ODD/CD in their classrooms. A number of interventions have been
developed that are mainly preventive programmes, including promoting
social and emotional learning. They are often delivered by teachers to
all children and include proactive strategies focusing on positive
behaviours, with effective instructions given to children alongside
effective behavioural management. As yet, the evidence base for these
interventions, as well as the use of teaching assistants, in classrooms
is poor.

Box 16.5 Factors that predict poor outcome in children with conduct
disorder In the young person Early onset (before age 8 years) Severe,
frequent, and varied antisocial behaviours â Hyperactivity and attention
problems â Low IQ â Pervasiveness (at home, in school, and elsewhere) â
â

In the family Parental criminality and alcoholism High hostility/discord
focused on the child â Harsh inconsistent parenting â Low income â â

In the wider environment â â

Economically deprived area Ineffective schools

Reproduced from Scott S, Oppositional and conduct disorders, In: Thapar
A. et al., Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 6th edn.,
pp.Â 913-931, Copyright (2015), with permission from John Wiley & Sons.

Forensic child psychiatry and juvenile delinquency Forensic psychiatry
is predominantly associated with children's interactions with the
juvenile justice system, and can include the assessment and management
of mentally disordered offenders or those at risk of offending, and
issues such as mental competency, fitness to testify, victimization, and
child custody disputes. This section will focus on the young offender,
with the term juvenile delinquent often used to denote a young person
who has broken the law and has been found guilty of an offence that
would be categorized as a crime if committed by an adult. In most
countries, the term applies only to a young person who has attained the
age of criminal responsibility (at present 10 years in the UK, but this
varies widely in other countries). Thus delinquency is not a psychiatric
diagnosis but a legal category. The term 'children in conflict with the
law' is gaining increasing popularity. However, juvenile delinquency may
be associated with psychiatric disorder, especially conduct disorder.
For this reason, it is appropriate to interrupt this

475

Review of syndromes review of the syndromes of child psychiatry to
consider juvenile delinquency. The majority of adolescent boys, when
asked to report their own behaviour, admit to offences against the law,
and about 20% are convicted at some time. Most offences are against
property. In England in 2009, young people aged between 10 and 17 years
committed about 200,000 detected offences of sufficient gravity to
result in a court disposal. The largest category (about 42,000 offences)
was for theft and handling stolen goods, although violence against the
person was a close second (about 38,000 offences). Many fewer girls than
boys are delinquent, although the ratio has fallen from 11:1 to 4:1 over
the past decades (Youth Justice Board, 2011). About 75% of those with
three or more convictions as juveniles go on to offend as adults
(Farrington, 2002). Delinquency is sometimes equated with conduct
disorder. This is wrong, for, although the two categories overlap, they
are not the same. Many delinquents do not have conduct disorder (or any
other psychological disorder). Equally, many of those with conduct
disorder do not offend. Nevertheless, in an important group, persistent
law-breaking is preceded and accompanied by abnormalities of conduct,
such as truancy, aggressiveness, and attention-seeking, and by poor
concentration.

Causes The causes of juvenile delinquency are complex and overlap with
the causes of conduct disorder. The causes are reviewed briefly here,
with many of the findings coming from the Cambridge Study in delinquent
development which has followed up 411 males from age 8 to 50 years; for
a more detailed account, see Young et al.Â (2015). Social factors.
Delinquency is related to low social class, poverty, poor housing,
bullying, and poor education. There are marked differences in
delinquency rates between adjacent neighbourhoods that differ in these
respects. Rates also differ between schools. Many social theories have
been put forward to explain the origins of crime, but none offers a
completely adequate explanation. Family factors. Many studies have found
that crime and interpersonal violence runs in families (Frisell et al.,
2011). For example, about 50% of boys with criminal fathers are
convicted, compared with 20% of those with fathers who are not
criminals. The reasons for this are poorly understood, but they may
include poor parenting and shared attitudes to the law (Farrington and
Welsh, 2008). Although delinquency is particularly common among those
who come from broken homes, this seems

to be largely because separation often reflects family discord in early
and middle childhood. Other family factors that are correlated with
delinquency are large family size and child-rearing practices, including
erratic discipline and harsh or neglecting care. Factors in the child.
Genetic factors appear to be less significant among the causes of
delinquency than in the more serious criminal behaviour of adulthood
(see page 515). (The role of genetic factors in conduct disorder is
considered above.) There are important associations between delinquency
and a range of neurodevelopmental disorders (Hughes, 2012), with
prevalence rates in those with delinquent behaviours of 23--32% of
intellectual disability, 43--57% of specific learning disability, 15% of
ASD, and ADHD in 11--30% (Hughes 2012; Young et al., 2015).

Assessment When the child is seen as part of an ordinary psychiatric
referral and the delinquency is accompanied by a psychiatric syndrome,
the latter should be assessed in the usual way. It is important to be
aware that there is a high prevalence of mental disorder among juvenile
offenders and it is important to screen for anxiety, depression, and
suicidal risk in particular. A thorough assessment is often needed, as a
juvenile offender can present with a broad range of needs and risks,
requiring information from collateral sources, clear notes, clear risk
assessments, and management plans. Sometimes the child psychiatrist is
asked to see a delinquent specifically to prepare a court report. In
these circumstances, as well as making enquiries among the parents and
teachers, it is essential to consult any social worker or probation
officer who has been involved with the child. Psychological testing of
intelligence and educational achievements can be useful. Other factors
to be taken into account are listed in Box 16.6. The form of the report
is similar to that described earlier in this chapter and in Chapter 18:
Forensic psychiatry. It should include a summary of the history and
present mental state together with recommendations about treatment.

Risk of violence among adolescents The term violence encompasses a wide
range of acts, from slapping to homicide with or without weapons (Young
et al., 2015). It is useful to distinguish between planned and reactive
aggression. Planned aggression (also called instrumental or proactive)
is classically associated with low anxiety and psychopathic traits,
whilst reactive aggression is associated with angry outbursts,

457

458

458

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry mood dysregulation, and disorders such as
ADHD. There are now a number of tools that can assist in assessing
adolescent violence, including the Structured Assessment of Violence
Risk in Youth (SAVRY; Borum et al., 2005) and, for sexually harmful
behaviour, the Juvenile Sex Offender Assessment Protocol II (J-SOAP-II;
Prentky and Righthand, 2003).

Box 16.6 Assessment of young offenders The offence Nature and
seriousness Characteristics of victim â Motive â Role in the group, if
others are involved â Attitude to the offence and the victim â

Interventions for juvenile offenders In this section we consider
interventions that are intended to reduce the chances of further
offending, often falling under the risk-need-responsivity (RNR) model,
which focuses on the prediction of risk and classification of offenders
for treatment. For juvenile offenders with psychiatric disorders,
including conduct disorders, mood disorders, ADHD, substance misuse and
dependence, and intellectual disability, the treatment of these
disorders should be a core aspect of care; treatment follows the
principles described elsewhere in this chapter. The range of
interventions developed for juvenile offending can be conceptualized
within a public health framework and is listed in Box 16.7 and described
in more detail in Young et al. (2015). Psychiatrists who treat juvenile
offenders need to understand the legal system in the country in which
they work. The legal responses usually include a warning not to offend
again, a fine, the requirement that the parent or guardian take proper
control, supervision by a social worker, a period at a special centre,
or an order committing the child to the care of the local authority.
Since delinquent behaviour is common, mainly not serious, and is often a
temporary phase, it is generally appropriate to treat first offences
with minimal intervention coupled with firm disapproval. The same
applies to minor offences that are repeated. A more vigorous response is
required for more serious, recurrent delinquency. For this purpose a
community-based programme is usually preferred, with the main emphasis
on improving the family environment, reducing harmful peer group
influences, helping the offender to develop better skills for solving
problems, and improving educational and vocational accomplishments. In
the UK, such a programme has been introduced by the setting up of Youth
Offending Teams. When this approach fails, custodial care may be
considered. The main aim of the law as it applies to children and
adolescents is treatment rather than punishment. There has been
extensive criminological research to determine the effectiveness of the
measures used. The general conclusions are not encouraging, although not
surprising since, as explained above, delinquency is strongly related

â

Other problem behaviours Other offences (number, nature, and whether
detected/convicted) â Violence â Self-harm â Cruelty to children or
animals â Fire-setting â

Adapted from Goodman R and Scott S, Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 3rd
edn., Copyright (2012), with permission from John Wiley & Sons.

to factors external to the child, including family disorganization,
antisocial behaviour among the parents, and poor living conditions. The
risks of reconviction are greater among children who have had any court
appearance or period of detention than among children who have committed
similar offences without any official action having been taken
(Farrington and Welsh, 2008). Of the many approaches to the treatment of
juvenile offending, a few are described below, but the evidence base
remains poor for most of the interventions. â

Structured programmes following cognitive behavioural models as well as
problem-solving skills training. These can focus on teaching social
skills, anger management, and problem-solving. An additional component,
attributional retraining, helps to correct cognitive distortions whereby
delinquent youths readily perceive threat and hostility even in neutral
interpersonal situations.

â

Multisystemic therapy. This consists of an intensive set of integrated
interventions across multiple systems in the young person's life,
following nine treatment principles, including family therapy, helping
the young person to find non-delinquent friends, personal development
(including assertiveness training), improving family problem-solving
skills, liaison with teachers, and coordination of other involved
agencies.

459

Review of syndromes â

Multidimensional treatment foster care. The young person lives in a
foster home, away from delinquent friends, for about 6 months and learns
better life skills. There are high levels of clinical support, daily
contact, and points systems for rewards alongside clear consequences for
negative behaviour. At the same time, the family are taught the skills
needed to respond to the young person more effectively.

Studies of these and other approaches indicate the need to match the
type of treatment to the needs of the particular offender. Some seem to
respond better to authoritative supervision, others to more permissive
counselling. However, it is not yet possible to provide any satisfactory
guidelines for matching treatment and offender. See Young et al.Â (2015)
for a review of forensic aspects of child and adolescent psychiatry.

Anxiety disorders Anxiety disorders are the most common mental disorders
of childhood. Fear and anxiety play important roles in functioning and
have major evolutionary significance, and therefore it is important for
a clinician to distinguish between normal anxiety and anxiety disorders
in childhood. This distinction is usually made when the symptoms are
impairing function and/ or cause marked avoidance and significant
distress. In ICD-10, anxiety disorders in childhood are classified as
'Emotional disorders with onset specific to childhood' (see Table 16.6).
DSM-5 classifies all childhood and adult anxiety disorders together in
the 'Anxiety disorders' section, although it has placed
obsessive--compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder in new
sections for each. Only ICD-10 has a diagnosis of sibling rivalry
disorder, whilst this is included in 'Relational disorders' in DSM-5.

Prevalence

Box 16.7 Interventions for youth offending Primary prevention Parenting
programmes Preschool programmes Daycare programmes School programmes
Cognitive skills training Peer programmes Community programmes
Situational crime prevention

Secondary prevention Family-focused therapies Mentoring Therapeutic
foster care Safeguarding of children Treatment of parental substance
misuse

Tertiary prevention Cooperation between police, social services, and
mental health Intensive supervision and surveillance Assertive treatment
of mental disorder Restorative justice Victim support

Anxiety disorders are the most common mental disorders in childhood and
are more frequent in girls than boys. They are associated with
significant impairment, with phobias and separation anxiety disorders
the most common in childhood and social anxiety becoming more prominent
in adolescence. Surveys of the general population suggest overall
prevalence rates of anxiety disorders in children of around 5--10%, with
age and cultural factors possibly influencing the rates, which, in
individual studies, can range from 1% to 24% (Pine et al., 2015).

Anxiety at different ages The nature and manifestations of anxiety
change as the child grows older. Infants pass through a stage of fear of
strangers. During the preschool years, separation anxiety and fears of
animals, imaginary creatures, and the dark are common. In early
adolescence these fears are replaced by anxiety about social situations
and personal adequacy. Anxiety disorders in childhood resemble these
normal anxieties and follow the same developmental sequence, although
they are more severe and more prolonged. In later adolescence, rates of
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder start to increase.
Comorbidity is common in childhood anxiety disorders, especially with
other types of anxiety disorders.

Aetiology The main factors that have been studied in the aetiology of
anxiety disorders concern the interlinked issues

459

460

460

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry of the child's temperament, genetic
influences, and the family social environment, including parenting
behaviours. Family aggregation and genetic studies indicate raised
vulnerability to anxiety in offspring of adults with the disorder
(e.g.Â the temperamental style of behavioural inhibition, or information
processing biases). Environmental factors are also important; these
include adverse life events and exposure to negative information or
modelling. Both mothers and fathers are likely to be key, although not
unique, sources of such influences, particularly if they are anxious
themselves. Some parenting behaviours associated with child anxiety,
such as overprotection, may be elicited by child characteristics,
especially in the context of parental anxiety, and these may serve to
maintain an anxiety disorder in the child. Emerging evidence emphasizes
the importance of taking the nature of child and parental anxiety into
account and of considering bidirectional influences. For a review of
aetiology see Murray et al.Â (2009).

Prognosis Longitudinal surveys of anxiety disorders highlight how most
affected children will be free of anxiety disorders in adulthood.
Anxiety disorders in childhood do, however, predict later major
depression in some samples. In studies of adults with anxiety disorders,
the majority had childhood anxiety disorders, therefore they do increase
risk of later disorders. Anxiety may also have greater long-term impact
in females. For a summary of relevant studies, see Pine et al.Â (2015).

Management Early detection and treatment of childhood anxiety disorders
can prevent substantial impairment over the course of a child's
development and accumulation of functional disability. Early treatment
may also prevent later development of adult psychiatric illness and
impaired development and accumulated functional disability. Family
education and training can reduce reinforcement of anxiety and
avoidance, but parents with their own anxiety disorders or other
psychopathology may need separate treatment. Existing studies support a
number of pharmacological and psychotherapeutic treatments for childhood
anxiety disorders. Both cognitive behaviour therapy and SSRIs are
effective treatments for separation, generalized, and social anxiety
disorders in children and adolescents, although non-pharmacological
interventions are usually used in the first instance. Combination
treatment with SSRIs and cognitive behavioural therapy has been found to
be more effective than either treatment alone (Mohatt et al., 2014;
James et al., 2013; Reynolds et al., 2012).

Table 16.6 Anxiety disorders in childhood DSM-5

ICD--10

Anxiety disorders

F93 Emotional disorders with specific onset in childhood

Separation anxiety disorder Separation anxiety disorder of childhood
Specific phobia

Phobic anxiety disorder of childhood

Social anxiety disorder (social phobia)

Social anxiety disorder of childhood

Generalized anxiety disorder Relational disorders Sibling relational
disorder

Sibling rivalry disorder

Obsessive--compulsive and Other anxiety disorders Obsessive--compulsive
related disorders disorder Trauma- and stressorrelated disorders
Post-traumatic stress disorder

Post-traumatic stress disorder

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric
Association.

Separation anxiety disorder Separation anxiety disorder is a fear of
separation from people to whom the child is attached that is clearly
greater than the normal separation anxiety of toddlers or preschool
children, or persists beyond the usual preschool period, and is
associated with significant problems of social functioning. The onset is
before the age of 6 years. The diagnosis is not made when there is a
generalized disturbance of personality development.

Clinical picture While separation anxiety is part of normal early-child
development, children with this disorder are excessively anxious when
separated from parents or other attachment figures, and are
unrealistically concerned that harm may befall these persons or that
they will leave the child. They may refuse to sleep away from these
persons or, if they agree to separate, may have disturbed sleep with
nightmares. They cling to their attachment figures by day, demanding
attention. Anxiety is often manifested as physical symptoms of stomach
ache, headache,

461

Review of syndromes nausea, and vomiting, and may be accompanied by
crying, tantrums, or social withdrawal. Separation anxiety disorder is
one cause of school refusal (see page 467).

Epidemiology Community surveys suggest that rates of separation anxiety
disorder are about 5% among 7- to 11-year-old boys and girls (Pine et
al., 2015).

Aetiology Separation anxiety disorder is sometimes precipitated by a
frightening experience. This may be brief (e.g.Â admission to hospital)
or prolonged (e.g.Â conflict between the parents). In some cases
separation anxiety disorder develops in children who react with
excessive anxiety to a large number of everyday stressors and who are
therefore said to have an anxiety-prone temperament. Sometimes the
condition appears to be a response to anxious or overprotective parents.

Prognosis The disorder often improves with time, but may worsen again
when there is a change in the child's routine, such as a move of school.
Some cases progress to generalized or other anxiety disorders in adult
life.

Treatment Account should be taken of the whole range of possible
aetiological factors, including stressful events, previous actual
separation, an anxiety-prone temperament, and the behaviour of the
parents. Stressors should be reduced, if possible, and children should
be helped to talk about their worries. It is more important to involve
the family, helping them to understand how their own concerns or
overprotection affect the child, and to find ways of making the child
feel more secure. Anxiolytic drugs may be needed occasionally when
anxiety is extremely severe, but they should be used for short periods
only. When separation anxiety is worse in particular circumstances, the
child may benefit from the behavioural techniques used for phobias, as
described in the next section.

Phobic anxiety disorder This diagnosis for children corresponds to
specific phobia for adults (see page 171). Minor phobic symptoms are
common in childhood. They usually concern animals, insects, the dark,
school, and death. The prevalence of more severe phobias varies with
age. Severe and persistent fears of animals usually begin before the age
of 5 years, and nearly all have declined by the early teenage years, but
a minority, probably about 10%, persist into adult life. Most childhood
phobias improve without specific treatment provided that the parents
adopt a firm and

reassuring approach. For phobias that do not improve, simple behavioural
treatment can be combined with reassurance and support. The child is
encouraged to encounter feared situations in a graded way, as in the
treatment of phobias in adult life (see page 170).

Social anxiety disorder of childhood This term is used in ICD-10 to
describe disorders starting before the age of 6 years in which there is
anxiety with strangers greater or more prolonged than the fear of
strangers that normally occurs in the second half of the first year of
life. Children with this condition tend to have an inhibited temperament
in infancy. These children are markedly anxious in the presence of
strangers and avoid them. The fear, which may be mainly of adults or of
other children, interferes with social functioning. It is not
accompanied by severe anxiety on separation from the parents. Treatment
resembles that of other anxiety disorders of childhood.

Sibling rivalry disorder This category is listed in ICD-10 for children
who show extreme jealousy or other signs of rivalry in relation to a
sibling, starting during the months following the birth of that sibling.
The signs are clearly greater than the emotional upset and rivalry
common in such circumstances, and they are persistent and cause social
problems. When the disorder is severe there may be hostility and even
physical harm to the sibling. The child may regress in behaviour---for
example, losing previously learned control of bladder or bowels---or act
in a way appropriate for a younger child. There is usually opposition to
the parents and behaviour intended to obtain their attention, often with
temper tantrums. There may be sleep disturbance and problems at bedtime.
In treatment, parents should be helped to divide their attention
appropriately between the two children, to set limits for all children,
and to help the child to feel valued.

Post-traumatic stress disorder Although not included in ICD-10 among the
anxiety disorders with onset usually in childhood, post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) can occur in children. The clinical picture resembles
that of the same disorder in adult life (see page 142), with disturbed
sleep, nightmares, flashbacks, and avoidance of reminders of the
traumatic events. Developmental factors can play an important role in
the presentation of PTSD, and so children may also present with
behavioural problems, developmental regression, physical symptoms, and
more generalized fears.

461

462

462

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Aetiology As in adults, the cause is an encounter with an exceptionally
severe stressor---for example, those encountered by children
experiencing natural and man-made disasters, war, physical or sexual
abuse, violence to self and others, and serious or life-threatening
injury or illness. As with adults, cases after vehicle and other
accidents are more common than after the less frequent major disasters.
Estimates of PTSD in children who have been exposed to potentially
traumatic events are around 16% (Alisic et al., 2014). The prevalence of
PTSD appears to vary with a number of factors, such as the gender and
age of the child or adolescent, type of trauma, frequency and severity
of exposure, and the amount of time since the traumatic event. Children
and adolescents who have undergone complex trauma defined by repeated or
chronic trauma, which is often of an interpersonal nature and begins
early in life, may demonstrate different responses to children and
adolescents who have undergone other forms of trauma, and therefore may
respond differently to different therapies for PTSD.

Prognosis Exposure to trauma in childhood is associated with a broad
range of adverse psychiatric outcomes in adulthood. Longitudinal studies
have shown that 15--30% of children with PTSD can continue to suffer
from the disorder in adulthood, in addition to generalized anxiety
disorders, substance misuse disorders, depression, and suicidality (Yule
et al., 2015).

Management Treatment resembles that for adults (see page 145). The most
studied treatments include trauma-focused cognitive behaviour therapy
(TF-CBT)---for which there is the greatest evidence base---as well as
eye-movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), narrative exposure
therapy (NET), and supportive counselling (Gillies, 2013).

Obsessive--compulsive disorder OCDs are increasingly recognized in
childhood and, although previously thought to be rare, are now seen to
be a common cause of distress for children and adolescents. As with the
disorder in adults, OCD is characterized by the presence of obsessions
(unwanted, repetitive, or intrusive thoughts) and compulsions
(unnecessary repetitive behaviours or mental activities). OCD is a
complex disorder, as there are clear continuities and discontinuities of
the disorder with normal development. Of note, several related forms of
repetitive behaviour

are common, particularly between the ages of 4 and 10 years. These
repetitive behaviours include preoccupation with numbers and counting,
the repeated handling of certain objects, and hoarding. Normal children
commonly adopt rituals such as avoiding cracks in the pavement or
touching lampposts. These behaviours cannot be called compulsive because
the child does not struggle against them. The preoccupations and rituals
of OCD are more extreme than these behaviours of healthy children, and
take up an increasing amount of the child's time---for example,
re-checking schoolwork many times, or frequently repeated hand washing.
OCD is also associated with certain neurological disorders, such as
Tourette's disorder, and there is increasing evidence that there might
also be some subgroups of OCD unique to child populations (Rapoport et
al., 2015).

Clinical features OCD typically develops in late childhood and early
adolescence. Obsessional disorders in childhood generally resemble those
in adulthood (see page 184). Most children have a combination of
obsessions and rituals and commonly present with washing rituals,
followed by repetitive actions and checking. Obsessional thoughts are
most often concerned with contamination, accidents, or illness affecting
the patient or another person, and concerns about orderliness and
symmetry. The content of symptoms often changes as the child grows
older. The obsessional symptoms may be provoked by external cues such as
unclean objects. Children with obsessional symptoms usually try to
conceal them, especially outside the family. Obsessional children often
involve their parents by asking them to take part in the rituals or give
repeated reassurance about the obsessional thoughts.

Aetiology OCD in childhood reflects a similar combination of biological
and psychological factors, with both genetic and environmental
influences, as in adult-onset OCD. Genetic factors are suggested as OCD
is a highly heritable disorder, particularly when it has childhood
onset. The concordance rate in monozygotic twins (about 80%) is
significantly more than that of dizygotic twins (about 40%). Family
studies find a 10-fold increase in rates of OCD among relatives of
children with OCD, compared to a doubling of rates of OCD among
relatives of those with adult-onset OCD. The genetic contribution to OCD
is increased when there is a comorbid tic disorder (Rapoport et al.,
2015). Neural basis. The conceptual model of OCD links the endless
repetitive thoughts and actions of OCD with uncontrolled activity of
parallel, discrete loops within

463

Review of syndromes the brain. These loops are postulated to connect the
basal ganglia, prefrontal cortex, and thalamus. Another model of OCD
views the disorder as a result of the overactivation of a system
designed to monitor performance completion, leading to a constant
feeling that the action is 'not just right' which then creates a need to
correct perceived mistakes. Autoimmune factors. The association with
Sydenham's chorea, which is thought to be an autoimmune disorder
following group A beta-haemolytic streptococcal infection, has led to
the description of a subtype of childhood-onset OCD with similar
aetiology. The condition is known as paediatric autoimmune
neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcal infection
(PANDAS). See Rapoport et al.Â (2015) for a review of aetiology.

Epidemiology The overall prevalence of OCD in young people up to 18
years of age is around 1--3%, with males having an earlier age of onset
and therefore higher prevalence rates in child as compared to adult
populations. Rates are much lower in young children and rise
exponentially with age (Flament and Robaey, 2009).

Associated disorders Severe and persistent obsessional thoughts and
compulsive rituals in childhood are often accompanied by other anxiety
and depressive symptoms. The patterns of comorbidity among
childhood-onset OCD are similar to adult-onset, with tic disorders
(30%), major depression (26%), and specific developmental disabilities
(17%) the most common. Simple phobias, ADHD, conduct disorder, and
separation anxiety disorders also occur.

Prognosis OCD in childhood has a generally poor prognosis, persisting in
almost half of cases, and 50% of adults with OCD report that their
symptoms started in childhood. The poorest outcomes are predicted by
earlier age of onset, comorbid psychiatric illness, and poor initial
response to treatment. OCD patients with tics or Tourette's have a
waxing and waning course, and, although tics can often improve after age
10 years, OCD symptoms can continue for several more years.

Management The first step is to inform the child, the parents, and the
teachers about the disorder and allow time for discussion of the
implications. When obsessional symptoms occur as part of an anxiety or
depressive disorder, treatment is directed to the primary disorder. True
obsessional disorders of later childhood are treated along similar lines
to

the same disorder in adults (see page 189), with cognitive behavioural
methods, medication, or a combination of the two. The cornerstone of
psychological therapies for children with OCD is exposure and response
prevention (ERP). A hierarchy of increasingly intense anxiety-provoking
situations that trigger obsessional thinking is constructed, and
subjects are exposed gradually to these situations and encouraged to
refrain from engaging in compulsive behaviours. They are taught
relaxation and anxiety management techniques to help them in this
process. Whatever the treatment, it is important to involve the family,
and about 30% of children will not respond to treatment. Both SSRIs and
clomipramine are more effective than placebo, but are associated with
side effects. In the UK, sertraline and fluvoxamine are licensed for the
treatment of OCD in people under 18 years of age, and, although
clomipramine is well studied, it is now rarely used as, in adults, the
symptoms are reduced but not removed by this treatment. In one trial
with children and adolescents with OCD, treatment with sertraline gave a
remission rate of 20%, which is modest but worthwhile when compared with
the placebo rate of 4%. In the same trial, the remission rate with
cognitive behavioural treatment was about 40%, and that with combined
treatment was over 50% (Pediatric OCD Treatment Study Team, 2004). As
OCD is frequently a chronic disorder, long-term maintenance therapy is
often needed.

Somatoform and related disorders Children with a psychiatric disorder
often complain of somatic symptoms which do not have an underlying
physical cause. These complaints include abdominal pain, headache, and
limb pains. Most of these children are treated in primary care. The
minority who are referred to specialists are more likely to be sent to
paediatricians than to child psychiatrists.

Chronic fatigue syndrome Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), which is
described on page 641, usually occurs after puberty. It is associated
with severe mental and physical fatigue that is not alleviated by rest,
coupled with significant disability. Its prevalence has been estimated
at around 0.1--2% of child and adolescent populations, with two-thirds
estimated to be female and those with CFS having high rates of
psychiatric comorbidity, predominantly anxiety and depressive disorders.
The strongest evidence regarding aetiology in younger populations is
that the Epstein--Barr

463

46

464

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry virus is associated with an increased risk
of CFS. There is some evidence for certain personality traits, with
excessive conscientiousness, rigidity, fearful behaviour, and
sensitivity being reported more frequently in young people with CFS
(Lievesley et al., 2014). The principles of treatment resemble those for
the treatment of the disorder in adults (see page 643). Cognitive
behaviour therapy, similar to that used for adults, has been found to be
effective in adolescents with a framework that conceptualizes how
inactivity can contribute to maintaining fatigue alongside other related
behavioural vicious cycles (Garralda et al., 2015). Often it is best for
treatment to be carried out jointly by a paediatrician and a
psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, and a good collaborative
relationship with the family is essential. Although the longer-term
prognosis for fatigue is relatively favourable, the shortterm effects on
school performance can have serious consequences.

Recurrent abdominal pain Childhood recurrent abdominal pain is one of
the most common medical complaints of childhood, with no organic
pathology identified in the majority of cases. It affects approximately
10% of children, and is a common reason for presentation to primary care
services and referral to a paediatrician. In many cases, the abdominal
pain is associated with headache, limb pains, and sickness, some of
which are related to anxiety, some to 'masked' depressive disorder, and
some to stressful events. Treatment is similar to that for other
emotional disorders. Follow-up suggests that 25% of cases severe enough
to require investigation by a paediatrician develop adult depression,
generalized anxiety disorder, or unexplained physical symptoms.

Conversion disorders Conversion disorders (or conversion and
dissociative disorder in ICD terminology) are described on page 648.
They are more common in adolescence than in childhood, both in
individual patients and in the rare epidemic form of the disorders. In
childhood, symptoms are usually mild and they seldom last long. The most
frequent symptoms include paralyses, abnormalities of gait, and
inability to see or hear normally. As with adults, organically
determined physical symptoms are sometimes misdiagnosed as conversion
disorder when the causative physical pathology is difficult to detect
and stressful events coincide with the onset of the symptom. For this
reason, the diagnosis of conversion disorder should be made only after a
careful search for organic disease.

Epidemiology Conversion disorders are relatively rare, with most cases
diagnosed after age 7 years; the incidence increases with age and has a
female preponderance. Incidence rates have been reported of 1.3--4.2 per
100,000, although some studies in India and Turkey have reported higher
prevalence rates, suggesting an influence of culture and ethnicity on
aetiology.

Management Conversion and other somatoform disorders should be treated
as early as possible, before secondary gains (see page 648) accumulate.
The psychiatrist and paediatrician should work closely together and with
the family and school. Unnecessary physical investigation should be
avoided. Treatment is directed mainly at reducing any stressful
circumstances and encouraging the child to talk about the problem.
Symptoms may subside with these measures, or management comparable to
that used for conversion disorder in adults may be needed (see page
649), with graded physiotherapy and behavioural methods. The majority
will improve on follow-up but almost a third will develop a new
psychiatric disorder in this time. For a review of child somatoform and
related disorders see Garralda et al.Â (2015).

Mood disorders Depression Major unipolar depression is a significant
global health problem, with the highest incident risk being during
adolescence. A depressive illness during this period is associated with
negative long-term consequences, including suicide, additional
psychiatric comorbidity, interpersonal relationship problems, poor
educational performance, and poor employment attainment well into adult
life (Cousins and Goodyer, 2015). It is normal for healthy children to
experience low mood or feel depressed in response to distressing
circumstances---for example, when a parent is seriously ill or a
grandparent has died. Some, including those experiencing grief, may also
lose interest, concentrate poorly, and eat and sleep badly. In
adolescence, depressive mood may be less immediately obvious than anger,
alienation from parents, withdrawal from social contact with peers,
underachievement at school, substance abuse, and deliberate self-harm.
This section will cover clinical depression and not normal variations in
mood or depressive symptoms that are part of another disorder, such as
anxiety or conduct disorder. Although

465

Review of syndromes there are many similarities with adult depression,
the treatment implications are very different. For a review of childhood
depression, see Brent and Maalouf (2015) and Thapar et al.Â (2012).

Clinical picture The clinical picture of major depression in childhood
and adolescence is in most ways similar to that in adults, but can be
easily missed. Irritability can be a common feature in adolescents.
Young children might not express guilt in an adult way, and may have
difficulty in describing feelings of sadness. Furthermore, their sleep
may not be disturbed in the ways found among adults with depressive
disorder and they might complain of symptoms such as unexplained
abdominal pains, headache, anorexia, and enuresis. However, while these
latter symptoms can be the first to be brought to medical attention,
their investigation should include the possibility of a depressive
disorder. When this is done, history-taking and mental state examination
will reveal persistent sadness, anhedonia, irritability, and other
symptoms typical of depressive disorder (Luby et al., 2003).

Epidemiology Depressive symptoms are more common in adolescence than in
childhood. Estimates of the prevalence of major depressive disorder give
figures of less than 1% in prepubertal children, with an equal male to
female ratio. The picture changes dramatically following puberty, with a
1-year prevalence of around 4%, with females at a greater risk with a
2:1 ratio of females to males. These prevalence estimates can vary
according to instrument used, population studied, and duration
investigated (Thapar et al., 2102).

Aetiology There are many individual, family, and social risks for child
and adolescent depression that are strongly correlated and might also
impact on continuing and later adversities. The causes of depressive
disorder in childhood appear to be similar to those of depressive
disorder in adulthood; however, in adolescence, major pubertal, and
brain and cognitive maturation processes take place and are likely to
have an influence on the aetiology and/or impact of depression. The
increased risk of depression in women correlates with endocrinological/
pubertal changes rather than chronological age (Joinson et al., 2011).
The heritability of major depression in adolescents is greater than that
in younger children. As in children, genes could act indirectly---for
example, through interaction with life events in the family or

elsewhere. Negative cognitive biases and increased cortisol secretion
have also been identified as risk factors. For a description of the
different models of depression and its neurobiology, see Brent and
Maalouf (2015) and Table 16.7. Genetic factors. Genetic factors appear
similar in nature and magnitude as in adult depression (see Chapter 9).
No individual genes have been identified, although the 5-HTTLPR variant
is reportedly associated with early-onset depression in the presence of
serious life events, peer victimization, or child maltreatment--- an
example of a gene--environment interaction (Caspi et al., 2010).
Neurobiology. This is described in detail in Brent and Maalouf (2015).
Current models include the potential role of cortisol in the
hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal (HPA)-stress system, its link with the
prefrontal cortex, and the increased sensitivity of female brains to
psychosocial stressors. Other causes. Negative life events often precede
the onset of depressive disorder in children, as they do in adults.
Temperament also seems to be important, especially the tendency to react
intensely to environmental stimuli.

Management General measures. Any distressing circumstances and stressors
should be reduced as far as possible, while the child is helped to talk
about their feelings. The possibility of depression in the parents
should be considered, and treated if necessary. With school-age
children, the management plan should involve the teachers to help them
to understand the effect of depression on the child's performance, and
to help to identify and reduce any stressors at school, including
bullying. The nature of the disorder is explained to the parents and, in
terms appropriate to their age, to the child. This explanation, and the
approach to possible stressors, should take full account of culture and
ethnicity. Psychological treatment. If depression does not improve with
the above measures, a specific psychological treatment should be
considered. Cognitive therapy, interpersonal therapy, and brief family
therapy can be used, although most of the evidence for their efficacy is
from trials with older children and adolescents. Medication. When a
child has failed to respond to psychosocial measures and psychological
treatment, or if the depressive disorder is severe at the outset, drug
treatment can be considered. For depressive disorders, SSRIs have been
shown to have clinical benefit for the treatment of moderate to severe
depression, while tricyclic antidepressant drugs have not shown
significant

465

46

466

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Table 16.7 Aetiology of depressive disorder in childhood Vulnerability
factors for depression

Environmental risk factors

Genetic

See text below

Parental depression and family discord

Negative impact of maternal depression possibly mediated by family
discord and expressed emotion directed towards the child

Cognitive distortion and rumination

Biased attention to negative emotional cues along with rumination can
influence the onset of depression

Child maltreatment

Potent risk factor for the onset and recurrence of depression

Emotion regulation

If difficulties in emotional regulation, less able to shift attention
away from negative cues in environment and possibly related to growth of
children's depressive symptoms

Peer victimization

Higher rates of depression in both bullies and their victims; can have
longlasting effects

Behavioural disorders and irritability

Increased rates in children with ADHD as well as their parents

Sexual minority status

3Ã higher risk of depression

Sleep

Sleep deprivation leads to increased mood lability and greater attention
to negative emotional cues

Bereavement

3Ã increased risk; greatest risk immediately after the bereavement and
if a past history of depressive symptomatology

Comorbid medical illness

Poor physical health associated with depression

Resilience

Higher IQ

Adapted from Brent D and Maalouf F, Depressive disorders in childhood
and adolescence, In: Thapar A. et al., Rutter's Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 6th edn., pp.Â 874--892, Copyright (2015), with permission
from John Wiley & Sons.

benefit over placebo in depressed adolescents (Cousins and Goodyer,
2015; National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2005d). Of
the SSRIs, a network meta-analysis has demonstrated that fluoxetine is
the only antidepressant currently considered to have a favourable
risk--benefit ratio (Cipriani et al., 2016), with another meta-analysis
quoting a number needed to treat of 10 (Bridge et al., 2007). Clinicians
should look for the emergence or exacerbation of suicidality on starting
medication, especially with SSRIs and venlafaxine, and therefore
prescribing decisions in these circumstances are best made by a
specialist in child psychiatry. The potential benefits and adverse
effects are examined in each case, and discussed with the carers and, in
appropriate terms, with the child. The information should include
warning about the delay between starting medication and improvement, and
dangerous side effects, including worsening ideas of and behaviour
around selfharm. If an antidepressant is prescribed, it should be

for a child or adolescent with a confirmed diagnosis of moderate or
severe depression, closely monitored, especially in the first few weeks,
and it should, if possible, be combined with some form of psychological
treatment. In the Treatment for Adolescents with Depression (TADS)
study, sponsored by the US National Institute for Mental Health (NIMH),
439 depressed adolescents were randomly allocated to fluoxetine, pill
placebo, cognitive behaviour therapy, or a combination of fluoxetine and
cognitive behaviour therapy. After 12 weeks of treatment, response rates
for pill placebo (34%) and cognitive behaviour therapy (43%) were
significantly less than for fluoxetine alone (61%) and the combination
treatment (71%). By 18 weeks, the response to cognitive behaviour
therapy (65%) was similar to that found with fluoxetine alone (69%),
while the response to combination treatment was now 85%. As noted above,
fluoxetine treatment was associated with an increased risk of suicidal
ideation and self-harm relative to placebo, but this

476

Review of syndromes increase was not seen in patients in whom fluoxetine
was combined with cognitive behaviour therapy (March and Vitiello,
2009). The TADS study supports the view that the best treatment for
moderate to severe depression in adolescence is a combination of
fluoxetine and cognitive behaviour therapy. Psychological treatments. A
network meta-analysis has shown that interpersonal therapy and cognitive
behaviour therapy should be considered as the most effective
psychotherapies for depression in children and adolescents (Zhou et al.,
2015).

Prognosis As with adult depression, child and adolescent depression
tends to be chronic and recurrent, although 60--90% will remit within 1
year; 50--70% will develop subsequent depressive disorders within 5
years. There is an increased risk of depression in adulthood, and
chronic depression in childhood is also associated with educational
underachievement and interpersonal difficulties.

Bipolar disorder In the past two decades there has been a marked
increase in knowledge about childhood-onset bipolar disorder. It can be
one of the most impairing childhood psychiatric illnesses, with
significant morbidity and mortality. Mania is generally thought to be
extremely uncommon before puberty, although there have been significant
recent diagnostic changes giving rise to estimates of bipolar disorder
in paediatric populations of about 1%. The diagnostic criteria for
making a diagnosis are similar to those in adults and are described in
Chapter 10. Recent changes in DSM-5 have helped to clarify some of the
more complex issues involved in diagnosis. These include a clearer
distinction between the prominence of irritability in childhood
presentation of mania compared to other disorders such as generalized
anxiety disorder, ASD, and ADHD. In the new classification of childhood
bipolar disorder, irritability has to be present at the same time as
some of the 'B symptoms' of mania, such as decreased need for sleep. The
second key area that helps distinguish mania from the overactivity of
ADHD involves the presence of these five symptoms: elation, grandiosity,
hypersexuality, flight of ideas/increased goal-directed activity, and
decreased need for sleep. The most significant departure in the DSM-5
classification is the introduction of a new category of 'disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder' (as described on page 453), which is now a key
differential diagnosis to consider. DMDD, as distinguished from
childhood bipolar

disorder, involves chronic, severe, irritability characterized by
frequent temper outbursts out of proportion to the situation and child's
developmental level, and a persistently irritable or angry mood. A
longitudinal perspective is very important to ensure the presence of
different episodes to help confirm a diagnosis. Children with bipolar
disorder tend to cycle more frequently than adults and are more likely
to have an impairing illness with symptoms much of the time. Their
treatment requires a complex approach to meet the complex needs of the
disorder, with targeted pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. Most of the
treatment data comes from adult studies. For mania, secondgeneration
antipsychotic medications have the strongest efficacy data in young
people with bipolar disorder. However, as with the treatment of
psychosis, there are significant side effects, such as substantial
weight gain and metabolic syndrome. Risperidone, aripiprazole, and
quetiapine have all been licensed by the Food and Drug Administraiton
(FDA) to treat mania or mixed states in 10--17-year-olds. There is some
support for the use of lithium in childhood bipolar disorder, and
weakest support for the therapeutic efficacy of antiepileptic drugs. The
treatment of depression associated with bipolar disorder in childhood is
poorly studied, although the data suggests that adolescents with bipolar
disorder spend considerable time suffering from symptoms of depression
and anxiety. There is some suggestion that the risk of manic induction
on antidepressant treatment is higher in prepubertal children than in
older adolescents. For a full review of bipolar disorder in childhood,
see Leibenluft et al.Â (2015).

School refusal School refusal is not a psychiatric disorder but a
pattern of behaviour that can have many causes. It is convenient to
consider it at this point in the chapter because of its association with
anxiety and depressive disorder. School refusal is one of several
reasons for repeated absence from school. Physical illness is the most
common. A small number of children are deliberately and repeatedly kept
at home by parents to help in the home or for other reasons. Others are
truants who could go to school but choose not to, often as a form of
rebellion, and usually without their parents' knowledge. Finally, school
refusers stay away from school but with parents' knowledge; they
experience emotional distress at the prospect of attending school and
their parents often try to get them to attend school (Maynard et al.,
2015).

467

468

468

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Epidemiology Temporary absences from school are extremely common, but
the prevalence of school refusal is around 1-- 2% of the general
population and up to 15% of those referred to mental health services.

Clinical picture At times, the first sign to the parents that something
is wrong is the child's sudden and complete refusal to attend school.
More often there is an increasing reluctance to set out, with signs of
unhappiness and anxiety when it is time to go. These children often
complain of somatic symptoms of anxiety such as headache, abdominal
pain, diarrhoea, sickness, or vague complaints of feeling ill. These
complaints occur on school days but not at other times. Some children
appear to want to go to school, but become increasingly distressed as
they approach it. The final refusal can arise in several ways. It may
follow a period of gradually increasing difficulty of the kind just
described. It may appear after an enforced absence for another reason,
such as a respiratory tract infection. It may follow an event at school
such as a change of class. It may occur when there is a problem in the
family such as the illness of a grandparent to whom the child is
attached. Whatever the sequence of events, the child is extremely
resistant to efforts to return them to school, and their evident
distress makes it hard for the parents to insist that they go. Almost
50% of school refusers referred to clinics have a diagnosable anxiety
disorder, including separation anxiety disorder, specific phobias,
social phobia, generalized anxiety disorder, and panic disorder with
agoraphobia.

Aetiology School refusal is a complex problem that is determined by a
broad range of risk factors that interact with each other and change
over time. The risk factors involve individual, family, school, and
community factors. Individual factors include behavioural inhibition,
fear of failure, low self-efficacy, and physical illness. The family
factors can include separation and divorce, parental mental illness,
overprotective parenting style, and dysfunctional family interactions.
School factors include bullying, physical education lessons, transition
to secondary school, while community factors can include increasing
pressure to achieve academically and inadequate support services
(Maynard et al., 2015). Separation anxiety is particularly important in
younger children. In older children there may be a true school phobia,
i.e.Â a specific fear of certain aspects of school life,

including travel to school. Some fear bullying, or failure to do well in
class. Other children have no specific concerns, but feel generally
inadequate and depressed. Some older children have a depressive
disorder.

Prognosis In the absence of treatment most youth with school refusal
continue to display problematic school attendance and emotional
distress, leading to short- and long-term adverse consequences. Studies
of the longer prognosis of school refusal show that, of those with more
severe problems, between a third and a half have emotional problems and
others will have poorer social adjustment and limited social contacts.
The impact on families can also be great.

Treatment Except in the most severe cases, arrangements should be made
for an early return to school. There should be discussion with the
schoolteachers, who should be asked about the child's problems, asked
how they can help the child to catch up with missed education, and
advised how to manage any difficulties that may arise when the child
returns. By the time that help is sought, parents often have difficulty
in pressuring the child to go to school. Psychosocial treatments for
children with school refusal typically incorporate both cognitive and
behavioural interventions. There are a number of manualized cognitive
behaviour therapy interventions and all involve individual treatment,
some level of parental involvement, consultation with school staff, and
between-session tasks. Graded exposure to school attendance is commonly
advocated, and many manuals incorporate problemsolving training with the
young person and family work on communication and problem-solving. For a
review of psychosocial interventions, see Maynard et al.Â (2015).

Other childhood psychiatric disorders Functional enuresis Functional
enuresis is the repeated involuntary voiding of urine occurring after an
age at which continence is usual (see below), in the absence of any
identified physical disorder. Enuresis may be nocturnal (bedwetting) or
diurnal (daytime wetting), or both. Most children achieve daytime and
night-time continence by 3 or 4 years of age. Nocturnal enuresis is
often referred to as primary if there has been no preceding period of
urinary continence. It is called secondary if there has been a preceding
period of urinary continence.

469

Review of syndromes Nocturnal enuresis can cause great unhappiness and
distress, particularly if the parents blame or punish the child. This
unhappiness may be made worse by limitations imposed by enuresis on
activities such as staying with friends or going on holiday.

motivation. A question should be asked about faecal soiling. The child
should be screened for other psychiatric disorders and a history taken
to determine if any difficult or distressing events might have
contributed to the presentation.

Epidemiology

Management

Estimates of prevalence vary, depending on the definition and method of
assessment. In the UK, the prevalence of nocturnal enuresis occurring
once a week or more is about 10% at 5 years of age, 4% at 8 years, and
1% at 14 years. Similar figures have been reported from the USA.
Nocturnal enuresis occurs more frequently in boys. Daytime enuresis has
a lower prevalence and is more common in girls than in boys. More than
50% of daytime wetters also wet their beds at night (Butler, 2008).

Primary care and paediatric services usually treat these disorders. Any
physical disorder should be treated. If the enuresis is functional, an
explanation should be given to the child and the parents that the
condition is common and the child is not to blame. It should be
explained to the parents that punishment and disapproval are
inappropriate and unlikely to be effective. The parents should be
encouraged to reward success without drawing attention to failure, and
not to focus attention on the problem. Many younger enuretic children
improve spontaneously soon after being given an explanation of this
kind, but those over 6 years of age are likely to need more active
measures. The next step is usually advice about restricting fluid before
bedtime, voiding at daytime intervals and/or before bedtime, taking the
child during the night to the toilet, and the use of star charts to
reward success. Enuresis alarms. Children who do not improve with these
simple measures may be treated with an enuresis alarm with high reported
success rates. Modern alarms consist of a detector pad attached to the
night clothes, and an alarm buzzer carried in a pocket or on the wrist.
When the child begins to pass urine the detector is activated and the
alarm sounds. The child turns off the alarm, gets up to complete the
emptying of the bladder, and changes their pyjamas and sheets, with help
from the parents if needed. The method requires about 6--8 weeks of
treatment, and, if carried to completion, is effective within a month in
about 70--80% of cases, although about a third relapse within 1 year. It
seems that children with associated psychiatric disorder do less well
than the rest. Medication. The synthetic antidiuretic hormone
desamino-D-arginine vasopressin (desmopressin) has been used in the
treatment of nocturnal enuresis in children over 5 years of age. It can
be administered as a tablet or in a nasal spray. In one clinical trial,
about 50% of the enuretic children treated with intranasal hormone
became dry, and good results have been reported for an oral preparation.
However, patients relapse when treatment is stopped. Side effects of the
oral preparation include rhinitis and nasal pain; other side effects are
nausea and abdominal pain. For this reason it is often used for
temporary relief at important times---for example, during

Aetiology Nocturnal enuresis occasionally results from physical
conditions, but more often appears to be caused by delay in the
maturation of the nervous system, either alone or in combination with
environmental stressors. There is some evidence for a genetic
contribution; about 70% of children with enuresis have a first-degree
relative who has been enuretic. Also, concordance rates for enuresis are
twice as high in monozygotic as in dizygotic twins (Butler, 2008). Some
family influences include exposure to family adversity and stress in
early childhood, parenting style, and difficulties in toilet
training---either due to child temperamental factors, parental factors,
or a combination of both. Although most enuretic children are free from
psychiatric disorder, the proportion with psychiatric disorder is
greater than that of other children and it can be associated with low
self-esteem if prolonged. There is evidence that early childhood
difficult temperament (problems adapting to change, high intensity, and
negative mood) and behaviour problems (conduct problems, hyperactivity,
and low levels of prosocial behaviour) are risk factors for later
bedwetting (Joinson et al., 2015). Enuresis is more frequent in large
families living in overcrowded conditions. Stressful events are
associated with the onset of secondary enuresis. Rigid or other
particular kinds of training have not been shown to improve outcomes.

Assessment A careful history and appropriate physical examination are
required to determine if the enuresis is primary or secondary and to
exclude undetected physical disorder, particularly urinary infection,
diabetes, or epilepsy, and to assess possible precipitating factors and
the child's

469

470

470

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry an overnight stay with friends. It is also
possible to use desmopressin in conjunction with the enuresis alarm to
speed the acquisition of bladder control. Imipramine and anticholinergic
agents have also been used. For guidelines for the treatment of
enuresis, see Walle et al.Â (2012).

Faecal soiling At the age of 3 years, 6% of children are still soiling
themselves with faeces at least once a week; at 7 years the figure is
1.5%. By the age of 11 years, the figure is only 1% once a month or
more. Soiling is three times more frequent in boys than in girls
(Butler, 2008). The term encopresis is used, but in two senses. In its
wider sense it is a synonym for faecal soiling. In its narrower sense it
denotes the repeated deposition of formed faeces in inappropriate
places, including the underclothes. Because of this ambiguity, the term
faecal soiling is used here. Children who soil their clothes for any
reason may feel ashamed, deny what has happened, and try to hide the
dirty clothing.

Aetiology Faecal soiling has several causes. â

â

Constipation with overflow is a common cause. Constipation has many
causes, but common ones are a low-fibre diet, pain on defaecation (due,
for example, to an anal fissure), or refusal to pass faeces as a form of
rebellion. Hirschsprung's disease is an uncommon but important cause.
Soiling results when, after prolonged constipation, liquid faeces leak
round the plug of hard faeces in the rectum. Fear of using the toilet.
Occasionally children who have no pain on passing faeces fear sitting on
the toilet for other reasons---for example, because they believe that
some harmful creature lives there. Shy or bullied children may fear
going to the toilet at school.

â

Failure to learn bowel control. This can occur in children with
intellectual disability or children of normal intelligence whose
training has been inconsistent or inadequate.

â

Stress-induced regression. Children who have recently learned control
may lose it as a result of a highly stressful experience, such as sexual
abuse.

â

Rebellion. Some children appear to defaecate deliberately in
inappropriate places, and some children smear faeces on walls or
elsewhere. Usually the family has many social problems, and often the
child has other emotional or behavioural difficulties. The act appears
to be a form of aggression towards the parents/carers, although this
intention is usually denied by the child.

Treatment Treatment depends on the cause. The first step is to check for
chronic constipation, and if it is present, to treat the cause. For
this, joint assessment with a paediatrician may be needed. Even when
constipation is not the main cause, it may require treatment as a
secondary problem. It is generally managed with a combination of
laxatives and behavioural interventions aimed at re-establishing normal
bowel habits, including short periods (less than 5 minutes) of toilet
sitting after meals, self-initiated toileting, and self-management of
cleanliness. A child who is fearful of the toilet should be reassured
sympathetically. Inadequate toilet training may be improved using
behavioural techniques, including achievable targets, and star charts or
other rewards, together with help for the parents. Stress-induced
regression usually disappears when the child has been helped to overcome
the trauma. Soiling as rebellion is more difficult to treat, as it is
generally part of wider social and psychological difficulties, which may
require intensive and prolonged help. If outpatient treatment fails in
these cases, or in those owing to inadequate or unsuitable training, the
child may respond to behavioural management in hospital. If the child is
admitted, the parents need to be closely involved in the treatment to
avoid relapse when the child returns home.

Prognosis Whatever the cause, it is unusual for encopresis to persist
beyond the middle teenage years, although associated problems may
continue. When treated, most cases improve within a year. For a review
of faecal soiling, see Butler (2008).

Selective mutism In this condition, sometimes called elective mutism, a
child consistently refuses to speak in certain social situations,
although they do so normally in others. Usually speech is normal in the
home but lacking at school. There is evidence that, although these
children are able to speak in some situations, they do have lower scores
on standardized measures of language than their peers. These children
often have a comorbid anxiety disorder, usually social phobia, and so in
DSM-5 this condition has now been placed with the anxiety disorders. The
condition usually begins between 3 and 5 years of age, after normal
speech has been acquired. Although reluctance to speak is not uncommon
among children starting school, clinically significant elective mutism
is rare, probably occurring in about 1 per 1000 children. Assessment is
difficult because the child often refuses to speak to the psychiatrist,
so that diagnosis depends to a large extent on the parents' and other
informant

471

Review of syndromes accounts. When questioning the parents, it is
important to ask whether speech and comprehension are normal at home.
Treatment approaches aim to lower the anxiety that a child has for
speaking in certain situations and increase the contexts in which the
child may speak comfortably. In general behavioural treatments,
cognitive behaviour therapy and/or play therapy will be the first choice
of intervention. Selective mutism is persistent, with a remission rate
of only 58% 13 years after first referral and high rates of phobia and
social anxiety, as well as increased risk for depression and substance
misuse in unresolved cases (Norbury et al., 2015).

Stammering Stammering (or 'child-onset fluency disorder' in DSM-5) is a
disturbance of the rhythm and fluency of speech. It may take the form of
repetitions of syllables or words, or of blocks in the production of
speech. This may be accompanied by excessive tension, struggle
behaviour, and secondary mannerisms such as eye-blinking or arm
movements. Stammering is four times more frequent in boys than in girls.
It is usually a brief problem in the early stages of language
development, although prognosis after age 7 years is more guarded.
However, 0.3%-- 1% of children suffer from stammering after they have
entered school. The cause of stammering is not known, although many
theories exist. It seems unlikely that all cases have the same causes.
Over 60% have a concurrent speech and language disorder, with the most
common being speech sound disorder. Genetic factors, brain damage, and
anxiety may all play a part in certain cases, but do not seem to be
general causes. Stammering is not usually associated with a psychiatric
disorder, even though it can cause embarrassment and distress. Most
children improve whether treated or not. Many kinds of psychiatric
treatment have been tried, including psychotherapy and behaviour
therapy, but none has been shown to be effective. The usual treatment is
speech therapy, and four classes of intervention are used: fluency
shaping, stuttering modification, use of electronic devices, and
parent-implemented techniques. For a summary see Norbury et al.Â (2015).

Tic disorders Tic disorders, including Gilles de la Tourette syndrome,
are considered on page 376.

Dementia Dementing disorders are extremely rare in childhood. They
result from organic brain diseases such

as lipidosis, leucodystrophy, or subacute sclerosing panencephalitis.
Many of the causes are genetically determined and may affect other
children in the family. The prognosis is usually poor, and many cases
are fatal.

Psychosis and early-onset schizophrenia Psychotic symptoms are
relatively common in young people, especially in childhood. Prevalence
is higher in younger (9--12 years) compared to older (13--18 years)
children, although they are rare before 9 years of age. For example, in
a systematic review of population-based studies the prevalence of
psychotic symptoms was 17% among children aged 9--12 years and 7.5%
among adolescents aged 13--18 years (Kelleher et al., 2012). In a UK
population cohort, up to 14% of 12-year-olds had 'non-clinical psychotic
symptoms', with higher levels in those from low socioeconomic status
families and with low IQ (Horwood, 2008). Experience of the psychotic
symptoms seemed to be similar to those of adult psychosis, but only 3%
met strict phenomenological criteria for adult psychotic disorders. In
another cohort, Polanczyk et al.Â (2010) confirmed that a significant
minority of 12-year-olds in the community self-report hallucinations
(most commonly) and delusions. In addition, these symptoms were
associated with many of the same risk factors and correlates as adult
schizophrenia, including genetic, social, neurodevelopmental,
home-rearing, and behavioural risks. Therefore, psychotic symptoms in
childhood are often a marker of an impaired developmental process and
should be actively assessed. Psychotic symptoms generally occur in the
context of other childhood psychiatric problems, indicating that it is
worthwhile to ask all preadolescent psychiatric patients about
hallucinations and delusions. Even if the psychotic symptoms are not
themselves impairing, they are associated with important risk factors,
such as chaotic household, maternal negativity, and physical
maltreatment, and with behavioural problems, such as early tobacco use
and self-harm, that should be a focus of attention. For those at the
most severe end of the spectrum, early-onset schizophrenia, starting in
childhood or adolescence is accepted to be clinically and biologically
continuous with the adult disorder. The most prominent differences are
that the early-onset form of schizophrenia is often more severe, has a
greater association with early neurodevelopmental difficulties, and has
poorer treatment response. There may also be a higher proportion of
cases attributable to CNVs (see Chapter 12). The whole range of symptoms
that

471

472

472

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry characterize schizophrenia in adulthood may
occur, and in both DSM-5 and ICD-10 the criteria for diagnosis in
children are the same as those used in adults; there is no separate
category of childhood schizophrenia. It is highlighted in DSM-5 that, if
other communication disorders of childhood are present where
disorganized speech and negative symptoms are also present, a diagnosis
of schizophrenia should be made only if prominent hallucinations or
delusions are also present for at least 1 month. Schizophrenia in
adolescence is more common in boys than in girls. Before symptoms of
schizophrenia appear, many of these children experience non-specific
behavioural changes, social withdrawal, and declining school
performance. The prognosis may be good for a single acute episode with
florid symptoms, but for the majority, early-onset schizophrenia runs a
chronic course and is especially poor when the onset is insidious.
Effective treatments are less well established for earlyonset
schizophrenia than for adult populations, and include antipsychotic
medications combined with psychoeducational, psychotherapeutic, and
educational interventions. For children, adolescents, and young adults,
the balance of risk and benefit of antipsychotics appears less
favourable than in adults (Stafford et al., 2015). Studies suggest that
many young people with early-onset schizophrenia do not respond
adequately to available antipsychotic drugs and are vulnerable to
adverse events, particularly metabolic side effects (McClellan and
Stock, 2013). In recent years there has been a growing emphasis on early
detection and intervention, with intervention in those with 'at-risk
mental states', but especially to minimize the duration of untreated
psychosis in child and adolescent populations, as these populations
often have long periods of untreated psychotic symptoms (Fraguas et al.,
2014). For review of childhood schizophrenia, see Driver et al.Â (2013).

Gender dysphoria These disorders are discussed in detail in Chapter 13.
This field, and the classification of these disorders, has changed
dramatically over the last few years. Although some children might
prefer to dress in the clothes of and to play with the toys of the other
gender, often referred to previously as effeminacy in boys or
tomboyishness in girls, the gender dysphorias in children are associated
with a strong desire to be of the other gender or an insistence that he
or she is the other gender. For a review see Zucker et al.Â (2015).

Suicidal behaviour and self-harm Self-harm and suicide are major public
health problems in adolescents, with rates of self-harm being high in
the teenage years and suicide being the second most common cause of
death in young people worldwide. Important contributors to self-harm and
suicide include genetic vulnerability and psychiatric, psychological,
familial, social, and cultural factors. The effects of media and
contagion are also important. Prevention of self-harm and suicide needs
both universal measures aimed at young people in general and targeted
initiatives focused on high-risk groups. There is little evidence of
effectiveness of either psychosocial or pharmacological treatment, with
particular controversy surrounding the usefulness of antidepressants.
Restriction of access to means for suicide is important. These issues
are discussed in Chapter 21. For a full account, see Hawton et
al.Â (2012).

Psychiatric aspects of physical illness in childhood The associations
between physical and psychiatric disorders in children resemble those in
adults (see Chapter 22). There are three main groups to consider; these
are children with: â

psychiatric manifestations of medical illnesses and treatments or
adjustment to their medical illness;

â

psychiatric disorders presenting with physical symptoms without an
identified underlying organic cause---for example, abdominal pain;

â

physical complications of psychiatric disorders---for example, eating
disorders.

In this section we consider only some problems specific to childhood.
For more information on psychiatric aspects of somatic disease in
children, see Pinsky et al. (2015).

The impact of childhood physical illness Psychiatric manifestations of
medical illness Children with medical illnesses serious enough to
warrant hospitalization are at increased risk for emotional disorders,
with estimates of psychological distress in children and adolescents
varying from 20% to greater than 35% and estimates of those with chronic
illnesses ranging from 10% to 30% (Pinsky et al., 2015). Those that
impact on the central nervous system,

473

Review of syndromes such as epilepsy and cerebral palsy, pose additional
risks. Other factors associated with poor psychological adjustment to
chronic medical conditions include physical disability and brain
dysfunction, pain frequency, younger age, poverty, single-parent family,
and increased psychological symptoms in the parents. There is evidence
that a child's psychiatric illness may affect the physical disease
process, not only by influencing adherence and lifestyle, but also by
producing psychophysiological changes. For instance, children with
diabetes mellitus are at greater risk for depressive disorders, and
those who have comorbid depression are at increased risk for treatment
non-adherence and repeated hospitalization as well as disease-related
complications (e.g.Â diabetic retinopathy) (DeMaso et al., 2009).
Non-adherence to medical treatments is common across conditions, with
estimates ranging from 50% to 80%; the factors contributing to poor
adherence are many, but include the medication regimen, family systems,
denial, psychiatric illness, and relationships with medical providers.
Asthma is the most common chronic illness of childhood and it is
important when treating a child with asthma to understand the factors
that affect adherence, delineate common psychosocial stresses that may
act as triggers for asthma attacks, and teach stress management skills
to improve adherence and decrease morbidity. At the other extreme,
childhood cancer is rare but also presents numerous challenges to
adaptation and development, although most studies show that childhood
cancer survivors adapt well following treatment. Psychological support
is particularly beneficial at the more stressful times, with these often
being at the time of diagnosis, the onset of treatment, and treatment
completion, as well as, for some, dealing with any late effects of
cancer and its treatment---such as any effects on sexual maturation that
might have been affected by chemotherapy or relapse. Challenges to
psychosocial adaptation often include persistent pain, persistent
debilitating side effects of treatment such as nausea, alteration in
body image, school disruptions, compromised peer relationships, and
family stresses and conflicts. There is evidence that cognitive
behavioural therapy has positive effects in the treatment of symptoms of
depression and anxiety in children who have chronic physical illness
(Bennett et al., 2015). There are growing psychological medicine or
psychiatry-liaison services working in general hospital settings, and
mental health services integrating with the general or specialist
medical teams can provide enhanced models of care for children with
medical illnesses and work closely as part

of the team contributing to the management of often complicated needs.

Effect on parents The effects on parents are greater when the child's
physical illness is chronic or disabling. Their response depends on
factors such as the nature of the physical disorder, the temperament of
the child, the parents' emotional resources, and the circumstances of
the family. The parents may experience a sequence of emotional reactions
like those of bereavement, and their marital and social lives may be
affected. Most parents develop a warm, loving relationship with a
physically disabled child and cope successfully with the difficulties. A
few manage less well; they may have unrealistic expectations, or they
may be rejecting or overprotective. The support of a multidisciplinary
team and, if needed, respite options for care are important for
families. It is important also to ensure that the brothers and sisters
of children with medical illnesses do not feel neglected, irritated by
restrictions on their social activities, or resentful of having to spend
so much time helping in the case of a child with greater physical and
emotional needs. Although some studies have shown more emotional and
behavioural disturbances in siblings than would be expected by chance,
most siblings manage well, and some even benefit through increased
abilities to cope with stress and to show compassion for others.

Children in hospital It is important to prepare children for admission
by explaining in appropriate terms what will happen, and by introducing
to them the members of staff who will care for them and, if possible, to
visit the hospital or treatment area in advance. Once admitted, many
hospitals appreciate the importance of ensuring a family member can stay
with their child, and, depending on each particular situation, let them
stay overnight in the same room with them or sleep in facilities on or
close to the hospital. The wider family and friends should be able to
visit frequently and, where appropriate, primary carers can take part in
the care of the child. Many hospitals have educational facilities
attached or associated with them as children who have prolonged hospital
stay, and are well enough, might benefit from educational input---not
only to distract them whilst in hospital but also to make the adjustment
back into school easier as they will not have to catch up on quite as
much missed work. For issues to consider in the very unwell or when a
child dies in hospital, see Pinsky et al. (2015).

473

47

474

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry

Special considerations for adolescent populations Adolescence and young
adulthood are the years in which an individual establishes the social,
cultural, emotional, educational, and economic resources to maintain
their health and wellbeing across the life course (Patton et al., 2016).
It is a dynamic period of brain development, with significant changes
taking place within neural systems. Early adolescence (10-- 14 years) is
biologically dominated by puberty and the effects of the rapid rise in
pubertal hormones on body morphology and sexual and brain development.
Adolescence is a time of remodelling of the brain's reward system.
Psychologically it is characterized by low resistance to peer
influences, low risk perception, often leading to increases in
risk-taking behaviour, and poor self-regulation. School and family
environments are critical social contexts during this period. In late
adolescence (15--19 years) pubertal maturation continues and the brain
continues to be extremely developmentally active, particularly in the
development of the prefrontal cortex and the increased connectivity
between brain networks. During this phase many adolescents develop
greater executive functioning and also increased autonomy. When making
decisions, adolescents seek out and are more influenced by exciting,
arousing, and stressful situations compared with adults. In many low-
and middle-income settings adolescent males and females might start to
work, get married, and have children, whilst in high-income countries,
education continues into mid or late adolescence, and responsibilities
come later. Adolescents are expected both to conform to the rules of
society and to become more independent and develop restraints on their
own behaviour. Many of the problems of adolescence relate to conflicts
between these two expectations, or to the rejection of the rules of
society. Although such problems are sometimes conspicuous, they are not
inevitable.

Epidemiology of psychiatric disorder in adolescence Although psychiatric
disorders are only slightly more common in adolescence than in the
middle years of childhood, the pattern of disorder is closer to that of
adults. In a UK survey, Meltzer et al.Â (2000) found that, between the
ages of 11 and 15 years, 13% of boys and 10% of girls had a psychiatric
disorder. Both emotional disorders and conduct disorder were more
frequent than in childhood, and occurred with approximately the same
frequency.

Clinical features of psychiatric disorders of adolescence There are no
specific disorders of adolescence. Nevertheless, special experience and
skill are required to apply the general principles of psychiatric
diagnosis and treatment to patients at this time of transition between
childhood and adult life. It can be difficult to distinguish psychiatric
disorder from the normal emotional reactions of the teenage years. The
clinical features of adolescent depression, anxiety, psychosis, and
other disorders are discussed under the relevant sections in this
chapter. A few specific disorders not included elsewhere and important
to mention are now included below.

Eating disorders Problems with eating and weight are common in
adolescence. They are discussed in Chapter 13, to which the reader is
referred, as they closely resemble the same conditions in adulthood. It
is particularly important to involve the parents and perhaps other
family members in the treatment of an adolescent patient with eating
disorder. Systemic family therapy has been shown to be of value for
anorexia nervosa in adolescents. For a review, see Bryant-Waugh (2015).

Alcohol and substance use disorders Substance use disorders are among
the most prevalent psychiatric disorders in those aged 9--21 years and
in children and adolescents are similar to those in adulthood, as
described in Chapter 20. The number with substance use disorders rises
rapidly in adolescence, peaks around age 20 years, and has a declining
incidence after age 25 years. However, adolescent substance use
disorders often persist into adulthood and those persisting further
become leading causes of adult deaths. There is considerable
countryto-country variability in substance use; a 36-country average of
rates showed that in 16-year-olds, on average around 87% had 'ever' used
alcohol, 54% cigarettes, and 17% cannabis. Substance use patterns also
shift over time as well as new, abusable substances appearing and
becoming more readily available via online sources. Excessive drinking
is common among adolescents, especially among those with conduct
disorder. Most adolescent heavy drinkers seem to reduce their drinking
as they grow older, but a few progress to more serious drinking problems
in adulthood. Prevention programmes have been developed, but there is
little evidence for their effectiveness. Occasional drug taking is
common in adolescence, and is often a group activity. Cigarette smoking
and the use

475

Review of syndromes of cannabis and 'ecstasy' are especially frequent.
Solvent abuse is largely confined to adolescence, and is usually of
short duration. Abuse of drugs such as amphetamines, barbiturates,
opiates, and cocaine is less common but more serious, as most
drug-dependent adults will have experimented with these drugs during
adolescence. There is a strong association between conduct disorder in
childhood and drug taking in adolescence. Most adolescents experiment
with drugs for short periods and do not become regular users. Those who
persist in taking drugs are more likely to come from discordant families
or broken homes, to have failed at school, and to be members of a group
of persistent drug users. Feelings of alienation and low self-esteem may
also be important. Since regular drug taking starts less often in
adulthood than in adolescence, and the developing brain is likely to be
more vulnerable to the deleterious effects of substance misuse, the
limitation of drug taking among adolescents is an important aim. One
approach is the application of appropriate psychosocial interventions in
young people at high risk of drug misuse (see page 475 and National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2007). See Crowley et
al.Â (2015) for an account of substance misuse by adolescents.

Assessment of adolescents Special skills are needed when interviewing
adolescents to know which approach might be best for that particular
person. In general, young adolescents require an approach similar to
that used for children, while for older adolescents it is more
appropriate to employ the approach used with adults. It must always be
remembered that a large proportion of adolescents attending a
psychiatrist do so somewhat unwillingly, and also that most have
difficulty in expressing their feelings in adult terms. Therefore
psychiatrists must be willing to spend considerable time establishing a
relationship with their adolescent patients. To do this, they must show
interest in the adolescents, respect their points of view, and talk in
terms that they can understand. As in adult psychiatry, it is important
to collect systematic information and describe symptoms in detail, but
with adolescents the interviewer must be prepared to adopt a more
flexible approach to the interview. It is usually better to see the
adolescent before interviewing the parents. In this way, it is made
clear that the adolescent is being seen as an independent person. Later,
other members of the family may be interviewed, and sometimes the family
may be seen as a whole. As well as the usual psychiatric history,
particular attention should be paid to information about the
adolescent's

functioning at home, in school, or at work, and about their
relationships with peers. Relevant physical examination should be
carried out unless this has already been done by the doctor who made the
referral.

Services for adolescents The proportion of adolescents in the population
who are seen in psychiatric clinics is less than the proportion of other
age groups. Of those referred, some of the less mature adolescents can
be helped more in a child psychiatry clinic. Some of the older and more
mature adolescents are better treated in a clinic for adults.
Nevertheless, for the majority the care can be provided most
appropriately by a specialized adolescent service, provided that close
links are maintained with child and adult psychiatry services and with
paediatricians. There are variations in the organization of these units
and the treatment that they provide, but most combine individual and
family psychological treatment with the possibility of drug treatment
for severe disorders. Most units accept outpatient referrals not only
from doctors but also from senior teachers, social workers, and the
courts. When the referral is non-medical, the general practitioner
should be informed and the case discussed. All adolescent units work
with schools and social services. Inpatient facilities are usually
limited in extent, so it is important to agree with social services what
kinds of problems need admission to a health service unit and which
should be cared for in residential facilities provided by social
services (in the UK). Reasons for admission to a health service
inpatient unit include the following: â

severe or very unusual mental symptoms requiring that the person's
mental state be observed carefully, investigations carried out, or
treatment monitored closely;

â

behaviour that is dangerous to the self or to others, and that is due to
psychiatric disorder.

When dangerous behaviour relates to personality and circumstances and
not to illness, a hospital unit is not more effective than secure
residential accommodation, and the behaviour of such adolescents may be
stressful for others with mental disorders. For a review of the
organization of mental health services for children and adolescents, see
Wolpert (2009).

Child maltreatment The World Health Organization definition states that
child maltreatment includes:

475

476

476

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry 'all forms of physical and/or emotional ill
treatment, sexual abuse, neglect or negligent treatment or commercial or
other exploitation, resulting in actual or potential harm to the child's
health, survival, development or dignity in the context of a
relationship of responsibility, trust or power.'

Over the past decade the concept of child maltreatment and abuse has
therefore been widened to include the overlapping categories of physical
abuse (non-accidental injury), emotional abuse, sexual abuse, and
neglect. (Table 16.8). Most of the literature on child abuse refers to
high- income countries; however, abuse of children is prevalent
throughout the world, although it can take different forms such that in
low- and middleincome countries other causes and risk factors are
involved. For example, there might be greater numbers of children in
low- income countries exposed to physical violence and corporal
punishment, growing up without a primary caregiver for reasons ranging
from parental illness (such as HIV/ AIDS) to migrant labour where
parents have to leave home to find employment, and child labour and
trafficking. A UK community survey found that nearly one in five
children experience some forms of maltreatment and that children who
have experienced one form of maltreatment are 2-- 3 times more likely to
experience other forms of maltreatment and to be victimized by other
perpetrators over time (Danese et al., 2015). The term safeguarding is
increasingly used to denote the consideration of and care needed for
children who are either at risk of or who have a past or current history
of child maltreatment; the term also encompasses ensuring that they come
to least harm and are protected. The term fetal abuse is sometimes
applied to behaviours that are detrimental to the fetus, including
physical assault and the taking by the mother of substances that are
likely to cause fetal damage. Fabricated and induced illness (or
Munchausen syndrome by proxy) is the name given to apparent illness in
children, which has been fabricated by the parents, and to conditions
induced by parents---for example, by giving medication or other
substances when not indicated (see page 644).

Aetiology There are many interacting causes for child maltreatment (see
Box 16.8). Although several risk factors show a statistical association
with child maltreatment, no single risk factor is either necessary or
sufficient for maltreatment to occur. The most useful way to frame the
many

risks is to consider them in a multilevel model, with individual,
family, and community factors considered alongside appreciating the
bidirectional nature of the child--adult interaction and how this might
influence maltreatment. The environment. Child maltreatment is more
frequent in neighbourhoods in which family violence is common, schools,
housing, and employment are unsatisfactory, and there is little feeling
of community. The parents. Factors associated with child maltreatment
include young age of parents, impaired capacity for empathy, low
education, psychiatric disorder and/or substance misuse, social
isolation, family dysfunction, and a criminal record. If a parent has a
psychiatric disorder, it is most often a personality disorder. Many
parents give a history of having themselves suffered abuse or
deprivation in childhood, and the parental relationship is marked by
conflict and sometimes violence. Although physical abuse is more common
in families with other forms of social pathology, it is certainly not
limited to such families. The children. Risk factors include younger
age, especially under age 5 years, and other factors associated with
increased child vulnerability, including prematurity, physical, and
intellectual disabilities, chronic illness, and those with either a more
difficult temperament or a more dependent relationship with carers.

Table 16.8 National Institute of Health and Care Excellence guidelines
on recognition of child maltreatment Emotional abuse

Age-inappropriate behaviour, aggression, body-rocking, eating and
feeding difficulties, encopresis, wetting, dissociation, cutting, and
other forms of self-harm

Physical abuse

Abrasions, teeth marks, bruises, burns and scalds, cuts, eye injuries,
fractures, intraabdominal injuries, oral injuries, petechiae, retinal
haemorrhage, subdural haemorrhage

Sexual abuse

Anal symptoms and signs, anogenital injuries, dysuria, genital symptoms
and signs, sexualized behaviour, pregnancy

Neglect

Abandonment, failure to thrive, lack of supervision, poor hygiene,
persistent infestations, poor medication adherence

Adapted from Danese and McCrory, Child maltreatment, In: Thapar A. et
al., Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 6th edn., pp.Â 364--376,
Copyright (2015), with permission from John Wiley & Sons.

47

Review of syndromes

Physical abuse (non-accidental injury) Estimates of the prevalence of
physical abuse of children vary according to the criteria used. Most
studies report prevalence rates of physical abuse in childhood in the
range 5--15%, depending on how this is defined, with lower rates of
significant violence.

Clinical features Parents may bring an abused child to the doctor with
an injury said to have been caused accidentally. Alternatively,
relatives, neighbours, school staff, or other people may become
concerned and report the problem to police, social workers, or voluntary
agencies. The most common forms of injury are multiple bruising, burns,
abrasions, bites, torn upper lip, bone fractures, and subdural or
retinal haemorrhages. Some infants are smothered, often with a pillow,
and the parents might report an apnoeic attack. Suspicion of physical
abuse should be aroused by the pattern of the injuries, a previous
history of suspicious injury, a vague or inconsistent account of the way
in which injuries came about; an account that is inconsistent with the
nature and extent of injury, delay in seeking help, and incongruous
parental reactions. The psychological characteristics of abused children
vary, but include fearful responses to the parents, other evidence of
anxiety or unhappiness, and social withdrawal. Such children often have
low self-esteem, may avoid adults and children who make friendly
approaches, and may be aggressive.

Assessment and management Doctors and others involved in the care of
children should always be alert to the possibility of physical abuse.
They need to be particularly aware of the risks to children who have
some of the characteristics described above, or who are being cared for
by parents with the predisposing factors listed. It is important for
professionals to receive regular child protection training to be aware
of the different ways these children might present, especially as the
majority are thought to be missed by health services, and also of the
heightened needs of these children. Doctors who suspect abuse should
refer the child to hospital and inform a paediatrician or casualty
officer of their suspicions. The paediatrician will usually take a
careful history, documenting the information in as much detail as
possible, and also perform a thorough physical examination. For further
information about the physical examination, see a textbook of
paediatrics. In the hospital emergency department,

Box 16.8 Risk factors for child maltreatment The parent(s) Young age Low
education or intelligence Social isolation/no one to provide help
Breakdown of relationship with partner Poor parenting skills: lack of
awareness of child's needs, harsh punishment, little reward; unrealistic
expectations of child Experience of maltreatment as a child Criminal
record Impaired emotional regulation Psychiatric problems: depression,
substance abuse, personality disorder

The child Factors leading to weak attachment to the parents:
prematurity, health problems including disability Separation from mother
during early life (e.g.Â in neonatal unit) Difficult temperament, cries a
lot

The environment Problem neighbourhood: high levels of family and
community violence, problem schools, high unemployment Large family size
or single parent Non-biological transient carers in the home Poverty
Little feeling of community

inpatient admission should be arranged for all children in whom
non-accidental injury is suspected. If possible, social services should
become involved early and the doctor's concerns should be discussed with
the parents, and in any case they should be told that admission is
necessary to allow further investigations. If the parents refuse
admission, it may be necessary in England and Wales to apply to a
magistrate for a Place of Safety Order; similar action may be
appropriate in other countries. During admission, assessment must be
thorough and include formal photographs of injuries (of a quality that
could be used in court if needed, so this can often be through the
medical illustration

477

478

478

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry departments of the hospital) and full
skeletal survey radiography. Radiological examination may show evidence
of previous injury or, occasionally, of bone abnormalities such as
osteogenesis imperfecta. A CT scan may be needed if subdural haemorrhage
is suspected. Once it has been decided that non-accidental injury is
probable, the first priority is to establish the child's safety. The
procedures involved will vary according to the administrative
arrangements in different countries. In the UK, the Social Services
Department is responsible for child protection and should be notified;
police departments also often get involved. It may be decided to put the
child's name on a child abuse register, thereby giving the Social
Services Department responsibility for visiting the home and checking
the problem regularly. In some cases, the risk of returning the child to
their parents is too great, and separation is required. If the parents
do not agree to separation, a care order can be sought by the Social
Services Department. If the abuse is severe, prolonged, or permanent,
separation may be necessary and the parents may face criminal charges.
Because there are known cases of injury or death in children who have
been returned to their parents, it is vitally important that the most
careful assessment is undertaken before physically abused children are
returned to their family. Countries vary in the requirements and
procedures for reporting and monitoring possible physical abuse in
children, and readers should familiarize themselves with the
arrangements that exist in the area in which they work.

Emotional abuse

Prognosis

Child neglect is the failure to provide necessary care. It can take
several forms, including emotional deprivation, neglect of education,
physical neglect, lack of appropriate concern for physical safety, and
denial of necessary medical or surgical treatment. These forms of
neglect may lead to physical or psychological harm, including poor
academic performance and disturbed behaviour. Child neglect is more
common than physical abuse, and it may be detected by various people,
including relatives, neighbours, teachers, doctors, or social workers.
Child neglect is associated with adverse social circumstances, and is a
common reason for a child to need to be taken into foster care or other
living arrangements.

Children who have been subjected to physical abuse are at high risk of
further problems. For example, the risk of further severe injury is
probably around 10--30%, and occasionally the injuries are fatal,
therefore a priority in the intervention is to try to prevent any
recurrence of maltreatment. Abused children are likely to have
subsequent high rates of physical disorder, delayed development, and
learning difficulties. There are also increased rates of behavioural and
emotional problems in later childhood and adulthood, even when there has
been earlier therapeutic intervention. As adults, many former victims of
abuse have difficulties in rearing their own children. The outcome is
better for abused children who can establish a good relationship with an
adult (often from outside the family), and who have dispositions that
include sociability and academic competence.

The term emotional abuse usually refers to persistent neglect or
rejection sufficient to impair a child's development. However, the term
is sometimes applied to gross degrees of overprotection, verbal abuse,
or scapegoating, which impair development. Emotional abuse often
accompanies other forms of child abuse. Emotional abuse has various
effects on the child, including failure to thrive physically, impaired
psychological development, and emotional and conduct disorders.
Diagnosis depends on observations of the parents' behaviour towards the
child, which may include frequent belittling or sarcastic remarks about
them during the interview. One or both parents may have a disorder of
personality, or occasionally a psychiatric disorder. The parents should
be interviewed separately and together to discover any reasons for the
abuse of this particular child---for example, the child may fail to live
up to their expectations, or may remind them of another person who has
been abusive to one of them. The parents' mental state should be
assessed.

Management In treatment, the parents should be offered help with their
own emotional problems and with their day-to-day interactions with the
child. It is often difficult to persuade parents to accept such help. If
they reject help and if the effects of emotional abuse are serious, it
may be necessary to involve social services and to consider the steps
described above for the care of children suffering physical abuse. The
child is likely to need individual help.

Child neglect

Non-organic failure to thrive and deprivation dwarfism Paediatricians
recognize that some children fail to thrive when there is no apparent
organic cause. For these

479

Review of syndromes children their calorific intake is insufficient to
maintain growth; this is usually associated with emotional deprivation,
psychological abuse, or both. The child is usually under the fifth
centile for weight and height, and the rate of weight gain is less than
expected for age. Nonorganic failure to thrive (NOFTT) is most frequent
under 3 years of age; in older children it has been referred to as
psychosocial short stature syndrome (PSSS).

Clinical picture NOFTT is caused by the deprivation of food and close
affection. In the children who are seen in the psychiatric service,
there is usually evidence of problems in the parent--child relationship
since the child's early infancy; these include rejection and, in extreme
cases, expressed hostility towards the child. There may be physical or
sexual abuse as well. The infant who is failing to thrive may present
with recent weight loss, persistently low weight, or reduced height.
There may be cognitive and developmental delay. The infant may be
irritable and unhappy, or, in more severe cases, lethargic and resigned.
There is a clinical spectrum ranging from infants with mild feeding
problems to those with all of the severe features described above. If
food and care are provided, the infant usually grows and develops
quickly. PSSS or 'deprivation dwarfism'. These children have abnormally
short stature, unusual eating patterns, retarded speech development, and
temper tantrums. Although short in stature, the child may be of normal
weight. Emotional and behavioural disorders occur, and there may be
cognitive and developmental delay with impairment of language skills.
These children have low self-esteem and are commonly depressed. There is
usually a history of deprivation or of psychological maltreatment. Away
from the deprived environment, these children eat ravenously.

Management When treating either syndrome, the first essential is to
ensure the child's safety, which may require admission to hospital.
Subsequently, some children can be managed at home, but others need to
be moved to alternative living arrangements, including foster care. Some
parents can be helped to understand their child's needs and to plan for
them; other parents are too hostile to be helped. If help is feasible,
it should be intensive and should probably focus on changing patterns of
parenting. It is unusual for the parents to be psychiatrically
ill.Â Home-based intervention programmes may improve treatment effects,
particularly in cognitive and behavioural domains.

Prognosis With both syndromes, the prognosis for early cases is
relatively good (Rudolf and Logan, 2005). However, some children have to
be placed permanently in foster care because family patterns are
resistant to change. In a positive emotional setting the abnormal
behaviour is usually lost quickly and mental development follows
physical growth.

Sexual abuse The term sexual abuse refers to the involvement of children
in sexual activities which they do not fully comprehend and to which
they cannot give informed consent, and which violate generally accepted
cultural rules. The term covers various forms of sexual contact with or
without varying degrees of violence. The term also covers some
activities that do not involve physical contact, such as posing for
pornographic photographs or films. The abuser is commonly known to the
child and is often a member of the family (incest). A minority of
children are abused by groups of paedophiles (sex rings).

Epidemiology Child sexual abuse is highly prevalent around the globe,
and differentiating between types of abuse is important to obtain
meaningful estimates of prevalence. A review collating results from
other studies estimated prevalence rates of sexual abuse and separated
abuse into four different types. For non-contact abuse (inappropriate
sexual solicitation, indecent exposure) the rates were estimated at 17%
for males and 31% for females; for contact abuse (fondling, touching,
kissing) the rates were 6% for males and 13% for females; for forced
intercourse (oral, vaginal, anal, and attempted) the rates were 3% for
males and 9% for females; and for mixed sexual abuse (more than one type
of abuse occurring) the rates were for 8% males and 15% for females
(Barth et al., 2013). Females therefore have a twofold or threefold risk
compared to males to be sexually abused in childhood, and about one in
ten women is confronted with this experience. Children with disabilities
are more likely to be victims of sexual abuse. The majority of children
know their abuser, usually because they are in their family, or
occasionally because they have been befriended as part of a grooming
process. The majority of abusers are male (85--95%) and stepfathers are
overrepresented. The extent of sexual abuse by women is not known; a few
carry out abuse in conjunction with a man, and those that abuse alone
are more likely to abuse boys. Sexual abuse by children and adolescents,
mostly boys, has become widely recognized and is no longer considered an
acceptable variant of

479

480

480

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry childhood or adolescent sexual development.
Sixty per cent of contact sexual abuse reported by children in the UK
was perpetrated by other children and young people under the age of 18
years (Glaser et al., 2015). Many adult abusers report the onset of
their abusive activities in adolescence.

Clinical features The presentation of child sexual abuse depends on the
type of sexual act and the relationship of the offender to the child.
Children are more likely to report abuse when the offender is a
stranger. It might come to light when a child talks about it to a
friend, relative, or teacher, or it is suspected on the basis of less
specific indicators described below. Spontaneous and intentional
disclosures are likely to be credible. Specific indicators include
age-inappropriate sexualized behaviour, rarer genital physical signs,
sexually transmitted diseases, and pregnancy in a young girl, especially
when the identity of the father is not clear. Non-specific indicators
include sudden onset of unexplained difficulties in a previously
untroubled child, such as distractibility, educational deterioration,
social isolation, aggressiveness, low selfesteem, marked unhappiness,
disturbed sleep and nightmares, fearfulness, and separation anxiety.
Depression, running away, deliberate self-harm, and drug and alcohol
misuse may arise later (Glaser et al., 2015). There may also be physical
symptoms in the urogenital or anal area, pregnancy, and behavioural or
emotional disturbance. When abuse occurs within the family, marital and
other family problems are common.

Effects of sexual abuse Childhood sexual abuse is a significant risk
factor for mental health disorders in childhood, adolescence, and
adulthood as well as having effects on physical health. Effects in
childhood and adolescence: not all children will develop difficulties
and some will only develop them later, but a wide range of difficulties,
which may not appear immediately, has been found with considerable
effect sizes: depression, anxiety, PTSD, self-harm, low self-esteem,
conduct disorder, bulimia, promiscuity, and sexual victimization of
other children. It may lead to unwanted pregnancy. The worst prognosis
is for children younger than 7 years when the abuse takes place and also
in those who have negative self-attributions about the abuse, including
self-blame and shame, children who have experienced penetration in the
abuse and those who have depressed parents. Effects in adulthood are
significant and have been estimated to contribute to around 13% of all
adult psychopathology. For example, in an Australian study, 23% of

adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse required longterm mental
health services as compared with 7% of a comparison population (Cutajar
et al., 2010). The effects include depressed mood, low self-esteem,
self-harm, difficulties in relationships, and sexual maladjustment in
the form of either hypersensitivity or sexual inhibition. The effects of
abuse are generally greater when the abuse has involved physical
violence and penetrative intercourse. Some of the long-term effects may
be related to the events surrounding the disclosure of the abuse,
including any legal proceedings, and to other problems in the family,
such as neglect of the children and sexual deviance or substance abuse.
Nevertheless, even when these other factors are controlled for, sexual
abuse in childhood seems to be associated with psychiatric disorder
later in life, especially with depressive disorders, anxiety disorders,
and personality disorders (Glaser et al., 2015).

Aetiology Sexual abuse of children occurs in all socioeconomic groups,
and studies have shown no ethnic differences in rates. Although
socioeconomic status is unrelated to the incidence of childhood sexual
abuse, there is an overrepresentation of low socioeconomic groups in
clinic samples (Glaser et al., 2015). There are several preconditions
that make sexual abuse more likely. In the abuser, these include deviant
sexual motivation, impulsivity, a lack of conscience, and a lack of
external restraints (e.g.Â cultural tolerance); in the child, they
include a vulnerability by virtue of age, disability, social isolation,
and previous sexual abuse, which can be identified and preyed upon by
abusers.

Assessment It is important to be ready to detect sexual abuse and to
give serious attention to any complaint by a child of being abused in
this way. When abuse has been established, it is important to assess
whether it is likely to continue if the child remains at home and, if
so, how dangerous it is likely to be. It is also important not to make
the diagnosis without adequate evidence, and this requires social
investigation of the family as well as psychological and physical
examination of the child. The child should be interviewed
sympathetically and encouraged to describe what has happened. Drawings
or toys may help younger children to give a description, but great care
must be taken to ensure that they are not used in a way that suggests to
the child events that have not taken place. Young children can recall
events accurately, but they are more suggestible than

481

Ethical and legal problems in child and adolescent psychiatry adults.
Interviewing is difficult, and, whenever possible, it should be carried
out by a child psychiatrist or social worker with special experience.
See Jones (2009) for further advice on interviewing. In the UK,
responsibility for child protection rests with social services, to whom
suspicions of abuse and actual abuse must be reported. Multidisciplinary
involvement, often including the police and the judicial system, is
usually needed to establish whether abuse has taken place and what the
appropriate response should be. As with the physical abuse, the first
priority is to protect the child and other children who might be at
risk. The arrangements vary in different countries, and readers should
find out how they apply in the country in which they are working.

Management The initial management and the measures to protect the child
are similar to those for physical abuse (see Box 16.9), including a
decision about separating the

child from the family. There are particular difficulties involved in
intervening with families in which sexual abuse has occurred. These
include a marked tendency to deny the seriousness of the abuse and other
family problems, and in some cases deviant sexual attitudes and
behaviour of other family members, possibly including other children.
Not all children require therapy; however, a minimum requirement is for
the child to have an appropriate narrative about their abuse and to have
access to an identified person who believes the child and is able to
listen to the child supportively and uncritically. Several meta-analyses
have found large to moderate effect sizes for psychotherapy, group
therapy, and cognitive behaviour therapy combined with supportive,
psychodynamic, or play therapy. The treatment of child and adolescent
abusers requires coordinated multidisciplinary support with child
protection services. Cognitive behaviour therapy individually and in
groups has been used, as has structured group work.

Ethical and legal problems in child and adolescent psychiatry As well as
the ethical and legal problems related to the treatment of adults and
which are discussed in Chapter 4 and elsewhere, the following issues are
particularly likely to arise in the care of children with psychiatric
disorders.

Consent In each country, the law decides an age below which the child is
deemed not to have capacity and so parents give consent on behalf of the
child. Below this age, the

Conflicts of interest In general, the interests of the child take
precedence over those of the parents. This principle is most obvious,
and most easily followed, in cases of child abuse. In other cases, the
decision is more difficult---for example, when a depressed mother is
neglecting her child and is likely to become more depressed if
substitute care is arranged. Such problems can usually be resolved by
discussion with the parents, and between the professionals who are
caring for the child and for the parent.

Confidentiality The care of children often involves collaboration
between medical and social services, and sometimes with teachers.
Different agencies may have different policies about the confidentiality
of records, and doctors should take account of these differences when
deciding what information to disclose.

Box 16.9 Steps in the assessment and management of child sexual abuse 1.
Suspicion and recognition; referral to child protection services (often
social services and police). 2. Establish whether immediate protection
is needed. 3. Plan investigation: interagency discussion, interview
child, medical examination, family assessment. 4. Initial multiagency
child protection meeting. 5. Investigation and draw up protection plan.
6. Plan implementation and review. 7. Legal proceedings. 8. Therapeutic
work. Reproduced from Glaser D, Child sexual abuse, In: Thapar A. et
al., Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 6th edn., pp.Â 376-389,
Copyright (2015), with permission from John Wiley & Sons.

481

482

482

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry child's assent should be obtained, if
possible, as this will aid treatment, but if the child refuses the
parents can decide. This problem arises, for example, when an adolescent
under the legal age of consent refuses treatment for anorexia nervosa.
The parents can also refuse treatment; however, their right to do so is
linked to their duty to protect the child. In cases in which the
parents' refusal appears not to be in the interests of the child,
countries generally have provisions for a decision by a court of law.
Some of the complexities of English law can be mentioned briefly to
illustrate the problems that have to be resolved in all legal systems. A
fuller account of these and other issues is given by Hale et al.Â (2015).
Readers are advised to find out for their respective countries the age
at which a 'minor' can consent to their own treatment and the rights of
parents when it comes to treatment. In English law, the age from which
people are judged legally capable of giving or refusing consent is 18
years. However, English law recognizes that most of those aged between
16 and 18 years have the capacity to give consent to receive treatment,
and allows them to do so without the need for consent by a parent. The
position is less clear when a 16- or 17-year-old does not consent to
treatment, but it is probably the case that the parents' consent is
sufficient. The decision in each case is likely to depend on the
consequences of refusal; the more severe these are, the more likely it
is that a court would accept that the child's refusal can be overridden
by the parents. Further complexities arise with children under 16 years
of age, some of whom are competent to give consent to certain
treatments. There is no general

assumption of competence at this age, and it has to be established in
the individual case, but, if it is established, the minor can give
consent. The question arose most notably with regard to the provision of
contraception without the additional consent of a parent. In the Gillick
case it was ruled that, in English law, a sufficiently competent minor
could consent without the need to obtain the consent of the parent (now
called Gillick competence and related Fraser guidelines). It is
probable, however, that with certain more invasive and risky treatments,
the consent of a parent could be legally necessary, as well as
clinically desirable. If a minor under the age of 16 years refuses
treatment, this can be overruled by the parents if refusal is likely to
result in harm. A final complexity concerns the definition of a parent.
This problem arises, for example, when the person accompanying the child
is not the person recognized by the law as having parental
responsibility. For example, in English law, a father who is not married
to the mother does not automatically have legal responsibility. Consent
for research poses similar problems for patients below the legal age of
consent. In most countries, parents consent on behalf of their children,
and they may find it difficult to balance the risks to the child against
the benefits, which are usually not to their child but to other children
who might be treated for the same condition in the future. It is
important that children, however, give their assent to the research and
that they are able to discuss the issues and any concerns they might
have, including with a person other than the individual who is
requesting the consent (e.g.Â a nurse in their usual clinic).

483

Appendix: Basic elements in child and adolescent psychiatric assessments

Appendix: Basic elements in child and adolescent psychiatric assessments
The format and extent of an assessment will depend on the nature of the
presenting problem and the age of the child. The role of the parental
history and information from other sources, including education and
other carers, will be important in child psychiatry. The following
scheme is adapted from Leckman et al.Â (2015), which should be consulted
for further information. 1 Reason for referral: why this child and why
now? Nature, frequency, and severity of presenting problem(s).
Situations in which it occurs. Provoking and ameliorating factors.
Stresses thought by parents to be important. Need to use this initial
time to build therapeutic relationship and also gauge opinions on
potential treatment options. 2 Child's strengths, talents, and
interests, and environmental supports. 3 Presence of other comorbid
problems or complaints. (a) Physical. Headaches, stomach ache. Hearing,
vision. Seizures, faints, or other types of episodes. (b) Eating,
sleeping, or elimination problems. (c) Relationships with other
children. Special friends. Experience of bullying or negative
experiences with peers (including on social media). (d) Level of
activity, attention span, concentration. (e) Mood, energy level,
sadness, misery. (f) Response to frustration. Temper tantrums. (g)
Antisocial behaviour. Aggression, stealing, truancy. (h) Educational
attainments, attitude to school attendance. (i)

Sexual interest and behaviour.

(j) 

Any other symptoms, tics, etc.

4 Family history, current structure, and functioning (construct
genogram). (a) Parents. Ages, occupations. Current physical and
emotional state. History of physical or psychiatric disorder.
Whereabouts of grandparents. Quality of parental relationship. Sharing
of attitudes over child's problems. Quality of parent--child
relationship. Positive interaction: mutual enjoyment. Parental level of
criticism, hostility, rejection. (b) Siblings. Ages, presence of
problems.

(c) Home circumstances: sleeping arrangements.
(d) Overall pattern of family relationships. Alliance, communication.
    Exclusion, scapegoating. Intergenerational confusion. 5
    Developmental, educational, and medical history, including possible
    traumatic events and current level of development (can include
    review of birth and paediatric records, education evaluations).
(e) Pregnancy issues, delivery, and state at birth, early mother--child
    relationship, postpartum depression, early feeding patterns.
    Milestones. Obtain exact details only if outside range of normal.
(f) Language: comprehension, complexity of speech.
(g) Spatial ability.
(h) Motor coordination, clumsiness.
(i) Past illnesses and injuries. Hospitalizations. 6 Personal history.
(j) Early temperamental characteristics. Easy or difficult, irregular,
    restless baby and toddler.
(k) Separations lasting a week or more. Nature of substitute care.
(l) Schooling history. Ease of attendance. Educational progress.
(m) Use of social media/screen time: how much, which sites, bad
    experiences online.
(n) Gender preference and sexual identity. 7 Mental state examination
(o) Appearance. Signs of dysmorphism. Nutritional state. Evidence of
    neglect, bruising, cuts, etc.
(p) Activity level. Involuntary movements. Capacity to concentrate.
(q) Mood. Expression of signs of sadness, misery, anxiety, tension.
(r) Rapport, capacity to relate to clinician. Eye contact. Spontaneous
    talk. Inhibition and disinhibition.
(s) Relationship with parents. Affection shown. Resentment. Ease of
    separation.
(t) Habits and mannerisms.
(u) Presence of delusions, hallucinations, thought disorder.
(v) Level of awareness. Evidence of minor epilepsy.

483

48

484

Chapter 16 Child psychiatry 8 Physical and neurological examination of
child--- only indicated if concern of presence of any genetic, medical,
metabolic, endocrine, or neurological disorders that may impact the
child's course of illness and treatment; or conduct as a baseline before
treatment. (a) Note any facial asymmetry. (b) Eye movements. Ask the
child to follow a moving finger and observe eye movement for jerkiness,
incoordination.

(c) Finger--thumb apposition. Ask the child to press the tip of each
    finger against the thumb in rapid succession. Observe clumsiness,
    weakness.
(d) Copying patterns. Drawing a man.
(e) Observe grip and dexterity in drawing.
(f) Jumping up and down on the spot.
(g) Hopping.
(h) Hearing. Capacity of child to repeat numbers whispered 2 metres
    behind them.

Further reading Goodman R and Scott S (2012). Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 3rd edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford. (A concise introduction to
the subject.) Megitt C (2012). Child Development: An illustrated guide:
birth to 19 years, 3rd edn. Pearson Education Canada. (An accessible
source of information about child development.)

Thapar A, Pine D, Leckman, J et al.Â (eds) (2015). Rutter's Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 6th edn. Blackwell, Oxford. (An established,
comprehensive work of reference.)

485

CHAPTER 17

Intellectual disability (mental retardation) Introduction 485

Other clinical aspects of intellectual disability 493

Terminology 485

Aetiology of intellectual disability 495

Epidemiology of intellectual disability 486

Assessment and classification of psychiatric conditions

Clinical features of intellectual disability 487 Physical disorders
among people with intellectual disability 488 Psychiatric disorders
among people with intellectual disability 489

in people with intellectual disability 502 The care of people with
intellectual disability 504 Treatment of psychiatric disorder and
behavioural problems 509 Ethical and legal issues in intellectual
disability 510

Introduction This chapter is concerned with a general outline of the
features, epidemiology, and aetiology of intellectual disability, the
organization of services, and, more specifically, with the psychiatric
disorders that affect these people. Intellectual disability refers to a
developmental disability presenting in infancy or the early childhood
years, although in some cases it cannot be diagnosed

until the child is older than 5 years of age, when standardized measures
of developmental skills become more reliable and valid (Moeschler et
al., 2014). Many of the psychiatric problems of children with
intellectual disability are similar to those of children of normal
intelligence; an account of these problems is given in Chapter 16.

Terminology Over the years, several terms have been applied to people
with intellectual impairment from early life. In the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, the word 'idiot' was used for people with
severe intellectual impairment, and 'imbecile' for those with moderate
impairment. The special study and care of such people was known as the
field of mental deficiency. When these words came to carry stigma, they
were replaced by the terms mental

subnormality and mental retardation. The terms mental handicap and
learning disability have also been widely used, but now the term
intellectual disability is generally preferred and has been adopted in
DSM-5 (and is used in this chapter). However, the term mental
retardation is still used in ICD-10, and, along with learning
disability, is employed in many countries. Moreover, in the USA the term
learning disability is generally applied to

486

486

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) dyslexia and
similar forms of specific disability, rather than to intellectual
disability. Intellectual disability is sometimes divided into syndromic
and non-syndromic forms. Syndromic intellectual disability refers to the
presence of additional medical or behavioural features (which allow a
'syndrome' to be diagnosed); if not, the term non-syndromic intellectual
disability is used.

The development of ideas about intellectual disability A fundamental
distinction, first made by Esquirol in 1845, is drawn between general
intellectual impairment starting in early childhood (intellectual
disability) and intellectual impairment developing later in life
(dementia). Complementing these two categories, acquired brain injury
(ABI) is the term used to describe individuals who develop an
intellectual disability after birth, either because of trauma
(e.g.Â following a head injury) or that may be non-traumatic
(e.g.Â because of a brain tumour). Early in the twentieth century,
Binet's tests of intelligence provided quantitative criteria for
ascertaining intellectual disability. These tests also made it possible
to identify lesser degrees of the condition that might not be obvious
otherwise. Unfortunately, it was widely assumed at the time that people
with such lesser degrees of intellectual impairment were socially
incompetent and required institutional care. Similar views were
reflected in the legislation of the time. For example, in England and
Wales the Idiots Act of 1886 made a simple distinction between idiocy
(more severe) and imbecility (less severe). In 1913, the Mental
Deficiency Act added a third category for people who 'from an early age
display some permanent mental defect coupled with strong vicious or
criminal propensities in which punishment has had little or no effect'.
As a result of this legislation, people of normal or near normal
intelligence were admitted to hospital for long periods simply because
their behaviour deviated from the values of society. Although in the
past the use of social criteria clearly led to abuse, it is
unsatisfactory to define intellectual disability in terms of
intelligence alone. Social criteria must

be included, since a distinction must be made between people who can
lead a normal or near-normal life and those who cannot. DSM-5 places
intellectual disability in the broader category of neurodevelopmental
disorders and defines intellectual disability as involving 'impairments
of general mental abilities that impact adaptive functioning in three
domains, or areas'. These domains determine how well an individual can
cope with everyday life and include communication and social skills,
personal independence, and school/work functioning. The disorder is
considered chronic and often co-occurs with other mental conditions like
depression, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). Having defined the disorder with a focus on
adaptive functioning and ability to meet developmental and sociocultural
standards, it is subdivided by severity levels according to adaptive
functioning into mild, moderate, severe, and profound categories,
placing some weight on standardized IQ testing. The categories broadly
map onto the ICD-10 subtypes that are made according to IQ: mild (IQ
50--70); moderate (IQ 35--49); severe (IQ 20-- 34); profound (IQ below
20). The original World Health Organization (WHO) classification of
impairment, disability, and handicap is useful when considering the
problems of people with intellectual disability. (The WHO now employs a
more positive terminology, with activity replacing 'disability', and
participation replacing 'handicap'.) The impairment is of the central
nervous system, and the disability (or limitation of activity) is in
learning and acquiring new skills. The extent to which impairment leads
to disability (limits activity) depends, in part, on experiences in the
family and at school, and on the correction of associated problems such
as deafness. The final stage, namely handicap (or limited
participation), depends on the degree of disability and on other factors
such as the support that is provided. Educationalists use other terms,
and these too differ between countries. In the UK, the term is special
educational needs, whereas in the USA mild, moderate, and severe
cognitive impairment is most commonly used, with 90% of the children
with intellectual disability falling in the mild category, which
approximately equates to an IQ lying between 55 and 70.

Epidemiology of intellectual disability Level of IQ is a key criterion
in defining intellectual disability, with IQ tests designed to be
normally distributed with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15.
In

DSM-5 intellectual disability is considered to be approximately two
standard deviations or more below the population, which equals an IQ
score of about 70 or below,

478

Clinical features of intellectual disability approximately 2.3% of the
population (Simonoff et al., 2015). Placing the diagnostic criteria on
both IQ and adaptive functioning allows for considerable individual
differences in presentation and diagnosis, as these differences can be
within syndromes and dependent on family functioning and levels of
engagement with activities of daily living; therefore the boundaries
between the categories of mild, moderate, and severe intellectual
disability are not firmly fixed. A current estimate for the UK is 9--14
in 1000 children, and 3--8 in 1000 adults (Cooper and Smiley, 2009).
Variability in apparent prevalence rates is due partly to experimental
factors such as methods of ascertainment and definition, but also
reflects genuine differences across time and place. In recent years, the
incidence has fallen substantially, because of the improvement in
preventable prenatal and perinatal causes of severe intellectual
disabilities. However, the prevalence has not fallen, and in fact is
expected to rise by over 10% by 2020. The preserved or increasing
prevalence despite reduced incidence reflects two factors. First, people
with intellectual disability, particularly those with Down's syndrome,
are living longer. This has also affected the age distribution of people
with severe intellectual disability, so that the

numbers of adults have increased. Secondly, improvements in maternal and
neonatal care, especially those born extremely premature (below 32
weeks' gestation) are resulting in a growing number of children with
intellectual disability, especially those in the severe and profound
categories, who have survived significant events. A further important
point regarding the prevalence of intellectual disability was made by
Tizard (1964), who drew attention to the distinction between
'administrative' prevalence and 'true' prevalence. He defined the former
as 'the numbers for whom services would be required in a community which
made provision for all who needed them'. In practice, the term usually
means the number with needs who are known to the service providers. It
is estimated that less than 50% of all such people require special
provision. Administrative prevalence is higher in lower socioeconomic
groups and in childhood, when more patients need services. It falls
after the age of 16 years because there is continuing slow intellectual
development and gradual social adjustment. The clinical features of the
individual syndromes that cause intellectual disability and the
epidemiology of psychiatric disorders for those with intellectual
disability are covered later in the chapter.

Clinical features of intellectual disability The most frequent
manifestation of intellectual disability is uniformly low performance on
all kinds of intellectual tasks, including learning, short-term memory,
the use of concepts, and problem-solving (see Table 17.1). Specific
abnormalities may lead to particular difficulties. For example, lack of
visuospatial skills may cause practical difficulties, such as inability
to dress, or there may be disproportionate difficulties with language or
social interaction, both of which are strongly associated with behaviour
disorders. Among children with intellectual disability, the common
behaviour problems of childhood tend to occur when they are older and
more physically developed than children in the general population, and
the problems last for longer. Such behaviour problems usually improve
slowly as the child grows older, but may be replaced by problems that
start in adulthood.

Mild intellectual disability (IQ 50--70) People with mild learning
disability account for about 85% of those with learning disability.
Usually their appearance is unremarkable and any sensory or motor

deficits are slight. Most people in this group develop more or less
normal language abilities and social behaviour during the preschool
years, and their learning disability may never be formally identified.
In adulthood, most people with mild learning disability can live
independently in ordinary surroundings, although they may need help in
parenting and coping with family responsibilities, housing, and
employment, or when under unusual stress.

Moderate intellectual disability (IQ 35--49) People in this group
account for about 10% of those with learning disability. Many have
better receptive than expressive language skills, which is a potent
cause of frustration and behaviour problems. Speech is usually
relatively simple, and is often better understood by people who know the
patient well. Many make use of simplified signing systems such as
Makaton sign language. Activities of daily living such as dressing,
feeding, and attention to hygiene can be acquired over time, but other
activities of daily living, such as the use of money

487

48

488

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation)

Table 17.1 Features of mild, moderate, and severe/profound intellectual
disability Mild

Moderate

Severe/profound

IQ range

69--50

49--35

\<35

Percentage of cases

85%

10%

5%

Ability to self-care

Independent

Need some help

Limited

Language

Reasonable

Limited

Basic or none

Reading and writing

Reasonable

Basic

Minimal or none

Ability to work

Semi-skilled

Unskilled, supervised

Supervised basic tasks

Social skills

Normal

Moderate

Few

Physical problems

Rare

Sometimes

Common

Specific cause discovered

Sometimes

Often

Usually

and road sense, generally require support. Similarly, supported
employment and residential provision are the rule.

to look after themselves under close supervision, and to communicate in
a simple way---for example, by using objects of reference. As adults
they can undertake simple tasks and engage in limited social activities,
but they need supervision and a clear structure to their lives.

Severe intellectual disability (IQ 20--34)

Profound intellectual disability (IQ below 20)

It is difficult to estimate IQ accurately when the score is below 34
because of the difficulty in administering the tests in a valid manner
to individuals in this group. Estimates suggest that people with severe
learning disability account for about 3--4% of the learning disabled. In
the preschool years their development is usually greatly slowed.
Eventually many people can be helped

People in this group account for 1--2% of those with intellectual
disability. Development across a range of domains tends to be around the
level expected of a 12month-old infant. Accordingly, people with
profound intellectual disability are a highly vulnerable group who
require considerable support and supervision, even for simple activities
of daily living.

Physical disorders among people with intellectual disability People with
intellectual disabilities experience a greater variety and complexity of
physical health problems than the rest of the population, but may not
complain of feeling ill, nor be able to articulate their symptoms, and
conditions may be noticed only because of changes in behaviour. The
prevalence of obesity among young people with intellectual disability is
almost double that of the general population and it is unclear if this
is because of mealtime behaviours and/or infrequent physical activity
(Segal 2016). Clinicians should be aware of the associations between
certain intellectual disability syndromes and physical illness
(e.g.Â Down's syndrome;

see page 497), and that people with an intellectual disability are more
likely to die prematurely. A UK review of deaths of over 200 people with
intellectual disabilities showed that nearly a quarter were younger than
50 years when they died, and the median age at death was 64 years---for
males 13 years younger and for females 20 years younger than the median
age of death for the general population. Contributory factors to the
premature deaths included poor health care and living in inappropriate
accommodation (Heslop et al., 2014). With the exception of people with
severe and multiple disabilities or Down's syndrome, the life expectancy
of

489

Psychiatric disorders among people with intellectual disability this
group now more closely approximates to that of the general population.
Middle and old age, which until 30 years ago were not recognized in this
population, are now important parts of the life course of these
individuals. Older adults with intellectual disabilities form a small
but significant and growing proportion of older people in the community
(Coppus, 2013). Sensory and motor disabilities and incontinence are the
most important physical disorders in people with intellectual
disability. People with severe intellectual disability (especially
children) usually have several of these problems. Only one-third are
continent, ambulant, and without severe behaviour problems. Around 25%
are highly dependent on other people. Among those with mild intellectual
disability, similar problems occur, but less frequently. Nevertheless,
they are important because they determine whether special educational
programmes are needed. Sensory disorders add an important additional
obstacle to normal cognitive development. Motor disabilities include
spasticity, ataxia, and athetosis. Ear infections and dental caries are
common in this population. Epilepsy is a frequent and clinically
important problem in intellectual disability. Around 22% of people with
intellectual disability have a history of

epilepsy, compared with 5% in the general population (Robertson et al.,
2015). The prevalence increases with the severity of intellectual
disabilities, with lifetime history of epilepsy estimated to be 12% in
people with Down's syndrome, 15% in mild to moderate intellectual
disability, and 30% in severe and profound intellectual disability. The
risk appears higher among those with additional neurological diagnoses,
such as cerebral palsy and those with ASD. Epilepsy is also more
commonly associated with fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis,
Angelman syndrome, and Rett syndrome, while certain epilepsy syndromes,
such as West syndrome and Lennox-- Gastaut syndrome, are more common
among people with intellectual disability. The proportion of epilepsy
cases that are drug- resistant is also greater among people with
intellectual disability. Of particular concern is the incidence of
sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP), which is estimated to be 1
in 295 per year in the intellectual disability population, compared with
1 in 1000 per year in epilepsy patients in the general population. For a
review of the aetiology, diagnosis, and treatment of epilepsy in
intellectual disability, see Iivanainen (2009).

Psychiatric disorders among people with intellectual disability In the
past, psychiatric disorder among the learning disabled was often viewed
as different from that seen in people of normal intelligence. One view
was that people with intellectual disability did not develop emotional
disorders. Another view was that they developed these disorders, but
that the causes were biological rather than psychosocial. It is now
generally agreed that people with intellectual disability experience
psychiatric disturbances similar to those that affect the general
population. However, the symptoms are sometimes modified by low
intelligence, and may not be easily recognized or communicated.
Therefore, when diagnosing psychiatric disorder among people with
intellectual disability, more emphasis may have to be given to behaviour
and less to reports of mental phenomena than is usually the case. For
reviews of psychiatric disorders in intellectual disability, see Einfeld
et al.Â (2011) and Dosen (2009), and for a review of their clinical
assessment, see Holland (2009) and Volkmar et al.Â (2014). Here we
outline their

epidemiology and clinical characteristics. Their assessment and
treatment are covered later in the chapter.

Epidemiology and features of psychiatric disorder in people with
intellectual disability Among people with intellectual disability,
published rates of psychiatric disorder vary widely, because of
methodological limitations in studies with case ascertainment,
detection, and definition. Early studies primarily had the selection
bias of including mainly people from institutions. Although more recent
studies have included people from the community, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to detect all adults with intellectual disability,
particularly those with mild disability. The diagnostic criteria used in
different studies have also varied---some used screening instruments,
while others used structured diagnostic instruments. In

489

490

490

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) addition,
studies have varied in terms of whether they included behaviour
disorders in the count of psychiatric disorders. Having noted these
caveats, recent surveys report a prevalence of 16--45% among adults with
intellectual disability (Cooper and Smiley, 2009; Morgan et al., 2008).
Studies in children with psychiatric disorders demonstrate a high
prevalence of intellectual disability, with estimates that 50% of
children with ASD have intellectual disability and 15--20% of children
with ADHD having intellectual disability (Einfeld et al., 2011; Simonoff
et al., 2007). Other disorders with higher rates in individuals with
intellectual disability include schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and
dementia. Behavioural problems are particularly common, especially
hyperactivity, stereotypies, and self-injury (Deb et al., 2001). In
general, the aetiology of psychiatric disorders in intellectual
disability is similar to that in the general population, in that they
result from a complex and non-deterministic combination of biological,
psychological, and social factors. However, there are some specific
factors that add additional risk and complexity to the incidence and
detection of psychiatric disorders. Although the direction of effects
can be difficult to unpick, intellectual disability and psychiatric
disorders might have shared genetic and other risk factors; they might
result from medical adversities that affect the brain (e.g.Â epilepsy,
cerebral palsy); they might come from environments of increased family
psychosocial adversity; and the intellectual disability itself might
impact on the individual's capacity to communicate, understand their
environment, and respond flexibly to various situations (Simonoff et
al., 2015). Some of these factors are summarized in Table 17.2.
Furthermore, the complexity of the presentation of psychiatric disorders

in those with intellectual disability reflecting the often behavioural,
medical, and neuropsychiatric components of an individual's specific
intellectual disability contributes to why a psychiatrist is often a key
member of the multidisciplinary team helping to manage the needs of
someone with an intellectual disability experiencing difficulties.

Psychotic disorders The epidemiological studies available suggest an
increased prevalence of psychotic disorders among individuals with
intellectual disability. Schizophrenia affects 3--4% of people with
intellectual disability, compared with less than 1% in the general
population (Deb et al., 2001). The overlap between the two conditions
largely reflects shared genetic factors. Clinically, delusions may be
less elaborate than in patients with schizophrenia of normal
intelligence, hallucinations may have a simpler content, and thought
disorder is difficult to identify. When IQ is less than 45, it is
difficult to make the diagnosis with any certainty. Furthermore, some of
the symptoms of underlying brain damage, such as stereotyped movements
and social withdrawal, may wrongly suggest schizophrenia, so a
comparison of current with previous behaviour is always valuable. The
diagnosis of schizophrenia should be considered as one of several
possibilities when intellectual or social functioning worsens without
evidence of an organic cause, and especially if any new behaviour is odd
and out of keeping. When there is continuing doubt, a trial of
antipsychotic drugs is sometimes appropriate. The principles of
treatment of schizophrenia in people with intellectual disability are
the same as those for patients of normal intelligence (see Chapter 11);
however, as

Table 17.2 Summary of factors in those with intellectual disability
associated with psychiatric illness Biological

Psychological

Social

Genetic syndromes ('behavioural phenotypes')

Coping style

Living circumstances

Epilepsy

Self-esteem

Daily structure and routine

Autism spectrum disorder

Social comparison

Social support

ADHD Physical illness Medication Adapted from Woodbury-Smith M, Hollins
S, Psychiatric illness and disorders of intellectual development: a dual
diagnosis. In: Woodbury-Smith, M, Clinical Topics in Disorders of
Intellectual Development, Copyright (2015), with permission from The
Royal College of Psychiatrists.

491

Psychiatric disorders among people with intellectual disability with all
pharmacological interventions in those with intellectual disability it
is important to be aware that often lower therapeutic doses are needed
and titration should be slower.

Mood disorder The rate of depressive disorders is estimated to lie
between 3% and 6%---slightly higher than that of the general population
(Davies and Oliver, 2014). However, people with intellectual disability
are less likely to complain of mood changes or to express depressive
ideation. Diagnosis has to be made mainly on the basis of an appearance
of sadness, changes in appetite and sleep, and behavioural changes of
retardation or agitation. Severely depressed patients with adequate
verbal abilities may describe hallucinations or delusions. Of note,
depressive disorder occurs commonly in association with Down's syndrome
during late adolescence and early adulthood, independent of life events
(Collacott et al., 1998). Mania has to be diagnosed on the basis of
hyperactivity and behavioural signs of excitement, irritability, or
nervousness. The differential diagnosis of mood disorder in people with
intellectual disability includes thyroid dysfunction, which is
especially prevalent in people with Down's syndrome, and grief (Brickell
and Munir, 2008). The rate of suicide in people with moderate and more
severe intellectual disability is lower than in the general population.
The rate of deliberate self-harm is less certain, because it is
difficult to decide patients' intentions and their knowledge of the
likely effects of the injurious behaviour. The principles of treatment
of mood disorders are the same as those for people of normal
intelligence (see Chapter 9).

Anxiety disorders and related conditions Adjustment disorders are common
among people with intellectual disability, occurring when there are
changes in the routine of their lives. Anxiety disorders are also
frequent, especially at times of stress, and social anxiety is often
seen in individuals with fragile X syndrome (Cordeiro et al., 2010).
Obsessive--compulsive disorders are also found. Conversion and
dissociative symptoms are sometimes florid, taking forms that can be
interpreted in terms of the patient's understanding of illness.
Somatoform disorders and other causes of functional somatic symptoms can
result in persistent requests for medical attention. Treatment is
usually directed mainly to bringing about adjustments in the patient's
environment, and reassurance. Counselling, at an appropriate level of
complexity, can also be helpful.

Eating disorders Overeating and unusual dietary preferences are frequent
among people with intellectual disability. Abnormal eating behaviours,
including pica (Chapter 13), are not uncommon, but classical eating
disorders appear to be less common than in the general population.
Overeating and obesity are features of Prader--Willi syndrome (see
below).

Personality disorder Personality disorder is difficult to diagnose among
people with intellectual disability. In this population there is a
considerable overlap between the diagnosis of behavioural disturbance
and that of personality disorder (Reid and Ballinger, 1987). Sometimes
the personality disorder leads to greater problems in management than
those caused by the intellectual disability itself. The general approach
is as described on page 409, although with more emphasis on finding an
environment to match the patient's temperament, and less on attempts to
bring about change through self-understanding.

Delirium and dementia Delirium. This may occur as a response to
infection, medication, and other precipitating factors. As in people of
normal intelligence, delirium in people with intellectual disability is
more common in childhood and in old age than at other ages. Disturbed
behaviour due to delirium is sometimes the first indication of physical
illness. Delirium may also occur as a side effect of drugs (especially
antiepileptics, antidepressants, and other psychotropic medication).
Dementia. As the life expectancy of people with intellectual disability
increases, dementia in later life is becoming more common. Alzheimer's
disease is particularly common among people with Down's syndrome (see
page 501), but dementia is also more commonly in other elderly
intellectually disabled people, with a prevalence of 18.3% in those over
the age of 65 years, making it 2--3 times more common in this population
(Strydom et al., 2009). Prevalence rates do not differ between mild,
moderate, and severe intellectually disabled groups. Dementia in people
with intellectual disability may initially present with seizures, or
with the usual progressive decline in intellectual and social
functioning, which has to be distinguished from conditions such as
depression and delirium.

Disorders that are usually first diagnosed in childhood and adolescence
Many of the disorders in this category are more frequent in children
with intellectual disability than in

491

492

492

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) the general
population, and they are more likely to continue into adulthood. It is
important to be aware that relatively specific developmental disorders
of scholastic skills, speech, and language and motor function may occur
alongside more global intellectual disability.

Autism spectrum disorder and attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder
Hyperactive behaviour and autistic-like behaviour are frequent symptoms
of intellectual disability. In addition, the diagnoses of ASD and ADHD
are more common for those with intellectual disability than among the
general population. There is a particular comorbidity between
intellectual disability and ASDs, probably reflecting an overlap in
their aetiology, especially with regard to genetic factors (Mefford et
al., 2012).

Abnormal movements Stereotypes, mannerisms, and rhythmic movement
disorders (including head banging and rocking) occur in about 40% of
children and 20% of adults with severe intellectual disability. Repeated
self-injurious behaviours are less common but important. There is a
specific association with Lesch--Nyhan syndrome, in which the biting
away of the corner of a lip is common. Prader--Willi syndrome is
strongly associated with a pattern of selfinjury where patients pick at
their skin.

Behaviour that challenges The term behaviour that challenges (or problem
behaviour) is used to describe problematic behaviour that is relatively
specific to intellectual disability and is associated with
neurodevelopmental disorders such as ASD. It describes behaviour of an
intensity or frequency sufficient to impair the physical safety of a
person with intellectual disability, to pose a danger to others, or to
make participation in the community difficult (Simonoff et al., 2015).
Those who present with behaviour that challenges are often marginalized,
stigmatized, disempowered, and excluded from mainstream society as it
often provokes punitive or restrictive responses (Banks et al., 2007).
It is probable that around 20% of intellectually disabled children and
adolescents, and 15% of intellectually disabled adults have some form of
behaviour that challenges. The causes of such behaviour are listed in
Box 17.1. Whenever possible, the primary cause should be understood and
treated. It is essential that the behaviour is understood in the context
of that individual and their environment, and therefore any intervention
must address the person, environment, and the interaction between the
two. The person might be expressing unhappiness in their current

Box 17.1 Causes of behaviour that challenges Physical: pain, discomfort,
malaise Psychiatric and neuropsychiatric disorder: mood disorders,
psychosis, anxiety, obsessive--compulsive disorders, ADHD, dementia
Psychological trauma: reaction to abuse or loss; or wish to escape an
unpleasant situation Communication difficulties: hearing loss, unclear
communication, insufficient vocabulary or means of expression,
difficulties understanding communication of others Phenotype-related
behaviours: Prader--Willi syndrome, Lesch--Nyhan syndrome, Williams
syndrome Understimulation or overstimulation Desire for attention or
other reward Side effects of medication

environment and the complexities of assessment might require a
comprehensive and multidisciplinary assessment, including a functional
assessment of behaviour, underlying medical and organic factors,
psychological/ psychiatric factors, communication, and
social/environmental factors. Intervention should be delivered in a
person-centred context and a framework of positive behavioural support.
This can include proactive and reactive strategies, psychotherapy,
communication, positive programming, physical and/or medical, and
psychopharmacological. For more information see Banks et al.Â (2007) and
Emerson and Einfeld (2011). Behavioural treatment (see page 510) is the
most widely used treatment. Behaviour that challenges is more likely to
be encountered in the family home, in small-scale community settings, or
in environments that are poorly organized and unable to respond well to
the needs of the person. Therefore the response of those in their
environment is key and, as these interventions are often provided in the
places where the behaviour usually appears, competency-based training
and professional support is often required for carers but, in severe
cases, a residential unit might be needed.

Sleep disorders Impaired sleep is common in people with intellectual
disability, with prevalence estimates ranging from 9% to

493

Other clinical aspects of intellectual disability 34% (van de Wouw et
al., 2012). Serious sleep difficulties, such as obstructive sleep
apnoea, excessive daytime sleepiness, and parasomnias, have a reported
prevalence of 9%, and can be a source of considerable distress.
Furthermore, sleep disorders may be associated with subsequent
challenging behaviours and a worsening of cognitive impairment. The high
rate of sleep disorders is accounted for by five factors: â

Coexisting damage to brain structures that are important for the
sleep--wake cycle.

â

Epileptic seizures that start during sleep.

â

Epilepsy-related sleep instability that disrupts sleep architecture.

â

Structural abnormalities in the upper respiratory tract causing sleep
apnoea (particularly common among people with Down's syndrome).

â

Poor sleep hygiene.

Treatment follows the usual principles of identifying and treating the
cause, and non-pharmacological interventions such as improving sleep
hygiene (see Chapter 13). Melatonin may have a role if medication is
indicated (Braam et al., 2009).

Other clinical aspects of intellectual disability Sex, relationships,
and parenthood Most people with intellectual disability develop sexual
interests in the same way as other people. Yet although people with
intellectual disability are encouraged to live as normally as possible
in other ways, sexual expression is usually discouraged by parents and
carers, and sexual feelings may not even be discussed. In the past,
sexual activity of people with intellectual disability was strongly
discouraged because it was feared that they might produce disabled
children. It is now known that many kinds of severe intellectual
disability are not inherited, and that those which are inherited are
often associated with infertility. Another concern is that people with
intellectual disability will not be good parents. Some studies have
shown that low parental intellectual capacity can negatively impact
child outcomes, while other studies indicate that child development
approaches population norms (Collings and Llewellyn, 2012). Parents will
be best able to care for a child successfully if they are strongly
supported, especially with behavioural interventions such as teaching
parenting skills (Wilson et al., 2014). Social exclusion, bullying, and
stigma are commonplace for children raised by intellectually disabled
parents, and they are at high risk of being removed from parental care
(Collings and Llewellyn, 2012). It is especially important to consider
issues of capacity and ability to consent to sexual relationships if a
person with an intellectual disability becomes involved in such a
relationship. These issues should be considered carefully in each case,
and contraception made available where appropriate. Some intellectual
disability teams run groups to help people who wish to find a partner.

Individuals in these groups are assessed carefully to create a safe
environment, which is essential for those who are vulnerable.

Sexuality There is little published literature on the sexual wellbeing
of people with intellectual disabilities. Carers may regard people with
intellectual disabilities as being more childlike and not as sexual
beings, and restrict their access to sexual health information and
services. Protective attitudes may be linked to the fact that people
with intellectual disabilities have been vulnerable to abuse, and
parents may fear that sexual knowledge exacerbates this vulnerability.
Some people with intellectual disability have a childlike curiosity
about other people's bodies, which can be misunderstood as sexual. Some
expose themselves without fully understanding the significance of their
actions. This is usually best dealt with by behavioural interventions or
with specialized group therapy for those who are more able. Promising
approaches have been developed to sex and relationships education,
starting early and using innovative methods, and to sexual health
services, adapted to allow additional time, address specific fears, and
ensure accessible communication (Talbot et al., 2010).

Maltreatment and abuse There is a strong association between disability
(physical and intellectual) and child maltreatment, and children are
therefore significantly more likely to experience abuse than their
non-disabled peers, more so if they have communication difficulties and
behavioural disorders (Stalker and McArthur, 2012). Furthermore, a
proportion of children with intellectual disability are raised

493

49

494

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) in families
characterized by the factors that are associated in the general
population with the maltreatment of children, but there is no convincing
evidence that sexual or physical abuse is more frequent in families with
an intellectually disabled child. Instead, the sequelae of abuse are
often found in people with intellectual disability who were brought up
in an institution. There is also evidence to suggest that abuse is often
underreported in disabled children. This might be for a number of
reasons, including difficulty communicating, perceived threat, fears of
being separated from family, and tolerance of abuse to be accepted or
receive rewards or affection. When abuse has occurred, it may lead to
psychological problems concurrently and later in life which are similar
to those experienced by any other victim of such abuse---for example,
depression and posttraumatic stress disorder. However, because of
difficulty in emotional expression and communication, such disorders may
present with challenging behaviours in situations with which the
individual associates past abuse.

Growing old Several problems arise more frequently as people with
intellectual disability live longer, other than just the emergence of
dementia and physical health problems (Hubert and Hollins, 2006). When
the parents are the carers, they may find care increasingly burdensome
as they grow old. Such parents are often concerned about the future of
their child when they have died, yet can be reluctant to arrange
alternative care while they are still alive. The older person with
intellectual disability also faces special challenges. If their parents
die first, they face problems of bereavement. The isolation felt by many
bereaved individuals may be increased because other people are not sure
how to offer comfort, and because the intellectually disabled person may
be excluded from the ritual of mourning and other supports that might be
needed at this time. These bereaved people should be helped to come to
terms with the loss, using the principles that apply generally to grief
counselling, but choosing appropriately simple forms of communication,
such as life story work, memory boxes, using photographs, storytelling,
art work, and films to help them explore loss in constructive ways
(McEvoy, 2016).

feelings of loss of the hoped-for normal child. Frequently the diagnosis
of intellectual disability is not made until after the first year of
life, and the parents then have to change their hopes and expectations
for the child. They can experience prolonged depression, guilt, shame,
or anger, and have difficulty in coping with the many practical and
financial problems. A few reject their children, some become
overinvolved in their care, sacrificing other important aspects of
family life, while others seek repeatedly for a cause to explain the
intellectual disability. Most families eventually achieve a satisfactory
adjustment, although the temptation to overindulge the child can remain.
However well they adjust psychologically, the parents might still be
faced with the prospect of prolonged dependence, frustration, and social
difficulties. If the child also has a physical disability, these
difficulties can be increased. There have been several studies on the
effect of a child's intellectual disability on the family. In an
influential study, Gath (1978) compared families who had a child with
Down's syndrome at home and families with a normal child of the same
age. She found that most families with an intellectually disabled child
had adjusted well and were providing a stable and enriching environment
for their child(ren), although the other siblings were at some
disadvantage because of the time and effort devoted to the disabled
child. These findings have been supported by subsequent research
reinforcing that families do best under conditions of high social
support and low financial hardship (McConnell et al., 2014).
Furthermore, services that facilitate improved functioning in activities
of daily living and assist the families in accessing suitable family
supports have the potential to influence family quality of life
positively (Foley et al., 2014). Teams specializing in services for
children with intellectual disability often offer a support service or
support groups for siblings. As the parents grow older, many fear for
the future of their now adult disabled son or daughter. They need advice
about ways in which they can arrange additional help when they become
unable to provide the support that they gave when they were younger, and
about ways of helping their son or daughter to remain in the family home
after they have died. For a review of the effects of intellectual
disability on the family, see Gath and McCarthy (2009).

Effects of intellectual disability on the family

Criminal justice system

When a newborn child is found to be disabled, many parents can be
distressed. Feelings of rejection are common, but seldom last for long,
and are replaced by

People with mild intellectual disability have higher rates of criminal
behaviour than the general population (see also Chapter 18, page 518).
The causes of this excess are

495

Aetiology of intellectual disability multiple, but influences in the
family and social environment are often important. Impulsivity,
suggestibility, vulnerability to exploitation, and desire to please are
other reasons for involvement in crime, alongside an increased
likelihood in being detected. Compared with the general population,
intellectually disabled people who commit offences are more likely to be
detected and, once apprehended, may be more likely to confess. Among the
more serious offences, arson and sexual offences (usually exhibitionism)
are said to be particularly common. Of note, people with intellectual
disability may be suggestible and may therefore give false confessions,

so particular care should be taken when questioning them about an
alleged offence. In the UK, police interrogation should accord with the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act, which requires the presence of an
appropriate adult to ensure that the person with intellectual disability
understands the situation and the questions. Once an intellectually
disabled person has been convicted, psychiatric supervision in a
specialized forensic intellectual disability unit and specialized
education may be needed. They are also more likely to be the victims of
crime and are perceived to be poor witnesses.

Aetiology of intellectual disability In a classic study of the 1280
mentally retarded people living in the Colchester Asylum, Penrose (1938)
found that most cases were due not to a single cause but to a
hypothesized interaction of multiple genetic and environmental factors.
This conclusion still broadly applies, especially for mild intellectual
disability. Conversely, a specific cause for severe intellectual
disability is increasingly often found. Table 17.3 lists the main
categories of intellectual disability aetiology, and some examples of
each. Genetic factors are a major cause of intellectual disability. IQ
is heritable (with estimates of 30--50%; Deary et al., 2009), and
intellectual disability is in this respect just the tail end of the
normal distribution of intelligence in the population (indeed, by
definition, 2% of people are expected to have an IQ of less than 70).
This aspect of genetic predisposition to intelligence reflects the
cumulative effects, and interactions, of a large number of genes, most
of which have yet to be identified. In addition, a specific chromosomal
or genetic defect can be the necessary and sufficient cause of a
person's learning difficulty. These include Down's syndrome and fragile
X syndrome, the two commonest causes of intellectual disability. It has
recently been estimated that over 1000 genes underlie intellectual
disability; the majority have yet to be discovered. The crude division
of intellectual disability into cases where a specific cause can be
found, and those where it reflects multiple, largely 'non-specific'
causes, parallels the categorization into either 'subcultural' (later
sociocultural) or 'pathological' mental retardation (as it was then
called) made by Lewis (1929). At a mechanistic level, the types of
genetic abnormality that cause intellectual disability are diverse (see
Box 17.2) and can be because of chromosomal

abnormalities, X-linked disorders, autosomal dominant and recessive
disorders, as well as copy number variants (duplications and deletions)
of chromosomal regions. (See Chapter 5 for an introduction to genetics.)
The clinical features of the major genetic causes of intellectual
disability are listed in Table 17.4, with additional details given in
the text for Down's syndrome and fragile X syndrome. For a review of the
genetic causes of intellectual disability, see Vissers et al.Â (2016).
Environmental factors are conveniently divided into prenatal, perinatal,
and postnatal factors, reflecting the time at which they are believed to
have occurred. The relative importance of environmental factors varies
according to setting. For example, they are more significant in low- and
middle-income countries and where health care provision or general
health are poorer, and they may be affected by local factors (e.g.Â areas
of low iodine predispose to congenital hypothyroidism). Social as well
as biological factors should be considered in the environmental
category. Even though the evidence remains inconclusive, it is notable
that low intelligence is related to, and predicted by, psychosocial
factors such as lower social class, poverty, and an unstable family
environment (Sameroff et al., 1987). Some non-genetic causes of
intellectual disability are summarized in Table 17.5. Note also that
aetiology of intellectual disability is sometimes defined in terms of an
accompanying physical characteristic, such as hydrocephalus,
microcephaly, or cerebral dysgenesis. Finally, the descriptive category
of inborn errors of metabolism encompasses multiple different syndromes,
mostly due to a single gene disorder affecting an enzyme that is
important in a particular biochemical pathway. They include urea cycle
disorders and lysosomal

495

496

496

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation)

Table 17.3 The types of causes of intellectual disability Genetic
category

Examples

Chromosomal disorders Trisomies

Down's syndrome, Edward's syndrome

Other aneuploidies

Turner's syndrome (XO), Klinefelter's syndrome (XXY)

X-linked

Fragile X syndrome, Coffin--Lowry syndrome

Copy number variation

Angelman syndrome (some cases), velocardiofacial syndrome, cri du chat

Single gene disorders Autosomal dominant

Neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis

Autosomal recessive

Phenylketonuria, Tay--Sachs disease, Hurler's syndrome

X-linked

Rett syndrome

Mitochondrial disorders Complex (non-Mendelian) disorders Environmental
causes

Prenatal Infection

Rubella, toxoplasmosis, syphilis

Toxins

Fetal alcohol syndrome, lead poisoning

Maternal

Pre-eclampsia, placental insufficiency

Nutritional

Iodine deficiency, severe malnutrition

Immune

Rhesus incompatibility

Perinatal Obstetric complications

Brain injury, cerebral palsy

Complications of prematurity

Postnatal Infection Injury Impoverished environment Miscellaneous
Hydrocephalus Microcephaly Spina bifida Inborn errors of metabolism
Idiopathic

Mucopolysaccharidoses, Lesch--Nyhan syndrome

479

Aetiology of intellectual disability

Box 17.2 The genetic basis of intellectual disability Genetic factors of
various kinds underlie intellectual disability. (See also page 102 for
an introduction to relevant genetic concepts and terminology.)
Chromosomal abnormalities. An abnormal number of chromosomes
(aneuploidy) invariably causes intellectual disability. Trisomy refers
to possession of an extra copy of a chromosome; the classic example is
trisomy 21 (Down's syndrome). Absence of an autosome is not compatible
with life, but an absence (or excessive number) of a sex chromosome is,
and produces a variable phenotype in which mild intellectual disability
is common (e.g.Â XO, Turner's syndrome). Intellectual disability is 25%
more common in boys, and Lehrke (1972) was the first to suggest that
this might be due to X chromosome-linked causes. This suggestion has
proved to be largely correct, with fragile X syndrome being the
commonest disorder, but many others have been identified as well.
X-linked intellectual disability is a collective term used to describe
these disorders. Their clinical picture can be particularly complex
(e.g. in terms of girls being affected, and the severity of the
phenotype). Copy number variations (CNVs) were introduced in Chapter 5.
They comprise deletions and duplications of part of a chromosome. Note
that we have two copies of each autosomal chromosome, one from each
parent, and only one is affected, hence the more precise term
hemideletion. Occasionally, the clinical picture depends upon which
parental chromosome is affected, via a process called imprinting. For
example, in chromosome

storage disorders, which in turn include mucopolysaccharidoses
(e.g.Â Hurler's syndrome), sphingolipidoses (e.g. Tay--Sachs disease),
and others (e.g.Â phenylketonuria). For a comprehensive review, see
Scaglia (2014). Overall, it is estimated that prenatal (genetic and
environmental) factors cause 50--70% of intellectual disability, with
10--20% originating perinatally, and 5--10% originating postnatally; the
proportions, and the causes within each category, depend on the
population being studied. For reviews of the aetiology of intellectual
disability, see Kaski (2009), and Reichenberg et al.Â (2016).

Down's syndrome Down's syndrome, first described by Langdon Down in
1866, is a frequent cause of intellectual disability,

15q 11--13, the parental origin of the deletion determines whether
Prader--Willi (paternal) or Angelman syndrome (maternal) is present.
Some parts of the genome are 'hotspots' for deletions and
rearrangements, such as the q11 band of chromosome 22, which causes
velocardiofacial syndrome (Box 11.10). The tips of the chromosomes
(telomeres) also seem to be particularly vulnerable, with subtelomeric
deletions thought to cause 5--10% of 'idiopathic' intellectual
disability. Cumulatively, CNVs represent the commonest cause of
intellectual disability. Single gene disorders are those attributed to a
defect limited to a single gene, and where the identity of the gene, and
often the causative mutation within it, is known. This category includes
most inborn errors of metabolism. Single gene disorders can be dominant
or, more commonly, recessive, and can be autosomal or X-linked. Note
that these points illustrate that genetic factors do not in fact fall
into discrete categories, but are more like a spectrum of causality.
Thus the size of the abnormality can be anything from a whole chromosome
to a CNV to a mutation in a single nucleotide. Similarly, the impact of
the genetic variation can range from being the sole cause of the
syndrome through to acting as a minor risk factor. Since many of the
genetic deficits arise de novo (i.e.Â are spontaneous mutations) in the
individual (owing to an error during gametogenesis, fertilization, or
early development), they blur the distinction between genetic (in the
sense of inherited) and environmental causes. For review, see Vissers et
al.Â (2016).

occurring in 1 in about every 650 live births. It is most commonly
caused by an additional chromosome 21 (95% of cases), chromosomal
translocation causing partial trisomy (in approximately 4% of cases), or
chromosomal mosacism (in approximately 1% of cases). It is more frequent
in children of older women, occurring in about 1 in 2000 live births to
mothers aged 20-- 25 years, and 1 in 30 live births to those aged 45
years or over. Improvements in the antenatal screening process (maternal
serum testing and, later, measurement of fetal nuchal translucency) has
led to an increase in the number of terminations of pregnancy due to
Down's syndrome. However, the incidence is stable, reflecting how the
older average age of mothers increases the risk of having a child with
Down's syndrome (Morris and Alberman, 2009).

497

498

498

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation)

Table 17.4 Notes on some genetic causes of intellectual disability
Syndrome

Aetiology\*

Clinical features

Comments\*\*

Chromosome abnormalities and copy number variants Down's syndrome

Trisomy 21

See text

Fragile X syndrome

See text

See text

Edwards's syndrome

Trisomy 18

Growth deficiency, abnormal skull shape and facial features, clenched
hands, rockerbottom feet, cardiac and renal abnormalities

Rare. Early death common

Cri du chat

Deletion of chromosome 5p, mostly sporadic

Microcephaly, hyperteleorism, typical cat-like cry, failure to thrive

1 in 35,000. ID often severe. Hyperactivity. Early death common

Prader--Willi syndrome

70% due to deletion of paternal 15q11; the rest are due to inheriting
two copies of the same region of maternal chromosome 15

Floppy infants. Small stature, hypogonadal. Excessive appetite, leading
to obesity. Daytime sleepiness. Delayed motor milestones and speech
difficulties. Skin-picking

1 in 40,000. ID usually mild or moderate

Angelman syndrome

Overlaps with Prader--Willi syndrome. Deletions and mutations affect
UBE3A gene on 15q11

Ataxia, hypotonia and epilepsy. Small head, hook nose, characteristic
face and wide mouth. 'Happy puppets'--- jerky movements, episodic
paroxysmal laughter, sociable

1 in 10,000. Severe to profound ID with absence of speech. Hyperactivity

22q deletion syndrome (velocardiofacial syndrome, di George syndrome)

Deletion involving chromosome 22q11; 10% inherited and 90% spontaneous

Variable. Cardiac deficits, characteristic facial appearance with flat
nose and cleft palate, short stature, long thin fingers

1 in 2000. ID variable, mild ID to borderline IQ typical. Poor social
interactions with autistic features and ADHD. 25% develop
schizophrenia-like disorders in adolescence (Box 11.10)

Williams syndrome (idiopathic infantile hypercalcaemia)

Deletion of 7q11, affecting elastin gene. Most cases are sporadic

Distinctive facies with 'elfin' appearance, small stature, with harsh,
brassy voice. Supravalvar aortic stenosis common, failure to thrive

1 in 1500. Most have moderate ID, delayed but preserved language skills.
Superficially sociable but lacks social flexibility and often anxious

Inborn errors of metabolism Phenylketonuria

Autosomal recessive, causing lack of liver phenylalanine hydroxylase.
Commonest inborn error of metabolism

Lack of pigment (fair hair and blue eyes), retarded growth, associated
epilepsy, microcephaly, eczema, and hyperactivity

1 in 10,000. Detectable by neonatal screening of blood or urine; treated
by removing phenylalanine from diet early in life

Galactosaemia

Autosomal recessive, deficiency of one of three enzymes involved in
galactose metabolism (GALT)

Presents following introduction of milk into diet; failure to thrive,
hepatosplenomegaly, cataracts

Very rare. Detected by neonatal screening. Intellectual disability
usually mild, if treated (by galactose-free diet)

49

Aetiology of intellectual disability

Table 17.4 Continued Syndrome

Aetiology\*

Clinical features

Comments\*\*

Hurler's syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I)

Autosomal recessive, affecting Î±-L-iduronidase, causing accumulation of
dextran and heparin sulphate

Grotesque features, protuberant abdomen, hepatosplenomegaly, cardiac
abnormalities

Rare. Death before adolescence. MPS II (Hunter syndrome) and MPS III
(Sanfilippo syndrome) are milder

Lesch--Nyhan syndrome

X-linked mutation of HGPRT gene, leading to enzyme defect affecting
purine metabolism. Excessive uric acid production and excretion

Severe self-injurious behaviour, compulsive biting of fingers and lips.
Development of spastic cerebral palsy and choreoathetoid movements.

Almost all are normal at birth but then develop low--mild ID. Very rare.
Diagnosed prenatally or postnatally, carrier screening possible. Death
in early adult life

Smith--Magenis syndrome

Deletion of chromosome 17p11.2, affecting the RAI1 gene. Usually
sporadic

Broad flat face, brachycephaly, hypoplasia, short stature, hoarse voice,
peripheral neuropathy

Severe ID often with speech delay. Engaging personalities but severe
self-injurious behaviour, tantrums, and sleep disturbance

Neurofibromatosis 1 (von Recklinghausen's syndrome)

Autosomal dominant, but 50% of cases are spontaneous mutations. Caused
by neurofibromin gene at 17q11

Neurofibromata, vitiligo, cafÃ© au lait spots. Astrocytomas and
meningiomas

1 in 3000. Intellectual disability in 50%

Tuberous sclerosis (epiloia)

Autosomal dominant, but variable penetrance and many cases sporadic.
Caused by two genes: TSC1 (hamartin) on 9q, and TSC2 (tuberin) on 16p

Epilepsy, adenoma sebaceum on face, white skin patches, shagreen skin,
retinal phakoma, subungual fibromata, multiple renal and other tumours

1 in 7000. ID usually mild. Autism and other psychiatric disorders
common

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

X-linked recessive; dystrophin gene on Xp21

Males. Progressive muscle weakness, including respiratory and cardiac
muscles

1 in 4000. 25% have ID. Verbal IQ lower than performance IQ. Depression
and anxiety common

Rett syndrome

MeCP2 gene mutation at Xq28

Females affected (lethal in males). Epilepsy, compulsive hand-wringing
movements, agitation

1 in 10,000. Normal early development, abnormalities beginning end of
first year, leading to progressive intellectual disability with death
common by adolescence (see Chapter 16)

Cornelia de Lange syndrome

50% of cases due to mutation in NIPBL gene; other genes include SMC1A,
HDAC8, RAD21, and SMC3. All affect the cohesin complex, which plays a
role in early growth

Typical facial features, including low anterior hairline and arched
eyebrows, long eyelashes. Prenatal and postnatal growth retardation.
Ptosis, myopia, microcephaly, GOR 60%

Typically severe ID but variable IQ. Self-injurious behaviour,
Communication impaired

Other single gene disorders

- Numeral refers to chromosome number. p, short arm; q, long arm.
  \*\*ID: intellectual disability; GOR, gastro-oesophageal reflux.

499

50

500

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation)

Table 17.5 Some non-genetic causes of intellectual disability Syndrome

Aetiology

Clinical features

Comments

Rubella

Viral infection in first trimester

Cataract, microphthalmia, deafness, microcephaly, congenital heart
disease

If mother infected in first trimester, 10--15% infants are affected

Cytomegalovirus

Intrauterine infection

Brain damage; only severe cases are apparent at birth

60% of survivors have intellectual disability

Toxoplasmosis

Protozoal infection of mother

Hydrocephaly, microcephaly, cerebral calcification, renal problems,
hepatosplenomegaly, epilepsy

Variable

Congenital syphilis

Syphilitic infection of mother

Many die at birth; variable neurological signs, 'stigmata' (Hutchinson's
teeth and rhagades)

Uncommon since routine testing of pregnant women

Hydrocephalus

Sex-linked recessive; inherited developmental abnormality, e.g.Â atresia
aqueduct, Arnold--Chiari malformation, meningitis, spina bifida

Rapid enlargement of head. In early infancy, symptoms of raised CSF
pressure; other features depend on aetiology

Mild cases may arrest spontaneously; may be symptomatically treated by
CSF shunt; intelligence can be normal

Microcephaly

Recessive inheritance, irradiation in pregnancy, maternal infections

Features depend upon aetiology

Intellectual disability usually severe

Cerebral palsy

Perinatal brain damage; strong association with prematurity

Spastic (common), athetoid, and ataxic types; variable in severity

Majority are below average IQ; athetoid are more likely to be of normal
IQ

Hypothyroidism (cretinism)

Iodine deficiency or (rarely) atrophic thyroid

Appearance normal at birth; abnormalities appear at 6 months; growth
failure, puffy skin, lethargy

Now rare in UK; responds to early thyroxine replacement

Facial dysmorphology--- thin upper lip, low-dset ears, growth
retardation, microcephaly

1 in 3000, depending on criteria. Intellectual disability usually mild,
or moderate. Hyperactivity and irritability

Kernicterus (choreoathetosis), opisthotonus, spasticity, convulsions

Prevention by anti-rhesus globulin; treatment by exchange transfusion

Infection

Other

Fetal alcohol syndrome

Hyperbilirubinaemia

Haemolysis, rhesus incompatibility, and prematurity

The clinical picture consists of a number of features, any one of which
can occur in a person without Down's syndrome. Four features together
are generally accepted as strong evidence for the syndrome. The most
characteristic signs are listed in Box 17.3. IQ is generally between 20
and 50, but in 15% of individuals it is above 50. Mental abilities
usually develop

fairly quickly in the first 6 months to 1 year of life, but then
increase more slowly. Children with Down's syndrome are often described
as loveable and easy-going, but there is wide individual variation.
Emotional and behaviour problems are less frequent than in forms of
retardation associated with clinically detectable brain damage.

501

Aetiology of intellectual disability

Box 17.3 Features of Down's syndrome Moderate or severe intellectual
disability Placid temperament Physical features Slanted eyes and
epicanthic folds Small mouth with furrowed tongue â Flat nose â
Flattened occiput â Stubby hands, fingers, and single transverse palmar
crease â Hypotonia with hyperextensibility of joints Associated medical
problems â â

Cardiac anomalies, especially septal defects Gastrointestinal
abnormalities â Atlantoaxial instability â Susceptibility to infection â
Impaired hearing Increased risk of leukaemia, hypothyroidism, and
autoimmune disorders â â

Increased risk of adolescent and early adult depression

In the past, the infant mortality of Down's syndrome was high, but with
improved medical care survival into adulthood is usual, and about 25% of
people with Down's syndrome now live beyond 50 years of age. Although
longevity in people with Down's syndrome has improved appreciably,
age-specific risk for mortality is still considerably increased, with
many body systems exhibiting signs of premature or accelerated ageing.
This may be due to both genetic and epigenetic factors (Zigman 2013).

Aetiology In 1959, Down's syndrome was found to be associated with the
chromosomal disorder of trisomy (three chromosomes instead of the usual
two). About 95% of cases are due to trisomy 21. These cases result from
failure of disjunction during meiosis, and are associated with
increasing maternal age. The risk of recurrence in a subsequent child is
about 1 in 100. The remaining 5% of cases of Down's syndrome are
attributable either to translocation involving chromosome 21 or to
mosaicism. The disorder leading to translocation is often inherited, and
the risk of recurrence is about 1 in 10. Mosaicism occurs when
non-disjunction takes place

during any cell division after fertilization. Normal and trisomic cells
occur in the same person, and the effects on cognitive development are
particularly variable. Although trisomy 21 is one of the most widespread
genetic causes of intellectual disability, it is still poorly
understood. Down's syndrome pathology is assumed to be due primarily to
the increased 'dosage' of genes, and thus increased production of the
proteins that they encode. This probably also accounts for the frequent
early onset of Alzheimer's dementia, with approximately 80% of
individuals with Down's syndrome developing Alzheimer's disease
pathology by 40 years of age (Box 14.11; see Ballard et al., 2016 for
review).

Fragile X syndrome and X-linked intellectual disability Fragile X
syndrome is the second most common specific cause of intellectual
disability after Down's syndrome, and is the most common inherited
cause. It occurs in around 1 in 4000 males and in a milder form in about
1 in 6000 females. It accounts overall for about 10% of those with
intellectual disability. The condition was so named because the X
chromosome is 'fragile' when lymphocytes from affected individuals are
cultured without sufficient folic acid. As shown in Box 17.4, there are
a number of characteristic but highly variable clinical features, none
of which is diagnostic, including enlarged testes, large ears, a long
face, and flat feet. Psychological features include abnormalities of
speech and language, social anxiety, autistic behaviour and other social
impairments, disorders of attention and concentration, and
hyperactivity. The inheritance of the condition, and the characteristics
of carriers, are unusual and complex. Fragile X syndrome is caused by an
amplified CGG repeat sequence in the FMR1 gene, which leads to silencing
of the gene and thus an absence of FMR1 protein. FMR1 regulates genes
involved in synaptic function and plasticity, and the syndrome is
thought to arise because the lack of FMR1 interferes with the action of
these other genes. Some of these genes are now therapeutic targets for
fragile X syndrome, notably the metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR5,
but as yet there are no established treatments. Folic acid is
ineffective. For review of fragile X syndrome, see Bagni et al.Â (2012).
It is now realized that fragile X is one of a family of X-linked causes
of intellectual disability, which together occur in up to 1 in 600 boys,
account for about 16% of cases of male intellectual disability, and
underlie the

501

502

502

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) male excess of
the condition. For review, see Lubs et al. (2012) and Bagni et
al.Â (2012). However, these disorders can also affect girls; an extreme
example is Rett syndrome

(see Table 17.4 and Chapter 16), which only affects girls, probably
because it is lethal to male embryos. Note: All features are
particularly variable.

Assessment and classification of psychiatric conditions in people with
intellectual disability Assessment of a person with suspected
intellectual disability can be different to those with normal
intelligence, especially when the person has communication and cognitive
difficulties affecting their emotional, perceptual, and thought-related
experiences Volkmar et al.Â (2014). The assessment is directed towards
five main areas: â

the cause and severity of the disorder

â

intellectual and social skills development

â

associated medical conditions

â

associated psychiatric disorders

â

assessment of needs.

A multiaxial classification is available to record some of this
information, the DC-LD (Diagnostic Criteria for Psychiatric Disorders
for Use with Adults with Learning Disabilities) (Royal College of
Psychiatrists, 2001), namely: Axis I: Severity of intellectual
disability Axis II: Cause of intellectual disability Axis III:
Psychiatric disorders: Level A: Developmental disorders Level B:
Psychiatric illness Level C: Personality disorders Level D: Problem
behaviours Level E: Other disorders. This system helps to ensure that
all of the key components are considered and recorded. It also
highlights the fact that the assessment is both about characterizing the
intellectual disability and its consequences, and also about making a
specific diagnosis, where possible, as to its aetiology. Severe
intellectual disability is usually diagnosed in infancy, especially as
it is often associated with detectable physical abnormalities or with
delayed motor development. Some people with intellectual disability have
specific developmental disorders--- that is, impairment of specific
functions greater than would be expected from the general intellectual
level (see Chapter 16). The clinician should be cautious

when diagnosing less severe intellectual disability on the basis of
delays in development. Although routine examination of a child may
reveal signs of developmental delay, suggesting possible intellectual
disability, confident diagnosis often requires specialist assessment.
Milder forms of intellectual disability often present when the child
attends school, and can include non-attendance at school, low academic
achievements, and immature interests and behaviour. Full assessment
involves several stages, including history-taking, examination of the
mental state, physical examination, genetic and other laboratory
investigations, developmental testing, functional behavioural
assessment, analysis of the interactions between the disabled person and
the family and the social support systems, and other aspects of
adjustment. Each of these stages will be considered in turn. Although
this section is concerned mainly with the assessment of children,
similar principles apply to assessments later in life. For reviews of
the assessment of intellectual disability, see Holland (2009) and Eng et
al.Â (2013).

History-taking In the course of obtaining a full history, particular
attention should be given to any family history suggesting an inherited
disorder, and to any difficulties or abnormalities in the pregnancy or
the delivery of the child. Dates of passing developmental milestones
should be ascertained. A full account of any behaviour disorders should
be obtained. Details of any associated medical conditions, such as
congenital heart disease, epilepsy, and cerebral palsy, should be
documented.

Mental state examination The approach should be flexible. Many people
with intellectual disability attend and concentrate poorly. Therefore
the interview may need to be carried out rather informally while the
person is engaged intermittently in some other interest. Questions
should be simplified to take account of each person's receptive

503

Assessment and classification of psychiatric conditions in people with
intellectual disability language and developmental level. Behavioural
observations by family, friends, and carers are often more helpful than
the observations that the assessor is able to make. Clinical assessment
can also be supplemented by using standardized scales for the assessment
of psychopathology, adapted for use in patients with intellectual
disability.

movements or social withdrawal, may resemble and be mistaken for
symptoms of schizophrenia or other psychiatric disorders---so-called
diagnostic overshadowing (Reiss and Szyszko, 1983). However, an increase
in a longstanding behaviour may be the first, and sometimes the only,
evidence of psychiatric disorder---so-called baseline exaggeration
(Sovner and Hurley, 1989).

Physical examination

Genetic and laboratory investigations

A systematic physical examination should include noting the child's
overall appearance, looking for dysmorphic features and other physical
signs suggestive of specific disorders (see Tables 17.3 and 17.5, and
Boxes 17.3 and 17.4). Head circumference should be recorded. The
parents' appearance may also be worth noting. Neurological examination
is important and should include particular attention to impairments of
vision and hearing. As in the assessment of patients of normal
intelligence, it is important to find out the person's previous baseline
state before concluding that an item of current behaviour is evidence of
a psychiatric disorder. Some longstanding behaviours, such as
stereotyped

As many cases of intellectual disability, especially moderate and severe
forms, are caused by a specific chromosomal or genetic abnormality,
genetic investigations are a major component of assessment. For example,
at the time of writing, chromosomal microarray (CMA) is considered a
first-tier genetic test, especially if a causal diagnosis is not known
(Moeschler et al., 2014). A clinical geneticist can provide up-to-date
information about the conditions for which screening is available and
the cytogenetic and molecular genetic methods in use (since both are
evolving rapidly) (see Vissers et al., 2016), as well as help with the
interpretation of test results, and sharing the information with the
family and addressing their questions. Genetic investigations are also
critical in preventative screening for intellectual disability.
Depending on the clinical suspicion, and informed by knowledge of the
common causes of intellectual disability, a range of blood tests to
detect inherited metabolic and endocrine disorders, and brain imaging,
may also be indicated. Close involvement with a paediatrician or
paediatric neurologist is recommended.

Box 17.4 Features of fragile X syndrome More common in males Caused by
FMR1 gene mutation Intellectual disability Variable from mild to
profound â Increases late in childhood â Performance IQ affected more
than verbal IQ â Poor attention and concentration â Speech repetitive,
lacking themes or content ('litany speech') Behavioural features â

â Autistic features common Physical features

Large, protruding ears â Long face with high-arched palate â Flat feet â
Lax joints â Soft skin â Large testes (after puberty) â Mitral valve
prolapse â

Developmental assessment This assessment is based on a combination of
clinical experience and standardized methods of measuring intelligence,
language, motor performance, and social skills. Although the IQ is the
best general index of intellectual development, it is not reliable in
the very young or among people who have severe to profound degrees of
intellectual disabilities.

Tests used in developmental assessment Standardized assessment
instruments are widely used for screening, diagnosing, and assessing the
severity of disorders of psychological development (Carr et al., 2016).
Many require special training for correct administration, but some do
not. The choice of test is important because many neuropsychological
tests are too difficult to perform on some people with intellectual
disability. The type of test is also important. There are normreferenced
tests such as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence

503

504

504

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) Scale (WAIS) and
other IQ measures, criterion-referenced tests that apply to particular
skills without reference to population norms, tests of adaptive
behaviour in social settings, and assessments of behavioural
functioning. An abbreviated version of the WAIS, called the Wechsler
Abbreviated Scales of Intelligence (WASI) (Psychological Corporation,
2004), is now available. Another quick useful method is the use of a
Picture Vocabulary Test or another non-verbal test, such as Raven's
Progressive Matrices. Other commonly used instruments are summarized in
Table 17.6 and include general, adaptive functioning, intelligence,
language, and other aspects of development. All have good reliability
and validity.

Functional behavioural assessment The functional assessment of behaviour
involves an assessment of events before, during, and immediately after
the behaviour takes place. It is based on observations reported by
family, carers, and members of the clinical team. It is concerned with
abilities related to self-care, and social abilities, including
communication, sensory motor skills, and social relationships. Sometimes
key behaviours are counted and recorded on paper or using a palmtop
computer.

Assessment of social interaction and adjustment This assessment is
concerned with the interaction between the person with intellectual
disability and the individuals closely involved in their care. It is
also concerned with opportunities for learning new skills, making
relationships, and achieving more choice. If the person with
intellectual disability has reasonable language ability, it is usually
possible to obtain much of the information from him or her. If language
ability is less well developed, the account has to be obtained mainly
from informants. It is particularly important to obtain a complete
description of any change from the usual pattern of behaviour. It is
often appropriate

to ask parents, teachers, or care staff to keep records of behaviours
such as eating, sleeping, and general activity so that problems can be
identified and quantified. The assessor should keep in mind the possible
causes of psychiatric disorder outlined above, including unrecognized
epilepsy.

Assessment of needs As the diagnostic assessment progresses, the likely
needs of the patient require careful consideration, too, as these will
form the basis of the care package and management plan to be
implemented. The needs assessment brings together the social, emotional,
and health needs of the person, and takes into account their views and
wishes as well as those of their significant others. This approach,
sometimes termed 'person-centred planning', is now integral to most
intellectual disability services (Robertson et al., 2007). A
modification of the Camberwell Assessment of Need, known as CANDID
(Camberwell Assessment of Need for Adults with Developmental and
Intellectual Disabilities), is available for use in adults with
intellectual disability.

Follow-up assessments Once intellectual disability has been diagnosed,
regular reviews are required. For children, these are usually carried
out by a multidisciplinary child health team together with teachers and
social workers. The child psychiatrist liaises with the team, and has a
particular role where the child has emotional, behavioural, or other
psychiatric problems. When the child reaches school-leaving age, a
thorough review is important. This should assess the need for further
education, the prospects for employment and independent living, and the
need for ongoing specialist physical and psychological healthcare.
Adults with intellectual disability need to be assessed regularly to
make sure that their care remains appropriate; an intellectual
disability psychiatrist will usually contribute to these
multidisciplinary reviews.

The care of people with intellectual disability A historical perspective
Current arrangements for care are best understood in a historical
context (Thomson, 1998), which usefully begins in the early nineteenth
century. At this time

there were numerous reports of improved forms of care, notably by Itard,
physician-in-chief at the Asylum for the Deaf and Dumb in Paris, who
attempted to train a 'wild boy' found in Aveyron in 1801. This child was
thought to have grown up in the wild, isolated from

50

The care of people with intellectual disability human beings. Itard made
great efforts to educate the boy but, after persisting for 6 years, he
concluded that the training had failed. Nevertheless, his work had
important and lasting consequences, for it led others to try educational
methods. These methods were developed, for example, by Seguin, director
of the School for Idiots at the BicÃªtre in Paris, who in 1842 published
the Theory and Nature of the Education of Idiots. Seguin believed that
the intellectually disabled had latent abilities which could be
encouraged by special training, involving physical exercise, moral
instruction, and graded tasks. These ideas were taken up in other
countries, particularly Switzerland and Germany, with the opening of
institutions that attempted to train their pupils and thereby enable
them to live as independently as possible, while recognizing that many
would need long-term care. At the end of the nineteenth century, several
influences led to a more custodial approach. These influences included
the development of the science of genetics, the eugenics movement, the
measurement of intelligence, and a general decrease in public tolerance
of abnormal behaviour. In England and Wales, such ideas were reflected
in the Mental Deficiency Act 1913, which empowered local authorities to
provide for the confinement of the 'intellectually and morally
defective', and imposed upon the authorities a responsibility to provide
training and occupation. In the years that followed, the total number of
people of this kind in institutions rose from 6000 in 1916 to 50,000 in
1939, and remained at high levels well into the post-war period. In the
1960s the need for reform was recognized in several high-income
countries, prompted in part by the changes away from institutions and
towards community care that had already been effected in general
psychiatry. Campaigning by groups of parents, and public concern about
the generally---and in some instances scandalously---poor conditions in
which people with intellectual disabilities were housed, was also
important. Surveys of hospitals for the 'retarded' showed that the mean
IQ of their patients was over 70, and thus many residents had only mild
intellectual disability and did not need hospital care. At around the
same time it was shown that training was beneficial in intellectual
disability across the severity range (O'Connor, 1968), and that there
was an advantage to providing residential care in small homely units
(Tizard, 1964). It is now recognized in many high-income countries that
people with intellectual disability should be integrated into and
included by society as far as possible. However, there have been
divergent views about the best

way to achieve greater integration. In the UK, resources have been
inadequate and progress has been slow. In the USA,
deinstitutionalization was carried out more quickly, with both successes
and failures. The current predominant principle of care is
normalization, an idea that was developed in Scandinavia in the 1960s.
This term refers to the general approach of providing a pattern of life
as near normal as possible. Normalization implies that almost all people
with intellectual disability will live in the community, participating
in normal activities and relationships, making choices, and having full
social opportunities. Children are brought up whenever possible with
their families, and adults are encouraged to live as independently as is
feasible. For the few who need special social and health care,
accommodation and activities are designed to be as close as possible to
those of family life. The concept of normalization has been further
developed in the USA and elsewhere, and includes specialist educational
and other help to enable people to achieve their full potential.
Increasingly, disabled people are organizing themselves into advocacy
groups, and those who are unable to speak for themselves about the
services have advocates speak for them. A recent systematic review
confirmed the better outcomes of communitybased services compared with
institutional care (Kozma et al., 2009).

General provisions The precise model for the care of people with
intellectual disability in a community matters less than the level of
detail in which it is planned and the enthusiasm with which it is
carried out. Good planning requires both an estimate of the needs of the
population to be served, and a summation of individual assessments of
those identified, as each person has individual needs. To achieve this,
local case registers and linked developmental records are needed. The
general approach to care is educational and psychosocial, together with
appropriate psychiatric interventions for mental health problems. The
family doctor and paediatrician are mainly responsible for the early
detection and assessment of intellectual disability. The
multidisciplinary team providing continuing health care benefits by
including psychiatrists, psychologists, speech therapists, nurses,
occupational therapists, and physiotherapists. Volunteers and self-help
groups for carers can play a valuable part. In the UK, residential
provisions for people with intellectual disability are from several
sources, including the education service, health service, social
services, and voluntary organizations.

505

506

506

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation)

Table 17.6 Commonly used instruments for developmental assessment
Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Scale This scale measures adaptive behaviour
across the life-course and assesses four domains: communication, daily
living skills, socialisation and motor skills.

Autism Behaviour Checklist (ABC) This questionnaire is completed by the
parent or other carer. It is a reliable indicator of problems in the
area of autism and delay in social development and easy to administer.

The British Ability Scales and Differential Ability Scales

The Disability Assessment Scale

These scales measure a range of functions and educational attainments
(spelling, arithmetic, reading), and can be used to calculate an overall
IQ.

This scale focuses on autistic and related social developmental,
language disorders, and behavioural problems.

ABAS (Harrison and Oakland, 2000) The ABAS assesses adaptive behaviours
within the domains of: communication, functional academics, health and
safety, self.

British (Peabody) Picture Vocabulary Test A test of language
comprehension, suitable for nonspeaking children. The test booklet is
largely pictorial and the age range covered is 3--19 years. Although
professional training is not required, the test is used mainly by
psychologists and speech therapists.

The Portage Guide to Early Education

Reynell Scales of Language Development

This assessment has been adopted for use internationally. It provides a
broad developmental assessment including socialization, self-help,
language, and cognitive and motor domains. Only a brief period of
training is required. The test requires the active involvement of parent
or other carer.

These scales assess comprehension and expressive language in the age
range 1 month to 6 years. The test is of particular use with non-verbal
children.

Griffiths mental development scales For 2 to 8 years of age. Consists of
subscales of: locomotor, personal-social, language, hand-eye
coordination, performance and practical reasoning.

Developmental, Dimensional and Diagnostic Interview This is a parental
autism interview that measures both symptom intensity and comorbidity
across the full range of the autistic spectrum.

Bayley scales of infant development (Bayley III; Bayley, 2005). Children
are assessed in the five key developmental domains of cognition,
language, socialemotional, motor and adaptive behaviour. Validated for
1--42 months.

Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-IV) and for adults
(WAIS-IV) Gives a full scale IQ and measures cognitive functioning
within four domains of verbal comprehension, perceptual reasoning,
processing speed and working memory. The WISC-IV is validated for use
between 6--16 years; the WAIS-IV for 16--90 years.

For a review of services for intellectual disability, see Bouras and
Holt (2009), and for a practical guide to their organization, see
Bernard and Turk (2009).

â

advice, support, and practical measures for families

â

provision for education, training, occupation, or work

â

housing and social support to maximize self-care

â

medical, nursing, and other services for those who require these forms
of help as outpatients, daypatients, or inpatients

â

psychiatric and psychological services.

Specific services The main elements in a comprehensive service for
people with intellectual disability are as follows: â

â

the prevention and early detection of intellectual disability regular
assessment of the intellectually disabled person's attainments and
disabilities

Preventive services Primary prevention consists of genetic counselling,
the education of pregnant women (and the population in general) about
behaviours that may put the fetus at

570

The care of people with intellectual disability risk, early detection of
fetal abnormalities during pregnancy, and good obstetric and perinatal
care. Secondary prevention aims to prevent the progression of disability
by either medical or psychological means. The latter includes
'enriching' education and early attempts to reduce behavioural problems.
In high-income countries, there remains considerable scope for reduction
of the genetic causes of severe intellectual disability, but it is
unlikely that it will be possible to affect the incidence of mild
intellectual disability significantly. In low- and middle-income
countries, the incidence of intellectual disability could be
substantially reduced by general measures to improve the health of
mothers during pregnancy, and by better perinatal care. For a review,
see Kaski (2009).

Genetic screening and counselling These measures begin with an
assessment of the risk that an intellectually disabled child will be
born. Such an assessment is based on study of the family history, on
knowledge of the genetics of conditions that give rise to intellectual
disability, and on awareness of the possibilities for genetic screening.
The risks of screening are explained to the parents, who are encouraged
to discuss them. Most parents seek advice only after a first abnormal
child has been born. Those who seek advice before starting to have
children usually do so because there is a person with intellectual
disability in the family. A positive diagnosis of an abnormality leading
to termination or, indeed, a false-positive result of screening causes
considerable distress. It is important, therefore, that those involved
in screening are alert to psychological issues and have the appropriate
counselling skills. Close liaison with a clinical geneticist is
recommended, given the rapid developments in the indications for
screening, the methods used, and the significant ethical and counselling
issues involved.

Prenatal care Prenatal care begins even before conception, with
immunization against rubella for women who lack immunity, and advice on
diet, alcohol, smoking, and folic acid supplementation. Prenatal
diagnosis overlaps with genetic screening, which is becoming available
for an increasing number of conditions with the aim of providing
information to those at risk of having abnormal children, reassurance to
others, and appropriate treatment of affected infants through early
diagnosis. Maternal blood tests, ultrasound scanning, fetoscopy,
chorionic villus sampling, and amniocentesis can reveal chromosomal
abnormalities, most open neural tube defects, and about 60% of

inborn errors of metabolism. Amniocentesis carries a small but definite
risk, and so is usually offered only to women who have carried a
previous abnormal fetus, women with a family history of congenital
disorder, and those with significant risk that the fetus they are
carrying will have a serious condition or abnormality. Rhesus
incompatibility is now largely preventable. Sensitization of a
rhesus-negative mother can usually be avoided by giving anti-D antibody.
An affected fetus can be detected by amniocentesis and treated if
necessary by exchange transfusion. For pregnant women with diabetes
mellitus, special care can improve the outlook for the fetus. Further
information about these aspects of care can be found in textbooks of
obstetrics and paediatrics.

Postnatal prevention In the UK, all infants are routinely tested for
phenylketonuria, and testing for hypothyroidism and galactosaemia is
becoming increasingly common. Screening for elevated levels of lead has
been advocated, especially in areas where they are known to be high.
Intensive care units and improved methods of treatment for premature and
low-birthweight infants can prevent intellectual disability in some who
would previously have suffered brain damage. However, these methods also
enable the survival of some disabled children who would otherwise have
died.

Help for families As noted earlier, having a child with intellectual
disability can have a major emotional and practical impact on the
family, and support is needed for the family from the time that the
diagnosis is first made (Gath and McCarthy, 2009). It is not enough to
give worried parents a full explanation on just one occasion. They may
need to hear the explanation several times before they can absorb all of
its implications. Adequate time must be allowed to explain the
prognosis, indicate what help can be provided, and discuss the part that
the parents can play in helping their child to achieve his or her full
potential. Community paediatricians, health visitors, and sometimes
clinical geneticists are usually involved in this process. Thereafter,
the parents need continuing support as there is good evidence for
promoting child development with parent-sensitive responsiveness
(Guralnik, 2016). When the child starts school, the parents should be
kept informed about progress, and feel involved in the planning and
provision of care. They should be given help with practical matters,
such as daycare during school holidays, babysitting, or arrangements for
family holidays. In addition to practical assistance, the parents

507

508

508

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) might need
continuing psychological support, which may be provided as a programme
for the whole family. Families are likely to need extra help when their
child reaches puberty or leaves school. Making the transition from child
to adult services is often extremely stressful. Both respite day and
overnight care can be required to relieve carers and to encourage the
intellectually disabled person to become more independent.

Education, training, and occupation One aspect of the policy of
normalization is that children with intellectual disability should be
educated as far as possible within inclusive preschool settings and
mainstream schools. The extent to which this is done varies in different
countries and also in different regions of the same country.
Compensatory education is intended to provide optimal conditions for the
mental development of the disabled child. An early example was the Head
Start programme in the USA, which provided extra education for deprived
children, including nursery schooling and attempts to teach specific
skills. Many of the results were disappointing, and it was followed by a
more intensive programme with similar aims, carried out in Milwaukee
(Garber, 1988). Skilled teachers taught children living in slum areas
with mothers who had a low IQ (less than 75). This additional education
started at 3 months of age and continued until the child reached school
age. At the same time, the mothers were trained in a variety of domestic
skills. These children were compared with children of the same age from
similar families who had not received these interventions. At the age of
four and a half, the trained children had a mean IQ 27 points higher
than that of the controls. This study can be faulted because the
selection of children was not strictly random, and because some of the
changes in test scores could have been due to practice. Nevertheless,
the main findings probably stand---substantial effort by trained staff
can produce worthwhile improvement in children of low intelligence born
to socially disadvantaged mothers. Overall, it seems that early
interventions can be effective, especially if they are family-centred.
However, many uncertainties remain about the components and the delivery
of such help. Research has consistently shown the improved cognitive and
social outcomes for children with intellectual disability, if
educational interventions are commenced early and, if possible, in
inclusive play group or nursery classes (Guralnick, 2016). When school
age is reached, the least disabled children can be supported within
mainstream classes and, if needed, attend remedial classes. Others need
to attend special educational

programmes for children with intellectual disabilities. It is still not
certain which intellectually disabled children benefit from ordinary
schooling. Education in an ordinary school offers the advantages of more
normal social surroundings, social integration, and the expectation of
progress, but it may have the disadvantage of a lack of special teaching
skills and equipment. Also, the methods of teaching that emphasize
self-expression are inappropriate for some children with intellectual
disability, who need special teaching of language and communication.
Another advantage of educating disabled children in ordinary schools is
that other pupils appreciate that their integration into society is the
norm. Before intellectually disabled children leave school, they need
reassessment and vocational guidance. The resources and opportunities
available to young people with intellectual disability have an
unfortunate tradition of being inadequate and not meeting their complex
needs; this is exacerbated by many accepting limited aspirations set for
them by themselves and others (Talbot et al., 2010). Most young people
with mild intellectual disability are able to take normal jobs or enter
sheltered employment. Adults with severe disability are likely to
transfer to adult day centres, which should provide a wide range of
activities if the abilities of each attender are to be developed as much
as possible.

Residential care It is now widely accepted that parents should be
supported in caring for their intellectually disabled children at home.
If care is too heavy a burden for the parents because of their other
family commitments, the child with intellectual disability should, if
possible, be placed in another family. Adults should be supported in
ordinary housing, or placed with a family, or in suitable lodgings, or
in a small residential group home. Staff need to encourage the residents
to develop their social skills and to live as normally as possible.

Medical services People with intellectual disability should have the
same access to general and specialist medical services as other
citizens, but they require extra support if they are to obtain full
benefit. This care is usually obtained from the ordinary medical
services and this arrangement can work well, provided that doctors and
nurses are sufficiently aware of how to deal with a person with
intellectual disability, and have the time and resources to do so.
Families and carers are helped when care is coordinated by a single
person, so that they do not receive conflicting advice. Specialist
nurses have a particularly important role in such coordination. Shared
care between

509

Treatment of psychiatric disorder and behavioural problems neurologists
and psychiatrists can improve outcomes for some patients---for example,
in the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy. People with intellectual
disability have increased health needs and it is therefore generally
recommended that annual health checks be performed. This helps to screen
for treatable conditions and improve their quality of life, as well as
preventing early death.

Psychiatric services Psychiatric care is an essential part of a
comprehensive community service for people with intellectual disability.
In some countries it is provided by generic mental

health services, but in the UK it is generally provided by staff who
specialize in the care of people with intellectual disability. The
psychiatrist with such a specialism forms part of a wider intellectual
disability team, consisting of intellectual disability nurses,
psychologists, and social workers. Once known to the team, the patient
may access the psychiatrist in the event of psychiatric disorders or
behaviours that are challenging. Some psychiatrists with specialist
intellectual disability training may also diagnose, treat, and manage
epilepsy, although, as noted above, a neurologist may also be involved
in this and in other neurological aspects of management.

Treatment of psychiatric disorder and behavioural problems Psychiatric
disorder in people with intellectual disability usually comes to notice
through changes in behaviour. It should be remembered, however, that
behavioural change can also result from physical illness or from
stressful events, both of which should be carefully excluded. In the
most disabled, and especially those with sensory deficits, behavioural
disturbance may be due to understimulation and frustration owing to the
inability to communicate wishes and needs. Once the cause is clear, the
treatment follows. Physical illness should be treated promptly,
stressful events reduced if possible, or a more stimulating environment
provided when appropriate. If the disturbed behaviour results from a
psychiatric disorder, the treatment is similar in most ways to that for
a patient of normal intelligence with the same disorder. Carers are
often involved in behavioural assessment and treatment methods, and it
is important to support them adequately. The most serious and persistent
disorders occasionally require hospital admission for more intensive
behavioural management, which may be combined with pharmacotherapy.

Medication The indications for psychotropic drugs are generally the same
as for patients of normal intelligence, and the full range of such
medication should be available for the intellectually disabled. However,
the psychiatrist has particular responsibility for organizing effective
ongoing monitoring, including regular physical examination. The latter
is especially important for patients with severe communication
impairments who cannot describe

adverse effects. Also, neurologically impaired patients may develop
adverse effects at lower doses and suffer from oversedation, delirium,
and extrapyramidal symptoms. Antipsychotic and benzodiazepine drugs are
often useful in the short-term control of behaviour problems, generally
at much lower doses than would be prescribed in the general population.
There are few controlled trials of the efficacy and tolerability of
antipsychotic drugs in the longer-term treatment of abnormal behaviour.
None the less, clinical experience suggests that severely behaviourally
disturbed patients who do not respond to psychosocial interventions
sometimes benefit from prolonged use of medication with frequent
monitoring of its effects and adjustment of dosage. For a review, see
Bramble (2011). Antiepileptic drug treatment is frequently required,
given the prevalence of epilepsy in intellectual disability (see page
489). Special care is needed to select a drug and dosage that controls
seizures without causing unwanted effects. The older antiepileptic drugs
sometimes cause oversedation and cognitive blunting, and newer drugs,
such as sodium valproate, are usually preferred. Because of the problem
of drug resistance, second-line and combination therapies may be
required, and involvement of an epilepsy specialist is recommended. For
a review of the management of epilepsy in intellectual disability, see
Iivanainen (2009).

Psychological treatment Although limited understanding of language sets
obvious limitations to the use of psychotherapy, it can be useful in
some settings. More able patients can benefit

509

510

510

Chapter 17 Intellectual disability (mental retardation) from a modified
or simplified approach, and psychological therapies are a key
intervention for people with an intellectual disability when
experiencing distress. Although the evidence base is small, some of the
key psychological therapies currently used include behaviour therapy,
cognitive behaviour therapy, psychodynamic psychotherapy, systemic
family therapy, and a range of arts therapies (Talbot et al., 2010).
Cognitive therapies can be attempted with some patients with higher
levels of verbal ability, although the most useful psychological
treatment takes the form of behavioural therapies. These may be, and
are, used for a wide variety of problems (e.g.Â challenging behaviour in
a wide variety of patient abilities). Some intellectual disability
nurses take a special interest in such therapies, and some psychologists
are extensively trained in the area. Counselling for parents is an
important part of treatment. If more formal family therapy is
undertaken, families generally prefer structural approaches, which
address the problems and solutions that are relevant to them. Some
children with profound intellectual disability can be helped by the use
of play and sensory stimulation to encourage developmental advances.

Behaviour modification Behavioural methods are helpful to people with
severe intellectual disability as some of the methods do not

require language, and can be used to encourage basic skills such as
washing, toilet training, and dressing. These are also discussed above
in the section 'Behaviours that challenge' with Positive Behaviour
Supports a prominent intervention. Often parents and teachers are taught
to carry out the training so that it can be maintained in the patient's
everyday environment. If the problem is an undesired behaviour, a search
is made for any environmental factors that seem regularly to provoke it
or reinforce it (functional analysis). If possible, these environmental
factors are changed and carers helped to avoid rewarding the behaviour.
At the same time, alternative adaptive responses are reinforced.
Aggressive behaviour is sometimes dealt with by so-called 'time-out', in
which the person is ignored or secluded until the behaviour subsides.
However, techniques that employ negative reinforcement should not be
used (Banks et al., 2007). If the problem is an insufficiency of some
socially desirable behaviour, attempts can be made to reinforce such
behaviour with material or social rewards, if necessary by 'shaping' the
final behaviour from simpler components. Reward should be given
immediately after the desired behaviour has taken place (e.g.Â using the
toilet). For training in skills such as dressing, it is often necessary
to provide modelling and prompting in the early stages, and to reduce
them gradually later.

Ethical and legal issues in intellectual disability Normalization,
autonomy, and the conflict of interests The policy of normalization has
encouraged intellectually disabled people to live as near normal lives
as possible. This policy can create conflicts between the interests of
the intellectually disabled person and those of others, such that it may
be difficult to balance the interests of the disabled person with those
of their carer(s) and other family members. Normalization can also
produce unintended effects. For example, it requires that intellectually
disabled children should be educated in ordinary schools whenever
possible. However, in secondary schools, children with special needs
were found to be bullied three times more often than other children
(Whitney et al., 1994). It could be argued that it is in the immediate
interests of an individual child to be educated in a special school
where he or she is less likely to be bullied, whereas the long-term
interests of intellectually

disabled children as a group may be advanced more by a policy of
education in ordinary schools while making strenuous efforts to
eradicate bullying. Normalization also leads to practical ethical
questions about sexual activity, contraception, and parenting, as
mentioned earlier. The social inclusion of people with intellectual
disability includes being able to participate in social networks, having
friends, holding membership of clubs, and being able to travel.

Consent to treatment Many people with severe intellectual disability are
unable to give informed consent, and it is essential to be aware of
local legislation and practice. In the UK, these issues are covered by
the Mental Capacity Act (see Chapter 4), under which the practitioner is
required to try to explain the nature of the procedure in a way that the
patient can understand. If the patient is deemed to

51

Further reading lack capacity, steps should be taken to help the person
understand through assistive methods. The least restrictive option in
keeping with the best interests of the intellectually disabled person
should be pursued, usually through the involvement of a person closely
involved in their care and who knows them well (Kelly, 2015). An
advocate may also be involved. If there is doubt and inpatient admission
is being sought, it is good practice to discuss matters with the local
Mental Capacity Act office and hold a 'best interests' meeting.
Discussing the case with an experienced practitioner is also helpful.
Seriously ill patients who refuse potentially life-saving treatments can
prove difficult to deal with in general medical settings. If the patient
is sufficiently impaired as not to understand the nature of the choice
that they face and there is a medical emergency, a Mental Capacity Act
assessment should be completed by the medical team. If there is time, it
may be necessary to refer the case for review in court---for example,
when the question of termination of pregnancy has to be decided.

Consent to research

to appreciate the consequences of situations, and to decide between
alternatives (see Chapter 4). The assessment of these abilities among
the intellectually disabled has been described by the American
Psychiatric Association (1998). Any individual who has agreed to take
part in research should understand that they can withdraw consent if
they wish, a point that should be explained with particular care
(Arscott et al., 1998). In general, no research should be undertaken
involving people who cannot consent, unless the same research cannot be
successfully carried out without involving these people. It is important
to remember that individuals with intellectual disability vary in their
capacity to provide informed consent. Some may be able to provide verbal
rather than written consent. Some may need sign language, pictures, or
written information in simple language and a large font size. For some
the proposal may have to be discussed repeatedly. It is also good
practice to have agreement with the carers and the multidisciplinary
team members. In every case the research should follow strictly the
relevant research governance criteria and, in the UK, the Mental
Capacity Act (see Chapter 4).

Consent to research requires the ability to understand information, to
use the information rationally,

Further reading Bhaumik S et al.Â (2015). The Frith Prescribing
Guidelines for Adults with Learning Disability, 3rd edn.
Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester. Emerson E and Einfeld SL (2011).
Challenging Behaviour, 3rd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJ Jr, and Geddes JR (eds) (2009).
Part 10: Intellectual disability. In: The New Oxford

Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (The
nine chapters in this part of the textbook provide a systematic account
of the subject written for the general psychiatrist.) Hassiotis A et
al.Â (2009). Intellectual Disability Psychiatry: a practical handbook.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester.

511

513

CHAPTER 18

Forensic psychiatry Introduction 513 General criminology 514 Causes of
crime 515 The association between mental disorder and crime 516 Specific
offender groups 520

The role of the psychiatrist in the criminal courts 528 The treatment of
offenders with mental disorder 530 The management of violence in health
care settings 532

Psychiatric aspects of specific crimes 521

Risk assessment 534

Psychiatric aspects of being a victim of crime 527

The psychiatric report 536

Introduction Chapter 4 covered general legal and ethical issues in the
practice of medicine and psychiatry. This chapter is concerned with
other aspects of psychiatry and the law covered by the term forensic
psychiatry, which is used in two ways. 1. Narrowly, it is applied to the
branch of psychiatry that deals with the assessment and treatment of
mentally abnormal offenders. 2. Broadly, the term is applied to all
legal aspects of psychiatry, including the civil law and laws regulating
psychiatric practice. Forensic psychiatrists are concerned with both of
these issues. In addition, they also assess risk and treat people with
violent behaviour who have not committed an offence in law. They have a
growing role in the assessment and treatment of victims. Offenders with
mental disorders constitute a minority of all offenders, but they
present many difficult problems for psychiatry and the law. These
include legal issues, such as the relationship between the mental
disorder and the crime, which may affect the court's determination of
responsibility, and practical clinical questions,

such as whether an offender needs psychiatric treatment, and finding the
appropriate setting for that treatment. The psychiatrist therefore needs
knowledge not only of the law but also of the relationship between
particular kinds of crime and particular kinds of psychiatric disorder.
Mental health services form only a small part of the social and legal
response to criminal deviance. The psychiatrist who is working with
offenders needs to be able to liaise with others in the criminal justice
system, such as lawyers, prison staff, and probation officers. Concepts
of deviance, guilt, and legality are influenced by legal, political, and
social factors, as well as by clinical issues. In reading this chapter
it is important to be aware of the very large differences between
countries and jurisdictions, with substantial national variations in
epidemiology, definitions of crime, legal practice, and the role of the
psychiatrist. Readers need to be aware of legal issues and procedures in
their jurisdiction. In the following account, the situations and
procedures in the UK (and more especially England and Wales) are used as
examples to illustrate general themes. Ethical issues are summarized in
Box 18.1.

514

514

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry

Box 18.1 Ethical issues in forensic psychiatry The principal ethical
issues relate to 'boundary problems'. The psychiatrist and others
involved need to be clear about accountability to legal authorities,
etc., rather than to the individual who is being assessed and treated.
This applies to a variety of activities: 1. Preparation of medicolegal
reports. In the UK, the responsibility of the psychiatrist is to the

Court rather than to the patient or their legal representative. 2.
Assessment of risk. Assessment of the risk to others may be paramount.
3. Voluntary and compulsory treatment. The primary reason for treatment
may involve decreasing the risk of harm to others.

General criminology There is an extensive literature on criminology and
many theories of the causes of crime; interested readers are referred to
criminology textbooks (see Maguire et al., 2012). Most theories have
emphasized the sociological aspects of crime and deviance, particularly
social and economic causes of crime in the family, peer group, and
subculture. These include poverty, poor schooling, and unemployment.
Predisposing social and individual factors are often interrelated, so
simple conclusions are rarely possible. However, social causes are
widely considered more important than individual factors such as
genetics and psychological traits. Despite this, most correctional and
forensic mental health programmes rely on psychological risk factors to
encourage, for example, the development of coping skills (Dowden et al.,
2003).

2010). Within Europe, overall crime rates in the UK are lower than those
in the Netherlands but higher than those in the Scandinavian countries.
Crimes of assault are more common in the USA and Australia. National
statistics are affected by local legislation, the recording of crimes,
and by the conduct of legal proceedings.

Gender Crime is predominantly an activity of young men. In England and
Wales, 50% of all indictable offences are committed by males aged under
21 years, and 25% by those under 17 years. Men represent at least 80% of
offenders (Monahan, 1997), and, in most western countries, male
prisoners outnumber female prisoners by 30:1. This gender difference is
reflected in forensic mental health services, where the majority of
patients are male.

Prevalence

Ethnicity

International data indicate a steady reduction in crime, particularly
violent crime, over the past two decades. Prevalence figures must be
viewed cautiously because much criminal behaviour goes unrecorded by the
police. This is especially true of violence within the home, such as
rape, child abuse, or partner battering. Crime surveys probably provide
more accurate figures. Data from the British Crime Survey are shown by
the curve in Figure 18.1. Property offences are the most common type of
crime, but forensic mental health services are most likely to be
involved with crimes of interpersonal violence.

Ethnic minority groups are usually overrepresented in prisoner
populations (Hassan et al., 2011). Minority groups are more likely to be
poor, unemployed, and living in poor housing, all of which are risk
factors for crime. Consequently, they are overrepresented in forensic
patient populations (Kaye and Lingiah, 2000). The high rates of arrests
and convictions in ethnic minority groups may also reflect
discrimination at all stages of the criminal justice system---from stop
and search through to trial and sentencing.

National differences There are large national differences in the rates
and patterns of crime (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,

Victims Most property crime is committed against strangers, but most
serious interpersonal violence (rape, homicide, or child abuse) is
committed by offenders known to the

51

Causes of crime 25,000 20,000 15,000 10,000 5,000 0 1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 18.1 Crimes reported to the British Crime Survey by the public
during the period 1981--2014 and those recorded by the police for the
same period.

victim. Women are exposed to sexual violence from men in both developed
and developing countries. Women and children are particularly at risk in
developing countries during armed conflicts, where about 70% of
casualties are non-combatants (Kennedy Bergen et al., 2005).

Victims of crime tend to be disadvantaged groups living in poorer parts
of urban communities, so the mentally disordered are more likely to be
victims of crime, and the risk is further increased as a consequence of
their illness (Hart et al., 2012).

Causes of crime Criminal behaviour (crime) needs to be distinguished
from rule-breaking behaviour. Not all rule-breaking or socially
unacceptable behaviour is criminal, nor is all criminal behaviour
violent. In fact, the vast majority is not, so general theories of the
causes of crime will not necessarily address the causes of violence.
Aggressive behaviour is not always violent, as it can be constrained by
social rules. Violence is aggressive behaviour that transgresses social
norms, as in street fighting as opposed to, for example, boxing. Many
factors determine whether an individual is aggressive in a particular
situation. These include personality, the immediate social group, the
behaviour of the victim, disinhibiting factors such as alcohol or drugs,
general environmental factors such as noise and social pressure,
physiological factors such as fatigue, hunger, and lack of sleep, and
the presence of mental abnormality.

Genetic and physiological factors Early studies of twins suggested that
concordance rates for criminality were substantially greater in
monozygotic twins than in dizygotic twins (Lange, 1931). Results from
well over 100 behavioural genetics

studies with different designs---including twin studies, studies of
twins reared apart, and adoption studies--- have converged on the
conclusion that antisocial and aggressive behaviour have a considerable
genetic basis. Estimates of the variance that is attributable to
genetics vary, but several meta-analyses estimate heritability at
between 40% and 60%, broadly consistent between genders and ethnicities
(Glenn and Raine, 2014). The gender difference in offending has raised
the question of the influence of either the Y chromosome or testosterone
levels on offending. However, there is little evidence that chromosomal
or hormonal abnormalities are causally associated with criminal
behaviour or aggression. As was noted in Chapter 15, low brain 5-HT
function has been associated with impulsive aggression. There is
evidence that individuals with sociopathic personalities have
longstanding neuropsychological deficits, particularly in executive
processes (Raine et al., 2005).

Psychosocial factors Individual psychological development interacts with
social factors and cultural values to make offending

515

516

516

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry more likely (see Box 18.2). Rule-breaking
and antisocial behaviour often starts in childhood or early adulthood: â

Follow-up studies of delinquent young people show that early patterns of
antisocial behaviour are likely to persist into adulthood.

â

Delinquency is associated with harsh parenting and poverty.

â

Exposure to physical abuse or neglect in childhood significantly
increases the risk of violent offending in later life, for both men and
women (Rutter, 2005).

Box 18.2 Psychosocial risk factors for offending Individual and family
factors Prenatal and perinatal influences---birth complications,
maternal rejection, fetal neurological maldevelopment, maternal nicotine
and alcohol consumption Hyperactivity and impulsivity Low intelligence
Punitive parenting style---poor supervision, harsh discipline, rejection
Teenage mothers Parental conflict---separations Criminal parents Large
family size

The association between childhood adversity and violence may have
several mechanisms. Abused and neglected children may have a heightened
perception of threat from others. They may have decreased capacities to
form successful interpersonal relationships owing to either decreased
empathy for others or reduced capacity for self-awareness.
Alternatively, they may have a decreased capacity to manage arousal or
regulate anger or anxiety arising from excessive exposure to fear
experiences. It is also possible that children and parents simply share
genetic factors that impair affect regulation or the ability to
empathize. However, it is always important to consider the impact of
resilience or vulnerability factors, such as temperament (Rutter, 2005).

Social factors Socioeconomic deprivation Peer influences School
influences Community influences Source: data from Farrington D P,
Psychosocial causes of offending. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC,
Lopez-Ibor JJ and Geddes J (eds.), The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, Copyright (2009), Oxford University Press; Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 15(1), Glenn A L and Raine A, Neurocriminology:
implications for the punishment, prediction and prevention of criminal
behavior, pp.Â 54--63, Copyright (2014), Nature Publishing Group.

Psychiatric causes A small but important group of offenders exhibit
criminal behaviour that seems to be partly explicable by specific
psychological or psychiatric abnormalities. This group particularly
concerns the psychiatrist, and is discussed in the next section.

The association between mental disorder and crime Frequency The
association between mental disorder and violence has been repeatedly
demonstrated. Fazel et al.Â (2009a) conducted a systematic review of
violence and schizophrenia and other psychoses. This meta-analysis of 20
studies, including 18,423 individuals, found that schizophrenia and
other psychoses were associated with violence (especially homicide).
However, this risk was mediated by comorbid substance abuse, and was the
same for individuals with substance abuse without psychosis. The
increased risk of violent offending in both men and women with a
diagnosis of affective

psychosis could be accounted for by alcohol and substance misuse.
Alcohol and substance misuse by themselves are associated with a
substantially increased risk of violent offending, as is personality
disorder (see Table 18.1; Johns, 2009). Research on the prevalence and
association of mental disorder in prisoners has recognized limitations:
â

Not all criminals are brought to trial and found guilty.

â

Not all criminals go to prison (potential sampling bias).

â

Mentally disordered offenders may be diverted away from courts and
prisons, or they may not be prosecuted.

571

The association between mental disorder and crime

Table 18.1 Relative risk estimates of violent crime from the Danish
Birth Register Disorder

Male

Female

Schizophrenia spectrum disorder

4.8

13.7

Affective disorders

3.5

4.3

Learning difficulties

1.7

---

Personality disorders

5.7

7.9

Reproduced from Psychological Medicine, 45(11), Stevens H et al,
Postillness-onset risk of offending across the full spectrum of
psychiatric disorders, pp.Â 2447--2457, Copyright (2015), with permission
from Cambridge University Press.

The proportion of prisoners with mental disorders is higher than the
proportion of the general population with such disorders (Ogloff, 2009).
In a metaanalysis of 62 psychiatric surveys of prisoners, Fazel and
Danesh (2002) found that about one in seven had a treatable psychiatric
illness (see Table 18.2). A larger number suffer from antisocial
personality disorder. Hassan et al.Â (2011) surveyed the mental health of
over 3000 prisoners on admission and found up to 17% with mental illness
and over half with drug or alcohol misuse.

The nature of the association A causal relationship between mental
disorder and crime is difficult to show empirically, especially if the
type of crime is not defined. The finding that mentally disordered
individuals are overrepresented in prison does not necessarily mean that
their mental disorder caused them to offend. Nor is criminal
law-breaking an indicator in itself of mental disorder, no matter how
heinous or bizarre the behaviour. Only a small minority of all people
who commit violent acts have serious mental illness such as psychosis.
Swedish national registers linking hospital admissions and criminal
convictions over 13 years demonstrated a population-attributable risk
fraction of 5.2% (i.e.Â only 5% of convictions were accounted for by
individuals with severe mental illness). This attributable risk

Table 18.2 Meta-analysis of 62 psychiatric surveys of prisoners Disorder

Male (%)

Female (%)

Psychosis

4

4

Major depression

10

12

Antisocial personality

65

42

fraction was higher in women across all age bands. In women aged 25--39
years, it was 14.0%, and in those aged 40 years or over, it was 19.0%
(Fazel and Grann, 2006). In a more recent Swedish register study, Fazel
et al.Â (2014a) showed that, within 5 years of their first diagnosis of
schizophrenia, 10.7% of men and 2.7% of women were convicted of a
violent offence. The vast majority of patients with psychotic illnesses
are no more dangerous than members of the general population. There is
no evidence that homicidal behaviour is becoming more common in people
with mental illness---indeed, it appears to have been declining since
the early 1970s (Large et al., 2008). For a review of the association
between psychiatric disorder and offending, see Thomson and Darjee
(2009) (see also Box 18.3).

Specific psychiatric disorders Substance dependence and crime There are
close relationships between substance abuse and crime, which have
substantially affected legislation, enforcement, and national policies
(Grann and Fazel, 2004). Alcohol and crime are related in three
important ways: 1. Alcohol intoxication may lead to charges related to
public drunkenness or to driving offences. 2. Intoxication reduces
inhibitions and is strongly associated with crimes of violence,
including murder. 3. The neuropsychiatric complications of alcoholism
may also be linked with crime. Offences may be committed during
alcoholic amnesias or 'blackouts'. Blackouts are periods of several
hours or days, which the heavy drinker cannot recall, although at the
time they appeared normally conscious to other people and were able to
carry out complicated actions. However, the association is complex, and
social factors related to drinking may be as important as alcohol
itself. For a review, see Johns (2009). Intoxication with drugs may lead
to criminal behaviour, including violent offences. Drug misusers,
especially those who are dependent on heroin and cocaine, commit
repeated offences against both property and people to fund their drug
habit. Some of the offences involve violence. Rates of drug abuse are
increased among prisoners, and many succeed in obtaining drugs in
prison. Involvement in criminal activity and with other criminals may
lead to drug usage. For a review of the relationship between drug
dependence and crime, see Johns (2009).

517

518

518

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry

Box 18.3 Psychiatric disorder and offending People with psychotic
disorders are more likely than members of the general public to acquire
convictions for violent or other crimes (by factors of approximately 4
and 10, respectively). â This increased likelihood is altered in
strength by local factors such as crime rate and sociodemographic
variables. â Antisocial personality disorder and substance misuse
disorders have stronger associations with offending than does psychotic
illness. â A combination of psychiatric disorders (particularly when one
of them is substance misuse disorder) may â

be more relevant than any single category of psychiatric disorder. â
Most offending by those with psychiatric disorder is minor in nature;
violence, when it occurs, is likely to be targeted at a family member.
Source: data from Thomson L and Darjee R, Associations between
psychiatric disorder and offending. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC,
Lopez-Ibor JJ and Geddes J (eds.), The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, pp.Â 1917-- 26, Copyright (2009), Oxford University Press;
Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 34(4), Mullen
PE et al, Assessing and managing the risks in the stalking situation,
pp.Â 439--50, Copyright (2006), American Academy of Psychiatry and the
Law.

Intellectual disability

Schizophrenia and related disorder

There is no evidence that most criminals are of markedly low
intelligence. However, reduced intellectual ability is an independent
predictor of offending (Holland et al., 2002). People with learning
disabilities may commit offences because they do not understand the
implications of their behaviour, or because they are susceptible to
exploitation by others. Property offences are the most common, but
sexual offences are overrepresented, particularly indecent exposure by
males (Perry et al., 2002). The exposer is often known to the victim and
therefore the rate of detection is high. There is also an association
between learning disability and arson (Taylor et al., 2002).

Psychotic illnesses may be associated with violence, especially when
paranoid symptomatology is present, or the patient also has a substance
abuse problem. Violence may occur because the offender is frightened,
and selfcontrol may be reduced by the presence of the psychotic state.
Any state in which paranoid psychotic symptoms feature carries an
increased risk of violent behaviour.

Mood disorder Depressive disorder is sometimes associated with
shoplifting. Severe depressive disorder may rarely lead to homicide. The
depressed person may be deluded, for example, that the world is too
dreadful to live in, and they consequently kill their family members to
spare them. Suicide often follows. A mother suffering from postpartum
disorder may sometimes kill her newborn child or her older children.
Rarely, a person with severe depressive disorder may commit homicide
because of a persecutory belief---for example, that the victim is
conspiring against them. Occasionally, ideas of guilt and unworthiness
lead depressed patients to confess to crimes that they did not commit.
Manic patients may spend excessive amounts of money on expensive
objects, such as jewellery or cars, that they cannot pay for. They may
be charged with fraud, theft, or false pretences. They are also prone to
irritability and aggression, which may lead to offences of violence,
although this is seldom severe.

Epidemiology Epidemiological studies have strongly suggested that
schizophrenia is associated with an increased risk of both violent and
non-violent offending (Fazel et al., 2014a). This risk is substantially
increased by substance misuse, but the proportion of violent crime
attributable to schizophrenia is low. A number of clinical risk factors
for violence in schizophrenia have been proposed, including the
following: â

fear and loss of self-control associated with nonsystematized delusions

â

irresistible urges

â

instructions from hallucinatory voices (command hallucinations)

â

dual diagnosis, particularly substance misuse

â

a strong negative affect (e.g.Â depression, anger, agitation).

Coid et al.Â (2013) found that six out of 32 types of delusions generated
anger in the patient and, of these, three (persecution, being spied on,
and conspiracy) resulted in increased risks of violence. Risk assessment
is discussed on page 534. Violent threats made by patients with
psychosis should be taken very seriously (especially in those with a
history of previous violence). Most serious

519

The association between mental disorder and crime violence occurs in
those already known to psychiatrists, particularly if there is an
identifiable victim.

Post-traumatic stress disorder Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) may
be related to offending in three ways: â

PTSD patients may abuse drugs and alcohol.

â

PTSD is associated with increased irritability and decreased affect
regulation.

â

PTSD patients may rarely experience dissociative episodes involving
violence, especially in circumstances resembling their original trauma.
This is often hard to determine retrospectively.

PTSD has increasingly been the basis for psychiatric defences to
homicide, especially in the US. It has also been advanced for battered
women with a history of prolonged trauma, in whom occasional acts of
retaliatory violence are not uncommon.

Morbid jealousy The syndrome of morbid (pathological) jealousy (see
Chapter 12) may be associated with several of the above diagnoses. It
has been identified in 12% of 'insane' male and 3% of 'insane' women
murderers. It is particularly dangerous because of the risk of the
offence being repeated with another partner. It may sometimes be
difficult to distinguish morbid jealousy from extreme possessiveness or
control over women's behaviour, which may be accompanied by violence.

Organic mental disorders Delirium is occasionally associated with
criminal behaviour, usually because of the associated confusion or
disinhibition. Diagnostic problems may arise if the mental disturbance
improves before the offender is examined by a doctor. Dementia is
sometimes associated with offences, although crime is otherwise uncommon
among the elderly, and violent offences are rare. Violent and
disinhibited behaviour may also occur after a head injury (Fazel et al.,
2009b) and be difficult to distinguish from PTSD.

Epilepsy The association between epilepsy and crime is complex and
poorly understood. It has been widely believed that the risk of epilepsy
is greater in prisoners than in the general population, but a
meta-analysis of seven studies did not find this (Fazel et al., 2002),
and a longitudinal study found that, after adjusting for familial
confounding, epilepsy was not associated with increased risk of violent
crime (Fazel et al., 2011a). Violent behaviour

associated with EEG abnormalities in the absence of clinical epilepsy is
unlikely to indicate a causal relationship (Fazel et al., 2009b).
Epileptic automatisms may, very rarely, be associated with violent
behaviour and subsequent criminal proceedings. Violence is more common
in the post-ictal state than ictally.

Impulse control disorders DSM-5 contains a category 'Disruptive
impulse-control and conduct disorders', which includes speculative
conditions relevant to forensic psychiatry---intermittent explosive
disorder, pyromania, and kleptomania. In ICD-10 these conditions are
classified under abnormalities of adult personality and behaviour as
'habit and impulse disorders'. Whatever the clinical value of such
classifications, none of these conditions has been established as a
separate diagnostic entity.

Intermittent explosive disorder This term is used to describe repeated
episodes of seriously aggressive behaviour out of proportion to any
provoking events and not accounted for by another psychiatric disorder
(e.g.Â antisocial personality disorder, substance abuse, or
schizophrenia). The aggression may be preceded by tension, followed by
relief, followed by remorse. The condition is rare, and many
psychiatrists doubt whether it is a distinct psychiatric disorder.

Pathological gambling Pathological gambling, 'gambling disorder', was
included with impulse control disorders in DSM-IV but has been moved to
'Substance-related and addictive disorders' in DSM-5 (Grant et al.,
2013; Petry, 2010). Gambling is pathological when it is repeated
frequently and dominates the person's life, and persists when the person
can no longer afford to pay their debts. The person lies, steals,
defrauds, or avoids repayment to continue the habit. Family life may be
damaged, other social relationships may be impaired, and employment put
at risk. Pathological gamblers demonstrate a range of cognitive
distortions, such as magnification of gambling skill, superstitions,
temporal telescoping, predictive skill, and obviously selective memory
(Hodgins et al., 2011). Treatments using cognitive behaviour therapy
(CBT) and family therapy have received some support. Gamblers Anonymous
is widely used but has not been carefully evaluated. Because of the
reclassification of gambling disorder with addictions, various trials
have been conducted with opioid receptor antagonists and indicate some
modest benefits (Hodgins et al., 2011). Pathological gamblers have an
intense urge to gamble, which is difficult to control. They are
preoccupied

519

520

520

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry with thoughts of gambling, much as a
person dependent on alcohol is preoccupied with thoughts of drink.
Increasing sums of money are gambled, either to increase the excitement
or in an attempt to recover previous losses. If gambling is prevented,
the person becomes irritable and even more preoccupied with the
behaviour. Similarities with the behaviour of people who are dependent
on drugs have led to the suggestion that pathological gambling is itself
a form of addictive behaviour. Brain imaging studies of pathological
gamblers show abnormalities in mesolimbic reward pathways similar to
those in drug dependence (Goudriaan et al., 2004). The prevalence of
pathological gambling is not known. The explosive growth in internet
gambling, smartphone gambling apps, and TV spot-betting have undoubtedly
increased the risks. There is currently considerable governmental
pressure to reduce the spread of online betting and betting shops and so
limit the potential losses with gambling machines. It is probably more
frequent among males. Most gamblers seen by psychiatrists are adults,
but there is concern that young people are increasingly being involved,
usually with gambling machines in amusement arcades. For a review of
pathological gambling, see Moran (2009).

Pyromania Pyromania refers to repeated episodes of deliberate
fire-setting, which are not carried out for identifiable reasons such as
monetary gain, to conceal a crime, as an act of vengeance, or as a
consequence of hallucinations or delusions. Impaired judgement resulting
from intoxication, dementia, or mental retardation excludes the
diagnosis of pyromania, as does antisocial personality disorder, a manic
episode, or

(among children or adolescents) a conduct disorder. Prins (2009) reviews
arson and observes that the rates have more than doubled over the past
40 years, that women are increasingly the perpetrators and that repeat
offending is more common. Like many authorities he doubts that pyromania
is a specific disorder and is better considered as a symptom. In the
rare condition of pyromania, the act of fire-setting is preceded by
tension or arousal, followed by relief. People with pyromania have a
preoccupation with fires and firefighting, and enjoy watching fires.
They may plan the offence in advance, taking no account of the danger to
other people.

Kleptomania Kleptomania refers to repeated failure to resist impulses to
steal objects that are not needed, either for use or for their monetary
value. The impulses are not associated with delusions or hallucinations,
or with motives of anger or vengeance. Before stealing there is
increased tension, which the stealing relieves. The diagnosis is
excluded by associated antisocial personality disorder, a manic episode,
or (among children or adolescents) a conduct disorder, or when the
stealing results from sexual fetishism. The objects stolen may be of
little value and may be hoarded, thrown away, or later returned to the
owner. The patient knows that the stealing is unlawful, and may feel
guilty and depressed after the immediate pleasurable sensations that
follow the act. Kleptomania occurs more often among women. Associations
with anxiety and eating disorders have been described. It may be
sporadic, or persist for years despite repeated prosecutions. The
diagnosis depends entirely on accused individuals' descriptions of their
own motives and is therefore viewed with some scepticism.

Specific offender groups Female offenders Women are more law-abiding
than men. Shoplifting accounts for 50% of all their convictions, and
violent and sexual offences are uncommon. Men and women are treated
differently by the criminal justice system. Women are sentenced more
leniently for similar offences, and they are more likely to be viewed as
'sick'. Psychiatric disorder is frequent among women admitted to prison,
with personality disorder and substance misuse being especially common
(Fazel

and Danesh, 2002), and self-harm before and during imprisonment is also
common (Jenkins et al., 2005).

Young people National crime statistics indicate that a significant
proportion of crime is conducted by those under the age of 18 years, or
'juveniles'. In the UK the rates appear to be declining but not in the
US (Ministry of Justice, 2015; National Center for Juvenile Justice,
2014). In Scotland, for example, in the year 2000, 34% of young

521

Psychiatric aspects of specific crimes people (aged 12--15 years)
reported committing a criminal offence in the previous year, compared
with 22% in 1992 (Scottish Executive Central Research Unit, 2002). Where
a young person is violent, the victim is often well known to them,
commonly a family member. Serious violence by young people and children
is rare, and the individuals involved have frequently been the
recipients of violence themselves, both within and outside their
families (Hamilton et al., 2002). Data from the American National
comorbidity study explored the relationship between crime and
psychiatric disorders in those under 18 years of age (Kendell et al.,
2014). They showed that there was a high prevalence of crime, with 18.4%
of those with a psychiatric disorder before the age

of 18 years reporting a crime and arrest history. Conduct disorder,
alcohol use disorders, and drug use disorders had the greatest odds.

Ethnic minorities Some ethnic groups are overrepresented in both the
criminal justice system and forensic psychiatric services. Non-white
prisoners are more likely to receive diagnoses of mental illness rather
than personality difficulties. Those with African Caribbean origin have
higher rates of imprisonment in the UK, but lower rates of psychiatric
morbidity despite an excess of African Caribbeans in secure hospitals
(Coid et al., 2002).

Psychiatric aspects of specific crimes The following sections are
concerned with the types of offences that are most likely to be
associated with psychological factors. These are crimes of violence,
sexual offences, and some offences against property.

Crimes of violence Violence among mentally abnormal offenders is more
strongly associated with personality disorder than with major mental
illness. It is particularly common in people with antisocial personality
traits who misuse alcohol or drugs, or who have marked paranoid or
sadistic traits. It is often part of a persistent pattern of impulsive
and aggressive behaviour, but it may be a sporadic response to stressful
events in 'over-controlled' personalities.

Homicide Rates of total homicide and stranger homicide have increased in
the UK between 1973 and 2003, but rates committed by people with mental
illness have remained static (Appleby et al., 2015). Stranger homicides
by the mentally ill have fallen somewhat since 2006, constituting 7% of
all such homicides (Appleby et al., 2015). Thus the proportion of
homicides committed by the mentally ill has fallen in the era of
community care.

Normal and abnormal homicide Mental disorders may count as mitigation
for an individual charged with murder, reducing the charge to
manslaughter. Homicide can be divided according to the legal outcome
into normal (murder or common-law manslaughter) and abnormal (insane
murder, suicide murder, diminished responsibility, or infanticide).

Normal homicide accounts for half to two-thirds of all homicides in the
UK, as in other western countries, including the USA, where the rate is
much higher. It is most likely to be committed by socially disadvantaged
young men. In the UK, the victims are mainly family members or close
acquaintances. In countries with high homicide rates, a greater
proportion of killings are associated with robbery or sexual offences.
Sexual homicide may result from panic during a sexual offence.
Alternatively, it may be a feature of a sadistic killing, sometimes
committed by a shy man with bizarre sadistic and other violent
fantasies. Abnormal homicide accounts for one-third to half of all
homicides in the UK. It is usually committed by older people. The
victims of abnormal homicide are often family members. The most common
psychiatric diagnoses are psychoses, substance use disorder, and
personality disorder (Fazel and Grann, 2004). Depressive disorder can
also be involved, especially in those who kill themselves afterwards.
Homicide by women is much less frequent than that by men, but is nearly
always 'abnormal'. A large proportion of all murderers are under the
influence of alcohol at the time of the crime, and drug misuse is also
an important factor.

Multiple homicide Multiple murders are rare, although they attract great
public attention. They include: â

Individuals without mental illness who kill several people at once,
sometimes a family killing which is often followed by suicide. Paranoid
and grandiose character traits are common (Mullen, 2004).

521

52

522

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry â

â

Killings attributable to a psychotic illness in which the killer aims to
save himself or his family from a perceived threat. Serial killings that
take place over a period of time. These may be 'normal' (e.g.Â killings
by terrorists) or 'abnormal' (e.g.Â psychotic, or motivated by sexual
sadism or necrophilia).

Homicide followed by suicide Homicide followed by suicide accounts for
about 50 deaths in the UK annually, while in the USA the comparable
figure is 1000--1500 (Chiswick, 2000). Barraclough and Harris (2002)
studied 180 victims and 147 perpetrators in the UK, and found that 80%
of the incidents involved one victim and one perpetrator, 88%
exclusively involving members of the same family. Around 75% of the
victims were female, and 85% of the perpetrators were male, whose
victims were nearly always current or previous female partners and their
children. The victims of female perpetrators were predominantly their
children.

Parents who kill their children Around 25% of all victims of murder or
manslaughter in the UK are under the age of 16 years, and babies under
the age of 1 year are at the highest risk of all age groups (Breslin and
Evans, 2004). Most children are killed by a parent who is mentally ill,
usually the mother. The classification of child murder is difficult, but
useful categories are mercy killing, psychotic murder, and, most common,
killing resulting from battering or neglect (D'Orban, 1979).

Family homicide Homicides can be distinguished by the relationship
between perpetrator and victim. Most serious violence takes place within
the family (25% of homicide victims are aged under 16 years, 80% killed
by their parents). Around 50% of female victims are wives or partners,
and the rest are often friends or relatives.

Domestic violence Domestic violence accounts for about 25% of all
violent incidents recorded by the British Crime Survey, about one
million incidents annually in England and Wales, about two-thirds
against women. Most batterers do not have either a diagnosable mental
disorder or a criminal history. However, heavy drinking is common. Some
people are violent only within their family, while others are also
violent outside. Violence in the family can have long-term deleterious
effects on the psychological and social development of the children and
on the mental health of the partner. Violence in the family also affects
children and elderly relatives (page 551). Any of these forms of
violence may rarely result in homicide. Alertness to possible domestic
violence is required not only in accident and emergency departments, but
also in primary care and in obstetric and paediatric clinics.
Intervention is difficult and raises ethical issues (see Box 18.4).

Infanticide A woman who kills her child may be charged with murder or
manslaughter. English law recognizes a special category, infanticide,
where the child is under 12 months of age. Infanticide is treated as
manslaughter with less harsh penalties. The English legal concept of
infanticide is unusual, requiring only that the woman's mind was
disturbed as a result of birth or lactation, not that the killing was a
consequence of her mental disturbance. Fewer than five cases a year are
recorded in the UK. Infants are most at risk on the first day of life,
and the relative risk decreases steadily to that of the general
population by 1 year. Fathers are slightly more likely to be recorded as
the prime suspect over time and receive more severe sentences. Puerperal
psychosis is a relatively infrequent cause of homicide, and depression
is a factor in some cases. Later infant homicides are usually due to
fatal child abuse. Infanticide has been associated with early
motherhood.

Box 18.4 Ethical and legal issues: domestic violence Confidentiality is
especially important because of the risk of retaliation by the abuser.
Careful records are essential, including documentation of the injuries.
Written consent should be obtained for photographs. Specialist advice
should be sought about providing practical and other help to those who
wish to end the relationship. Where the risk of serious violence is
believed to be very high, disclosure to the police and other authorities
to provide protection needs to be carefully planned with the maximum
collaboration with the victims.

523

Psychiatric aspects of specific crimes

Violence towards partners Violence by men towards their female partners
is much more frequent than violence by women towards their male
partners. It is physically more serious and is more often reported. Most
'wife batterers' are men with aggressive personalities, while a minority
are violent only when psychiatrically unwell, usually with a mood
disorder. Other common features among these men are morbid jealousy and
heavy drinking. Such men may have suffered violence in childhood, and
often come from backgrounds in which violence is frequent and tolerated.
Behaviour by the victim may contribute to or provoke (but never justify)
violence. This is difficult to assess if only the perpetrator is
interviewed but, when battering is possibly a 'joint' problem, may be
more difficult to stop. Repetitive battering, especially motivated by
jealousy, is a real risk factor for homicide. The impacts of intimate
partner violence to any children in the household must always be
considered (Gonzalez et al., 2014).

Box 18.5 Some factors associated with increased risk of reoffending in
sex offenders Previous criminal history Higher number of sexual offences
and more than one type of sexual offence â Being a childhood victim of
sexual abuse â Violent sexual fantasies â Negative attitudes to women â
Belief that victims consent to or enjoy the act â Choice of location and
occupation to facilitate access to victims â Use of sadomasochistic or
paedophilic pornography â Substance misuse â Treatment non-compliance â
â

Source: data from Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 10(1), Gordon H and
Grubin D, Psychiatric aspects of the assessment and treatment of sex
offenders, pp.Â 73--80, Copyright (2004), The Royal College of
Psychiatrists.

Sexual offences Sexually violent offences In the UK, sexual offences
account for less than 1% of all indictable offences recorded by the
police. Although only a small proportion of these are referred to
psychiatrists they account for a significant number of assessments. Most
sexual offences are committed by men. Sexual offenders are generally
older than other offenders. Reconviction rates are generally lower but
recidivist sexual offenders are extremely difficult to manage (see Box
18.5). In the UK, Part 1 of the Sex Offenders Act 1997 requires those
convicted or cautioned for relevant sex offences to be kept by police on
the Sex Offender Register. The most common sexual offences are indecent
assault against women, indecent exposure, and unlawful intercourse with
girls aged under 16 years. Some sexual offences do not involve physical
violence (e.g.Â indecent exposure, voyeurism, and most sexual offences
involving children), but others, such as rape, may involve considerable
violence. The nature and treatment of non-violent sexual offences are
discussed in Chapter 13; only their forensic aspects are considered
here. For a review, see Gordon and Grubin (2004) or Hucker (2009).

Sexual abuse of children The age of consent varies in different
countries. In England and Wales it is illegal to have any sexual
activity with a person aged under 16 years, and this accounts for over
50% of all reported sexual offences. Underreporting is probable,
particularly within families. Severity varies from mild indecency to
seriously aggressive behaviour, but the large majority do not involve
violence. Offenders may or may not be paedophilic. Paedophiles are
defined as having a primary sexual interest in prepubertal children.
They are almost always male, either homosexual or heterosexual, and
usually abuse children not previously well known to them. Paedophiles
are rarely mentally ill.Â Victims are often prepared ('groomed') over a
long period of time, increasingly via the internet. Some paedophiles may
seek work in occupations where they will have access to children who
will be left in their care. Cultural tolerance of paedophilia is now
negligible, and high profile 'historical abuse' investigations are
taking place worldwide, focusing on the church, childrens' homes, and
the entertainment industry. It is difficult to classify paedophiles, but
the following groups have been recognized: â

the timid and sexually inexperienced

â

the learning disabled

523

524

524

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry â

those who have experienced normal sexual relationships but prefer sexual
activity with children

â

a predatory group who may use violence. In rare cases, paedophile sexual
activities end in murder.

However, not all child sex offenders are paedophiles thus defined. A
significant majority do not have a primary sexual interest in children.
Many have 'normal' heterosexual histories and may be involved in such
relationships at the time when they offend. Paedophilic child sex
offenders typically are strangers to children, or else have gained
opportunistic access through their chosen work or social activities.
However, the majority of child sex offending is carried out by men
(usually), who have some familial relationship to the child. Most
commonly these are stepfathers or other male members of the extended
family circle, who are typically not primary paedophiles. The prognosis
is difficult to determine. Among those who receive a prison sentence,
the recidivism rate is about one in three. An important minority
progress to violent sexual offences, so psychiatrists may be asked to
give an opinion on their dangerousness.

Assessment Usually, the perpetrator and the victim are assessed by
different people. When trying to decide whether an offence is likely to
be repeated or to progress to more serious offences, the psychiatrist
should first consider the depositions and the victim's statement to gain
available information about the following: â

â

The duration and frequency of the particular sexual activity in the past
(remembering that paedophiles often deny their offending). The
offender's predominant sexual preferences; exclusively paedophile
inclinations and behaviour indicate a greater risk of repetition. Older
paedophiles are less likely to be aggressive.

The interviews should determine: â

The offender's previous sexual history.

â

Whether alcohol or drugs played any part in the offence, and, if so,
whether the person is likely to continue to use them.

â

Whether there are any feelings of regret or guilt.

â

Any stressful circumstances associated with the offence (and the
likelihood that these will continue).

â

The degree of access to children.

â

Evidence of any psychiatric disorder or relevant personality features.

Treatment Treatment is directed towards any associated psychiatric
disorder. Direct treatment of the sexual behaviour is difficult. Group
therapy run jointly by mental health and probation services may be
helpful, as is individual and group support provided by some charities.
A recent systematic review showed some effect of group CBT to reduce
reoffending at 1 year (number needed to treat \[NNT\] = 6) (Kenworthy et
al., 2004), but, despite enormous investment in prison services, there
is little strong evidence of effect. The use of antiandrogens such as
cyproterone and medroxyprogesterone has also been advocated, but their
use is associated with many adverse effects and ethical issues.

Indecent exposure This is the legal term for the offence of exposing the
genitals to other people. It is applied to all forms of exposure;
exhibitionism is by far the most frequent form, but exposure may also
occur as an invitation to intercourse, as a prelude to sexual assault,
or as an insulting gesture. Exhibitionism is the medical name for the
behaviour of those who gain sexual satisfaction from repeatedly exposing
to the opposite sex. In England and Wales, indecent exposure is one of
the most frequent sexual offences, usually by men aged between 25 and 35
years with no history of psychiatric disorder or other criminal
behaviour. Occasionally it is associated with compulsive disorder or
substance misuse. Despite this, exhibitionism is listed as a psychiatric
disorder in both DSM-5and ICD-10. A proportion of offenders are repeat
recidivists, and may proceed to more serious sexual violence.

Indecent assault The term indecent assault refers to a wide range of
behaviour, from attempting to touch a stranger's buttocks to sexual
assault without attempted penetration. The psychiatrist is most commonly
asked to give a psychiatric opinion on adolescent boys and on men who
have assaulted children. Although many adolescent boys behave in ways
that could be construed as 'indecent', more serious indecent behaviour
is associated with aggressive personality, ignorance, lack of social
skills, and, occasionally, learning difficulties. Treatment depends on
the associated problems.

Stalking The lay term 'stalking' is usually taken to mean the repeated,
unwanted, and intrusive targeting of a

52

Psychiatric aspects of specific crimes particular victim with following
and other harassment. It implies an intensive preoccupation with the
victim. The scope of behaviour is wide, and includes: â

following the victim

â

communication by telephone, mail, and electronic communication

â

ordering goods and services in the victim's name

â

aggression and threats, including violence, damage to property, and
false accusations.

Most stalkers are men, and most victims are women. The victims
invariably suffer severe distress. Management requires cooperation
between forensic psychiatrists and the criminal justice system in
assessing risks, treating any associated psychiatric disorder
(e.g.Â erotomania), and protecting and treating the victim. For a review,
see Mullen et al.Â (2009) (also see Chapter 12).

Rape In English law, a man commits rape if: â

â

He has unlawful sexual intercourse (whether vaginal or anal) with a
woman or man who at the time of the intercourse does not consent to it.
At the time he knows that the victim does not consent to the
intercourse, or he is reckless as to whether they consent to it.

Most jurisdictions define rape in terms of the lack of consent of the
victim. Not all jurisdictions recognize male rape or sexual assault.
Some countries (such as the USA) additionally define lack of consent by
age---socalled 'statutory rape'. English law is among the few that
recognize rape within marriage. Rape varies in the degree of violence
used, and the extent to which it is mainly to exert control, or exciting
in its own right. Most rapists are married or in partnerships, and over
half fail to perform sexually during the assault. Rapists frequently
have previous non-sexual violent convictions. Stranger rape is rare and
most rapists know their victims. Stranger rapes are more likely to be
physically violent and involve the use of weapons, whereas rapists who
know their victims may not need to use physical threats. Most rapes take
place in the home (see Box 18.6).

Epidemiology Rape and other forms of sexual aggression towards women are
probably much more frequent than reported (see Box 18.6). Only one-third
of reported rapes are proceeded with by the police, and only one-third
of those proceeded with will be heard at a higher court. Even

Box 18.6 Sexual assault of women: findings from the British Crime Survey
of 2000 About 1% of women said that they had been subject to some form
of sexual victimization in the past year. â In total, 0.4% of women
(leading to an estimate of 61,000 victims in the UK) said that they had
been raped in the previous year. â Current partners (at the time of the
attack) were responsible for 45% of rapes. Strangers were responsible
for a minority (8%) of attacks. â Around 18% of sexual assaults were
reported to the police. â

Source: data from Myhill A and Allen J, Rape and Sexual Assault of
Women: the extent and nature of the problem. Findings from the British
Crime Survey. Home Office Research Study 237, Copyright (2002), Home
Office.

then, the alleged rapist has only a one in three chance of being
convicted, and this is most likely where the rape fits the stereotype of
stranger rape. Victims of acquaintance rape (often rightly) assume that
they will not be believed. The prevalence of male rape is unknown and
even then it is likely that many male rapes go underreported, as male
victims may be reluctant to come forward. As in rape of females, it
often aims to degrade or dominate the victim. Rapists of males tend to
be violent heterosexual men. It has been suggested that rape is
associated with gender identity problems in the rapist.

Causes Most explanations of rape are sociocultural in terms of cultural
attitudes to women, and social constructions of male and female gender
roles. Men who are violent towards women often have rigid and
conservative views of their role. Rapists frequently blame their victims
for the attack (e.g.Â 'She deserved it because she was flirting with X').
That the victim is often an acquaintance, and in 20% of cases may have
some engagement in events leading up to the offence, should not be
interpreted as consent or voluntary participation. There is little
evidence for the frequently expressed view that rape victims encourage
the rape or change their minds after having sex. Rape has been found in
population studies to be associated with severe mental illness, and the

525

526

526

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry proportion of all sexual crimes that were
committed by patients psychiatrically hospitalized at some point in
their lifetimes is 20% (Fazel et al., 2007). Sexual behaviour may be
associated with disinhibition as part of a manic or other psychotic
illness, substance abuse comorbidity, or paranoid delusions in psychotic
states. Evidence of current substance abuse is found in over 50% of
rapists. Often both rapist and victim will have been using drugs or
alcohol, as many rape scenarios begin in social situations. Some men who
commit rape, homicide, or other violent offences have considerable
sexual problems or suffer sexual jealousy, which contribute to their
dangerousness. A small group of men obtain sexual pleasure from sadistic
assaults on unwilling partners (Novak et al., 2007).

Prognosis In the UK, most rapists serve only half their sentence in
prison, and are then released on licence to be supervised by the
probation service. The reconviction rate is 30%. The prison service
offers psychological treatment to rapists as part of the Sex Offender
Treatment Programme (SOTP) in prisons, but data to date suggest that
little improvement occurs in individuals on this programme (Marques et
al., 2005). Adding to the evidence base is made difficult by the
constant evolution of the SOTP programme, so that effective comparisons
and systematic reviews are problematical. In a broader review of
treatments for sex offenders, there is evidence for several individual
interventions, but this is usually supported by small studies and few
with effective randomization (Schmucker and LÃ¶sel, 2008).

A minority of shoplifters suffer from psychiatric disorders. Depressive
disorders are most common, but various other psychiatric diagnoses can
be associated with shoplifting (Lamontagne et al., 2000). Patients with
any type of mental illness, especially those with substance abuse
problems, may steal because of economic necessity. Patients with
disinhibiting conditions may be more likely to steal impulsively, and
patients with eating disorders may steal food. In other conditions,
shoplifting may result from distractibility---for example, in organic
mental disorders, when the person is confused or forgetful, and during
panic attacks when the person may run out of the shop without paying.
The assessment of a person charged with shoplifting is similar to that
for any other forensic problem. If the accused has a depressive disorder
at the time of the examination, the psychiatrist should try to establish
whether the disorder was present at the time of the offence or developed
after the charge was brought. The legal question most often posed is
whether the accused had the intention to steal, and if a mental
condition could have affected that intention.

Arson Arson is regarded extremely seriously, because it can result in
great damage to property and threatens life. Most arsonists are males.
Although the courts refer many arsonists for psychiatric assessment, the
psychiatric literature on arson is small. Certain groups can be
recognized: â

Fire-setters who are free from psychiatric disorder and who start fires
for financial or political reasons, or for revenge; they are sometimes
referred to as motivated arsonists.

â

So-called pathological fire-setters, who suffer from learning
difficulties, mental illness, or alcoholism; this group accounts for
about 10--15% of arsons.

â

A group that meet the DSM-5 criteria for pyromania (see page 520). These
individuals (who sometimes join conspicuously in firefighting) obtain
intense satisfaction and relief of tension from fire-setting.

â

Those with psychotic illness (Anwar et al., 2009).

Child abduction Child abduction is rare. A child may be abducted by one
of the parents, by a man with a sexual motive, or by an older child.
Babies are usually abducted by women. Their motives are to achieve
comfort, or to manipulate another person, or may occur on impulse in
psychiatrically disturbed women. Fortunately, most stolen babies are
well cared for and are found quickly.

Offences against property Shoplifting The vast majority of shoplifting,
like other theft, is carried out by people without any mental disorder.
Many adolescents admit to occasional shoplifting. Both observational
studies and the reports of huge losses from shops suggest that
shoplifting is common among adults (including shop staff).

Soothill et al.Â (2004) found at follow-up that 10% were re-convicted for
arson, but over 50% for offences of other kinds. A person convicted of
arson a second time is at much greater risk of committing further
offences. The factors associated with an increased risk of repetition
include: â

antisocial personality disorder

â

learning difficulties

â

persistent social isolation

â

fire-setting for sexual gratification or relief of tension.

572

Psychiatric aspects of being a victim of crime The scope for psychiatric
intervention is limited. Management of arsonists within hospital
requires a secure setting and close observation. Children also present
with fire-setting. Sometimes it represents extreme mischievousness in
psychologically

normal children, at times it is a group activity, and sometimes it
arises from psychiatric disturbance, most commonly conduct disorder
(Martin et al., 2004). The recurrence rate in the following 2 years is
reported to be less than 10%.

Psychiatric aspects of being a victim of crime It is only relatively
recently that criminology and society have paid attention to the role
and needs of victims (Mezey and Robbins, 2009). General population
surveys indicate that being a victim of crime is frequent, and is
related to geographical area, gender, age, and social habits. Much
violence, especially sexual and domestic assaults, goes unreported.
Young men are particularly at risk of personal violence, whereas women
are more likely to suffer domestic and sexual violence. In the UK,
around one-sixth of assaults on Asians and Afro-Caribbeans are believed
to be racially motivated. The response of the victim is important in
determining whether an offence is reported to the police and whether
charges are brought.

Psychological impact Childhood abuse and experience of violence during
childhood may have major consequences in adulthood. Adult crime victims
are at risk of a variety of early and late psychological problems. These
include the immediate distress following the crime, and the subsequent
distress associated with the investigation and court hearings. PTSD is
frequently reported. These consequences are more common and severe
immediately after the crime, but they may persist for many years.

Types of crime Murder Relatives of victims experience feelings of
isolation and shame, and an inability to share their distress that is
greater than in other kinds of bereavement. The bureaucracy and delay of
legal processes increases anger and feelings of isolation.

Rape Rape victims may suffer long-term psychological effects (Mezey and
Robbins, 2009). Recent research has shown very high levels of intrusive
thoughts and other posttraumatic symptoms in the week following rape.
Serious

distress may also be experienced by the partners and families of rape
victims. In many countries, including the UK, crisis intervention
centres staffed by multidisciplinary teams have been set up for rape
victims. Police practice has significantly improved, and there is now
more sensitive handling of rape cases.

Burglary and robbery Although the consequences are less severe than
those following violent crime, they can include adjustment disorder and
PTSD. Victims may become excessively preoccupied with security.

Terrorist crimes There are increasing reports of terrorist crimes,
including shootings, bombings, and hostage-taking, and all note severe
immediate distress. PTSD and other psychiatric consequences only become
persistent in a minority of cases.

Management Critical incident debriefing as a routine treatment is not
helpful (Raphael and Wilson, 2000). Clinical judgement is needed in
assessing the severity and persistence of psychological problems to
determine whether victims require specific psychological help. Support
for victims of crime may be available within the community. In the UK,
the Home Office funds the national Victim Support schemes, which
routinely contact victims of crime to offer support, and a service is
also available to support crime victims appearing at the Crown Court.
However, these services rely on volunteers, who may not be able to offer
long-term help and who cannot offer specialist psychiatric intervention.
Voluntary groups, such as Rape Crisis, offer support to victims of
sexual assault. Compensation is available to crime victims from the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, and psychiatrists may be asked to
provide reports in relation to claims for compensation for psychological
distress.

527

528

528

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry

Specialist services

Routine psychiatric care

Specialist psychiatric assessment and treatment services acquire
particular experience of the problems suffered by victims. These may be
provided within normal community services, specialized trauma clinics,
or designated units such as rape clinics.

Assessment of routine referrals to psychiatric services should include
enquiry about experiences of being a victim, as this may be important in
both aetiology and planning treatment.

The role of the psychiatrist in the criminal courts Mental state,
intention, and responsibility Most jurisdictions require evidence of
guilty intention for an offender to be convicted. Psychiatrists are
therefore most often asked to provide opinions about whether a
psychiatric illness affects the accused's intent to commit the crime.
The underlying principle is that no one should be regarded as culpable
unless they were able to control their own behaviour and to choose
whether to commit an unlawful act or not. In determining guilt, it is
necessary to consider the mental state at the time of the act, and
especially intention (mens rea). This means the person perceives and
intends that their act will produce unlawful consequences. Three other
forms of intent need consideration. 1. Recklessness. The deliberate
taking of an unjustifiable risk when the consequences can be foreseen
but are not avoided.

intent. The Latin term for this is doli incapax. Children between the
ages of 10 and 14 years may be convicted if there is evidence of mens
rea and that the child knew that the offence was legally or morally
wrong. The English age for legal responsibility is lower than in most
other European states, and is likely to be raised in the near future.

Competence to stand trial This issue may arise in relation to any
charge. Most jurisdictions require that a defendant must be in a fit
condition to defend themselves. In English law, the issue is called
'fitness to plead' and may be raised by the defence, the prosecution, or
the judge. It cannot be decided in a magistrates' court, but only by a
jury. It is necessary to determine how far the defendant can: â

understand the nature of the charge

2.  Negligence. Bringing about a consequence which a 'reasonable and
    prudent' person would have foreseen and avoided.

â

understand the difference between pleading guilty and not guilty

â

instruct counsel

3.  Accident (or 'blameless inadvertence').

â

challenge jurors

The key issue is whether the accused had the mental capacity to form the
intention, or whether mental disorder might have affected that capacity.
Sometimes it will be beyond psychiatric expertise or evidence to answer
this question. Asked to give an opinion on these matters, the
psychiatrist should liaise closely with the lawyers.

â

follow the evidence presented in court.

Children In most jurisdictions, the age of the accused is thought to
affect their capacity to form the intent to commit crime. Most
jurisdictions exclude children under a certain age from criminal
prosecution; for example, in English law, children under 10 years of age
are excluded because they are deemed incapable of forming criminal

A person may be suffering from severe mental disorder but still be fit
to stand trial. If an individual is found not fit to plead, the court
will hold a 'trial of the facts' to determine whether the individual
carried out the offence. If the offence is not serious, the court may
make an order directing the offender to have treatment, often as an
outpatient. In cases where the offence is serious, or carries a
mandatory penalty (e.g.Â murder), the court will direct the offender to
be detained in hospital indefinitely. If the person should become fit to
plead, they may be returned to court for a trial. Detention after being
found unfit to plead (or legally insane) operates in the same way as
detention accompanied by a restriction order.

529

The role of the psychiatrist in the criminal courts

Legal insanity (not guilty by reason of insanity) This defence may also
be raised to any charge. It is argued that the defendant lacked mens rea
for the charge because they were 'legally insane'. This term has nothing
to do with diagnostic terms or classifications such as ICD-10 or DSM-5.
Legal insanity is defined in different ways in different jurisdictions.
It usually results in the defendant being admitted for treatment in
hospital, as opposed to being sent to prison. In some jurisdictions, a
'not guilty by reason of insanity' verdict may result in more lenient
sentencing. In English law, insanity is defined in law by the McNaughton
Rules, after the famous case of Daniel McNaughton, who in 1843 shot and
killed Edward Drummond, the Private Secretary to the then Prime
Minister, Sir Robert Peel. In the trial at the Old Bailey, a defence of
insanity was presented on the grounds that McNaughton had suffered from
delusions that he was being persecuted by spies. His delusional system
gradually focused on the Tory Party, and he decided to kill their
leader, Sir Robert Peel. McNaughton was found not guilty on the grounds
of insanity, and was admitted to Bethlem Hospital. Because this was such
a contentious decision, rules were provided for guidance. It must be
clearly proved that, at the time of committing the act, the accused was:
labouring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as
not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing, or, if he
did know it, that he did not know what he was doing was wrong.

Several other common law jurisdictions (including some states in the USA
and Australia) have used this as the basis for their own definitions of
legal insanity. Critics argue that the rules are too narrow, and that
few mentally ill offenders would fulfil these criteria. Indeed,
McNaughton himself may not have fulfilled them. In some countries, the
insanity defence is widely used, especially in crimes of violence such
as homicide. In English law, the alternative defence of diminished
responsibility is more usual.

Diminished responsibility Some jurisdictions include the concept of
diminished responsibility. In this an individual's blameworthiness may
be reduced (rather than removed) by virtue of having a mental illness.
In English law, it is only available in relation to the charge of
murder, and is defined as follows: where a person kills or is party to a
killing of another, he shall not be convicted of murder if he was
suffering from such abnormality of mind (whether arising from a
condition of arrested or retarded development of mind or any inherent
causes or

induced by disease or injury) as substantially impaired his mental
responsibility for his acts and omissions in doing or being party to the
killing.

There are several difficulties with this definition. 'Abnormality of
mind' does not fit any diagnostic category but is basically anything
which a 'reasonable man' would call abnormal. It has been widely
interpreted. Successful pleas have been based on conditions such as
'emotional immaturity', 'mental instability', 'psychopathic
personality', 'reactive depressed state', 'mixed emotions of depression,
disappointment, and exasperation', and 'premenstrual tension'. The
relationship between abnormality of mind and responsibility is also
unclear, and psychiatrists have no special expertise in this area. Most
legal commentators argue that the finding of responsibility is for the
jury to decide, not a matter of expert evidence. Nevertheless,
psychiatrists are frequently asked to comment on this issue.

Assessment Most defendants who are charged with murder undergo extensive
psychiatric assessment, often by a specialist in forensic psychiatry but
sometimes by a general psychiatrist. Defence lawyers often seek
independent psychiatric advice. It is good practice for the doctors
involved, whether engaged by prosecution or defence lawyers, to discuss
the case together. Disagreement is unusual. Copies of the reports are
distributed to the judge and to the prosecution and defence lawyers.
Similar arrangements apply to other offences in which a psychiatric
opinion is required. If the psychiatric evidence is accepted by the
court, supporting diminished responsibility, the defendant will be
convicted of manslaughter rather than murder. In some jurisdictions,
diminished responsibility may protect the convicted offender from the
death penalty. In the UK, offenders who are convicted of manslaughter in
this way may be detained in hospital under the Mental Health Act. If the
offence is particularly dangerous, and the offender presents a risk to
the public, the court may impose a restriction order, requiring the Home
Office to agree discharge. Infanticide is a particular form of
manslaughter charge, which can only be brought against women who have
killed their newly born children (under 1 year old). If there is
psychiatric evidence to show that the woman was mentally ill at the time
of the killing, she will be found guilty of infanticide rather than
murder. If the court makes a hospital order, a restriction order is
rarely applied. This is a rare example of the English law formally
recognizing the

529

530

530

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry existence of psychiatric illness, namely
postpartum psychosis, as relevant to the commission of an offence.

Absence of intention (automatism) It is sometimes argued that the
defendant lacked intention altogether (technically, the absence of mens
rea) and this is referred to as automatism. The paradigm example is acts
committed while sleepwalking. Automatism is difficult to determine
retrospectively, and the defence is now rarely used, although it played
a significant role in nineteenthcentury psychiatry's development. With
patients who abuse alcohol or drugs, it may be argued that because they
were 'intoxicated' they had no intention to commit the crime. The law on
intoxication is complicated, and specialist legal advice should be
sought.

Fitness to be punished In those jurisdictions that have corporal or
capital punishment, psychiatrists may be asked to assess offenders to
determine whether they are mentally well enough to be punished. In
addition to assessment, psychiatrists may be asked to treat offender
patients to make them fit to be punished or executed. Clearly it is
unethical for psychiatrists to be involved in such procedures.

Other psychiatric issues that may be relevant to the criminal court
Amnesia Over one-third of those charged with serious offences,
especially homicide, report some degree of amnesia for the offence and
inadequate recall of what happened. It has been argued, unsuccessfully,
that loss of memory should be regarded as evidence of unfitness to
plead. The factors most commonly associated with claims of amnesia are
extreme emotional arousal, alcohol abuse and intoxication, and severe
depression. Amnesia has to be distinguished from malingering, but there
appear to be instances of true amnesia for offences, just as there is
impaired recall by victims and witnesses. Moreover, the

factors associated with amnesia are similar in offenders and victims. In
the absence of a relevant neuropsychiatric disorder, the presence of
amnesia is unlikely to be accepted as having any legal implications.

False confessions False confessions to criminal deeds are sometimes
made, but their frequency is unknown. Gudjonsson (1992) suggested that
there are three main types of false confession: 1. Voluntary. 2.
Coerced--compliant. 3. Coerced--internalized. Voluntary confessions may
arise from a morbid desire for notoriety, from difficulty in
distinguishing fact from fantasy, from a wish to expiate guilt feelings,
or from a desire to protect another person. Coerced--compliant
confessions result from forceful interrogation, and are usually
retracted subsequently. Coerced--internalized confessions are made when
the technique of interrogation undermines the suspect's own memories and
recollections, so that they come to believe that they may have been
responsible for the crime. Factors that make a person more likely to
make a false confession include a history of substance abuse, head
injury, a bereavement, current anxiety, or guilt. The assessment of
possible false confessions is difficult. It requires a thorough review
of the circumstances of arrest, custody, and interrogation, as well as
an assessment of the personality and the current mental and physical
state of the suspect. Clinical psychologists can carry out a
neuropsychological assessment and, in some cases, an assessment of
suggestibility.

False accusations Occasionally there are reports of individuals who
claim to be the victims of a crime that has not occurred, and who make
false accusations. Examples are accusations of rape and also of stalking
(PathÃ© et al., 1999). Legal and clinical experience suggests such cases
are uncommon, and that accusers frequently have severe personality and
other problems.

The treatment of offenders with mental disorder General issues The
assessment needs to include as much information as possible from a
variety of sources, including, if possible, the general practice notes.
Relatives may not be the most

reliable informants, particularly if they are victims of interpersonal
violence. Careful attention must be paid to both mental illness and
personality disorders, as well as histories of substance misuse, which
are extremely common.

531

The treatment of offenders with mental disorder Forensic psychiatric
treatment usually involves treating general psychiatric conditions in
specialized settings, such as secure treatment units or hospitals. It
may also involve involuntary outpatient care (Swanson et al., 2000).
Treatment planning involves not only the appropriate medications, but
also organization of appropriate psychological interventions. This is
particularly important for forensic patients with severe personality
disorders. Management of such patients requires specialist training for
staff and support by forensic psychotherapists. It also depends upon
introducing evidence-based psychiatric care into forensic practice. Many
forensic patients have personality disorder; the general principles of
management are described in Chapter 15 (see also Bateman et al., 2015).

Settings of treatment After conviction, an offender may be treated on
either a compulsory or voluntary basis. In the UK, special treatment for
mentally abnormal offenders is, in principle, provided by the Home
Office (the prison medical service and the probation service) and by the
Department of Health (high secure hospitals, specialist forensic
services, and general psychiatry services). There has been a lack of
research in forensic psychiatry, which means that the evidence base for
effective treatment is slender. For a general review of the organization
of forensic psychiatric services, see Taylor and Dunn (2009). Much work
with offenders is carried out by general psychiatrists, who assess
patients and prepare court reports. General psychiatrists as well as
forensic psychiatrists treat offenders who have been given non-custodial
sentences. Forensic psychiatrists work in separate units and undertake
specialized assessment and court work. In many places there are
community forensic services to provide assessment and treatment, and the
management of the boundary with general services is subject to ongoing
controversy (Dawson and Burns, 2016). Forensic psychiatrists may work to
provide care for patients who need security in ordinary psychiatric
hospitals.

The mentally abnormal in prison About one-third of sentenced prisoners
have a psychiatric disorder and 4% have a psychosis (Fazel and Danesh,
2002), although more recent surveys using structured diagnoses find
higher rates, with up to 10% classified with psychotic illnesses (Hassan
et al., 2011). Most of these disorders can be treated in prison, but a
few offenders need transfer to a hospital (see Box 18.7). The care of
mentally disordered prisoners has come under intense scrutiny in recent
years. The increase in

Box 18.7 Reasons for hospital transfer of prisoners with psychiatric
disorder Psychosis Failure to improve with medical treatment in prison â
Refusal to have treatment for serious psychiatric illness â
Life-threatening self-harm â Risk of abuse â â

prison suicides (Fazel et al., 2011b) (when that in the general
population is falling), plus the transfer of prison health care to the
NHS in the UK, have highlighted the issue. Prison medical services have
to provide psychiatric care under extremely difficult conditions, and a
substantial increase in psychiatric input to prisons is needed. A few
prisons offer psychological treatment, usually for personality disorders
and sexual offences, as a main part of their work. Grendon Underwood in
England is a long-established specialist prison for such treatments. A
recent initiative in the UK established four special units in prisons
and high secure hospitals to treat prisoners/patients with severe
personality disorder (see below, dangerous severe personality disorder
\[DSPD\]). While effectively discontinued, the initiative has generated
a pathway within prisons for the care of such individuals. Although
there is an undoubted need for psychiatric care within prisons, the
benefits should be weighed against any encouragement for courts to send
the mentally abnormal to prison rather than hospital.

Offenders in hospital Most jurisdictions allow for the detention of
mentally abnormal offenders in secure psychiatric settings. In England
and Wales, a convicted offender may be committed to hospital for
compulsory psychiatric treatment under a Mental Health Act hospital
order. There is also provision in law for a prisoner to be transferred
from prison to a psychiatric hospital. Hospital orders may have no time
limit, whereas most prison sentences are of fixed length. The length of
stay in a psychiatric hospital may be shorter than a prison sentence, or
it may be longer. Prisoners cannot be treated against their will in
prisons.

Special hospitals and secure units in the UK In the UK, detention of
mentally abnormal offenders may be in a local psychiatric hospital, a
medium security

531

532

532

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry unit, or a maximum secure hospital
('special hospital'). In England, the first special provision for the
criminally insane was made in 1800, when a criminal wing was established
at the Bethlem Hospital. In 1863, Broadmoor, the oldest of the special
hospitals, opened under the management of the then Home Office. There
are now four highsecurity special hospitals in England and Wales for
patients who require such high levels of security. The detention of
patients in special hospitals is usually for an indeterminate duration.
For those with mental illness (mostly schizophrenia), the length of
detention is determined by the severity or chronicity of the psychiatric
disorder, rather than by the nature of the offence. By contrast, for
patients suffering from psychopathic disorder, the main determinant of
length of stay is the assessment of the future risk of offending. The
closure of the larger mental hospitals in the UK has had unforeseen
consequences for the care of mentally abnormal offenders. There is less
physical security in the new psychiatric wards and hospitals, and less
willingness by hospital staff and other patients to tolerate severely
disturbed behaviour. Allied with shorter admission practices, it has
become increasingly difficult to arrange admission to hospital for
offenders, particularly those who are severely disturbed. Two
alternative provisions have been developed: 1. Well-staffed secure areas
in ordinary psychiatric hospitals in which the less dangerous of these
patients can be treated. 2. Special secure units associated with
psychiatric hospitals, to provide a level of security intermediate
between that of an ordinary hospital and a special hospital
(medium-secure units).

Dangerous severe personality disorder units The notion of DSPD is an
administrative category based on clinical diagnosis and risk assessment.
It was introduced in England in 1999 as a response to two pressing

problems of public safety. The first was offenders coming to the end of
their sentences with a persisting serious risk of violence. The second
was that psychiatrists would not detain severely personality-disordered
individuals because they judged there to be no evidence of their
'treatability'. Treatability was, uniquely, required in the 1983 Mental
Health Act for personality disorder but not for mental illness stemming
from the original 1959 Act. Four pilot units were established---two in
prisons and two in high secure hospitals. They reflected the context of
decreased public tolerance of risk of violent crime, improved
standardized risk assessment, establishment of CBT programmes for sexual
and violent offenders (McGuire, 2008), and international experience from
the Netherlands and Canada (Maden, 2007). The criteria for admission
were very prescriptive, requiring a violent crime, a clear personality
disorder, and an established link between the personality disorder and
the crime. In practice, the units have proved difficult to staff and
utilize fully, and the introduction of indefinite sentencing has removed
much of their raison d'Ãªtre. The hospital units are already closed, and
the prison units are revising their remit and practice.

Treatment in the community Offender patients may not pose sufficient
risk, or be sufficiently ill, to require treatment in hospital. Courts
may also use non-custodial sentences in which the offender patient may
receive support from the probation service as well as psychiatric
treatment. On occasion, psychiatric treatment may be made a condition of
probation, with which the offender must agree to comply. The psychiatric
treatment provided for a mentally abnormal offender is similar to that
for a patient with the same psychiatric disorder who has not broken the
law. It is often difficult to provide psychiatric care for offenders
with chronic psychiatric disorders who commit repeated petty offences,
move around, and often become homeless. In the past many would have been
long-stay patients in a psychiatric hospital.

The management of violence in health care settings Violent incidents are
not confined to patients with forensic problems, but this is a
convenient place to consider their management. Although not frequent,
violent incidents in hospitals are increasing. The reasons for this
increase appear to include the following:

â

changes in mental health policies emphasizing dangerousness as a reason
for admission

â

overcrowding

â

lack of sufficiently experienced staff

â

increased use of illegal drugs.

53

The management of violence in health care settings All psychiatrists
should be familiar with how to manage incidents of violence in inpatient
settings. Prior education and training are essential, and the National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2005c and 2015) has
provided guidelines (see Figure 18.2). It is important that staff have a
clear policy for managing incidents of violence and are trained to
implement it. Such a policy calls for attention to the design of wards,
arrangements for summoning assistance, and suitable training of staff.

When violence is threatened or actually occurs, staff should be
available in adequate numbers, and emergency medication such as
intramuscular lorazepam and haloperidol should be unobtrusively
available. The emphasis should be on the prevention of violence (see Box
18.8). Potentially dangerous people can often be calmed by sympathetic
discussion or reassurance, preferably given by someone whom they know
and trust. It is important not to challenge the patient but
inappropriate to reward

PREDICTION Risk assessment Searching

EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTS Seek expert help from a member of the on-call
mental health team

Continuous risk reassessment and use of de-escalation techniques

PREVENTION De-escalation techniques Observation

INTERVENTIONS FOR CONTINUED MANAGEMENT Consider, in addition to the
above, one or more of the following: Rapid tranquillization

Seclusion

Used to avoid prolonged physical intervention Medication is required to
calm a psychotic or non-psychotic behaviourally disturbed service user

Physical intervention

Used to avoid prolonged physical intervention

Better if service user responds quickly Can be used to enable rapid
tranquillization to take effect

CONTRAINDICATED AS AN INTERVENTION When service user has taken previous
medication

Should be terminated when rapid tranquillization, if given, has taken
effect When other interventions have not yet been explored

Prolonged physical intervention

POST-INCIDENT REVIEW

Figure 18.2 Algorithm for the short-term management of disturbed or
violent behaviour in health care settings. Source: data from NG10:
Violence and aggression: short-term management in mental health, health
and community settings, Copyright (2015), National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence.

533

534

534

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry

Box 18.8 De-escalation techniques used to prevent violence If a service
user becomes agitated or angry, one staff member should take the primary
role in communicating with them. That staff member should assess the
situation for safety, seek clarification with the service user, and
negotiate to resolve the situation in a non-confrontational manner. â
Use emotional regulation and self-management techniques to control
verbal and non-verbal expressions of anxiety or frustration (for
example, body posture and eye contact) when carrying out de-escalation.
â Use a designated area or room to reduce emotional arousal or agitation
and support the service user to become calm. In services where seclusion
is practised, do not routinely use the seclusion room for this purpose
because the service user may perceive this as threatening. â

Source: data from National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
Copyright (2015).

violent or threatening behaviour by making concessions. Every effort
should be made to allow the patient to withdraw from confrontation
without loss of face. The use of medication should be followed by
appropriate

monitoring (for advice about the use of medications in emergencies, see
Chapter 25). After an incident has occurred, the clinical team should
meet to consider the following issues. â

The future care of the patient. For mentally disordered patients, there
should be a review of the drugs prescribed and their dosage. When
violence occurs in a person with a personality disorder, medication may
be required in an emergency, but it is usually best to avoid maintenance
medication. Other measures include trying to reduce factors that provoke
violence, or providing the patient with more constructive ways of
managing tension, such as taking physical exercise or asking a member of
staff for help.

â

Supportive psychological interventions. These may be required for
patients or staff who have been the victims of a violent assault (see
the earlier section on victims of crime).

â

Whether the police should be informed. It should not be forgotten that
such assaults may be criminal. Opinion has moved to a preference for
involving the police more often, although they are often reluctant to
press charges.

â

The possible effect on the whole patient group. Other patients may need
support whether or not they were present at the incident.

â

The need for changes in the general policy of the ward. A violent
incident may enable lessons to be learned that are applicable in a
general way to ward policies and procedures.

Risk assessment The change to community care has made both minor
criminality and rare violent offences more conspicuous, and has resulted
in increased public disquiet. Psychiatric services need the resources to
minimize difficulties and to identify and manage serious threats of
violence. For a review of dangerousness and risk, see Buchanan (2008).
The psychiatrist may need to assess risk in everyday psychiatric
practice and also in forensic work. In everyday practice, careful risk
assessment may be required so that the most appropriate steps can be
taken in the interests of the patient and of other people. Risk of
serious harm to others is an important consideration for compulsory
detention in hospital. In forensic work, the court may ask about the
defendant's dangerousness, so that a suitable sentence can be passed.
The psychiatrist may also be asked to comment

on offenders who are being considered for release from institutions. In
both situations there is an ethical conflict between the need to protect
the community and respect for the rights of the offender. There have
been two broad approaches to risk assessment. 1. Clinical psychiatrists
have tried to identify factors associated with dangerousness in an
individual patient (see Box 18.9). While general predictors of violence
(e.g. past violence, antisocial personality disorder, substance misuse)
are helpful, they lack specificity in identifying particular individuals
at risk (Fazel et al., 2012). 2. Actuarial methods have been used to
predict future criminal behaviour among offenders and psychiatric
patients. In general, the low correlations between

53

Risk assessment

Box 18.9 Factors associated with dangerousness Male gender

Mental state

History

Morbid jealousy Paranoid beliefs plus a wish to harm others
Deceptiveness Lack of self-control Threats to repeat violence Attitude
to treatment, poor compliance

One or more previous episodes of violence Repeated impulsive behaviour
Evidence of difficulty in coping with stress Previous unwillingness to
delay gratification Antisocial traits and lack of social support History
of conduct disorder

The offence Bizarre violence Lack of provocation Lack of regret
Continuing major denial

predicted and observed behaviour have meant that they have been
unhelpful for making individual predictions. Recent instruments have an
improved predictive accuracy, but may be more useful in predicting those
not likely to be violent than those who are (Fazel et al., 2012). There
are no fixed clinical rules for assessing risk, but there are recognized
basic principles. A thorough review should be conducted of the history
of previous violence, the characteristics of the current offence and the
circumstances in which it occurred, and the mental state of the
individual (see Figure 18.3). When making the review, it is helpful to
consider the following key factors: â

whether any consistent pattern of behaviour can be discerned

â

whether any circumstances have provoked violence in the past and are
likely to occur again in the future

â

whether there is any good evidence that the defendant is willing to
change their behaviour

â

whether there is likely to be any response to treatment (see Figure
18.3).

Of these predictors, the most useful is a history of past violence
(Buchanan, 2008). Particular difficulties may arise in the assessment of
dangerousness in people with antisocial personality or learning
disabilities, who may be poorly motivated.

Circumstances Provocation or precipitant likely to recur Alcohol or drug
misuse Social difficulties and lack of support

Another difficult problem is presented by the person who threatens to
commit a violent act such as homicide. Here the assessment is much the
same as for suicide threats but with a lower threshold for intervention.
The psychiatrist should ask the individual about their intent, their
motivation, and the potential victim, and should make a full assessment
of the person's

Pre-existing vulnerabilities Mental disorder Substance abuse

Current state of mind

Situational triggers

Recognized

Probability of violent behaviour

Social and interpersonal stressors

Social and interpersonal protectors

Not recognized

Figure 18.3 Schematic representation of the issues that should be
considered when assessing the probability of violent behaviour. Source:
data from Mullen P and Ogloff RP, Dangerousness, risk and the prediction
of probability. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJ Jr and Geddes
JR (eds), The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn, Copyright
(2009), Oxford University Press.

535

536

536

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry mental state. Some patients who make
threats can be helped by outpatient support and treatment, but sometimes
hospital admission is required if the risk is high. It may be necessary
to warn potential victims or the police.

It is good practice for the psychiatrist to discuss their evaluation of
dangerousness with other colleagues, including other psychiatrists,
general practitioners, social workers, and the individual's relatives.

The psychiatric report A psychiatric report prepared for a major
criminal charge is an important document, and should be based on a full
psychiatric and social assessment. It is essential that the psychiatrist
reads all of the depositions by witnesses, statements by the accused,
and any previous medical notes and social reports. Family members should
be interviewed. When evidence about previous offences is not admissible
(as is the case in English law) the psychiatrist's report should not
include these facts. This may cause problems for the psychiatrist, whose
opinion is often based in large part on the offender's previous
behaviour. The writing of the court report follows the format described
in Box 18.10, and should include an assessment of the person's mental
state at the time of the alleged offence, and of their fitness

to plead. The involvement of the psychiatrist at various stages of the
legal process in England and Wales is shown in Table 18.3.

The role of the psychiatrist in relation to the court The psychiatrist's
role is to draw on their special knowledge to help the court. They
should not attempt to tell the court what to do. In the UK, the duty of
the expert medical witness is to the court as a whole; they are not
expected to be partisan. It is sometimes hard for psychiatrists to
appreciate that they must remain neutral and not provide evidence to
order that supports the party instructing them. This is particularly

Box 18.10 Some headings for a court report A statement of the
psychiatrist's full name, qualifications, and present appointment (and,
in England and Wales, whether they are approved under Section 12 of the
Mental Health Act). â Where and when the interview was conducted and
whether any third person was present. â Sources of information,
including documents that have been examined. â Family and personal
history of the defendant/plaintiff. Usually this does not need to be
given in great detail, particularly if a social report is available to
the court. The focus should be on information that is relevant to the
diagnosis and disposal. â Present mental state. Only the salient
positive findings should be stated, and negative findings should be
omitted. A general diagnosis should be given in the terms used in the
old 1983 Mental Health Act (mental illness, mental impairment, or
psychopathic disorder). A more specific diagnosis can then be given, but
the court will be interested in a broader â

categorical statement rather than the finer nuances of diagnosis. â
Mental state at the time of the relevant events. This is often a highly
important issue, especially in criminal cases, and yet it can be based
only on retrospective speculation. The assessment can be helped by
accounts given by eye witnesses who saw the offender at the time of the
crime or soon afterwards. A current psychiatric diagnosis may suggest
the likely mental state at the time of the crime. For example, if the
accused suffers from chronic schizophrenia or a chronic organic mental
syndrome, the mental state may well have been the same at the time of
the crime as at the examination. However, if the accused suffers from a
depressive disorder (now or recently) or from an episodic disorder such
as epilepsy, it is more difficult to infer the mental state at the
material time. Even if it is judged that the defendant was suffering
from a mental disorder, a further judgement is needed as to their mens
rea at the time of the crime. â Conclusions. A summary of the key
findings.

573

The psychiatric report

Table 18.3 The involvement of psychiatrists in the stages of the UK
legal process Stage I Arrest

Stage II Pre-trial

Stage III At the trial

Stage IV After the trial

Removal to a place of safety (police station, hospital, for medical
examination)

Court report Remand for inpatient assessment or treatment

Special problems: fitness to plead, diminished responsibility

Treatment under hospital orders or guardianship

Assessment after arrest Court diversion schemes

Transfer from prison for assessment

Advice about subsequent management

Transfer from prison Decisions about release Treatment in the community

difficult because most psychiatrists use their clinical skills to
establish rapport with individuals on whom they are preparing a report,
and they experience a desire to advocate for them. The psychiatrist
should be aware that the court will see the report and that it may be
read out in open court. Reports that are commissioned and paid for by
lawyers are the property of the court.

5.  Obtain a careful history of previous psychiatric disorder and
    treatment. Make a full examination of the present mental state.
    Special investigations should be requested if appropriate. If the
    defendant's intelligence level is under question, a clinical
    psychologist should make a separate assessment.

The assessment

6.  If possible, obtain further information from relatives and other
    informants. If the defendant is remanded in custody, the staff may
    have long periods of contact with the prisoner and may be able to
    provide particularly useful information.

When conducting a psychiatric assessment on a person who is accused of a
crime or who has been convicted of an offence, some key points should be
kept in mind.

Preparing the report

1.  Prepare as thoroughly as possible before the interview. Have a clear
    idea of the purpose of the examination, and particularly about any
    question of fitness to plead. Obtain details of the present charge
    and past convictions, together with copies of any statements made by
    the defendant and witnesses. Study any available reports of the
    defendant's social history; during the subsequent interview go
    through this report with the defendant and check its accuracy.
2.  Begin by explaining the source of the referral and why it was made.
    You should explain that their opinion may be given in court and that
    they are under no obligation to answer any of your questions if they
    choose not to do so.
3.  Make detailed notes, recording any significant comments in the
    defendant's own words. At some stage in the interview (not
    necessarily at the start), the alleged crime should be discussed.
    The defendant may or may not admit guilt, but the psychiatrist is
    not obliged to comment on this.
4.  Take a detailed history of any physical illnesses, paying particular
    attention to neurological disorders, including head injury and
    epilepsy.

The preparation of a court report will be affected by the circumstances
of the case, and the instructions given by solicitors. Court reports for
civil and criminal cases may be very different. A possible outline is
shown in Box 18.10. For further details, see O'Grady (2009). When
preparing a court report, the psychiatrist should remember that it will
be read by people with a non-medical background. Therefore the report
should be written in simple English and should avoid the use of jargon.
If technical terms are used, they should be defined as accurately as
possible. The report should be concise.

Advice on medical treatment One of the psychiatrist's main functions is
to give an opinion on whether psychiatric treatment is indicated. The
psychiatrist should make sure that any recommendations on treatment are
feasible, if necessary by consulting colleagues, social workers, or
others. If hospital treatment is recommended, the court should be
informed whether or not a suitable placement is available. The
assessment of risk is important here (see page 534). The psychiatrist
should not recommend any form of disposal other than treatment. However,
the

537

538

538

Chapter 18 Forensic psychiatry court often welcomes respectfully worded
comments on the suitability of possible sentences, particularly in the
case of young offenders.

The psychiatrist appearing in court The psychiatrist appearing in court
should be fully prepared and should have well-organized copies of

all reports and necessary documents. It is helpful to speak to the
lawyer involved beforehand to clarify any points that may be raised in
court. When replying to any questions in court, it is important to be
brief and clear, to restrict the answers to the psychiatric evidence,
and to avoid speculation. A number of expert witness training programmes
are available, which may be useful for psychiatrists who often give
expert evidence.

Further reading Gelder MG et al.Â (eds) (2009). Part 11: Forensic
psychiatry. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, and J Geddes
(eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford pp.Â 1895--2014.

Hart C et al.Â (2012). A UK population-based study of the relationship
between mental disorder and victimization. Social Psychiatry &
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 47, 1581--90.

539

CHAPTER 19

Psychiatry of the elderly Introduction 539

Principles and practice of old age psychiatry 544

Normal ageing 539

Clinical features and treatment of psychiatric

Epidemiology of psychiatric disorders in the elderly 541

disorders in the elderly 552 Treatment of dementia 556

Introduction Older people with mental health problems present particular
challenges to the practice of old age psychiatry and the organization of
its services. They are often physically as well as mentally frail, and
this affects presentation and course. On the other hand, they have the
advantage of a rich history to tell and a lifetime's experience of
responding to fortune and adversity. Dementia comprises a substantial
part of the clinical practice. When considering psychiatric disorder in
the elderly, the clinician must be able to collect and integrate
information from a variety of sources, and produce a

management plan that takes account of physical and social needs, as well
as psychological ones. This plan is likely to involve the cooperation of
several professionals. It is in this clinical complexity that much of
the challenge and fascination of old age psychiatry lies. This chapter
deals with the psychiatry of old age, with two important exceptions,
both of which were covered in Chapter 14: â

delirium (see page 000)

â

the clinical features, aetiology, and investigation of dementia (see
page 000).

Normal ageing Demographics In 1993, 6% of the world's population was
over 65 years of age. However, in higher income countries the proportion
was about 14%, while in low- and middle-income countries it was 4%. The
latter have higher birth rates, but the life expectancy at birth is
substantially lower than in higher income countries---60 years, compared
with 73 years. In the UK, life expectancy at birth has increased from 41
years in 1840 to 46 years in 1900, 69 years in 1950, and 80 years in
2011.

Table 19.1 shows that the difference in age structure of the population
is changing, and Table 19.2 shows that the proportion of older people in
low- and middleincome countries is increasing much faster than it is in
higher income countries. Although some psychiatric disorders become less
common (see Figure 19.1), the prevalence of dementia increases rapidly
with age (see below), and all countries face the increasing problem of
managing large numbers of cognitively impaired older people.

540

540

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly

Table 19.1 Percentage change in the world population during the period
1975--2000 Age (years) Total

Percentage change during the period 1975--2000 Developed countries

Less developed countries

\<15

57.6

20.2

72.6

15--24

41.8

8.6

50.0

25--34

56.5

4.2

75.0

35--44

72.2

16.9

95.0

45--54

74.5

33.2

104.2

55--64

64.5

30.5

86.7

65--74

68.9

33.2

104.2

75--79

84.3

53.4

121.2

â¥80

91.7

64.7

138.0

Source: data from United Nations, Copyright (2010).

Physical changes in the brain The weight of the human brain decreases by
approximately 5% between the ages of 30 and 70 years, by a further 5% by
the age of 80 years, and by another 10-- 20% by the age of 90 years. As
well as these changes, the ventricles enlarge and the meninges thicken.
MRI studies show a complex temporal and spatial profile of changes
affecting both grey and white matter, with volume reductions prominent
in the hippocampus, frontal cortex, and cerebellum (Caserta et al.,
2009). There is some loss of neurons, although this is regionally
selective and much less marked than was formerly believed, and
reductions in synapses appear to be more important. The cytoplasm of
some neurons contains a pigment, lipofuscin. The ageing brain also tends
to accumulate senile plaques and neurofibrillary

tangles, but with a more restricted distribution and smaller numbers
than in Alzheimer's disease (see Chapter 14). Neurofibrillary tangles
are usually limited to neurons in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex,
while senile plaques can also occur in the neocortex and amygdala.
Similarly, a small proportion of brains from healthy old people contain
Lewy bodies. For reviews of the neuropathology of normal ageing, see
Yankner et al.Â (2008). Ageing itself is thought to reflect genomic
changes (e.g.Â acquired damage to DNA or its epigenetic regulation),
mitochondrial damage (caused in part by disorders of calcium regulation
and to free radicals), and alterations in some growth factor and
signalling pathways, together with the accumulation of multiple random
(stochastic) changes. For a review of the biology of ageing, see Bittles
(2009).

Table 19.2 Percentage of the population aged 60 years or over, 65 years
or over, and 80 years or over by gender Major areas and regions

Age 60 years or over

Age 65 years or over

Age 80 years or over

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male Female

Worldwide

10.8

9.7

11.9

7.5

6.6

8.4

1.5

1.1

1.9

More developed regions

21.4

18.7

23.9

15.8

13.2

18.2

4.2

2.9

5.5

Less developed regions

8.5

7.9

9.1

5.7

5.2

6.2

0.9

0.7

1.1

Least developed countries

5.1

4.7

5.5

3.3

3.0

3.6

0.4

0.3

0.5

Source: data from United Nations, Copyright (2010).

541

Epidemiology of psychiatric disorders in the elderly in capacity, so
that the elderly perform significantly less well than the young if
attention has to be divided between two tasks or if the material has to
be processed additionally in some way. The elderly can usually recall
remote events of personal significance with great clarity. Despite this,
their long-term memory for other remote events shows a decline. Overall,
there appears to be a balance between losses in flexible
problem-solving, and the benefits of accumulated wisdom derived from
experience. For a review, see Anderson (2008). As well as these
cognitive and motor changes, there are alterations in personality and
attitudes, such as increasing cautiousness and rigidity.

Prevalence (%) over past month

10

8

6

4

2

0 18--24

25--44

45--64

â¥65

Age group (years) Anxiety disorders Substance use disorders

Affective disorders Severe cognitive impairment

Figure 19.1 Prevalence of mental disorders across age groups: data are
1-month prevalence rates from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study
using DSM-III criteria. Reproduced from Jorm AF, The ageing population
and the epidemiology of mental disorders among the elderly. In: MG
Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ LÃ³pezIbor Jr and Geddes JR, (eds.), The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, Copyright (2000), with permission from
Oxford University Press.

The neuropsychology of ageing Assessment of cognitive function in the
elderly is complicated by the frequent presence of physical ill health,
notably sensory deficits, and by the need carefully to distinguish
normality from the earliest phase of dementia. Longitudinal studies
suggest that intellectual function, as measured by standard intelligence
tests, shows a significant decline only in later old age. A
characteristic pattern of change occurs, with psychomotor slowing and
impairment in the manipulation of new information. By contrast, tests of
well-rehearsed skills such as verbal comprehension show little or no
age-related decline. Short-term memory, as measured by the digit span
test, for example, does not change in the normal elderly. Tests of
working memory show a gradual decrease

Physical health In addition to a general decline in functional capacity
and adaptability with ageing, chronic degenerative conditions are
common. As a result, the elderly consult their family doctors frequently
and occupy over 50% of all hospital beds. These demands are particularly
large in those aged over 75 years. Medical management is made more
difficult by the presence of more than one disorder and by sensory and
motor disabilities, as well as by an increased risk of side effects of
treatment.

Social circumstances For most people, ageing brings with it profound
changes in social circumstances. Retirement affects not only income but
also social status, time available for leisure, and social contacts.
Loss of income is a serious problem facing many older people, and
financial problems were the commonest worry reported in a large European
survey of people over 65 years of age. Social isolation is a fact of
life for many older people, especially in higher income countries. In
the UK and the USA, about one-third of those over 65 years of age were
living alone in 1993, compared with 7% in Chile and 3% in China.
However, for many older people, living alone is not seen as a problem.
Many older people see family, friends, and neighbours regularly, and
provide as much support as they receive.

Epidemiology of psychiatric disorders in the elderly Kay et al.Â (1964)
conducted the first systematic prevalence study of psychiatric disorder
among older people

in the general population, including those living at home as well as
those living in institutions, in an area

541

542

542

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly of Newcastle upon Tyne, in northern
England. The findings (see Table 19.3) have been broadly replicated in
subsequent surveys, taking into account changes in diagnostic criteria
(e.g.Â inclusion of depression in their category of neurosis), and the
problems of case finding. For example, a large French population study
of people aged 65 years or over found a point prevalence of 14% for
anxiety disorder, 11% for phobia, 3% for major depression, and 1.7% for
psychosis, using an interview to make DSM-IV diagnoses (Ritchie et al.,
2004). These figures mask the significant changes in the prevalence and
proportions of disorders at different stages of old age, as shown by a
large Swedish study (Skoog, 2004), summarized in Table 19.4. Other
surveys have shown a high prevalence of psychiatric disorder among older
people in sheltered accommodation and in hospital. One-third of the
residents in old people's homes have significant cognitive impairment.
In general hospital wards, between onethird and half of the patients
aged 65 years or over have some form of psychiatric illness. It has
often been reported that general practitioners are unaware of many of
the psychiatric problems among older people living in the community.
Moreover, the presentation of such disorders to general practitioners
and mental health services is determined as much by social factors as by
a change in the patient's mental state. For example, there may be a
sudden alteration in the patient's environment, such as illness of a
relative, or bereavement. Sometimes an increasingly exhausted or
frustrated family decides that they can no longer continue to care for
their elderly relative. As in younger people, there are gender
differences in the prevalence, presentation, and course of some
psychiatric disorders, and in treatment needs (Lehmann, 2003).

Table 19.3 Prevalence of psychiatric disorder in people over 65 years of
age Disorder

Prevalence (%)

Dementia (severe)

5.6

Dementia (mild)

5.7

Neurosis and personality disorder

12.5

Manic depression

1.4

Schizophrenia

1.1

Any disorder

26.3

Source: data from British Journal of Psychiatry, 110(465), Kay DWK,
Beamish P and Roth M, Old age mental disorders in Newcastle-upon-Tyne:
1: a study in prevalence, pp.Â 146--58, Copyright (1964), The Royal
College of Psychiatrists.

For a review of the epidemiology of psychiatric disorders in the
elderly, see Henderson and Fratiglioni (2009).

Dementia Although there are references in classical literature, dementia
in the elderly has been recognized by modern medicine since the French
psychiatrist Esquirol described dÃ©mence sÃ©nile in 1838. Emil Kraepelin
distinguished dementia from psychoses due to other organic causes such
as neurosyphilis, and divided it into presenile, senile, and
arteriosclerotic forms. In an important study, Roth (1955) showed that
dementia in the elderly differed from affective disorders and paranoid
disorders in its poorer prognosis. Reflecting its growing contribution
to the global burden of disease, there has been extensive research on
the prevalence of dementia, and several meta-analyses (see Tables 19.5
and 19.6). A recent systematic review reported a global prevalence of
5--7% in those aged 60 or older, corresponding to about 36 million
people; this number is predicted to double every 20 years, with over 70%
of cases being in low- or middle-income countries by 2050 (Prince et
al., 2013). The prevalence of dementia rises continuously in old age,
approximately doubling every 5 years, reaching 45% in those aged 95 or
older (Alexander et al., 2015). Equally, these figures illustrate that
half of the oldest old still remain cognitively intact. Moreover, there
is now strong evidence that the age-adjusted incidence of dementia is
decreasing; the decline is unexplained, and not attributable solely to
reductions in vascular risk factors (Matthews et al., 2013; Satizabal et
al., 2016). As discussed in Chapter 14, the commonest causes of dementia
are Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, and dementia with Lewy
bodies, with frequent coexistence of the features of more than one
disorder.

Delirium Delirium and its many causes were discussed in Chapter 14. Age
is also a major risk factor. For example, in the community, rates of
delirium rise from 1--2% to at least 14% in those over 85 years of age
(Rahkonen et al., 2001). Elderly patients in hospital are at particular
risk, with about one-third experiencing an episode of delirium (see
Chapter 14).

Mood disorder Despite the focus on dementia in the elderly, depressive
disorders are considerably more common. A systematic

543

Epidemiology of psychiatric disorders in the elderly

Table 19.4 Changing prevalence of psychiatric disorders with age among
the elderly Age (years) Number

Dementia\*

Depression

Anxiety disorders

Psychotic disorders

70

392

2

6

6

1

75

303

5

6

4

2

79

206

11

11

3

3

85

494

31

13

10

5

- Moderate or severe. Figures are percentage values. Adapted from Acta
  Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109(1), Skoog I, Psychiatric epidemiology
  of old age: the H70 study---the NAPE lecture 2003, pp.Â 4--18,
  Copyright (2004), with permission from John Wiley & Sons.

review of community-based studies found an average prevalence of
clinically relevant depression of 13.5% for those aged 55 years or over,
of which 9.8% was classed as minor and 1.8% as major. Prevalence was
higher in women and among older people living in adverse circumstances
(Beekman et al., 1999). Consistent with these data, a large European
collaborative study found rates of 9--14% for clinically significant
depression in the elderly and 1--4% for major depression (Copeland et
al., 1999). Amongst the over-75s, the prevalence of major depression is
about 7%, and 17% for all depressive disorders (Luppa et al., 2012). The
figures show that many depressed older people do not meet the criteria
for major depression, but are instead variously labelled as having minor
depression, dysthymia, or subthreshold depression. However, this does
not diminish its clinical significance, as these cases have a similar

morbidity and course to those of patients who meet the criteria for
major depression (Beekman et al., 2002). Rates of depression in the
elderly depend on the setting. Koenig and Blazer (1992) reported rates
of 0.4--1.4% in the community, 5--10% among medical outpatients, 10--15%
among medical inpatients, and 15--20% among nursing home patients. These
variations probably reflect the frequent comorbidity of depression in
the elderly with other psychiatric (Devanand, 2002) and physical (Huang
et al., 2010) disorders. However, not all physical disorders show the
same association; rates of depression are clearly increased with cardiac
and pulmonary disease, but not with gastrointestinal disease (Huang et
al., 2010). The physical comorbidities may also contribute to the
increased mortality rate, especially from cardiac events (Penninx et
al., 1999), found in older people with depression. Elderly prisoners
have particularly high rates of depression (Fazel et al., 2001).

Table 19.5 Prevalence and incidence of dementia in different populations
Prevalence at age â¥60 years (%)

Incidence per 1000 individuals

Number of people Predicted increase with dementia in 2001 in proportion
with dementia during the period 2001--2040

Western Europe

5.4

8.8

4.9 million

2-fold

North America

6.4

10.5

3.4 million

2.7-fold

Latin America

4.6

9.2

1.8 million

3.9-fold

China

4.0

8.0

6 million

3.4-fold

India and South Asia

1.9

4.3

1.8 million

3.1-fold

Africa

1.6

3.5

0.5 million

2.3-fold

Combined values

3.9

7.5

24.3 million

2.3-fold

Adapted from Lancet, 366(9503), Ferri CP et al, Global prevalence of
dementia: a Delphi consensus study, pp.Â 2112--17, Copyright (2005), with
permission from Elsevier.

543

54

544

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly

Table 19.6 Prevalence of dementia at different ages in European
populations Age (years)

Prevalence

60--65

0.15 (0--2.3)

65--70

1.2 (0--3.4)

70--75

3.6 (1.3--5.9)

75--80

7.6 (5.2--10.0)

80--85

13.4 (10.6--16.1)

85--90

21.3 (18.1--24.6)

90--95

31.2 (27.7--35.6)

> 95

44.7 (39.8--49.6)

Values are percentages, with 95% confidence interval in brackets.
Reproduced from Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 48(2), Alexander M et
al, Age-stratified prevalence of mild cognitive impairment and dementia
in European populations: a systematic review, pp.Â 355--369, Copyright
(2015), with permission from IOS Press, Inc.

The high prevalence of depressive disorder masks the fact that first
episodes become less common after the age of 60 years and rare after the
age of 80 years. Similarly, though bipolar disorder remains a prevalent
disorder in the elderly (Sajatovic et al., 2015), first episodes of
mania are rare, and an organic cause (e.g.Â secondary to steroids) should
always be suspected (Richards and Curtice, 2011). C-reactive protein is
elevated prior to the onset of late-onset bipolar disorder, suggesting
that inflammation may play a role (WiumAndersen et al., 2016). The
incidence of suicide, especially in men, increases steadily with age
(see Chapter 21), and suicide in the

elderly is usually associated with depressive disorder (Waern et al.,
2002).

Anxiety disorders In general practice, Shepherd et al.Â (1966) found
that, after the age of 55 years, the incidence of new cases of neurosis
(i.e.Â anxiety disorder) declined. However, the frequency of
consultations with the general practitioner for neurosis did not
fall---presumably as a result of chronic or recurrent cases. Subsequent
larger population surveys have largely confirmed this view, although
prevalence and incidence figures differ markedly between studies,
depending on the case definitions employed. For example, in a study from
Liverpool, 1-month prevalence rates for 'caseness' for neurotic
disorders were less than 1% in men and less than 2% in women over 65
years of age, whereas 'subcase' rates were about 20% in both sexes. In a
3-year follow-up, this corresponded to an incidence rate of 4.4 per 1000
per year. For a review, see Lindesay (2008).

Schizophrenia-like disorders Schizophrenia has an estimated prevalence
of 0.1--0.5% in those aged 65 or older, with 20--25% of these having an
onset after aged 40 years (Cohen et al., 2015). Schizophrenia-like and
paranoid disorders with their first onset in old age have been a
longstanding source of debate and terminological confusion, as discussed
in Chapter 11, with the terms paraphrenia and late paraphrenia still
commonly used. There are no good data on prevalence.

Principles and practice of old age psychiatry Having surveyed the
epidemiological landscape, in this section we outline the principles and
practice of old age psychiatry, in terms of service organization,
assessment, treatment, and legal issues. The remainder of the chapter
describes the specific features and treatments of the individual
psychiatric disorders of old age.

Organization of services An international consensus statement defined
the essential elements of a mental health service for older people as
follows (Wertheimer, 1997):

â

primary health care team

â

specialist old age psychiatry team

â

inpatient unit

â

rehabilitation

â

daycare

â

availability of respite care

â

range of residential care facilities

â

family and social supports

â

liaison with geriatric medicine

â

education of health care providers about the needs of older people with
psychiatric problems

54

Principles and practice of old age psychiatry â

research, especially into epidemiological issues, and evaluation of
services.

The 'team' concept is highlighted as being the key to effective
provision of care, with multidisciplinary involvement being the norm.
However, beyond these broad points of consensus, national policies have
differed considerably in terms of the development of services and how
they are implemented. In the USA, emphasis has been placed on care in
hospitals and nursing homes. In Europe, Canada, and Australasia, there
has been varying emphasis on social policies to provide care in the
community and sheltered accommodation. In this section, services in the
UK will be described as an example. Health, social, and voluntary
services will be described separately, although good care depends on
close collaboration at all levels, from strategic planning to the
coordinated provision of care for each individual patient. Reflecting
this need, health and social services, and their budgets, are now
usually integrated in the UK. A National Dementia Strategy, 'Living well
with dementia' was launched in England and Wales in 2009 (Department of
Health, 2009), with three key steps: 1. Ensure better knowledge about
dementia and remove stigma.

patients rather than seeking out their problems. Some old age psychiatry
services will only accept referrals from a general practitioner, but,
increasingly, referrals may be accepted directly from any source,
although liaison with the general practitioner will always be important.

Old age psychiatry services The organization of psychiatric services
varies in different localities, as it reflects the local styles of
service providers, local needs, and the extent of provision for this age
group by general psychiatric services, as well as national policies.
Nevertheless, there are some general principles of planning. â

The aims should be to maintain the elderly person at home for as long as
possible, to respond quickly to medical and social problems as they
arise, to ensure coordination of the work of those providing continuing
care, and to support relatives and others who care for the elderly
person at home.

â

There should be close liaison with primary care, other hospital
specialists who may be involved, social services, and voluntary
agencies.

â

A multidisciplinary approach should be adopted with a clinical team that
may include psychiatrists, psychologists, community psychiatric nurses,
occupational therapists, and social workers. Some members of the team
should expect to spend more of their working day in patients' homes and
in general practices than in the hospital.

â

Issues of mental capacity should always be borne in mind, and the
relevant legislation adhered to (see page 000).

â

It is important that the care provided by different agencies is
coordinated. In the UK the Care Programme Approach (CPA) is intended to
improve coordination by making a single person, the key worker or 'care
coordinator', responsible for ensuring that appropriate assessment, care
planning, and review take place (see Chapter 26).

2.  Ensure early diagnosis, support, and treatment for people with
    dementia and their families and carers.
3.  Develop services to better meet changing needs. The strategy remains
    in place, and dementia remains high on the political agenda. There
    are no research data regarding the extent to which the goals of the
    strategy have yet been achieved. For review of old age psychiatry
    services, see Dening (2013).

Health services Primary care The general practitioner has a central role
in assessment and management of the problems of mentally ill older
people. In many instances, the general practitioner, together with other
health professionals in the primary care team and community health
services, assesses and manages patients without referring them to a
specialist. However, as already mentioned, general practitioners do not
detect all of the psychiatric problems of the elderly at an early stage
(Mitchell et al., 2011), nor do they always provide all of the necessary
long-term medical supervision. These problems may be due to lack of
awareness of the significance of psychiatric illness among the elderly,
or to reliance on a traditional service model in which doctors respond
to requests from

The contributions of the various parts of an old age psychiatry service
will now be considered. In England and Wales, severe financial
constraints and the reorganization of the NHS to move control of budgets
to general practitioners mean that the description of services for older
people are rapidly changing and will no doubt change further over the
lifetime of this edition of this book. Although the basic principles and
components of care may not change radically, the relative availability
of these components may do so, and

545

546

546

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly readers will need to familiarize
themselves with local conditions. Domiciliary psychiatric care.
Assessment and treatment commonly takes place in the patient's own home.
This is more convenient for the patient, and offers a more relevant and
realistic assessment of the difficulties facing the patient and their
carers. Assessment is often undertaken by a member of the community
mental health team who has a clinical background in nursing,
occupational therapy, or social work. This person may become the
patient's care coordinator, able to take an overview of their health and
social needs, and who can liaise between different agencies, including
primary care and specialist services. Care coordinators may assess
referrals from general practitioners, monitor treatment in collaboration
with general practitioners and the psychiatric services, and take part
in the organization of home support for older people with dementia.
Outpatient clinics. Although assessment at home is desirable, outpatient
clinics are convenient for the assessment and follow-up of mobile
patients. In recent years, memory clinics have been developed in most
areas for the specialist assessment and treatment of patients with
memory problems (Kelly, 2008). In the UK, these clinics provide
information, advice, and support to patients and their carers; they also
initiate medication used to treat dementia, which can be prescribed
subsequently in primary care (see page 000). Day hospitals and day
centres. Although some treatments can be provided at home, others may
require the patient to attend a day hospital, where a high level of
stimulation and social interaction can also be provided. In the 1950s,
day care began in geriatric hospitals. A few years later the first
psychiatric day hospitals for the elderly were opened. Psychiatric day
hospitals should provide a full range of diagnostic services and offer
both short-term and continuing care for patients with functional or
organic disorders, together with support for relatives. Currently,
daycare is more often provided by day centres rather than day hospitals.
These centres combine health and social care elements, very often with
the financial and practical involvement of voluntary organizations, such
as the Alzheimer's Society. Day centres provide an important and
cost-effective component of the services available for the elderly with
psychiatric problems. All daycarebased arrangements depend crucially on
adequate transport facilities. Inpatient units. Inpatient teams should
be able to provide multidisciplinary assessment and treatment of
patients with severe disorders. In addition to psychiatrists and

psychiatric nurses, these teams may include occupational therapists,
psychologists, speech and language therapists, physiotherapists, social
workers, healthcare assistants, and others. There is substantial
variation in different areas both in the composition of teams and in
whether patients with functional illnesses are cared for separately from
or together with those with organic disorders. Geriatric medicine. There
is inevitably some overlap in the characteristics of patients treated by
units for geriatric medicine and those treated in psychiatry units; both
are likely to treat patients with dementia. However, in the geriatric
medicine setting the primary concern is likely to be with a patient's
physical health; in old age psychiatry units the predominant problem
usually relates to behaviour, personality, or comorbid mental illness
(e.g.Â depression). Earlier concern that many patients were 'misplaced'
and therefore received poor treatment, stayed too long in hospital, and
had an unsatisfactory outcome has not been confirmed by research.
Optimal placement depends on the relative predominance of behavioural
and physical problems. Medical and psychiatric teams need to cooperate
closely if all patients are to receive appropriate treatment. Geriatric
medicine units are usually found in acute general hospitals, wherein the
increasing availability of liaison psychiatry expertise helps to
integrate medical and psychiatric treatments. Long-term care. In some
countries, many elderly psychiatric patients are still treated in the
wards of psychiatric hospitals. However, the nature of the care provided
is more important than the type of institution in which it is given. The
basic requirements are opportunities for privacy and the use of personal
possessions, together with occupational and social therapy. Provided
that these criteria are met, long-term hospital care can be the best
provision for very disabled patients. In the UK, long-term care is now
almost entirely provided outside hospital in residential and nursing
homes. There is an active debate on how long-term care should be funded.
The Dilnot Report in 2011 recommended that, once a certain funding
contribution ('cap') had been reached by a particular individual, their
social care costs should be free. The recommendations of this report are
to be implemented in 2017, but the details remain uncertain. In England
and Wales, the Care Act (2014) enshrines in law the duty of local
authorities to provide appropriate assessment and support for social
care needs. However, the provision, availability, and costs incurred by
individuals differ considerably in different parts of the UK. Further
changes are also to be anticipated as personal health budgets are
introduced into the NHS.

574

Principles and practice of old age psychiatry

Social services Domiciliary services In addition to medical services,
domiciliary services include home helps, meals at home, laundry,
telephone, and emergency call systems. In the UK, local authorities both
provide and commission these services; they also support voluntary
organizations and encourage local initiatives such as good-neighbour
schemes and self-help groups. Increasing financial pressures on local
authorities, and rising demand from the increasing number of elderly
people, mean that all services are under constant threat. The last
decade has also witnessed a major shift in provider for these services,
with the majority being from private or voluntary organizations.

Residential and nursing care Older people may need a variety of social
service accommodation, ranging from entirely independent housing through
sheltered housing schemes, where there may be some communal provision,
often including access to a warden, to residential or nursing homes
where there are staff available at all times. There is a need for
special housing for the elderly that is conveniently sited and easy to
run. Ideally, the elderly should be able to transfer to more sheltered
accommodation if they become more disabled, without losing all
independence or moving away from familiar places. In residential homes,
the needs of residents for help with personal care can be met by health
care assistants, whereas in nursing homes more skilled nursing care is
available with a greater proportion of staff with a higher level of
training. Some, but not all, nursing homes specialize in the care of
older people with mental disorders. In the UK, local social services are
responsible for providing residential homes and other sheltered
accommodation. However, many independent organizations and charities
also provide residential homes for older people and play an increasing
and substantial role.

Voluntary and third sector services Voluntary agencies play a large and
increasing role in the provision of facilities and support for patients,
their families, and carers. Previously the task for NHS services was to
ensure that their contributions were integrated with health and social
service provisions. As their role has increased, they may be set to play
a dominant role in this area. Any discussion of service provision for
elderly

mentally ill patients must acknowledge the major part played by informal
carers.

Carers In the present context, carers are unpaid relatives, neighbours,
or friends who look after older people at home. These informal carers
provide substantially more care to older people than do the statutory
services, and their role in the overall provision of care should not be
underestimated. Most informal carers of older people are (in descending
order of frequency) partners, daughters, or sons. About twice as many
women as men are informal carers, and about 50% of all informal carers
are themselves elderly. Several studies have shown that patients
suffering from dementia place the greatest stress on carers (Pinquart
and SÃ¶rensen, 2003). Incontinence, behavioural disturbance at night, and
aggression are the most distressing problems for carers, both
practically and emotionally. The degree of strain imposed on these
committed individuals (who are themselves often elderly and with their
own health problems) is often undeclared and easily underestimated.
Caregiver symptoms lessen when the patient has moved to permanent
residential care (Gaugler et al., 2009). Accurate assessment of carers'
needs is important and, in the UK, social services now have a statutory
responsibility to provide this, where requested. Box 19.1 summarizes the
key recommendations made by Levin (1997). Time should be spent with
carers, giving advice and

Box 19.1 Support for carers of elderly patients with dementia Early
identification of dementia Comprehensive medical and social assessment
of identified cases Timely referrals between agencies Continuing reviews
of each patient's needs, and backup for carers Active medical treatment
for any intercurrent illness Provision of information, advice, and
counselling Regular help with household and personal care tasks Regular
breaks for carers (e.g.Â daycare and respite care) Appropriate financial
support Permanent residential care when this becomes necessary

547

548

548

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly discussing their problems. Such
support can help families to avoid some of the frustration and anxiety
involved in caring for elderly relatives. Published guides available on
the internet are also useful. Other practical help can ease the burden;
for example, carer support groups, additional support at home
(e.g.Â laundry or meal services), daycare, respite care, or holidays
designed to be suitable for people with dementia. The assessment of need
and carer support may often have to be multidisciplinary; both community
psychiatric nurses and care managers (social workers) play essential
roles in coordinating these services, supporting relatives, and
providing direct nursing care. The best evidence for an effective
treatment to support carers is for an eight-session, manual-based coping
intervention. This was shown to improve mood and anxiety significantly
over a 2-year period, and to be costeffective (Livingston et al.,
2014a). However, such interventions are not widely available.

Psychiatric assessment in the elderly The principles and basic purpose
of assessment of older people are not substantially different from those
for all other patients (Chapter 3). Assessment is intended to establish
a diagnosis, to develop the best possible plan of care, and to inform
the prognosis. However, there are differences of emphasis and process. â

The assessment is likely to take longer, requiring more than one
interview, and with a greater reliance on informants. In the assessment
of suspected dementia, an informant is essential to complete the history
and to verify the extent to which the impairments are affecting the
patient's capabilities and safety. Time will also be required to
administer cognitive rating scales.

â

The assessment is likely to include assessment of the wider psychosocial
situation, taking into account not only the patient's needs but also
those of carers, dependents, and other individuals who are involved.
This is particularly relevant for the patient with moderate or severe
dementia.

â

The physical examination and laboratory investigations play a greater
role, because of the higher prevalence of organic disorders as a cause
of psychiatric symptoms in the elderly. The psychiatric assessment may
also bring coincidental medical problems to light which require
investigation or referral.

For a review of psychiatric assessment in the elderly, see Jacoby
(2009).

The referral It is important to establish at the outset what prompted
the referral, and what the referrer hoped to gain from it. This may well
require information to be collected even before the patient is seen, not
least to establish the most useful way to approach the assessment. In
any one case, each person involved in the patient's care may have
different, and possibly conflicting, expectations and needs.

Informants Many old people seen by psychiatrists are unable to give
complete or reliable information about themselves. Frequently there is a
partner or other close relative living with the patient, but in other
cases it may be necessary (with consent) to talk to neighbours, friends,
or relatives living away from the patient, to build up a picture of the
patient's personality and past history. Most patients will already be
well known to their general practitioner or to other health
professionals, and it is always worth consulting them.

Where to assess the patient In the UK, most old age psychiatrists prefer
to assess patients in their own homes. This enables much essential
'real-life' information about the patient's ability to function at home
to be gained (e.g.Â ability to make a cup of tea, or recognize relatives
in family photographs). It also avoids the patient appearing excessively
disorientated simply because of the disturbing effect of having to
travel to a hospital for assessment in an unfamiliar environment.
Furthermore, it makes it easier to interview other members of the
family, and to assess the level of support from neighbours or outside
carers, who may be available at the patient's home during the
assessment. For review of home assessment in old age psychiatry, see Ng
and Atkins (2012). Old age psychiatrists may also be asked to assess
patients on general hospital wards, for example because the admission
may have revealed, or exacerbated, underlying cognitive (or other)
difficulties. Although this provides less information about the
patient's circumstances, it makes close liaison with the hospital team
possible. Conditions on hospital wards are often unfavourable for a
quiet, private interview. It is important to spend time reading the
notes carefully, talking to nursing and other staff, and then requesting
the use of an office or side room in which to see the patient. Even if
the family or

549

Principles and practice of old age psychiatry other carers cannot be
present, it may be possible to telephone them. Similar principles apply
to assessment in residential and nursing homes. Increasingly, patients
with early cognitive impairments are offered assessments in a memory
clinic. This offers the advantages of a systematic and detailed
assessment, and enables relevant further investigations and follow-up to
be arranged as efficiently as possible. It is also the vehicle by which
drugs to treat dementia are prescribed in the NHS.

The assessment The information that is required about the medical and
psychiatric history is the same as in younger patients. However, it may
be necessary to piece it together from accounts given by the patient and
by other informants. It is particularly important to obtain a clear
medical history and to determine the patient's past and present
medication. During the mental state examination, assessment of cognitive
function has particular significance, especially for those in whom
memory impairment is apparent or suspected. This assessment requires a
range of clinical questions and observations, supplemented by one or
more of the questionnaires available for this purpose (see Chapter 3),
such as the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) or Montreal Cognitive
Assessment (MoCA). As physical problems are extremely common, the
psychiatrist will often need to examine the patient (especially if this
has not been done recently by the general practitioner), including a
neurological examination. Laboratory investigations are important for
patients on admission, and in all others with significant psychiatric
disorder (for investigation of dementia, see Chapter 14). Finally, the
assessment process includes assessments of risk, and of the needs of the
carer(s), discussed above, as most older people with psychiatric
disorders live in their own homes and are cared for by family members
or, occasionally, by good neighbours or friends.

Psychiatric treatment in the elderly As with assessment, the principles
of psychiatric treatment in the elderly resemble those for other adults,
but the greater age of these patients does require one to bear in mind
three issues that have an impact upon treatment (Oppenheimer, 2009). â

Elderly patients are likely to have multiple problems. Psychiatric,
physical, and social difficulties usually

coexist to some extent. 'Treatment' may thus include a broad range of
interventions beyond those normally associated with psychiatry---for
example, antibiotics for a urinary tract infection, or liaison with a
district nurse or dietitian. These complex treatment needs are reflected
in the multidisciplinary nature of services, described above, and
require careful planning and integration of treatment provision. â

Clear boundaries between normality and disease are rare. This poses
challenges for treatment thresholds and service provision.

â

Lack of competence (capacity) is common, due to cognitive impairment.
There is an increasing focus on how (lack of) competence should be
assessed and responded to. The question of capacity underlies a range of
ethical and legal issues in which old age psychiatrists become involved
(see below).

Physical treatments The efficacy of psychotropic drugs is generally not
affected by age, and elderly patients should not be denied effective
drug treatment, especially for depressive disorders. However,
prescribing in the elderly requires particular caution, for two main
reasons. â

The incidence of unpleasant or dangerous side effects is high, and can
produce delirium and other psychiatric disorders. Most problems arise
with drugs used to treat cardiovascular disorders (antihypertensives,
diuretics, and digoxin) and those that act on the central nervous system
(antidepressants, hypnotics, anxiolytics, antipsychotics, and
antiparkinsonian drugs). These problems arise because of differences in
pharmacokinetics with ageing, and the greater number of drugs that older
people are prescribed, which increases the likelihood of harmful
interactions. There is particular concern about the use of
antipsychotics in dementia, especially Lewy body dementia (see page
000).

â

Compliance with treatment may be compromised in those who live alone,
who have poor vision, or who are forgetful or confused.

Given these factors, the following points should be borne in mind when
prescribing for the elderly person with a psychiatric disorder. â

Start with a low dose, increase slowly, and expect the final dose to be
considerably lower than in younger patients. The main exceptions to this
are the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), for which
comparable doses are used.

549

50

550

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly â

â

All medication should be reviewed regularly, and kept to a minimum.
Before starting a drug in the elderly, it is good practice to state
clearly in the notes the reason for the decision (including, for
example, the score on a depression rating scale), and the criteria by
which the effects of the treatment will be assessed. If good evidence of
efficacy is not achieved, medication should be gradually withdrawn. The
drug regimen should be as simple as possible. Medicine bottles should be
labelled clearly, and memory aids, such as packs containing the drugs to
be taken on a single day with daily dose requirements, should be
provided. If possible, drug-taking should be supervised.

Psychosocial treatments Some patients can achieve independence through
measures designed to encourage self-care and domestic skills, and to
increase social contacts. For those living at home, a domiciliary
occupational therapist may be able to give useful advice on
environmental or other modifications that will help the patient to live
more independently. More severely impaired patients who are living in
institutional care can benefit from an environment in which individual
needs and dignity are respected, and each person retains some of their
personal possessions. Further psychosocial interventions of this kind
are discussed in the section on treatment of dementia.

Electroconvulsive therapy Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) remains one of
the most effective and valuable treatments for serious depressive
disorder in the elderly (see below). Advanced age is not a
contraindication. However, attention should be paid to the physical
health of all elderly patients undergoing this treatment, and frail
patients should be assessed by an experienced anaesthetist before
receiving ECT.

Psychological treatment In all patients, supportive therapy with clearly
defined aims can be helpful, including joint sessions with the patient's
partner or carer. In patients who have no cognitive impairment, the
specific psychological therapies that are used in younger individuals
remain appropriate for the same range of disorders and with similar
expectations of success. In particular, cognitive and behavioural
interventions for mood and anxiety disorders are effective, and are
often preferred by the patient. Family or systems therapy, although not
widely available, is advocated as it explicitly recognizes the patient
in their social context (Jacoby, 2009). Psychodynamic psychotherapy is
less appropriate for the elderly and is seldom used, although cognitive
analytic therapy has been found useful. Even mild cognitive impairment
militates against the use of most of the common psychological therapies,
as it is likely to prevent the patient from understanding or
implementing the treatment (Oppenheimer, 2009). However, a range of
specialized psychological and behavioural interventions
(e.g.Â reminiscence therapy) are becoming widely used in this group, with
the benefits targeted as much at the carer as at the patient. For a
review of psychological treatment in the elderly, see Wilkinson (2013).

Legal, financial, and ethical issues Both the law and ethical principles
apply as much to the elderly as to younger people, and these issues are
discussed in Chapter 4. However, certain legal and ethical issues that
are relevant in psychiatry have particular relevance to the elderly (see
Box 19.2), for several reasons: â

The nature of the common illnesses from which they suffer, especially
dementia, which compromises their competence to make decisions and give
consent.

Box 19.2 Ethical and legal issues in the elderly Confidentiality in
relation to information from carers Confidentiality of information about
financial circumstances Consent to treatment Capacity to consent to
physical and psychological treatment â Advance directives â Decisions
'not to treat' Damaging behaviour â

Management of financial affairs Nominating another to take
responsibility (Power of Attorney) â Procedures to enable others to take
responsibility Entitlement to drive a vehicle â

Consent to participate in research

51

Principles and practice of old age psychiatry â

Problems arising from increasing age and frailty (e.g. driving).

â

The greater likelihood and proximity of death, which gives greater
urgency to issues such as testamentary capacity (Posener and Jacoby,
2008) and advance directives.

In the UK, many of these issues are governed by the Mental Capacity Act
2005.

Financial affairs Older people, particularly those with mental
disorders, may have difficulty in managing their financial affairs. In
the UK, if the issues are relatively simple---for example, involving
only a state pension and benefits--- the person can request that someone
else, known as an appointee, collects these benefits on their behalf.
Alternatively, while the person still has mental capacity to understand
what is involved, they can grant a Lasting Power of Attorney in favour
of one or more others. The attorney then has authority to carry out any
financial transaction on behalf of that person. If the donor of the
power subsequently becomes mentally unable to manage their own affairs,
the attorney may continue to do so on their behalf (in the UK, provided
the arrangement is registered with the Court of Protection). Sometimes a
person becomes mentally incapable of managing their affairs without
having made any formal arrangement for someone else to act on their
behalf. Under these circumstances, an application supported by medical
evidence of incapacity may be made to the Court of Protection for a
deputy to be appointed to manage the patient's affairs. Under the Mental
Capacity Act an attorney can also make proxy health and welfare
decisions on behalf of an incompetent person. This requires that the
person was competent to donate that Power of Attorney before
subsequently becoming incompetent. The Mental Capacity Act introduced a
new power, the Advance Decision to Refuse Treatment (ADRT), which allows
an agreed proxy to make decisions that are binding even where they will
result in death. Because of the gravity of this power, it must be
written and witnessed and confirm the competence of the patient at the
time at which it is arranged (see Chapter 4). The ADRT can be overridden
by the Mental Health Act.

Driving A common practical problem is the inability of older patients,
especially those with dementia and Parkinson's disease, to drive safely.
As with other

disorders, doctors generally have an obligation, which overrides
confidentiality, to inform the authorities responsible for the provision
of driving licences if patients decline to do so themselves. In
practice, older people often make the decision to stop driving anyway,
or are persuaded to do so by relatives. For review, see Wilson and
Pinner (2013).

Abuse and neglect of the elderly Abuse and neglect of the elderly by
family members, carers, or acquintances, raises the importance of
safeguarding awareness for all health care professionals working with
the elderly. Its psychiatric relevance arises in part from the finding
that people with dementia are particularly likely to be abused.

Elder abuse This term refers to actions by a carer or other trusted
person that cause harm or create a serious risk of harm to an elderly
person (whether or not harm is intended), or to failure by a caregiver
to satisfy the elderly person's basic needs or protect them from harm.
The term 'elder maltreatment' is also used. Five forms of elder abuse
are recognized---physical, psychological, sexual, financial, and
neglect. Prevalence rates of 2--10% are reported, with a higher risk if:
â

the abused person has dementia

â

the carer and the abused person live together

â

the abused person is socially isolated (e.g.Â lacks close friends)

â

the carer has a psychiatric disorder or misuses alcohol

â

the carer is heavily dependent (e.g.Â financially) on the person who is
being abused.

Elder abuse is associated with an increased mortality rate compared with
that for matched older people, and with other adverse outcomes, ranging
from depression to placement in a nursing home. Although there is now
widespread awareness of the problem, and of the need to identify elder
abuse and respond to it, there is no evidence about the effectiveness of
interventions. At present, a range of measures are used, such as
increased social support, respite care, relationship counselling, and
carer education programmes. Legal approaches (e.g.Â guardianship, law
enforcement agencies) may also be necessary. For a review of elder
abuse, see Lachs and Pillemer (2015).

551

52

552

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly

Clinical features and treatment of psychiatric disorders in the elderly
Depressive disorder in the elderly Clinical features There is no clear
distinction between the clinical features of depressive disorders in the
elderly and those in younger people, but some symptoms are more striking
in the elderly. Post (1972) reported that one-third of depressed elderly
patients had severe retardation or agitation. A recent meta-analysis
confirmed these findings, and also reported that hypochondriasis and
somatic symptoms were more common, whereas guilt and loss of libido were
less common than in younger adults (Hegeman et al., 2012). Depression
itself is sometimes not conspicuous in the elderly and may be masked by
other symptoms, particularly hypochondriacal complaints, and so
depressive disorder should always be considered when the patient
presents with symptoms of this kind. Psychotic depression in the elderly
also differs in some respects from psychotic depression in younger
adults, with a greater overall severity and more prominent
hypochondriacal delusions (Gournellis et al., 2014).

Depressive pseudodementia Some retarded depressed patients, especially
the elderly, present with 'pseudodementia'---that is, they have
conspicuous difficulty with concentration and remembering, but careful
clinical testing shows that there is no major defect of memory.
Differentiation of these patients from those with early dementia is
important and can be difficult. Moreover, the distinction is complicated
by evidence that depressive pseudodementia is a strong predictor of
subsequent dementia (Saez-Fonseca et al., 2007). Features that suggest
depressive pseudodementia include the following: â

The patient's complaint of memory disturbance tends to be greater than
the informant's account of memory problems in everyday life.

â

Depressive symptoms that pre-dated the memory difficulties.

â

'Don't know' responses and poor involvement with neuropsychological
tests (these features are characteristic).

â

A personal or family history of mood disorder.

Aetiology The aetiology of depressive disorders of first onset in late
life broadly resembles the aetiology of similar disorders

at younger ages, with biological, psychological, and social influences
(Fiske et al., 2009). Twin studies and genome-wide profiling show a
comparable genetic contribution to that of depression occurring earlier
in life (Demirkan et al., 2013). It might be expected that the
loneliness and hardship of old age would be important predisposing
factors for depressive disorder. Surprisingly, there is no convincing
evidence for such an association. Indeed, Parkes et al. (1969) even
found that the association between bereavement and mental illness no
longer held in the aged. The major difference in aetiology for
depression in late life is related to vascular factors. First noted by
Post (1972), it has become the prominent hypothesis since Alexopoulos et
al.Â (1997) coined the term 'vascular depression'. There is now diverse
evidence for a multifaceted and bidirectional relationship between
late-life depression and vascular disease. Meta-analysis shows that
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, stroke, and a composite vascular risk
score are all significant risk factors for depression in the elderly,
but hypertension, smoking, and dyslipidaemia are not (Valkanova and
Ebmeier, 2013). Biological mechanisms include findings that the
neuropathological basis of the white matter hyperintensities that are
frequently seen in late-life depression on MRI scans reflects focal
areas of ischaemia and infarction, with effects on brain connectivity.
Inflammation is also thought to be a contributory factor. For review see
Taylor et al.Â (2013).

Differential diagnosis As noted above, it is sometimes difficult to
distinguish between depressive pseudodementia and dementia, and this
problem is compounded by the fact that depression may occur during the
course of dementia. It is essential to obtain a detailed history from
other informants and to make careful observations of the patient's
mental state and behaviour using the differentiating features listed
earlier. Psychological testing can be a useful adjunct, but it requires
experienced interpretation and it usually adds little to skilful
clinical assessment. At times, dementia and depressive illness coexist.
If there is real doubt, a trial of antidepressant treatment may be
appropriate. Other aspects of the differential diagnosis are similar to
those for depressive disorder in younger people.

Treatment The principles of the treatment of depressive disorder are the
same as for younger adults, as described in Chapter 9,

53

Clinical features and treatment of psychiatric disorders in the elderly
and should follow current guidelines (Cleare et al., 2015). Effective
treatments thus exist, but often they are not implemented, both because
cases are not diagnosed and because interventions are not offered (Park
and Unutzer, 2011). Guidelines for managing late-life depression in
primary care have been produced (Baldwin et al., 2003). With elderly
patients it is especially important to be aware of the risk of suicide.
Any intercurrent physical disorder should be thoroughly treated.
Antidepressants are as effective as in younger people. The drugs should
be used cautiously, perhaps starting with half the normal dosage and
increasing this slowly in relation to side effects and response. SSRIs
are preferred to tricyclic antidepressants because of their lower
propensity to cause side effects and cardiotoxicity. Potential
interactions with other drugs that are being taken by the patient must
also be noted, and may influence the choice of antidepressant (Spina and
Scordo, 2002). For patients who do not respond to the maximum tolerated
dose of an antidepressant, it may be necessary to use a combination of
drugs, as in younger patients, or to combine medication with
psychological treatment (Cooper et al., 2011). As with medication,
psychological interventions show similar efficacy in the elderly, and
are often preferred by patients, but their availability is very limited
(Simon et al., 2015). There is evidence that, within this setting, the
outcome is improved by models of collaborative care in which specialists
provide some input, and care is supplemented by education about
depression and medication (Park and Unutzer, 2011). ECT is appropriate
for depressive disorder with severe and distressing agitation, suicidal
ideas and behaviour, life-threatening stupor, or failure to respond to
drugs. Concerns that ECT is dangerous or ineffective in elderly patients
are unwarranted; in fact, remission rates are favourable (Rhebergen et
al., 2015). After recovery, expert guidelines suggest that fulldosage
antidepressant medication should be continued for at least 12 months for
a first episode in the elderly, and proportionately longer for
subsequent episodes. Indefinite continuation has also been advocated
(see Cleare et al., 2015). For a review of the depression in the elderly
and its management, see Unutzer (2007).

Course and prognosis In his classic study, Post (1972) described
depression in the elderly as following the rule of threes---a third
recover, a third remain the same, and a third deteriorate and become
'chronic invalids'. Later studies have generally found a similar, if not
poorer, outcome. For

example, in a 6-year longitudinal study of 277 elderly depressed people,
Beekman et al.Â (2002) found that 32% had a severe, chronic course, 44%
had a fluctuating course, and only 23% achieved substantial remissions.
The natural history of depression in old age has implications for its
management (see below). Factors that are believed to predict a good
prognosis for depression in old age include the following: â

onset before the age of 70 years

â

short duration of illness

â

good previous adjustment

â

the absence of disabling physical illness

â

good recovery from previous episodes

â

religiosity (self-reported faith, or belonging to a religious group).

Poor outcome is associated with the severity of the initial illness, the
presence of organic cerebral pathology, poor compliance with treatment,
and severe life events during the follow-up period. As discussed in
Chapter 21, the risk of suicide remains high in older people with
depression, especially men. Depression and dementia. As well as the
finding mentioned earlier that depressive pseudodementia increases the
risk of dementia several years later, there is now strong evidence that
a history of depression in late life (Diniz et al., 2013) and at younger
ages (da Silva et al., 2013) approximately doubles the risk of
developing dementia, including Alzheimer's disease and vascular
dementia. The mechanism for the association between depression and
dementia is not known. The use of statins may decrease the risk of
dementia in late-onset depression (Yang et al., 2015).

Bipolar disorder in the elderly Broadhead and Jacoby (1990), in the
first prospective study of mania in old age, found that the clinical
picture was the same as in younger patients, but that a depressive
episode immediately after the manic episode occurs more frequently.
Mixed affective episodes may be somewhat more common than in younger
patients. As with depression, a history of bipolar disorder appears to
increase the risk of dementia (da Silva et al., 2013). Management of
bipolar disorder in the elderly follows the principles described in
Chapter 10 for younger patients (Goodwin et al., 2016). Lithium
prophylaxis remains valuable, but blood levels should be monitored with
particular care and kept at the lower end of the therapeutic range
(0.4--0.6 mmol/l). For a review, see Sajatovic et al.Â (2015).

553

54

554

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly

Anxiety disorders in the elderly In later life, anxiety disorders are
seldom causes for referral to a psychiatrist, although this may be
largely because of non-presentation by patients and lack of recognition
or referral by general practitioners. It does not reflect their rarity
in the population, as shown by the epidemiological data reviewed earlier
in the chapter. Symptoms of anxiety disorders among the elderly are
often non-specific, with features of both anxiety and depression.
Hypochondriacal symptoms may be prominent. As in younger patients, the
possibility that anxiety symptoms are secondary to an underlying
depressive episode should always be actively considered before the
diagnosis is made. Personality disorder is a predisposing factor, while
physical illness and life events such as retirement or a change of
accommodation may act as precipitants. A first onset of panic attacks in
an elderly person should always prompt a search for an underlying
physical or depressive disorder. The approach to treatment is similar to
that for anxiety disorders in younger adults, with a preference for
psychological and behavioural interventions. In practice, medication is
often prescribed first-line, and should be done cautiously. For review,
see Goncalves and Byrne (2012).

Schizophrenia-like disorders in the elderly Schizophrenia usually begins
in early adulthood (see Chapter 11), but new-onset cases after the age
of 60 years, although uncommon, are well recognized. This section will
focus on the features that characterize such cases compared with
schizophrenia of younger onset. It also highlights some issues that
affect the management of all patients with schizophrenia as they become
elderly (sometimes called 'graduates'). The complicated terminology in
this area has been covered earlier in this chapter (and see Box 11.4),
and reflects the longstanding view that these cases are, to some extent,
clinically different from earlier-onset cases. For review of late-onset
schizophrenia, see Brunelle et al.Â (2013). For a review of schizophrenia
in the elderly, see Cohen et al.Â (2015).

Clinical features Although the core symptoms and overall clinical
profile are very similar to those of younger-onset cases, the relative
prominence of some features does differ (see Box 19.3). Of these, the
extreme rarity of thought disorder and negative symptoms in the elderly
is the most

Box 19.3 Features characteristic of late-onset compared with earlyonset
schizophrenia Symptoms that are more common Visual, tactile, and
olfactory hallucinations Third-person, running commentary, and
derogatory auditory hallucinations Persecutory delusions

Symptoms that are less common Formal thought disorder Affective
flattening and blunting Negative symptoms

Other features Female predominance No clear genetic loading Association
with sensory deficits and social isolation Less premorbid educational
and psychosocial impairment Less working memory and verbal learning
impairment Much lower antipsychotic doses required

striking. A similar generalized cognitive impairment is seen regardless
of age of onset, but late-onset cases show somewhat milder deficits,
especially in working and verbal memory. However, it should also be
noted that a history of schizophrenia is associated with a threefold
increase in risk of dementia at age 65 years, with a lesser but still
significant increased risk at older ages (Riisgaard et al., 2015).

Course and prognosis There are no contemporary data on the course or
outcome of schizophrenia with onset in old age. There is no good
evidence that it heralds or progresses to dementia.

Differential diagnosis Compared with younger-onset schizophrenia, there
is a greater likelihood that an elderly patient presenting with
psychotic symptoms has an organic psychosis of some kind. Therefore all
elderly patients who present with a first onset of schizophrenia-like
features should be assessed carefully to exclude a delirium, dementia,
or organic psychosis due to a neurological or medical disorder such as
neurosyphilis, HIV, or neoplasm (see Chapter 14). As in younger
patients, schizophrenia must also be distinguished from other
psychiatric disorders

5

Clinical features and treatment of psychiatric disorders in the elderly
in which psychotic symptoms occur, notably delusional disorder or
affective psychosis. Such distinctions may be particularly difficult if
the patient presents with persecutory beliefs but no other clear
symptoms, and if there is a history suggestive of paranoid personality
traits. For those in whom visual hallucinations are an isolated symptom,
consider Charles Bonnet syndrome (see page 000).

Aetiology Familial aggregation is much less common than in earlier-onset
schizophrenia, which suggests that there is a smaller genetic
predisposition. There is no familial association with neurodegenerative
or cerebrovascular disorders. Brain imaging changes are similar in
nature and magnitude to those described in youngeronset schizophrenia.
Unlike late-life depression, rates of white-matter hyperintensities are
not increased. A role for sex hormones in the aetiology of late-onset
schizophrenia has been proposed, based upon the female predominance
(which approaches 3:1), but there is little direct evidence for this.
Schizoid or paranoid personality traits are common in older people who
develop lateonset psychotic disorders (Kay et al., 1976). Deafness is
also a risk factor.

Treatment Antipsychotic medication is the mainstay of treatment of
late-onset schizophrenia, as in younger patients. However, much lower
doses (10--20% of a 'normal' dose) are often sufficient. This is not
just a reflection of the age of the patient, as higher doses are
typically needed for earlier-onset cases when they reach the same age.
Another reason for cautious use of antipsychotic medication is that the
risk of tardive dyskinesia appears to be considerably greater than in
younger patients, although this may be independent of age at onset of
illness (Liddle, 2013). Atypical antipsychotics probably have a lower
risk of tardive dyskinesia than do typical antipsychotics in this age
group, but recent concerns that they may increase cerebrovascular events
in the elderly must be taken into account (see page 000). Cognitive and
other psychological interventions may reduce disability, as in
earlier-onset cases, although there is little direct evidence for this
(Schimming and Harvey, 2004). Management of schizophrenia in the elderly
must also focus due attention on the complex medical and social needs of
many patients; services are often fragmentary and inadequate, in part
because of the emphasis on younger patients (Cohen et al., 2015).

Personality disorder in the elderly As discussed in Chapter 15, some
personality traits and disorders attenuate with age, while others remain
or become exaggerated. A meta-analysis found that the prevalence of
personality disorder in people over 50 years of age was 7--10% (Abrams
and Horowitz, 1996), somewhat lower than in younger adults. The decline
is mainly attributable to a decline in Cluster B personality disorders,
whereas obsessive--compulsive and schizoid characteristics may become
more prominent (Debast et al., 2014). Schizoid or paranoid traits may
become accentuated by the social isolation of old age, sometimes to the
extent of being mistaken for a delusional disorder or schizophrenia.
Criminal behaviour is unusual, with only 1.7% of men in England and
Wales who are found guilty of indictable offences being aged 60 years or
older (Fazel et al., 2001). For a review of personality disorder in the
elderly, see Oppenheimer (2013).

Other psychiatric syndromes of the elderly Senile squalor syndrome
Senile squalor syndrome, also known as Diogenes' syndrome, is
characterized by severe neglect of self and surroundings, domestic
squalor, and social withdrawal and isolation. Syllogomania (the hoarding
of rubbish) also occurs. It may be precipitated by stressful life
events, and is associated with a high mortality after hospital
admission. Other causes of self-neglect must be excluded, notably
dementia, psychosis, or severe depression. The person usually stubbornly
refuses all offers of help, and it is difficult to decide when to
intervene using compulsory powers. For a review, see Pavlou and Lachs
(2006).

Charles Bonnet syndrome Charles Bonnet syndrome refers to the occurrence
of visual hallucinations without any other features of psychosis,
dementia, or delirium. The syndrome is important, as misdiagnoses,
especially of psychosis, resulting in inappropriate treatments have been
reported. It is named after a Swiss philosopher who described the case
of his own grandfather in 1760. The syndrome is particularly common in
older people with failing eyesight, in whom there is a prevalence of
10--15%. It is usually thought to involve direct damage to the visual
system. It is said to occur in up to 3.5% of referrals to old age
psychiatrists.

555

56

556

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly The visual hallucinations are well
formed, elaborate, vivid, and perceived in external space. They may be
transient or persistent, and either variable in content or stereotyped.
They have no personal meaning for the patient. Although they meet most
of the criteria for true hallucinations, patients usually retain some
insight into their unreality, and can often make the image disappear by
closing their eyes.

The condition tends to improve if vision is restored, or when total
blindness occurs. There is no specific treatment. It has been suggested
that the syndrome may be an early indication of dementia, but this is
unproven (Russell and Burns, 2014). For a review, see Jacob et
al.Â (2004).

Treatment of dementia The clinical, epidemiological, and aetiological
features of dementia were described in Chapter 14, and its epidemiology
was discussed earlier in this chapter. Here its management will be
covered. First the treatment of the behavioural and psychological
disturbances of dementia, for which non-pharmacological and
pharmacological strategies are used, will be discussed. Then the
pharmacological treatment of Alzheimer's disease and some other specific
dementias for which drugs are becoming available will be considered. For
an overview of the management of dementia, see Cullum (2013).

Treatment of behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia A
spectrum of behavioural changes and psychological symptoms occurs during
the course of dementia, as described in Chapter 14 and summarized in Box
19.4. These features affect the majority of sufferers at some stage of
the illness, although the overall prevalence and frequency of individual
features vary according to the type of dementia. The behavioural and
psychological symptoms cause considerable problems for carers, and their
management can be difficult. There is increasing concern about the
inappropriate use of medication, yet there is a shortage of
evidence-based non-pharmacological alternatives. For review, see Kales
et al.Â (2015). Before any treatment is considered, careful assessment is
required, and attention should be paid to the following points: â

The nature of the problem behaviour(s) should be clearly identified,
including its duration, severity, and any suspected causative or
modifying factors. Rating scales may be useful (see Box 14.8). Examples
of remediable causal factors include urinary tract infections,

constipation, and pain. The latter is often overlooked as a cause of
agitation, and adequate analgesia may not be provided (Corbett et al.,
2012). Pain in dementia may be due to concurrent physical problems
(e.g.Â leg ulcers, arthritis), or it may be part of the disease process.
â

A mental state examination is needed to determine whether the behaviour
can be explained in terms of an underlying psychopathology (e.g.Â whether
there is evidence of psychotic symptoms, low mood, or anxiety). If this
examination, together with the history

Box 19.4 Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia Behaviours
Agitation Shouting Wandering Apathy Inappropriate sexual behaviour
Impaired sleep

Symptoms Delusions Hallucinations Depression Anxiety

Contributory factors Constipation Pain Superimposed delirium Sensory
deficits

57

Treatment of dementia and other observations, supports a diagnosis
(e.g.Â of psychosis, depression, or delirium), it will probably influence
the treatment plan. On other occasions, however, no such diagnostic
evidence may be forthcoming, in which case the behaviour is dealt with
on its merits. â

â

Box 19.5 Non-pharmacological interventions for behavioural and
psychological symptoms of dementia

The natural history is that behavioural and psychological symptoms of
dementia fluctuate and often last for less than 3 months (Hope et al.,
1999). Any treatment, especially if drugs are used, should reflect this
fact. Regular reassessment and trials of medication withdrawal should be
an integral part of the management plan.

Sensory stimulation

Behavioural changes in dementia are usually problems for the carer
rather than for the patient. This reality should be borne in mind when
treatment decisions are made, especially as informed consent is often
not possible because of the patient's cognitive impairment.

Behavioural management

Music therapy Aromatherapy (e.g.Â lavender oil) Bright light therapy
Massage/touch White noise

Differential reinforcement Stimulus control

Social contact One-to-one interaction Pet therapy

Non-pharmacological treatment of behavioural and psychological symptoms
If a behaviour or symptom is deemed, following assessment, to be
sufficient to require treatment, a hierarchical approach should be
employed. The first approach is to treat any underlying remediable
cause, as outlined above. If the problem persists, the next approach
should be based on modification of the patient's environment, or a
behavioural or psychological intervention, the choice of which will be
influenced by the nature of the problem, the severity of the dementia,
the setting, and the resources and expertise available. Medication
should be reserved for those patients in whom such approaches prove
unsuccessful. Many types of intervention are used (Box 19.5), as
reviewed in Patel et al.Â (2014), but there are few randomized controlled
trials. Evidence is strongest for an effect on agitation of
person-centred care, communication skills training, dementia care
mapping, and music therapy, but aromatherapy and light therapy did not
demonstrate efficacy (Livingston et al., 2014b). For a review of
strategies for use in primary care, see Robinson et al.Â (2010).

Drug treatment of behavioural and psychological symptoms High rates of
prescribing of psychotropic drugs in dementia, largely to control
behavioural problems, have been reported in nursing homes and other
institutions. However, the evidence shows that medication has at most a
modest effect and, in the case of antipsychotics,

Person-centred care Dementia care mapping Exercise Structured activity
programmes Environmental modifications Wandering areas Carer education
and support

is associated with considerable morbidity and an excess mortality, as
noted below. Reflecting these increasing concerns, medication for
behavioural problems and psychological symptoms in dementia should not
be contemplated until: â

A full assessment has been conducted.

â

Any aggravating physical and environmental factors have been addressed.

â

Non-pharmacological strategies have been attempted. In a randomized
trial, Fossey et al.Â (2006) showed that enhanced psychosocial care led
to a significant reduction in the prescribing of medication for nursing
home residents with dementia.

Box 19.6 summarizes the drug treatments currently used for behavioural
problems in dementia (Ballard and Corbett, 2013). A recent trial showed
citalopram to be effective for agitation in Alzheimer's disease, but at
the expense of a worsening of cognition and QTc interval prolongation,
emphasizing that drug treatment in this area requires a

557

58

558

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly

Box 19.6 Daily doses of drugs used to treat behavioural and
psychological symptoms of dementia

â

They are associated with a dose-related increased mortality risk (Maust
et al., 2015) and increased risk of stroke (Mehta et al., 2010).

â

Antipsychotics can precipitate an irreversible and sometimes fatal
syndrome of parkinsonism, impaired consciousness, and autonomic
disturbance, notably in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies.

â

Antipsychotics may hasten cognitive decline (McShane et al., 1997), an
observation confirmed in a randomized trial of quetiapine (Ballard et
al., 2005). The mechanism involved is unknown, but may relate to
antimuscarinic actions.

For mild agitation Trazodone 50--100 mg Benzodiazepines, e.g.Â lorazepam
0.5--4 mg SSRIs, e.g.Â citalopram 10--20 mg Carbamazepine 50--300 mg
Sodium valproate 250--1000 mg Rivastigmine (for Lewy body dementia)
1.5--6 mg

For severe agitation with psychosis Quetiapine 25--200 mg Risperidone
0.5--3 mg Olanzapine 2.5--10 mg

For depression SSRI, as above Mirtazapine 15--45 mg

For severe behavioural problems Consider haloperidol in small doses
(0.5--4 mg), for a limited time Reproduced from British Medical Journal,
338, Burns A, Illiffe S, Dementia, b75, Copyright (2009), with
permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

careful consideration of risks and benefits (Porsteinsson et al., 2014).
The combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine is another potential
treatment, which appears to be well tolerated (Ballard et al., 2015).

Antipsychotics Despite their widespread use, robust evidence for the
efficacy of antipsychotics in the behavioural problems associated with
dementia is limited to the short-term (6--12 weeks) treatment of
aggression (Seitz et al., 2013). They can often be withdrawn without any
deterioration in behavioural problems. Moreover, their limited benefits
must be set against the significant risk of extrapyramidal side effects,
postural hypotension, tardive dyskinesia, metabolic syndrome, and the
many other side effects of antipsychotics to which the elderly are prone
(Schneider et al., 2006). The increasing concern about the use of
antipsychotics in dementia is enhanced by three other serious potential
risks.

These concerns apply to atypical and typical antipsychotics. In
consequence, current UK guidelines recommend that antipsychotics should
not be used in dementia unless the patient's problems are severe,
associated with either psychotic symptoms or serious distress, or the
behaviour poses a danger of physical harm. Comparable warnings and
restrictions are also in force elsewhere, and have led to a fall in
prescribing rates (Kales et al., 2011). However, many older people,
especially those in nursing homes, continue to be prescribed these drugs
(Shah et al., 2011). Antipsychotics should be used rarely, if ever, in
dementia with Lewy bodies. Assessment for vascular risk factors is
advised because of the risk of stroke. As older people are more
sensitive to antipsychotics, treatment should always start with a low
dose, which is increased slowly, and the effects should be monitored
regularly (Uchida et al., 2009). The choice of antipsychotic should be
based on the side effect risk profile, with particular attention to
extrapyramidal and anticholinergic effects and sedation.

Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine These drugs were developed to
treat the cognitive symptoms of Alzheimer's disease. They are used to
treat behavioural problems and psychological symptoms of dementia, too,
in part because of the increasing concern about antipsychotics. However,
they have limited efficacy against these aspects of dementia. A recent
meta-analysis was inconclusive (Rodda et al., 2009), and they are not
recommended for routine clinical practice (Ballard and Corbett, 2013),
although they do have a role in behavioural disturbances occurring in
dementia with Lewy bodies (Stinton et al., 2015).

Other drugs A range of other drugs are also used, as illustrated in Box
19.6, based upon limited evidence. For depression in dementia,
antidepressants show equivocal efficacy (Modrego, 2010).

59

Treatment of dementia

Drug treatment of Alzheimer's disease Treatment of behavioural and
cognitive symptoms continues to be the most important element of therapy
of dementia. However, pharmacological treatment of Alzheimer's disease
itself is now available using cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine,
and a range of other drugs are under investigation. For clinical
practice guidelines for the use of antidementia drugs, see O'Brien et
al. (2017).

Cholinesterase inhibitors A loss of acetylcholine was the first
neurochemical abnormality of Alzheimer's disease to be discovered, and
led to the development of cholinesterase inhibitors as the first
effective treatments for the disease. They now have an important role in
clinical practice, and their discovery was responsible for bringing a
new therapeutic optimism to old age psychiatry. They work by decreasing
the enzymatic breakdown of acetylcholine and thus increase its
availability at the synapse; some of the drugs may also enhance activity
at nicotinic cholinergic receptors. However, their efficacy is limited,
they do not alter the disease process, and the magnitude of their
clinical benefit, as well as their cost-effectiveness, has been
controversial, reflected in the UK by shifts in their availability
within the NHS (see below). The first cholinesterase inhibitor was
tacrine, but its use was limited by hepatotoxicity. The drugs currently
available are donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine. All of these are
approved for use in mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease, based upon
trial data showing beneficial effects, relative to placebo, on cognitive
function (usually measured on the cognitive portion of the Alzheimer's
Disease Assessment Scale, ADAS-Cog) and on global functioning (assessed
with the Clinician InterviewBased Impression of Change scale with carer
input, CIBIC-Plus). The size of the effect is relatively modest--- for
example, benefits of about 3 points on the ADAS-Cog (range of scores,
0--70), and 0.4 on the CIBIC-Plus (range of scores, 1--7). As disease
progression averages about 7 points on the ADAS-Cog per year,
cholinesterase inhibitors may be viewed as delaying progression by about
6 months. In other words, the drugs roughly double the likelihood of a
patient improving by 4 ADAS-Cog points. The efficacy of the three drugs
is similar. Given the inexorable progression of dementia, and the
limitations of rating scales alone, an alternative and attractive way to
view medication efficacy is in terms of whether it reduces the
percentage of patients

who 'clinically deteriorate'. Clinical deterioration can be defined as
cognitive decline, plus a decline in activities of daily living, plus a
decline in global functioning. Using these criteria, donepezil
significantly reduces clinical worsening (from 30% on placebo to 14% on
donepezil) over a 24-week period, with a greater proportional benefit
among patients with milder dementia (MMSE \>18, from 21% to 7%)
(Wilkinson et al., 2009). Side effects of cholinesterase inhibitors are
common and can be troublesome. They include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
muscle cramps, insomnia, bradycardia, syncope, and fatigue. Their
occurrence can be reduced by starting with a low dose, taking the drug
with meals, and increasing the dose slowly. If a patient does not
respond to, or cannot tolerate, a cholinesterase inhibitor, a trial of a
different one is worthwhile (O'Brien et al., 2017). Current UK practice
is that treatment with a cholinesterase inhibitor should be instituted
in memory clinics by a specialist, following a formal assessment of the
patient, from which the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is made, and
its severity established as mild or moderate, using the MMSE and other
cognitive scales. The response should be assessed 2--4 months later, and
the drug continued only if the MMSE score has not declined, together
with evidence of global or behavioural improvement. In those who show
this initial response, the drug should continue as long as the MMSE
score remains above 12, taking into account the patient's overall
condition and global functioning. However, the benefits of treatment may
continue beyond that point (Howard et al., 2012). Decisions to stop
medication are also complicated by some evidence that this is followed
by an accelerated cognitive decline, such that within months the patient
returns to the expected level of functioning had treatment never been
given.

Memantine Memantine is an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate
receptor antagonist. The rationale for its use in Alzheimer's disease is
that neurotoxicity mediated via the NMDA receptor might contribute to
the disease process (Danysz and Parsons, 2012). Randomized controlled
trials have shown that memantine benefits cognition and function in
moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease; its efficacy is modest, but it
is better tolerated than cholinesterase inhibitors (Matsunaga et al.,
2015a). Applying the concept of clinical worsening mentioned with regard
to cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine significantly reduces the risk
compared with placebo (11% versus 21%) (Wilkinson

559

560

560

Chapter 19 Psychiatry of the elderly and Andersen, 2007). Combining
memantine and a cholinesterase inhibitor has equivocal benefits and is
not currently recommended (Howard et al., 2012; Matsunaga et al.,
2015b). In the NHS, memantine can be prescribed for patients with severe
Alzheimer's disease, and for those with moderate Alzheimer's disease who
cannot tolerate cholinesterase inhibitors.

Drug treatment of other dementias

Other drugs

Vascular dementia

As discussed in Chapter 14, exposure to hormone replacement therapy,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and statins have all been
associated with lower rates of Alzheimer's disease. Each of these drug
classes has therefore been used to treat the condition, but without
benefit. Vitamin E has uncertain efficacy. None of these drugs are
recommended for clinical practice (O'Brien et al., 2017). Extracts from
the leaves of the maidenhair tree, Ginkgo biloba, have long been used in
China as a remedy for various diseases. A recent meta-analysis suggests
some efficacy, and it is well tolerated (Tan et al., 2015).

There have been few randomized trials of treatment for vascular
dementia. Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine are of little benefit
and they are not recommended for use. Similarly, there are insufficient
data to support routine use of the calcium channel blockers,
cerebrolysin, or huperzine A (a natural cholinesterase inhibitor derived
from a Chinese herb). Currently, treatment of vascular dementia remains
limited to control of the cardiovascular risk factors, such as
cholesterol and blood pressure, that are thought to underlie the
condition. However, there is no good evidence that this is effective at
preventing onset of dementia. For a review of management of vascular
dementia, see O'Brien and Thomas (2015).

Novel treatment approaches Treatments currently under development for
Alzheimer's disease are intended to modify the disease process, and
thereby produce greater and more persistent benefits than the drugs that
are being used at present. The evidence that Î²-amyloid is central to the
Alzheimer's disease process (see Box 14.11) has led to this molecule and
its biochemical pathways being the key treatment targets of current
research. Three main approaches are being used: â

Drugs to inhibit the enzymes (secretases) by which Î²amyloid is formed
from its precursor molecule.

â

Drugs to prevent aggregation of Î²-amyloid.

â

Immunization strategies that target Î²-amyloid.

The other main therapeutic target is tau and its phosphorylation (Iqbal
et al., 2016; see page 000); there is also emerging interest in novel
types of antiinflammatory therapies (Heppner et al., 2015). To date,
none of these strategies have produced clear positive results in
clinical trials; one reason may be that the trials need to be carried
out in patients at an earlier, ideally presymptomatic, phase of the
illness (Langbaum et al., 2013). For review of current treatment
research in Alzheimer's disease, see Anand et al. (2014) and Scheltens
et al.Â (2016).

There are no drugs currently licensed for any other common dementia.
However, several of the approaches that are being used in Alzheimer's
disease are also being applied in these disorders, and some are
mentioned in dementia treatment guidelines (O'Brien et al., 2017).

Dementia with Lewy bodies Cholinesterase inhibitors have moderate
effectiveness in dementia with Lewy bodies and in Parkinson's disease
dementia (Wang et al., 2015). The evidence is strongest for
rivastigmine, which also has some beneficial effects on behavioural
symptoms. This is valuable given the toxicity of antipsychotic drugs in
this patient group. Memantine is minimally effective. For a review, see
Stinton et al.Â (2015).

Other dementias In frontotemporal dementia, no treatments have been
shown to improve cognition or behavioural symptoms; cholinesterase
inhibitors are not effective and may worsen the behavioural symptoms
(Bang et al., 2015). No treatments are known for the dementia of
Huntington's disease, although a range of drug interventions for its
psychiatric and motor components are available (Videnovic, 2013).
Finally, despite much interest in delaying the onset of dementia, there
are no drug treatments effective for mild cognitive impairment (Cooper
et al., 2013), but aerobic exercise, mental activity, and reduction of
cardiovascular risk factors are recommended (Langa and Levine, 2014).

561

Further reading

Further reading Dening T and Thomas A (2013). Oxford Textbook of Old Age
Psychiatry, 2nd edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Gelder MG et al.Â (eds) (2009). Section 8: The psychiatry of old age. In:
The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

561

562

563

CHAPTER 20

The misuse of alcohol and drugs Introduction 563

Alcohol-related disorders 566

Classification of substance use disorders 563

Other substance use disorders 586

Introduction The presentation of alcohol and drug misuse is not limited
to any particular psychiatric or indeed medical specialty. Alcohol and
drug use may play an important part in all aspects of psychiatric
practice, and is relevant, for example, to the assessment of a patient
with acute confusion on a medical ward, a suicidal patient in the
accident and emergency department, an elderly patient whose self-care
has deteriorated, a troubled adolescent, or a disturbed child who may be
inhaling volatile substances.

The phrases 'substance use disorders' (DSM-5) or 'disorders due to
psychoactive drug use' (ICD-10) are used to refer to conditions arising
from the misuse of alcohol, psychoactive drugs, or other chemicals such
as volatile substances. In this chapter, problems related to alcohol
will be discussed first under the general heading of alcohol use
disorders. Problems related to drugs and other chemicals will then be
discussed under the general heading of other substance use disorders.

Classification of substance use disorders The two classification
systems, DSM-5 and ICD-10, use broadly similar categories for substance
use disorders, but group them in different ways. Both schemes recognize
intoxication and withdrawal states. ICD-10 has separate categories for
'harmful use' and 'dependence'. In contrast, DSM-5 has a single category
of 'use disorder', which is rated on a continuum from mild to severe
depending on the number of features present; there is therefore no
separate category for 'drug dependence'. ICD-10 also recognizes
drug-induced psychotic states and amnestic states, while in DSM-5 these
are coded with the psychiatric disorders with which they share
phenomenology; thus an alcohol-induced psychotic disorder would be
classified under 'Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders'.
These and some additional categories are shown in Table 20.1.

In both diagnostic systems the first step in classification is to
specify the substance or class of substance that is involved (see Table
20.2); this provides the primary diagnostic category. Although many drug
users take more than one kind of drug, the diagnosis of the disorder is
made on the basis of the most important substance used. Where this
judgement is difficult or where use is chaotic and indiscriminate,
ICD-10 has a category, 'disorder due to multiple drug use', which may be
employed. Then the relevant disorder listed in Table 20.1 is added to
the substance misused. In this system any kind of disorder can, in
principle, be attached to any drug, although in practice certain
disorders do not develop with individual drugs; for example,
hallucinogens do not have a recognized withdrawal syndrome.

564

564

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs

Table 20.1 Substance-related disorders

Table 20.2 Classes of substances

DSM-5

ICD-10

DSM-5

ICD-10\*

Intoxication

Intoxication

Alcohol

Alcohol

Use disorder

Harmful use

Stimulants

Other stimulants, including caffeine

Dependence syndrome Withdrawal

Withdrawal state

Delirium\*

Withdrawal state with delirium

Psychotic disorders\*

Psychotic disorder

Neurocognitive disorder *Amnestic disorder*

Amnestic syndrome

Mood disorders\*

Residual and late-onset psychotic disorder

Anxiety disorders\*

Other mental and behavioural disorders

Sexual dysfunctions *Sleep disorders* \*Classified under related
psychiatric disorder Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of
mental and behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic
guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013),
American Psychiatric Association.

ICD-10 also has a specific category, 'residual and lateonset psychotic
disorder', which describes physiological or psychological changes that
occur when a drug is taken but then persist beyond the period during
which a direct effect of the substance would reasonably be expected to
be operating. Such categories might include 'hallucinogeninduced
flashbacks' and 'alcohol-related dementia'.

Definitions in DSM-5 and ICD-10 Intoxication Both DSM-5 and ICD-10
provide definitions of intoxication. In both systems, intoxication is
considered to be a transient syndrome due to recent substance ingestion
that produces clinically significant psychological and physical
impairment. These changes disappear when the substance is eliminated
from the body. The nature of the psychological changes varies with the
individual as well as with the drug---for example, some people when
intoxicated with alcohol become aggressive, while others become maudlin.

Caffeine Cannabis

Cannabinoids

Cocaine

Cocaine

Hallucinogens (phencyclidine and other)

Hallucinogens

Inhalants

Volatile solvents

Tobacco

Tobacco

Opioids

Opioids

Sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics

Sedatives or hypnotics

Other

Multiple drug use

- The order of entries in the classification has been amended to show
  parallels with DSM-5. Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of
  mental and behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic
  guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic
  and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright
  (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

Use disorder, harmful use, and dependence The terms 'use disorder' in
DSM-5 and 'harmful use' in ICD-10 refer to maladaptive patterns of
substance use that impair health in a broad sense. As noted above in
ICD-10 there is a distinction between 'harmful use' and the more serious
condition of 'dependence', whereas in DSM-5 the concept of 'use
disorder' covers the range of severity of substance use. The latter
includes features associated with drug dependence in ICD-10, such as the
experience of 'pharmacological tolerance' and 'withdrawal', a 'sense of
compulsion to take the substance' and 'neglect of alternative goals and
interests' (Table 20.3 and Box 20.1). Thus in ICD-10 it is possible to
meet criteria for harmful use without meeting those for dependence, but
the presence of dependence always implies harmful use.

Tolerance This is a state in which, after repeated administration, a
drug produces a decreased effect, or increasing doses are required to
produce the same effect.

56

Classification of substance use disorders

Table 20.3 Criteria for harmful use and dependence (ICD-10) Harmful use

Dependence

A. A pattern of psychoactive substance use A. Diagnosis of dependence
should be made if three or more of the following that is causing damage
to health; the have been experienced or exhibited at some time during
the last year: damage may be to physical or mental health (1) A strong
desire or sense of compulsion to take the substance (2) Difficulties in
controlling substance-taking behaviour in terms of its onset,
termination, or levels of use (3) Physiological withdrawal state when
substance use has ceased or been reduced, as evidenced by either of the
following: the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the substance, or
use of the same (or closely related) substance with the intention of
relieving or avoiding withdrawal symptoms (4) Evidence of tolerance,
such that increased doses of the psychoactive substance are required to
achieve effects originally produced by lower doses (5) Progressive
neglect of alternative pleasures or interests because of psychoactive
substance use and increased amount of time necessary to obtain or take
the substance or to recover from its effects (6) Persisting with
substance use despite clear evidence of overtly harmful consequences
(physical or mental) Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of
mental and behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic
guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health Organization.

Withdrawal state This refers to a group of symptoms and signs that occur
when a drug is reduced in amount or withdrawn, which last for a limited
time. The nature of the withdrawal

state is related to the class of substance used. Sometimes the
pharmacological properties of substances allow for cross-tolerance; for
example, benzodiazepines can be used to stave off alcohol dependence.

Box 20.1 Substance use disorder in DSM-5 DSM-5 captures all the symptoms
associated with harmful use and dependence in ICD-10. However, there is
no separate category for 'dependence' in DSM-5 and the extent of the
substance use disorder is decided by the number of symptoms endorsed out
of a total of 11 (mild, 2--3 symptoms; moderate, 4--5 symptoms; severe,
6 or more symptoms). The symptoms cover the following areas: â Use of
the substance in greater amounts and for longer than was initially
intended, with concomitant problems in cutting down use, often
associated with craving. â The substance and the energies needed to
obtain it gradually take over more and more of the person's life

despite the harm this causes to other interests, roles, activities, and
relationships. â Substance use continues despite knowledge of the harm
being done to the physical and psychological health of the person. This
can include the physical safety of the person and/or that of others to
whom the person owes responsibility. â The presence of pharmacological
tolerance and withdrawal symptoms. Source: data from Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013),
American Psychiatric Association.

565

56

566

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs

Alcohol-related disorders Terminology Alcoholism. In the past, the term
alcoholism was generally used in medical writing. Although the word is
still widely used in everyday language, it is unsatisfactory as a
technical term because it has more than one meaning. It can be applied
to habitual alcohol consumption that is deemed excessive in amount
according to some arbitrary criterion, and it may also refer to damage,
whether mental, physical, or social, resulting from such excessive
consumption. In a more specialized sense, alcoholism may imply a
specific disease entity that is supposed to require medical treatment.
However, to speak of an alcoholic often has a pejorative meaning,
suggesting behaviour that is morally bad. For most purposes it is better
to use four terms that relate to the ICD-10 classification outlined
above. 1. Excessive consumption of alcohol. This refers to a daily or
weekly intake of alcohol that exceeds a specified amount (see below).
Excessive consumption of alcohol is also known as hazardous drinking.
Harmful drinking is a term used to describe levels of hazardous drinking
at which damage to health is very likely. 2. Alcohol misuse. This refers
to drinking that causes mental, physical, or social harm to an
individual. However, it does not include those with formal alcohol
dependence. 3. Alcohol dependence. This term can be used when the
criteria for a dependence syndrome listed in Table 20.3 are met. 4.
Problem drinking. This term is applied to those in whom drinking has
caused an alcohol-related disorder or disability. Its meaning is
essentially similar to alcohol misuse, but it can also include drinkers
who are dependent on alcohol. At this point it is appropriate to examine
the moral and medical models of alcohol misuse.

The moral and medical models According to the moral model, if people
drink too much, they do so of their own free will, and if their drinking
causes harm to them or their family, their actions are morally bad. The
corollary of this attitude is that public drunkenness and associated
criminal activity should be punished. In many countries this is the
official practice; public drunks are fined, and if they cannot pay the
fine they go to prison. Many people now believe that this approach is
too harsh and unsympathetic. Whatever

the humanitarian arguments, there is little practical justification for
punishment, since there is little evidence that it influences the
behaviour of dependent drinkers. However, it is possible that social
disapproval could play a role in dissuading non-dependent drinkers from
excessive consumption. According to the medical model, a person who
misuses alcohol is ill rather than wicked. Although it had been proposed
earlier, this idea was not strongly advocated until 1960, when the
physiologist and alcohol researcher, E. Morton Jellinek (1890--1963),
published an influential book, The Disease Concept of Alcoholism. The
disease concept embodies three basic ideas. 1. Some people have a
specific vulnerability to alcohol misuse. 2. Excessive drinking
progresses through well-defined stages, at one of which the person can
no longer control their drinking. 3. Excessive drinking may lead to
physical and mental disease of several kinds. One of the main
consequences of the disease model is that attitudes towards excessive
drinking become more humane. Instead of blame and punishment, medical
treatment is provided. The disease model also has certain disadvantages.
By implying that only certain people are at risk, it diverts attention
from some important facts. First, anyone who drinks regularly for a long
time may become dependent on alcohol. Secondly, the best way to curtail
the misuse of alcohol may be to limit consumption in the whole
population, and not just among a predisposed minority. Thirdly, it may
suggest that excessive drinking, at least initially, is not a product of
a personal choice. Perhaps a useful way to resolve these two approaches
is to apply the moral model to excessive drinking in the population in
the hope of decreasing the number of people who put themselves at risk
of alcohol-related disability. However, once dependence has occurred,
with its attendant loss of control over drinking, a medical approach may
be more appropriate.

Excessive alcohol consumption In many societies the use of alcohol is
sanctioned and even encouraged by sophisticated marketing techniques.
Therefore the level of drinking at which an individual is considered to
demonstrate excessive alcohol consumption is a somewhat arbitrary
concept,

576

Alcohol-related disorders which is usually defined in terms of the level
of use associated with significant risk of alcohol-related health and
social problems. It is usually expressed in units of alcohol consumed
per week. For example, in the UK, government advice published in 2015
suggests that men and women should not regularly drink more than 14
units a week and that those drinking towards the higher end of this
range should spread their drinking over 3 days or more. These limits are
lower than those previously recommended (3--4 units a day for men and
2--3 units a day for women). If the concept of excessive alcohol
consumption is to be understood and accepted, it is necessary to explain
the units in which it is assessed. In everyday life, this is done by
referring to conventional measures such as pints of beer or glasses of
wine. These measures have the advantage of being widely understood, but
they are imprecise because both beers and wines vary in strength (see
Table 20.4). Alternatively, consumption can be measured as the amount of
alcohol (expressed in grams). This

measure is precise and useful for scientific work, but is difficult for
many people to relate to everyday measures. For this reason, the concept
of a unit of alcohol has been introduced for use in health education. A
unit can be related to everyday measures because it corresponds to half
a pint of beer, one moderately-sized glass of table wine, one
conventional glass of sherry or port, and one single bar measure of
spirits. It can also be related to average amounts of alcohol (see Table
20.4). Thus on this measure a can of beer (450 ml) contains nearly 1.5
units, a bottle of table wine contains about 12 units, a bottle of
spirits contains about 30 units, and 1 unit is about 8 g of alcohol. The
increase in strength of wine and beer over the past two decades has made
many of these calculations difficult. Wine sold in the UK now contains
an average of 12--14% alcohol, and sometimes more. To compound matters,
the size of wine glass used in most restaurants has increased from 125
ml to 175 ml, so that an average serving in a restaurant or public house
is equivalent to a minimum of 2 units.

Table 20.4 Alcohol content of some beverages Beverage

Approximate alcohol content (%)

Grams of alcohol per conventional measure

Units of alcohol per conventional measure (approximate)

3

16 per pint

2 per pint

12 per can

1.5 per can

32 per pint

4 per pint

24 per can

3 per can

40 per pint

5 per pint

32 per can

4 per can

Beer and cider Ordinary beer

Strong beer

Extra-strong beer

5.5

7

Cider

4

24 per pint

3 per pint

Strong cider

6

32 per pint

4 per pint

10--14

10 per glass

1.5 per glass

70 per bottle

12 per bottle

Wine and spirits Table wine

Fortified wines (sherry, port, vermouth)

13--16

8 per measure 120 per bottle

1 per measure 15 per bottle

Spirits (whisky, gin, brandy, vodka)

32--40

8--12 per single measure 240 per bottle

1--1.5 per measure\* 30 per bottle

- Somewhat larger measures are used in Scotland and Northern Ireland (12
  grams).

567

568

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs

Epidemiological aspects of excessive drinking and alcohol misuse
Epidemiological methods can be applied to the following questions
concerning excessive drinking and alcohol misuse. 1. What is the annual
per capita consumption of alcohol for a nation as a whole, and how does
this vary over the years and between nations? 2. What is the pattern of
alcohol use of different groups of people within a defined population?
3. How many people in a defined population misuse alcohol? 4. How does
alcohol misuse vary with such characteristics as gender, age,
occupation, social class, and marital status? Unfortunately, we lack
reliable answers to these questions, partly because different
investigators have used different methods of defining and identifying
alcohol misuse and 'alcoholism', and partly because excessive drinkers
tend to be evasive about the amount that they drink and the symptoms
that they experience.

Consumption of alcohol in different countries and at different times In
the UK, the annual consumption of alcohol per adult (calculated as
absolute ethanol consumption) doubled

between 1960 and 2000, rising from about 4 litres to over 8 litres.
Consumption in western Europe has generally been higher than this,
particularly in France and Luxembourg. High levels of consumption are
also seen in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, while in the
Eastern Mediterranean and in Muslim countries consumption is much less.
Recent changes in the UK can be usefully considered in a historical
perspective. For example, in Great Britain, between 1860 and 1900 the
annual consumption of alcohol was about 10 litres of absolute alcohol
per head of population over 15 years of age. It then fell until the
early 1930s, reaching about 4 litres per person over 15 years of age per
annum. Consumption then increased slowly until the 1950s, when it began
to rise more rapidly, reaching a peak in about 2005. Over the past few
years there has been a small but continuing drop in annual consumption;
however, the average annual amount drunk in 2014 was still about twice
what it was in the 1950s (see Figure 20.1).

Drinking habits in different groups Surveys of drinking behaviour
generally depend on self-reports, a method that is open to obvious
errors. Enquiries of this kind have been conducted in several countries,
including the UK and the USA. Such studies show that the highest
reported consumption of alcohol is generally among young men who are
unmarried,

10 Consumption (litres of 100% alcohol per head)

568

8

6

4

2

0 1950

1960

1970

1980 Year

1990

Figure 20.1 Average annual consumption of alcohol in the UK between 1947
and 2009. Source: data from BBPA Statistical Handbook, Copyright (2010),
British Beer and Pub Association.

2000

569

Alcohol-related disorders separated, or divorced. However, over the past
15 years drinking by women has increased. Based on population estimates
in 2013 in the UK, 15% of men and 20% of women had drunk no alcohol in
the past year, while just over 60% drank at levels with low risk of
harm. The remainder---that is about a quarter of the adult
population---drank at levels that could be considered to represent
harmful use. In 2013 about 40% of school pupils aged 7--11 said that
they had drunk alcohol at least once; this figure is less than that
reported in 2003 (61%) (Health and Social Care Information Centre,
2015).

The prevalence of alcohol misuse This can be estimated in three
ways---from hospital admission rates, from deaths from alcoholic
cirrhosis, and by surveys of the general population.

Hospital admission rates These give an inadequate measure of prevalence,
because a large proportion of excessive drinkers are not admitted to
hospital. â

â

In the UK during the period 2012--2013 there were just over 1,000,000
hospital admissions where an alcohol-related disease, injury, or
condition was the primary reason for hospital admission or a secondary
diagnosis. In the UK in 2012 there were over 6000 deaths directly
related to alcohol use (see Alcohol Concern, 2016).

Deaths from alcoholic cirrhosis About 10--20% of people who drink
alcohol excessively develop cirrhosis of the liver, and there are
correlations in a population between rates of liver cirrhosis and mean
alcohol consumption. Therefore deaths from cirrhosis can be used as a
means of estimating rates of alcohol misuse. For example, in the UK in
2012, over 60% of deaths directly related to alcohol were caused by
cirrhosis. UK deaths from cirrhosis have risen 20% over the past 10
years while declining in many other European countries (Alcohol Concern,
2016).

General population surveys One method of ascertaining the rate of
alcohol misuse in a population is by seeking information from general
practitioners, social workers, probation officers, health visitors, and
other agencies who are likely to come into contact with heavy drinkers.
Another approach is the community survey, in which samples of people are
asked about the amount they drink and whether they experience symptoms.
For example, the National Survey Comorbidity Replication in the USA
found a 1-year

prevalence rate for DSM-IV alcohol abuse of 3.1%, while the prevalence
of alcohol dependence was 1.3% (Kessler et al., 2005b). A more recent
USA population study using the more liberal 'alcohol use disorder'
criteria of DSM-5 found a 1-year prevalence of 13.9% (Grant et al.,
2015). The Psychiatric Morbidity Survey in England, reporting 6-month
prevalences, classified 24% of adults living in households as hazardous
drinkers, and 6% as alcoholdependent (although 5% of these individuals
were classified as having 'mild' dependence) (McManus et al., 2009).
Over time there are significant individual fluctuations in alcohol
consumption, with a substantial proportion of people moving from
hazardous drinking towards safer drinking, while others move into the
hazardous drinking category. Surveys based on households are likely to
miss certain groups at high risk of alcohol misuse and dependence. The
British Psychiatric Morbidity Survey sampled separately from homeless
populations and from those in institutions such as prisons. Among people
living in night shelters or sleeping rough, 40% were found to drink more
than 50 units of alcohol a week, and about 35% of those sleeping rough
were estimated to have severe alcohol dependence (Gill et al., 1996).

Alcohol misuse and population characteristics Gender Rates of alcohol
misuse and dependence are consistently higher in men than in women, but
the ratio of affected men to women varies markedly across cultures. In
western countries, about three times as many men as women suffer from
alcohol misuse and dependence, but in Asian and Hispanic cultures a
higher ratio of men to women are affected. In the Psychiatric Morbidity
Survey in England the rate of hazardous drinking among white men (36%)
was more than twice as high as that among white women (16%), while the
rate among South Asian men (12%) was four times higher than that among
South Asian women (3%) (McManus et al., 2009). However, perhaps because
of changing social attitudes, the gap between men and women with regard
to excessive drinking seems to be narrowing in many western countries.
This is of concern because studies indicate that women are more
susceptible than men to many of the damaging effects of alcohol (see
below).

Age Early use of alcohol is an important determinant of later use. A
cross-sectional survey of over 10,000 US adolescents showed that 15.1%
met criteria for lifetime abuse of alcohol with the median age at onset
of 14 years (Swendsen et al., 2012). We have seen that the heaviest

569

570

570

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs drinkers are men in their
late teens or early twenties. In most cultures the prevalence of alcohol
misuse and dependence is lower in those aged over 45 years.

Religion, culture, and ethnicity The followers of certain religions
which proscribe alcohol (e.g.Â Islam, Hinduism, and the Baptist Church)
are less likely than the general population to misuse alcohol. It is
also worth noting that the non-Caucasian population in the UK and the
USA are less likely to drink excessively than the Caucasian population,
and therefore have a lower rate of alcohol-related disorders. In some
instances, the low consumption of alcohol in a particular ethnic group
may be due to a biologically determined lack of tolerance to alcohol.
For example, some Asian populations with a particular variant of the
isoenzyme of aldehyde dehydrogenase experience flushing, nausea, and
tachycardia owing to accumulation of acetaldehyde when they drink
alcohol. Such individuals are likely to be at reduced risk of excess
drinking and the consequent development of alcohol-related disorders
(Hurley and Edenberg, 2012).

Occupation The risk of alcohol misuse is much increased among several
occupational groups. These include chefs, kitchen porters, bar workers,
and brewery workers, who have easy access to alcohol, executives and
salesmen who entertain on expense accounts, actors and entertainers,
seamen, and journalists. Doctors have been said to have an increased
risk of harmful drinking, but whether this is in fact the case has been
questioned. However, doctors do have higher rates of prescription drug
misuse, and treatment programmes for both this problem and
alcohol-related disorders may be difficult to institute (Marshall,
2008).

Alcohol dependence and alcohol withdrawal Patients are described as
alcohol-dependent when they meet the ICD-10 criteria for dependence
described in Table 20.3. The presence of withdrawal phenomena is not
necessary for the diagnosis of dependence, and a substantial minority of
individuals who meet the dependence criteria do not experience any
withdrawal phenomena when their intake of alcohol decreases or stops.
However, about 5% of dependent individuals experience severe withdrawal
symptomatology, including delirium tremens and grand mal seizures.

Course of alcohol misuse and dependence Vaillant (2003) described a
60-year follow-up of 194 men who had exhibited misuse of alcohol at some
point

in their adult life. By the age of 70 years, over 50% of the cohort had
died and about 20% were abstinent. Around 10% were drinking in a
controlled way, while a further 10% continued to misuse alcohol. In a
number of individuals alcohol misuse had apparently persisted for
decades without remission, death, or progression to formal dependence.
However, for alcohol-dependent men, periods of controlled drinking were
invariably followed by a return to a pattern of alcohol dependence.
Attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous was the best predictor of good
outcome. This study suggests that the prognosis of alcohol misuse is
very variable. However, once an individual has become alcohol-dependent
the prognosis is poor unless abstinence can be maintained. Trim et
al.Â (2013) carried out a follow-up study of 129 men aged between 28 and
33 years, who were diagnosed initially with an alcohol use disorder.
Over the next 20 years, 60% of the sample showed remission at some point
and in 45% the remission was sustained. Predictors of a good response
included a diagnosis of alcohol misuse rather than dependence as well as
a lower drinking frequency and the receipt of a structured treatment for
the alcohol problem soon after the onset of the disorder. This supports
the view that a diagnosis of alcohol dependence carries a poor
prognosis, and also suggests a longer-term benefit for specific
treatment early in the course of the condition.

The alcohol withdrawal syndrome Withdrawal symptoms occur across a
spectrum of severity, ranging from mild anxiety and sleep disturbance to
the life-threatening state known as delirium tremens, a specific form of
delirium (Chapter 14) that is described further below. The symptoms
generally occur in people who have been drinking heavily for years and
who maintain a high intake of alcohol for weeks at a time. The symptoms
follow a drop in blood alcohol concentration. They characteristically
appear on waking, after the fall in concentration has occurred during
sleep. Dependent drinkers often take a drink on waking to stave off
withdrawal symptoms. In most cultures, early-morning drinking is
diagnostic of dependency. With the increasing need to stave off
withdrawal symptoms during the day, the drinker typically becomes
secretive about the amount consumed, hides bottles, or carries them in a
pocket. Rough cider and cheap strong beers may be drunk regularly to
obtain the most alcohol for the minimum cost. The earliest and commonest
feature of alcohol withdrawal is acute tremulousness affecting the
hands, legs, and trunk ('the shakes'). The sufferer may be unable to sit
still, hold a cup steady, or fasten buttons. They are

571

Alcohol-related disorders also agitated and easily startled, and often
dread facing people or crossing the road. Nausea, retching, and sweating
are frequent. Insomnia is also common. If alcohol is taken, these
symptoms may be relieved quickly; otherwise they may last for several
days (see Box 20.2). As withdrawal progresses, misperceptions and
hallucinations may occur, usually only briefly. Objects appear distorted
in shape, or shadows seem to move; disorganized voices, shouting, or
snatches of music may be heard. Later there may be epileptic seizures,
and finally, after about 48 hours, delirium tremens may develop.

Other alcohol-related disorders The different types of
damage---physical, psychological, and social---that can result from
alcohol misuse are described in this section. A person who suffers from
these disabilities may or may not be suffering from alcohol dependence
but will certainly meet criteria for harmful use (ICD-10) or alcohol use
disorder (DSM-5).

Physical damage Excessive consumption of alcohol may lead to physical
damage in several ways. First, it can have a direct toxic effect on
certain tissues, notably the brain and liver. Secondly, it is often
accompanied by poor diet, which may lead to deficiency of protein and B
vitamins. Thirdly, it increases the risk of accidents, particularly head
injury. Fourthly, it is accompanied by general neglect, which can lead
to increased susceptibility to infection.

Gastrointestinal disorders Gastrointestinal disorders are common,
notably liver damage, gastritis, peptic ulcer, oesophageal varices, and
acute and chronic pancreatitis. Damage to the liver, including fatty
infiltration, hepatitis, cirrhosis, and

Box 20.2 Symptoms and signs of acute alcohol withdrawal Anxiety,
agitation, and insomnia Tachycardia and sweating Tremor of limbs,
tongue, and eyelids Nausea and vomiting Seizures Confusion and
hallucinations Reproduced from British Medical Journal, 330(7483),
Ritson B, Treatment for alcohol-related problems, pp.Â 139--41, Copyright
(2005), with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

hepatoma, is particularly important and is occurring at younger ages.
For a person who is dependent on alcohol, the risk of dying from liver
cirrhosis is almost 10 times greater than the average. However, only
about 10--20% of alcohol-dependent people develop cirrhosis.

Nervous system Alcohol also damages the nervous system. Neuropsychiatric
complications are described later; other neurological conditions include
peripheral neuropathy, epilepsy, and cerebellar degeneration. The last
of these is characterized by unsteadiness of stance and gait, with less
effect on arm movements or speech. Rare complications are optic atrophy,
central pontine myelinolysis, and Marchiafava--Bignami syndrome. The
latter condition results from widespread demyelination of the corpus
callosum, optic tracts, and cerebellar peduncles. Its main features are
dysarthria, ataxia, epilepsy, and marked impairment of consciousness; in
the more prolonged forms, dementia and limb paralysis occur. Head injury
is also common in alcohol-dependent people.

Cardiovascular system and other general medical conditions Alcohol
misuse is associated with hypertension and increased risk of stroke.
Paradoxically, low to moderate alcohol consumption (up to about 10 units
a week) appears to have modest cardiovascular protective effects
(O'Keefe et al., 2014). Alcohol use, even at low levels, has been linked
to the development of certain cancers, notably of the mouth, pharynx,
oesophagus, liver, and breast. Other physical complications of excessive
consumption of alcohol are too numerous to detail here. Examples include
anaemia, myopathy, episodic hypoglycaemia, haemochromatosis,
cardiomyopathy, vitamin deficiencies, and tuberculosis. They are
described in textbooks of medicine, such as the Oxford Textbook of
Medicine (Warrell et al., 2010).

Alcohol misuse in women Studies suggest that women progress more rapidly
than men to problem drinking, and tend to suffer the medical
consequences of alcohol use after a shorter period of exposure to a
smaller amount of alcohol. As well as the expected medical complications
noted above, female drinkers also show elevated rates of breast cancer
and reproductive pathology, including amenorrhoea, anovulation, and
possibly early menopause.

Damage to the fetus There is evidence that drinking alcohol in pregnancy
can lead to a number of fetal abnormalities estimated to

571

572

572

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs affect around 2% of people in
high income countries, of which fetal alcohol syndrome is the most
severe. This consists of a syndrome of facial abnormality, small
stature, low birth weight, low intelligence, and overactivity. Fetal
alcohol syndrome is associated with clearly excessive alcohol use during
pregnancy. However, subsequent research has suggested that even moderate
or low levels of alcohol consumption at this time can have adverse
effects on childhood behavioural, cognitive, and physical development,
and the 'safe limit' for alcohol consumption during pregnancy (if such a
level exists) is not known. Current advice from the UK Department of
Health is that women should avoid alcohol during pregnancy. For a review
of the prevalence and characteristics of fetal alcohol syndrome, see May
et al.Â (2014).

Mortality People with a low level of alcohol consumption (about 1 unit
daily) have decreased mortality rates compared with non-drinkers;
however, it has been suggested that this apparently protective effect is
mainly attributable to confounding lifestyle factors (Knott et al.,
2015). Not surprisingly, however, the mortality rate is increased in
those who misuse alcohol. Follow-up investigations have studied mainly
middle-aged men drinking excessively, in whom overall mortality is at
least twice the expected rate, and mortality in women who drink
excessively appears to be substantially higher than this (Harris and
Barraclough, 1998). In England it has been estimated that over 6000
deaths a year are directly attributable to the medical consequences of
alcohol misuse (Alcohol Concern, 2016). Of course, alcohol must
contribute indirectly to many more deaths from causes such as accidents.
At a global level, the World Health Organization has estimated that
alcohol causes 1.8 million deaths annually (about 3.2% of all deaths).

Psychiatric disorders Alcohol-related psychiatric disorders fall into
four groups:

are more likely to cause social difficulties. At high doses, alcohol
intoxication can result in serious adverse effects, such as falls,
respiratory depression, inhalation of vomit, and hypothermia. The
molecular mechanisms that underlie the acute effects of alcohol are
unclear. An influential view has been that alcohol interacts with
neuronal membranes to increase their fluidity---an action also ascribed
to certain anaesthetic agents. This action gives rise to more specific
changes in the release of a range of neurotransmitters, leading to the
characteristic pharmacological actions of alcohol. For example, the
pleasurable effects of alcohol use could be mediated by release of
dopamine and opioids in the mesolimbic forebrain, while the anxiolytic
effects could reflect facilitation of brain gammaaminobutyric acid
(GABA) activity (Lingford-Hughes et al., 2010). The term idiosyncratic
alcohol intoxication has been applied to marked maladaptive changes in
behaviour, such as aggression, occurring within minutes of taking an
amount of alcohol insufficient to induce intoxication in most people
(with the behaviour being uncharacteristic of the affected individual).
In the past, these sudden changes in behaviour were called pathological
drunkenness, or mania Ã  potu, and the descriptions emphasized the
explosive nature of the outbursts of aggression. However, there is doubt
as to whether behaviour of this kind really is induced by small amounts
of alcohol. The term 'idiosyncratic alcohol intoxication' does not
appear in DSM-5 or ICD-10. Memory blackouts or short-term amnesia are
frequently reported after heavy drinking. At first the events of the
night before are forgotten, even though consciousness was maintained at
the time. Such memory losses can occur after a single episode of heavy
drinking in people who are not dependent on alcohol. If they recur
regularly, they indicate habitual excessive consumption. With sustained
excessive drinking, memory losses may become more severe, affecting
parts of the day or even whole days.

â

intoxication phenomena

Withdrawal phenomena

â

withdrawal phenomena

â

toxic or nutritional disorders

â

associated psychiatric disorders.

The general withdrawal syndrome has been described earlier under the
heading of alcohol dependence. Here we are concerned with the more
serious psychiatric syndrome of delirium tremens. Delirious states are
described generally in Chapter 14, but delirium tremens is discussed
here because of its prevalence and mortality, and its somewhat different
treatment. Delirium tremens occurs in people whose history of alcohol
misuse extends over several years. Following alcohol withdrawal there is
a dramatic and rapidly

Intoxication phenomena The severity of the symptoms of alcohol
intoxication correlates approximately with the blood alcohol
concentration. As noted above, there is much individual variation in the
psychological effects of alcohol, but certain reactions, such as
lability of mood and belligerence,

573

Alcohol-related disorders changing picture of disordered mental
activity, with clouding of consciousness, disorientation in time and
place, and impairment of recent memory. Perceptual disturbances include
misinterpretations of sensory stimuli and vivid hallucinations, which
are usually visual but sometimes occur in other modalities. There is
severe agitation, with restlessness, shouting, and evident fear.
Insomnia is prolonged. The hands are grossly tremulous and sometimes
pick up imaginary objects; truncal ataxia may occur. Autonomic
disturbances include sweating, fever, tachycardia, raised blood
pressure, and dilatation of pupils. Dehydration and electrolyte
disturbance are characteristic. Blood testing shows leucocytosis and
impaired liver function. The condition lasts for 3 or 4 days, with the
symptoms characteristically being worse at night. It often ends with
deep prolonged sleep from which the patient awakens with no symptoms and
little or no memory of the period of delirium. Delirium tremens carries
a significant risk of mortality and should be regarded as a medical
emergency.

Neurological damage Neurological syndromes include Korsakov's psychosis
and Wernicke's encephalopathy (see also Chapter 14). In the past, the
term 'alcoholic dementia' was widely used, but it remains unclear
whether this is a discrete category (Ridley et al., 2013); most cases of
dementia in people with a history of alcohol misuse are probably
attributable to Alzheimer's disease and other common forms of dementia.
Instead, the above conditions are now often referred to collectively as
'alcohol-related brain damage', covering the spectrum of cognitive
impairments (Jauhar et al., 2014). In this respect, it is worth noting
that cognitive impairments in severe alcohol use disorders often have a
multifactorial aetiology, which can include effects of head injury,
vascular changes, and metabolic and nutritional impairments as well as
direct alcohol neurotoxicity. The neurotoxicity of alcohol is magnified
by concomitant thiamine deficiency, which is common in heavy drinkers.
However, even young heavy drinkers can exhibit evidence of
neuropsychological impairments; for example, in executive function
(Jauhar et al., 2014). Attention has also been directed to the related
question of whether chronic alcohol misuse can cause structural brain
atrophy. Both computerized tomography (CT) scanning and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) have shown that excess alcohol consumption is
associated with enlarged lateral ventricles. Furthermore, MRI scans have
shown focal deficits,

with loss of grey matter in both cortical and subcortical areas.
Subcortical changes are more likely to be found in patients with
Korsakov's syndrome. White matter changes are also common in heavy
drinkers, and studies using diffusion tensor imaging indicate that there
is demyelination, particularly in tracts linking limbic system and
prefrontal cortex. Many of the changes noted above occur in patients
without obvious neurological disturbance, although, as noted above,
psychological testing usually reveals deficits in cognitive function.
The changes in brain structure and cognitive impairment that are seen in
excessive drinkers remit to some extent with cessation of alcohol use.
However, some abnormalities can still be detected after long periods of
abstinence. For a review of alcohol-related brain damage, see Jauhar et
al.Â (2014).

Associated psychiatric disorder Personality deterioration. As the
patient becomes increasingly concerned with the need to obtain alcohol,
interpersonal skills and attention to their usual interests and
responsibilities may deteriorate. These changes in social and
interpersonal functioning should not be confused with personality
disorder, which should be diagnosed only when the appropriate features
have been clearly present prior to the development of alcohol
dependence. Mood and anxiety disorders. The relationship between alcohol
consumption and mood is complex. On the one hand, some depressed and
anxious patients drink excessively in an attempt to improve their mood.
On the other hand, excess drinking may induce persistent depression or
anxiety. People with a history of alcohol dependence have a fourfold
increased risk of experiencing subsequent major depression, and the risk
remains elevated even in those who are no longer drinking. The risk of
experiencing an anxiety disorder is also significantly increased, but to
a somewhat lesser extent (Anthenelli, 2010). Suicidal behaviour. Suicide
rates among people with alcohol use disorders are much higher than those
among individuals who do not misuse alcohol. Conner and Duberstein
(2004) identified a number of risk factors for suicidal behaviour among
people with alcohol dependence, including impulsivity, negative affect,
and hopelessness. Suicide among alcohol misusers is discussed further in
Chapter 21. Here it is worth noting that suicide in young men is
associated with a high rate of substance misuse, including alcohol
misuse. Pathological jealousy. Excessive drinkers may develop an
overvalued idea or delusion that their partner is being

573

574

574

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs unfaithful. This syndrome of
pathological jealousy is described in Chapter 12. Alcoholic
hallucinosis. This is characterized by auditory hallucinations, usually
involving voices uttering insults or threats, which occur in clear
consciousness. The patient is usually distressed by these experiences,
and appears anxious and restless. The hallucinations are not due to
acute alcohol withdrawal, and can indeed persist after several months of
abstinence. There has been considerable controversy about the aetiology
of the condition. Some follow Kraepelin and Bonhoffer in regarding it as
a rare organic complication of alcoholism; others follow Bleuler in
supposing that it is related to schizophrenia. More recent reviewers
have concluded that alcoholic hallucinosis is an alcohol-induced organic
psychosis, which is distinct from schizophrenia and has a good prognosis
if abstinence can be maintained (Mann and Kiefer, 2009). In both DSM-5
and ICD-10, 'alcoholic hallucinosis' is subsumed under the heading of
'substance-induced psychotic disorder'.

Social damage Family problems Excessive drinking is liable to cause
profound social disruption, particularly in the family (Box 20.3).
Marital (or other relationship) and family tension is virtually
inevitable. The divorce rate among heavy drinkers is high, and the
partners of men who drink excessively are likely to become anxious,
depressed, and socially isolated. The partners of 'battered wives'
frequently drink excessively, and some women who are admitted to
hospital because of self-poisoning blame their partner's drinking. The
home atmosphere is often detrimental to any children present, because of
quarrelling and violence, and a drunken parent provides a poor role
model. Children of heavy drinkers are at risk of developing emotional or
behavioural disorders, and of performing poorly at school.

Work difficulties and road accidents At work, the heavy drinker often
progresses through declining efficiency, lower-grade jobs, and repeated
dismissals to lasting unemployment. There is also a strong association
between road accidents and alcohol misuse. The strength of the
association varies between countries. For example, in 2006, the
proportion of fatal traffic accidents involving alcohol was about 17% in
the UK, whereas the corresponding figures for France and Germany were
about 27% and 11%, respectively. Whether these figures are attributable
to real crossnational differences in the role of alcohol in traffic
fatalities, or whether they are due to variations in 'legal' alcohol
limits for driving, methods of data collection and definition, is not
certain (Assum and SÃ¸rensen, 2010).

Crime Excessive drinking is also associated with crime, mainly petty
offences such as larceny, but also with fraud, sexual offences, and
crimes of violence, including murder. Studies of recidivist prisoners in
England and Wales have shown that many had serious drinking problems
before imprisonment. It is not easy to determine to what extent alcohol
causes the criminal behaviour and to what extent it is part of the
lifestyle of the criminal. In addition, there is a link between certain
forms of alcohol misuse and antisocial personality disorder.

The causes of excessive drinking and alcohol misuse Despite much
research, surprisingly little is known about the causes of excessive
drinking and alcohol dependence. At one time it was believed that
certain people were particularly predisposed, either through personality
or due to an innate biochemical anomaly. Nowadays this simple notion of
specific predisposition is no longer held. Instead, alcohol misuse is
thought to result from a

Box 20.3 Medical and social consequences of excessive alcohol
consumption in the UK 1. Annual alcohol-related costs of crime and
public disorder are Â£7.3 billion, workplace costs are Â£6.4 billion, and
health costs are Â£1.7 billion. 2. Up to one-third of all accident and
emergency attendances involve alcohol. 3. Around 2.9 million (6%) of the
adult population are dependent on alcohol.

4.  Around 47% of victims of violence believe that their assailant was
    under the influence of alcohol.
5.  Alcohol is involved in 30--60% of child protection cases. Up to 1.3
    million children are adversely affected by family drinking. Source:
    data from Prime Minister's Strategy Unit, Copyright (2003).

57

Alcohol-related disorders variety of interacting factors, which can be
divided into individual factors and those in society.

Individual factors Genetic factors Most genetic studies of alcoholism
have investigated individuals with evidence of alcohol dependence. If
less severe diagnostic criteria are involved---for example, fairly
broadly defined alcohol misuse---the relative genetic contribution is
somewhat less. However, it is well established that alcohol dependence
aggregates in families, and twin studies show a higher concordance in
monozygotic than dizygotic twins, with an estimated heritability of
about 50% (Bienvenu et al., 2011). Support for a genetic explanation
also comes from investigations of adoptees. A number of studies have
indicated a higher risk of alcohol misuse and dependence in the
adopted-away sons of alcohol-dependent biological parents than in the
adopted-away sons of non-alcohol-dependent biological parents. Such
studies suggest a genetic mechanism, but they do not indicate its
nature. Adoption studies in Sweden led to the suggestion that there are
two separate kinds of alcohol dependence, which have been called type 1
and type 2 (Cloninger et al., 1988). Type 2 alcoholism is strongly
genetic, predominantly occurs in males, has an early age of onset, and
is associated with criminality and sociopathic disorder in both adoptee
and biological father. By contrast, type 1 alcoholism has a later age of
onset, is only mildly genetic, and occurs in both men and women.
Subsequent typologies of alcohol dependence have become more complex,
but continue to include a group of alcohol-dependent people with early
age of onset and sociopathic disorder. In others, however, an early age
of onset of alcohol dependence is associated not with sociopathic traits
but with high levels of anxiety-related symptoms (Leggio et al., 2009).
If a genetic component to aetiology were to be confirmed, it would still
be necessary to discover the mechanism. The latter might be biochemical,
involving the metabolism of alcohol or its central effects, or
psychological, involving personality. In addition, it is important to
note that a predisposition to misuse alcohol and develop dependence will
only be expressed if a person consumes excessive amounts of alcohol.
Here non-genetic familial factors are likely to play a major role. Genes
for alcohol dependence risk. Allelic association studies have focused in
particular on genes that affect alcohol metabolism because, as we have
already seen, people with impaired activity of the

alcohol-metabolizing enzyme, aldehyde dehydrogenase, have unpleasant
reactions when they consume alcohol, and are therefore at significantly
lower risk of alcohol dependence. At a molecular level, a point mutation
in the gene for a form of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) renders the
enzyme inactive; this mutation is less common in people with alcohol
dependence. Subsequent linkage analyses have confirmed that mutations in
the genes that code for aldehyde dehydrogenase protect against harmful
drinking (Hurley and Edenberg, 2012). However, such mutations are rare
in people of European ancestry. Other candidate genes have included the
dopamine D4 receptor and the GABA receptor, and some associations with
alcohol dependence have been reported. However, attempts at replication
have yielded inconsistent findings. Similarly, genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) have not generally provided reliable indications of
relevant genes, although the effect of genes coding for alcohol
metabolizing enzymes on the risk of alcohol dependence was confirmed
(Hart and Kranzler, 2015).

Other biological factors The sons of men with alcohol dependence are at
increased risk of developing alcohol dependence themselves, and a number
of studies have attempted to find biological abnormalities that may
antedate and predict the development of alcohol dependence in these
individuals. A variety of impairments have been described, including
diminished performance on cognitive tasks, particularly executive
function, and an abnormal P300 visual evoked response, which is a
measure of visual information processing. There is also reasonably
consistent evidence that sons of alcohol-dependent men are less
sensitive to the acute intoxicating effects of alcohol. Presumably, if
people experience less subjective responses to alcohol, they may tend to
drink more, thus putting themselves at risk of developing alcohol
dependence. There is also evidence that young heavy drinkers have lesser
subjective and neural responses to alcohol than light drinkers, but
whether this diminished effect represents a vulnerability factor or
results from alcohol tolerance is unclear (Gilman et al., 2012).

Learning factors Alcohol use. Children tend to follow their parents'
drinking patterns, and from an early age boys tend to be encouraged to
drink more than girls. Non-genetic familial factors appear to be
important in determining levels of alcohol use. Nevertheless, it is not
uncommon to meet people who are abstainers although their parents drank
heavily. In addition, the risk of children of

575

576

576

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs alcohol-dependent parents
developing alcohol use disorders is apparently little influenced by
whether their parents are currently drinking or not. This suggests that
modelling of drinking behaviour does not contribute substantially to the
increased risk in the children. Reward dependence. It has also been
suggested that learning processes may contribute in a more specific way
to the development of alcohol dependence. Thus the ability of alcohol to
increase pleasurable feelings and decrease anxiety could lead to
behavioural reinforcement, particularly in people who for physiological
or social reasons overemphasize the positive effects of alcohol while
ignoring its negative consequences. Recent formulations that combine
biochemical and cognitive approaches emphasize the role of dopamine
release in mesolimbic pathways in mediating incentive learning. In this
way drugs such as alcohol, which increase dopamine levels in this brain
region, stimulate motivational behaviours that are focused on the need
to secure further drug supplies. These behaviours may eventually evade
conscious control, and become difficult to extinguish (Lingford-Hughes
et al., 2010).

Personality factors Little progress has been made in identifying
personality factors that contribute to alcohol misuse and dependence. In
clinical practice it is common to find that excessive alcohol
consumption is associated with chronic anxiety, a pervading sense of
inferiority, or self-indulgent tendencies. However, many people with
personality problems of this kind do not resort to excessive drinking or
become alcohol dependent. Other surveys have emphasized the role of
personality traits that lead to risk-taking and novelty-seeking. It
seems likely that these characteristics apply to those with antisocial
personality disorder, who are known to be at increased risk of misusing
alcohol and developing alcohol dependence. However, the majority of
alcohol-dependent people do not have an antisocial personality disorder.

Childhood factors We have seen that genetic factors are involved in the
tendency of alcohol dependence to run in families, but the estimated
heritability (about 50%) leaves much room for environmental factors.
Childhood exposure to potentially traumatic events, particularly
emotional abuse, predisposes to alcohol misuse in adulthood, and there
is also a role for associated factors such as family disruption,
poverty, and social isolation (Shin et al., 2015). It is, of course,
likely that alcohol dependence in a parent will contribute towards the
latter.

Psychiatric disorder Alcohol misuse is commonly found in conjunction
with other psychiatric disorders, and sometimes appears to be secondary
to them. For example, some patients with depressive disorders use
alcohol in the mistaken hope that it will alleviate low mood. Those with
anxiety disorders, particularly panic disorder and social phobia, who
use alcohol to relieve anxiety are also at risk. In other cases alcohol
misuse appears to precede another psychiatric disorder, suggesting that
heavy alcohol consumption itself can act as an aetiological factor,
perhaps in a person who is predisposed through genetic and other
environmental factors to develop the specific psychiatric condition. A
national epidemiological survey of alcohol-related disorders carried out
in the USA found that 55% of patients with alcohol dependence had a
coexisting lifetime psychiatric disorder. The majority of this
comorbidity was with mood disorders (40%), anxiety disorders (32%), and
antisocial personality (14%) (Kandel et al., 2013). Similar findings
were reported by Grant et al.Â (2015), who drew attention to the high
comorbidity between alcohol and other drug use disorders. Clinically,
alcohol misuse is also seen in patients with schizophrenia. (The
treatment of patients with severe mental illness and comorbid substance
misuse is discussed on page 590.)

Alcohol consumption in society There is now general agreement that rates
of alcohol dependence and alcohol-related disorders are correlated with
the general level of alcohol consumption in a society. Previously it had
been supposed that levels of intake among excessive drinkers were
independent of the amounts taken by moderate drinkers. In 1956, however,
the French demographer, Sully Ledermann, challenged this idea, proposing
instead that the distribution of consumption within a homogeneous
population follows a logarithmic normal curve. If this is the case, an
increase in the average consumption must inevitably be accompanied by an
increase in the number of people who drink an amount that is harmful.
Although the mathematical details of Ledermann's work have been
criticized, there are striking correlations between average annual
alcohol consumption in a society and several indices of alcohol-related
damage among its members; for example, rates of liver cirrhosis. For
this reason, it is now widely accepted that the proportion of a
population that drinks excessively is largely determined by the average
alcohol consumption of that population. What then determines the average
level of drinking within a nation? Economic, formal, and informal

57

Alcohol-related disorders controls must be considered. The economic
control is the price of alcohol. There is now ample evidence from the UK
and other countries that the real price of alcohol (i.e. the price
relative to average income) profoundly influences a nation's drinking
habits. Furthermore, heavy drinkers as well as moderate drinkers reduce
their consumption when the tax on alcohol is increased. For example,
modelling the effect of a statutory minimum price for alcohol on
consumption in England showed overall a modest reduction; however, the
model predicted a more striking decrease in harmful drinking by people
on low incomes, where the health gains would be greatest (Holmes et al.,
2014). The main formal controls are the licensing laws, but these do not
seem to influence drinking behaviours in a consistent way when
comparisons are made between different countries. Informal controls are
the customs and moral beliefs in a society that determine who should
drink, in what circumstances, at what time of day, and to what extent.
Some communities appear to protect their members from alcohol misuse
despite the general availability of alcohol. For example,
alcohol-related problems are uncommon among Jewish people even in
countries where there are high rates in the rest of the community.

Recognition of alcohol misuse Detection Only a small proportion of
alcohol misusers in the community are known to specialized agencies.
When special efforts are made to screen patients in medical and surgical
wards, around 10--30% are found to misuse alcohol, with the rates being
highest in accident and emergency wards. It has been estimated that, of
the 2.9 million people in the UK who are dependent on alcohol, only
about 6% a year receive treatment. There are probably several reasons
for this, including lack of help-seeking by users, limited availability
of specialist alcohol services, and underidentification of alcohol
misuse by health professionals (National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence, 2011a).

Screening questionnaires Alcohol misuse may go undetected because
patients conceal the extent of their drinking. However, doctors and
other professionals often do not ask the right questions. It should be a
standard practice to ask all patients (medical, surgical, and
psychiatric) about their alcohol consumption. Brief screening
questionnaires can be helpful---for example, the CAGE questionnaire,
which consists of the following four questions.

â

Have you ever felt you ought to Cut down on your drinking?

â

Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?

â

Have you ever felt Guilty about your drinking?

â

Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning (an 'Eye-opener')
to steady your nerves or get rid of a hangover?

Two or more positive replies are said to identify alcohol misuse. Some
patients will give false answers, but others find that these questions
provide an opportunity to reveal their problems. Overall the CAGE has a
good sensitivity but only modest specificity (Mitchell et al., 2014). An
alternative is the AUDIT, a 10-item structured interview developed by
the World Health Organization for screening for both currently harmful
and potentially hazardous drinking. It shows good sensitivity and
specificity, can identify mild dependence, and is probably the most
useful screening questionnaire for clinicians and researchers in primary
care (see Box 20.4). Scores for each question range from 0 to 4, with
the first response for each question scoring 0, and the last response
scoring 4. For questions 9 and 10, which only have three responses, the
scoring is 0, 2, and 4. People who score in the range 8--15 should
receive a brief intervention based on their risk for developing
alcohol-related harm. Those who score 16--19 need a brief intervention
and regular monitoring, including referral to specialist alcohol
services if heavy drinking continues. Those who score in the range
20--40 should receive an early specialist referral and, depending on the
severity of physical dependence, community or inpatient detoxification
and other treatments (Pilling et al., 2011).

General 'at-risk' associations The next requirement is for the doctor to
be suspicious about 'at-risk' associations. In general practice, alcohol
misuse may come to light as a result of problems in the patient's
primary relationship and family, at work, with finances, or with the
law. The alcohol misuser is likely to have many more days off work than
the moderate drinker, and repeated absences on a Monday should arouse
strong suspicion. The high-risk occupations (see 'Occupation' above)
should also be borne in mind.

Medical 'at-risk' associations In hospital practice, the
alcohol-dependent patient may be noticed if they develop withdrawal
symptoms after admission. Florid delirium tremens is obvious, but milder
forms may not be recognized as such, or instead considered to be
delirium of another cause---for example, pneumonia or postoperative. In
both general and

577

578

578

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs

Box 20.4 AUDIT questionnaire: screen for alcohol misuse 1. How often do
you have a drink containing alcohol? â Never â Monthly or less â 2--4
times a month â 2--3 times a week â 4 or more times a week 2. How many
standard drinks containing alcohol do you have on a typical day when
drinking? â 1 or 2 â 3 or 4 â 5 or 6 â 7 to 9 â 10 or more 3. How often
do you have six or more drinks on one occasion? â Never â Less than
monthly â Monthly â Weekly â Daily or almost daily 4. During the past
year, how often have you found that you were not able to stop drinking
once you had started? â Never â Less than monthly â Monthly â Weekly â
Daily or almost daily 5. During the past year, how often have you failed
to do what was normally expected of you because of drinking? â Never â
Less than monthly â Monthly â Weekly â Daily or almost daily

hospital practice, at-risk factors include physical disorders that may
be alcohol-related. Common examples are gastritis, peptic ulcer, and
liver disease, but others, such as neuropathy and seizures, should be
borne in mind. Repeated accidents should also arouse suspicion.
Psychiatric at-risk associations include anxiety, depression, erratic
moods, impaired concentration, memory lapses, and sexual dysfunction.
Alcohol misuse should be considered in all cases of deliberate
self-harm.

6.  During the past year, how often have you needed a drink in the
    morning to get yourself going after a heavy drinking session? â
    Never â Less than monthly â Monthly â Weekly â Daily or almost daily
7.  During the past year, how often have you had a feeling of guilt or
    remorse after drinking? â Never â Less than monthly â Monthly â
    Weekly â Daily or almost daily
8.  During the past year, have you been unable to remember what happened
    the night before because you had been drinking? â Never â Less than
    monthly â Monthly â Weekly â Daily or almost daily
9.  Have you or someone else been injured as a result of your drinking?
    â No â Yes, but not in the past year â Yes, during the past year
10. Has a relative or friend, doctor or other health worker been
    concerned about your drinking or suggested that you cut down? â No â
    Yes, but not in the past year â Yes, during the past year Reproduced
    from The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test: Guidelines for
    Use in Primary Care, Copyright (2001), with permission from the
    World Health Organization.

Drinking history If any of the above factors raise suspicion of alcohol
misuse, the next stage is to take a comprehensive drinking history (see
Box 20.5). This should be done sensitively, with understanding that the
patient may have difficulty in giving a clear history. The clinician
should aim to build up a picture of what and how much the patient drinks
throughout a typical day---for example, when and where they have the
first drink of the day. Patients

579

Alcohol-related disorders

Box 20.5 Alcohol use history Describe a typical day's drinking. What
time is the first drink of the day? â When did daily drinking start? â
Presence of withdrawal symptoms in the morning or after abstinence â
Previous attempts at treatment â Physical health problems â Patient's
attitude towards drinking

Box 20.6 Laboratory tests for alcohol dependence

â

should be asked how they feel if they go without a drink for a day or
two, and how they feel on waking. This can lead on to enquiries about
the typical features of dependence and the range of physical,
psychological, and social problems associated with it. To gain an idea
of the duration of alcohol problems, key points in the history may
include establishing when the patient first began drinking every day,
when they began drinking in the mornings, and when, if ever, they first
experienced withdrawal symptoms. It is useful to ask about periods of
abstinence from alcohol, what factors helped to maintain this state of
affairs, and what led to a resumption of drinking. This can lead on to
enquiries about past attempts at treatment. It is necessary to obtain a
clear understanding of the patient's own view of their drinking
behaviour, because there are a number of possible treatment goals. In
this situation the patient's attitude to their problems plays a key role
in deciding which approaches are likely to be most beneficial (see the
section on motivational interviewing, below).

Laboratory tests Several laboratory tests can be used to detect alcohol
misuse, although none gives an unequivocal answer. This is because the
more sensitive tests can give 'false-positive' results when there is
disease of the liver, heart, kidneys, or blood, or if enzyme-inducing
drugs such as anticonvulsants, steroids, or barbiturates have been
taken. However, abnormal values point to the possibility of alcohol
misuse. The most useful tests are listed in Box 20.6.

The treatment of alcohol misuse Early detection and treatment Early
detection of excessive consumption of alcohol and alcohol misuse is
important because treatment of established cases is difficult,
particularly when dependence

Gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase (GGT) Estimations of GGT in blood provide
a useful screening test. The level is raised in about 70% of alcohol
misusers, both men and women, whether or not there is demonstrable liver
damage. The heavier the drinking, the greater is the rise in GGT. Mean
corpuscular volume (MCV) MCV is raised above the normal value in about
60% of alcohol misusers, and more commonly in women than in men. If
other causes are excluded, a raised MCV is a strong indicator of
excessive drinking. Moreover, it takes several weeks to return to normal
after abstinence. Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin This is a variant
of a serum protein which transports iron, and levels are increased in
response to heavy drinking. It is probably more specific than GGT.
Breath alcohol concentration A high concentration does not distinguish
between an isolated episode of heavy drinking and chronic misuse.
However, if a person is not intoxicated when the breath alcohol
concentration is well above the legal limit for driving, they are likely
to be unusually tolerant of alcohol. This tolerance suggests persistent
heavy drinking. Alcohol is eliminated rather slowly from the blood and
can be detected in appreciable amounts for 24 hours after an episode of
heavy drinking.

is present. Many cases can be detected early by general practitioners,
physicians, and surgeons when patients are seeking treatment for another
problem (see Box 20.7).

Brief intervention General practitioners are well placed to provide
early treatment of alcohol problems, and they are likely to know the
patient and their family well. It is often effective if the general
practitioner gives simple advice in a frank, matter-of-fact way, but
with tact and understanding. Brief interventions generally involve
simple education and advice about safe levels of alcohol consumption.
The aim is to promote safer drinking, rather than abstinence. Generally,
brief interventions lead to modest reductions in alcohol consumption
over the next few years, and are the best initial approach for a person
whose alcohol consumption exceeds safe limits. However, whether the
beneficial effects of brief motivational interviewing or

579

580

580

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs

Box 20.7 Approach to treatment of alcohol misuse

Box 20.8 Motivational interviewing Express empathy Avoid arguing; don't
be judgemental â Detect and 'roll with' resistance â Point out
discrepancies in the patient's history â Raise awareness about the
contrast between the substance user's aims and behaviour â

Raise awareness of problem â Increase motivation to change â Support and
advice â Withdraw alcohol (or controlled drinking) â High-intensity
psychological treatments â Alcoholics Anonymous â Medication
(disulfiram, acamprosate, naltrexone) â

lifestyle counselling are greater than the simple completion of an AUDIT
questionnaire followed by feedback has been questioned (Luty, 2015a). It
is, however, agreed that brief interventions are not effective for
people with severe drinking problems, particularly those who are
alcohol-dependent.

Motivational interviewing Patients with problems of alcohol misuse,
particularly those detected by screening methods, may be unsure whether
or not to engage in treatment programmes. An appropriate interviewing
style, particularly during the first assessment, can help to persuade
the patient to engage in a useful review of their current pattern of
drinking. Confrontation is avoided in motivational interviewing, and a
less directive approach is taken, during which patients are helped to
assess the balance of the positive and negative effects of alcohol on
their lives. The clinician can help in this exercise by providing
feedback to the patient about the personal risks that alcohol poses both
to them and to their family, together with a number of options for
change. The aim of motivational interviewing is to persuade the patient
to argue their own case for changing their pattern of substance use (see
Box 20.8). For an explanation of the origin of motivational interviewing
and a description of the relevant techniques, see Treasure (2004).

â

those bought over the counter) and an assessment of cognitive function
with, for example, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). An
intensive and searching enquiry often helps the patient to gain a new
recognition and understanding of the problem, and this is the basis of
treatment. As noted above, however, it is important to avoid
confrontation, as this will only alienate someone who is likely to have
very mixed feelings about the prospect of life without alcohol. It is
usually desirable to involve the patient's partner in the assessment,
both to obtain additional information and to give the partner an
opportunity to unburden their feelings. A mutually agreed treatment plan
should be worked out with the patient (and their partner if
appropriate). There should be specific goals, and the patient should be
required to take responsibility for realizing these. The goals should
deal not only with the drinking problem, but also with any accompanying
problems with regard to the patient's health, marriage, or other
relationship, job, and social adjustment. In the early stages they
should be short-term and achievable---for example, complete abstinence
for 2 weeks. In this way the patient can be rewarded by early
achievement. Longer-term goals can be set as treatment progresses. These
will be concerned with trying to change factors that precipitate or
maintain excessive drinking, such as tensions in the family. When
drawing up this treatment plan, an important decision is whether to aim
for total abstinence or limited consumption of alcohol (controlled
drinking).

Treatment plans for more established alcohol misuse and dependence

Total abstinence versus controlled drinking

For patients who have significant alcohol-related disorders,
particularly alcohol dependence, treatment generally needs to be more
intensive. Any intervention should be preceded by a full assessment, and
should include a drinking history and an appraisal of current medical,
psychological, and social problems. Other important issues concern the
use of other drugs (including

The disease model of alcoholism proposes that an alcohol-dependent
person must become totally abstinent and remain so, as a single drink
would lead to relapse. Alcoholics Anonymous have made this a tenet of
their approach to treatment. The issue of abstinence versus controlled
drinking remains unresolved. A prevalent view is that controlled

581

Alcohol-related disorders drinking may be a feasible goal for people
whose alcohol misuse has been detected early, and who are not dependent
or physically damaged. Abstinence is a better goal for dependent
drinkers and others who have attempted controlled drinking
unsuccessfully. If controlled drinking is to be attempted, the doctor
should give the patient clear advice about safe levels (see 'Excessive
alcohol consumption' above).

Withdrawal from alcohol For patients with dependence syndrome,
withdrawal from alcohol is an important stage in treatment and should be
managed carefully. In less severe cases, withdrawal may take place at
home provided there is adequate support and clinical monitoring (see Box
20.9). This should involve daily assessment by the general practitioner,
practice nurse, or specialist alcohol worker to check the patient's
physical state and supervise medication (see Box 20.10). In
uncomplicated cases, withdrawal symptoms usually resolve within 4--6
days. However, any patient who is likely to have severe withdrawal
symptoms, especially if there is a history of delirium tremens or
seizures, should be admitted to hospital. The Severity of Alcohol
Dependence Questionnaire (SADQ) can be useful for estimating the likely
severity of alcohol dependence and thereby gauging the amount of
difficulty that the patient might encounter during withdrawal. A SADQ
score of more than 30 is an indication for inpatient detoxification.
Other indications for residential detoxification are very high alcohol
consumption (over 30 units daily), concomitant benzodiazepine misuse,
and significant medical or psychiatric comorbidity (National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2011a). The extensive research on
pharmacological treatment for alcohol withdrawal has been systematically
reviewed by Lingford-Hughes et al.Â (2012). The most important concern is
the prevention of major complications of withdrawal, such as seizures or
delirium

Box 20.9 Considerations before alcohol detoxification 1. What are the
medical risks? 2. What setting is appropriate? 3. What does the patient
want from detoxification? 4. What kind of aftercare is needed to help to
maintain abstinence?

Box 20.10 General management of alcohol detoxification 1. Explanation of
the process to the patient and their family 2. The patient should stay
off work and rest. They should not drive 3. The patient should take
plenty of fluids but avoid caffeinated drinks 4. Daily visit by health
professional 5. Maintain abstinence 6. Reducing course of
benzodiazepines over 5--7 days (see text)

tremens. Treatment with benzodiazepines is usually the most suitable
choice. Benzodiazepines differ in their duration of action (see Chapter
25). Although the longer-acting compounds may carry the risk of
oversedation in the elderly or in those with significant liver disease,
they also have the advantage of smoother withdrawal and generally better
relief of withdrawal symptoms. Chlordiazepoxide is often used. A typical
outpatient regimen would start with 20--30 mg four times daily, reducing
and stopping over a period of 5--7 days. In more severe cases,
particularly in inpatients, higher doses are commonly used. If
convulsions occur, the dose of benzodiazepine should be reviewed and
increased if necessary. Administration of a benzodiazepine that is well
absorbed parenterally (e.g.Â lorazepam) may be useful to relieve severe
acute withdrawal, although oral medication can usually be resumed
promptly. In home-based withdrawal it is helpful for a family member or
friend to supervise the medication. Carbamazepine has also been found to
be effective in the treatment of alcohol withdrawal, and although not
often used in the UK, it is a good alternative to the use of a
benzodiazepine. There is no added benefit from using carbamazepine and a
benzodiazepine together. Clomethiazole was frequently used in the
management of alcohol withdrawal in the past, but is no longer
recommended because of its toxicity when combined with alcohol and its
danger in overdose. It is occasionally used for the most severe
withdrawal states, where intensive inpatient medical monitoring is
available, but there is no clear advantage compared with adequate doses
of a benzodiazepine. Antipsychotic drugs lower the seizure threshold and
are less effective than benzodiazepines in preventing

581

582

582

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs delirium. They are sometimes
used to reduce agitation during alcohol withdrawal, but use of adequate
doses of a benzodiazepine is a safer strategy. Antipsychotic drugs may
be required occasionally, however, in patients with delusions that do
not respond to benzodiazepines. In these circumstances, combination of
antipsychotic treatment with benzodiazepines would be expected to
attenuate the pro-convulsive effects of the antipsychotic drug. Vitamin
supplements, particularly thiamine, should also be given to prevent the
Wernicke--Korsakoff syndrome. Parenteral thiamine should be given to
patients at high risk (i.e.Â those with alcohol dependence and a poor
diet). In the treatment of delirium tremens or Wernicke's
encephalopathy, thiamine treatment should always precede glucose
administration.

Psychological treatment As noted above, provision of information and
advice about the effects of excessive drinking is an important first
stage in treatment. The information given should relate to the specific
problems of the individual patient, including both those that have
already occurred and those that are likely to develop if drinking
continues. The technique of motivational interviewing can be useful (see
Box 20.8). More specialized, high-intensity psychological treatments are
appropriate if the drinking problem is more serious, particularly in
cases of alcohol dependence. Several treatment approaches have been
employed, although there is significant overlap between the different
therapies (see Box 20.11). Important features of successful
psychological approaches include the use of behavioural techniques,
which require drinkers to take some action themselves, as well as the
involvement of a partner and the drinker's wider social network. There
are also important roles for education and the improvement of social and
interpersonal skills, as these relate to alcohol misuse. It may be
helpful, for example, to identify situational or interpersonal triggers
that cause the patient to drink excessively, and then to plan and
rehearse new methods of coping with these situations. This is an
important part of relapse prevention. The use of cue exposure to
alcoholic drinks, without subsequent consumption, may also lessen the
risk of subsequent relapse when the patient has to contend with the
ready availability of alcohol in social settings. It is important for
the patient to appreciate that a lapse in drinking behaviour does not
have to progress to a full-blown relapse. Many patients who misuse
alcohol have general deficiencies in problem-solving skills, and
appropriate training may help to reduce relapse rates. If the patient is
in a relatively stable relationship with a partner, cognitive
behavioural relationship

therapy can produce improvements in both drinking behaviour and
relationship adjustment. For a review of psychological treatments for
problem drinking, see National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2011a).

Pharmacological treatments to help to maintain abstinence A number of
different kinds of medication have been employed to help people to
abstain from drinking or to experience less drinking-related harm.
Medications are not regarded as 'stand-alone' treatments and, when used
in the management of drinking problems, should be combined with an
appropriate psychosocial intervention (see Lingford-Hughes et al., 2012,
and Box 20.12). Disulfiram (Antabuse) acts by blocking the oxidation of
alcohol so that acetaldehyde accumulates. Some patients find it useful
because the anticipation of an unpleasant reaction acts as a deterrent
to impulsive drinking. The reaction includes facial flushing, throbbing
headache, hypotension, palpitations, tachycardia, and nausea and
vomiting. In vulnerable patients, cardiac arrhythmias and collapse may
occur. The main contraindications to the use of disulfiram are a history
of heart failure, coronary artery disease, hypertension, psychosis, and
pregnancy. The patient should be given clear verbal and written
instructions, together with a list of alcohol-containing substances to
be avoided. Common side effects are drowsiness, bad breath, nausea, and
constipation. Disulfiram is given in a single dose of 800 mg on the
first day of treatment, reducing over 5 days to 100--200 mg daily. The
efficacy of disulfiram depends on compliance. The treatment is likely to
be more successful if a partner or health worker is able to supervise
its use, perhaps in the context of a structured treatment such as
cognitive behavioural relationship therapy. However, the unsupervised
use of disulfiram is not considered to be an effective approach (Luty,
2015b). Acamprosate (calcium acetyl homotaurinate) appears to suppress
the urge to drink in response to learned cues, and can produce modest
but useful reductions in drinking behaviour in alcohol-dependent
individuals. It is believed to act by stimulating GABA-inhibitory
neurotransmission and decreasing the excitatory effects of glutamate.
The effects of acamprosate have not been consistent across studies. For
example, a large trial in the United States (COMBINE) showed no
increased benefit in measures of drinking behaviour when acamprosate was
combined with cognitive behaviour therapy compared with cognitive
behaviour therapy alone (Anton et al., 2006). However, a meta-analysis
of 19 randomized

583

Alcohol-related disorders

Box 20.11 High-intensity psychological therapies for alcohol-focused
specialist treatment Community reinforcement approach. A broad range of
treatments, with the overall aim of changing the drinker's social
environment so that sobriety is rewarded. Components include training in
communication skills, problem-solving, and assertive drink refusal.
Relationship therapy and promotion of relapse prevention are also
offered. Disulfiram with monitored compliance is frequently used. Social
behaviour and network therapy. Use of the drinker's social network to
help to modify their drinking and maintain change. Facilitation of
communication within the network and the agreement of common goals with
the drinker. Use of pleasant social activities as an alternative to
drinking. Behavioural self-control training. Main use is to control
drinking rather than to achieve abstinence. Can be used in groups,
individually, or in a self-help format. Key components include setting
drinking limits, development of methods to control drinking rate, drink
refusal skills training, and self-reward for successful behaviours that
replace drinking. Coping and social skills training. Can be used in a
group or individual format. Improves relationships by building up
interpersonal skills, and uses cognitive emotional coping for mood
regulation. Coping skills training enhances

trials showed that, over a 2-year follow-up, acamprosate significantly
increased the abstinence rate, with a relative risk of 0.83 (95% CI,
0.77--0.88) (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
2011a). The usual dose of acamprosate is two tablets (333 mg each) three
times daily with meals. In lighter patients (\<60 kg), four tablets
daily are recommended. Acamprosate is not metabolized in the liver and
is excreted by the kidney. It is therefore unlikely to cause drug
interactions. Adverse effects include diarrhoea and, less frequently,
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Skin rashes may occur, as can
fluctuations in libido. Naltrexone. The opioid antagonist, naltrexone,
is believed to block some of the reinforcing effects of alcohol and in
this way decrease the likelihood of relapse after detoxification. Not
all trials have found a significant benefit over placebo. In the COMBINE
study, the best effects on drinking behaviour were shown by participants
who received both naltrexone and cognitive

activities of daily living and facilitates dealing with stressful life
events and the impact of alcohol-related cues that prompt drinking.
Cognitive behavioural relationship therapy. Based on social learning
theory. Uses behavioural contracting, communication skills training, and
behavioural rehearsal with the drinker and their partner. Particularly
appropriate in cases where the drinking problem and relationship
difficulties exacerbate each other. Cue exposure. Based on Pavlovian
conditioning theory, and views craving for alcohol as a conditioned
response to specific environmental cues. Aims to 'extinguish'
conditioned responses and ameliorate craving by presenting relevant cues
in the absence of the reinforcing effect of alcohol. Not used as a
'stand-alone treatment'. Relapse prevention. Difficult to define because
it is a goal of treatment rather than a specific treatment modality.
Based on cognitive behavioural techniques, and involves training in
social skills and coping and behavioural rehearsal. An important
component of many other approaches. Source: data from Raistrick D,
Heather N and Godfrey C, Review of the Effectiveness of Treatment for
Alcohol Problems, Copyright (2006), National Treatment Agency for
Substance Misuse.

behaviour therapy (Anton et al., 2006). A meta-analysis of 27 randomized
trials showed that, over a 12-month follow-up, naltrexone significantly
increased rates of abstinence, with a relative risk of 0.83 (95% CI,
0.75-- 0.91), an effect very similar to that of acamprosate (National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2011a). Common side
effects of naltrexone treatment include nausea, vomiting, headache,
dizziness, and weight loss. Nalmefene, like naltrexone, is an orally
active opioid antagonist. Nalmefene has been studied in patients who
drink heavily but who do not have severe alcohol dependence with
withdrawal symptoms. In this group, given with psychosocial support,
nalmefene produces modest reductions in total alcohol consumption and
number of days of heavy drinking over the following 6 months. National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence has recommended nalmefene
as a potential treatment for men who drink more than 45 units of alcohol
a week and

583

584

584

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs

Box 20.12 National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE)
guidance on the management of harmful drinking and alcohol dependence 1.
For harmful drinking and mild dependence offer a high-intensity
psychological treatment (see Box 20.9). 2. For those drinking over 15
units of alcohol a day and/or scoring 15--30 or more on the SADQ\* test,
offer community-based assisted withdrawal, or inpatient treatment if
there are safety concerns. 3. After successful withdrawal for patients
with moderate or severe alcohol dependence, consider offering
acamprosate or oral naltrexone in combination with a high-intensity
psychological treatment that promotes relapse prevention. \*

Severity of Alcohol Dependence Questionnaire.

Source: data from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
Copyright (2014).

women drinking more than 35 units a week. However, whether the benefits
of nalmefene in this population are clinically significant has been
questioned (Palpacuer et al., 2015). The most common side effects of
nalmefene are similar to those of naltrexone, namely nausea, vomiting,
dizziness, headache, and insomnia. Topiramate is an anticonvulsant drug
which in randomized trials has been shown to benefit drinking outcomes
in terms of reductions in days of heavy drinking and harmful drinking
consequences, as well as improving quality of life (Lingford-Hughes et
al., 2012). The adverse effects of topiramate, however, can be
troublesome, and include paraesthesia, anorexia, headache, abdominal
pain, sleep disturbance, and cognitive impairment. Antidepressant
medication may be useful in patients who experience persistent symptoms
of major depression after detoxification. However, tricyclic
antidepressants are not recommended because of potentially serious
adverse reactions, including cardiotoxicity and death following
overdose. There is no evidence that antidepressants are helpful in
patients with alcohol use disorders who are not depressed. Indeed,
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) appear to worsen the
outcome in Cloninger type 2 alcohol dependence (early age of onset,
positive family history, impulsive/antisocial personality traits)
(Lingford-Hughes et al., 2012).

For a systematic review of the pharmacotheray of alcohol use disorders,
see Jonas et al.Â (2014).

Other agencies concerned with drinking problems Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) is a self-help organization founded in the USA by two alcoholic
men, a surgeon and a stockbroker. It has since extended to most
countries of the world. Members attend group meetings, usually
twice-weekly, on a long-term basis. In crisis they can obtain immediate
help from other members by telephone. The organization works on the firm
belief that abstinence must be complete. At present there are about 1200
groups in the UK. Alcoholics Anonymous is based on a number of
fundamental principles, known as the 'Twelve Steps', to which members
adhere. It does not appeal to all problem drinkers because the meetings
involve an emotional confession of problems, and because of the
evangelical, quasireligious nature of the twelve-step approach. However,
the organization is of great value to some problem drinkers, and anyone
with a drink problem should be encouraged to try it. A treatment
approach similar to that provided by Alcoholics Anonymous, coupled with
encouragement to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, was one of the
psychological therapies employed in Project MATCH (see below). In
general, all of the treatments that were employed appeared to be roughly
equal in efficacy. However, patients with fewer psychiatric problems at
entry tended to have a better outcome with the Alcoholics Anonymous type
of treatment. Al-Anon is a parallel organization that provides support
for the partners of excessive drinkers. Alateen has a similar role for
their teenage children. Non-statutory agencies are voluntary bodies that
provide a range of services, including advice for problem drinkers and
their families, counselling, and help with occupational and social
activities for those who have recovered. Hostels are intended mainly for
homeless problem drinkers. They provide rehabilitation and counselling.
Usually abstinence is a condition of residence.

Results of treatment In a famous controlled trial involving 100 male
alcoholics, Edwards (1977) compared simple advice with intensive
treatment that included introductions to Alcoholics Anonymous,
medication, repeated interviews, counselling for their wives, and, where
appropriate, inpatient treatment as well. The advice group received a
3-hour assessment together with a single session of counselling with the
partner present. The two groups were well

58

Alcohol-related disorders matched. After 12 months there was no
significant difference between them with regard to drinking behaviour,
subjective ratings, or social adjustment. Similar findings with regard
to drinking behaviour were reported by Chick et al.Â (1988), who found
that at a 2-year follow-up there was no difference in stable abstinence
rates between alcohol-dependent patients who received a minimal
treatment intervention, consisting mainly of advice, and those who were
offered a broad range of therapies, including inpatient care and group
therapy. However, the group that was offered the broad range of
therapies suffered less alcohol-related harm, particularly in relation
to family life. Some have argued that abstinence rates by themselves do
not provide a useful measure of treatment outcome. For example, although
the patient may still be drinking, the amount consumed may decrease.
This can be associated with a reduction in aspects of alcohol-related
harm, as shown by the study by Chick et al.Â (1988). From this viewpoint,
harm reduction, even where the individual continues to drink, is a
worthwhile achievement. The principles of the harm reduction approach
have been applied to the misuse of other substances (see below). The
effectiveness of structured psychological treatments was studied by
Project MATCH, a large randomized controlled trial of three
psychological treatments for patients with alcohol problems (Project
MATCH Research Group, 1997). The three treatments studied were a
cognitive behavioural intervention, a brief motivational enhancement
therapy, and a treatment that aimed to help patients to make use of the
'twelve-step' philosophy of Alcoholics Anonymous. The main aim of the
study was to attempt to find patient characteristics that predicted
response to particular treatments. There were no important differences
between the treatments, and few strong correlations were found between
effectiveness and patient characteristics. However, in general the
outcome was favourable, and the authors concluded that structured
psychological treatments of various kinds were helpful in the management
of alcohol misuse. In fact, the brief motivational enhancement therapy
was generally as effective as the two more intensive psychological
treatments. Consistent with this, the UK Alcohol Treatment Trial
(UKATT), which was conducted at several UK centres, found that
motivational enhancement therapy was just as effective as social network
therapy in decreasing alcohol consumption and alcohol dependence.
However, at a 1-year follow-up the effects of treatment were fairly
modest. For example, relative to baseline levels, average alcohol
consumption on a drinking day fell from 27 units to 19 units, and the
number of days on which

patients abstained from alcohol rose from 30% to 45% (UK Alcohol
Treatment Trial Research Team, 2005). The guidelines from the National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2011a) recommend that
patients with alcohol dependence, once withdrawn from alcohol, should be
offered a psychological intervention that matches their needs and social
situation (Box 20.11), together with either naltrexone or acamprosate.
If neither of these are suitable and the patient is committed to the
goal of abstinence, disulfiram can be offered if supervision is
available. There are likely to be factors within the patient that will
predict a good response to a number of different kinds of treatment.
There is some disagreement as to what these factors are, but the
following generally predict a better prognosis regardless of which
treatment is used: â

Good insight into the nature of the problems.

â

Social stability in the form of a fixed abode, family support, and
ability to keep a job.

â

Ability to control impulsiveness, to defer gratification, and to form
satisfactory emotional relationships.

For reviews of the effectiveness of a broad range of treatment
approaches for alcohol use disorders, see Luty (2015a, 2015b) and the
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2011a).

Prevention of alcohol misuse and dependence In seeking to prevent
excessive drinking and alcoholrelated disorders, two approaches are
possible. The first is to improve the help and guidance available to the
individual, as already described. The second is to introduce social
changes that are likely to affect drinking patterns in the population as
a whole (see Box 20.13). It is this second group that we are concerned
with here. Consumption within a population might be reduced by four
methods: 1. The pricing of alcoholic beverages. Putting up the price of
alcohol would probably reduce consumption within the population. Based
on a systematic review, Wagenaar et al.Â (2010) predicted that doubling
alcohol taxes in the USA would reduce direct alcoholrelated mortality by
35%, traffic fatalities by 11%, and violent crime by 2%. 2. Controls on
advertising. Controlling or abolishing the advertising of alcoholic
drinks might be another preventive measure. It is unclear how far
advertising

585

586

586

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs

Box 20.13 Some recommendations by the Academy of Medical Sciences (2004)
for decreasing alcohol-related harm in the UK Increase taxes on alcohol
to restore its affordability relative to income to that obtaining in the
early 1970s â Reduce the duty-free allowance of alcohol for travellers â
Review advertising and promotion of alcoholic drinks, particularly to
young people â Improve medical research on the damaging effects of
alcohol â

encourages the use of particular brands of alcohol rather than overall
consumption. However, in the UK, annual expenditure on alcohol
advertising and promotion is over Â£800 million. There is an accepted
link between alcohol advertising and consumption, particularly in young
people (Stockings et al., 2016). Alcohol marketing now makes extensive
use of digital media, which will enhance the impact of advertising in
young people. 3. Controls on sale. Another preventive measure might be
to control sales of alcohol by limiting hours or banning sales in
supermarkets. Although relaxation of restrictions has been shown to lead
to increased sales of alcohol in some countries, it does not follow that
increased restrictions would reduce established rates of drinking.
However, there is evidence that a higher minimum age for legal drinking
is

Inform the public and encourage debate about the extent of
alcohol-related harm â Reduce the statutory blood alcohol concentration
for drivers from 80 mg/100 ml to 50 mg/100 ml. Impose a zero statutory
blood alcohol level for young drivers up to the age of 21 years. â

associated with a decrease in alcohol consumption and fatal car
accidents in young drivers (McCartt et al., 2010). There is concern
about the heavy drinking associated with nightlife culture in many UK
cities. 4. Health education. It is not known whether education about
alcohol misuse is effective. Little is known about how attitudes are
formed or changed. Although education about alcohol would seem to be
desirable, it cannot be assumed that classroom lectures or mass media
propaganda alter attitudes. In general, there is little convincing
evidence that such approaches are effective. Interventions focusing on
the family, designed to improve parenting skills and child--parent
relationships, may be more beneficial; for example, by delaying the age
at which children start drinking (Stockings et al., 2016).

Other substance use disorders Under this heading we shall consider the
use and misuse of substances other than alcohol. Although these
substances include agents such as volatile substances (inhalants), the
general term drug will be employed because it is in common use. In this
discussion the term misuse will be applied to what is classified as
'harmful use' in ICD-10 and 'use disorder' in DSM-5 (see Table 20.1 and
Box 20.1).

Epidemiology Illicit drug use The 2009 National Survey on Drug Use and
Health in the USA found that 8.7% of the population aged

12 years or over had used an illicit substance in the past month
(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2010). Use
was highest in unemployed people in the 16--25-year age range. The most
commonly used illicit drug was cannabis, with a slight majority of
illicit drug takers (58%) using cannabis only. The Psychiatric Morbidity
Survey reported that, in England, 9.2% of adults had taken an illicit
drug in the past year, most commonly cannabis (7.5%) (McManus et al.,
2009). Use was higher in men (12.0%) than in women (6.7%). Among males,
drug use was highest in black men (21.8%) and lowest in South Asian men
(3.5%). In women the highest rate of drug use was in white women (6.8%),
with South Asian women reporting the lowest

578

Other substance use disorders

Box 20.14 Illicit drug use in England in the past year Cannabis 7.5%
Cocaine 2.5% Ecstasy 1.2% Amphetamines 0.7% Amyl nitrite 0.7%
Tranquillizers 0.7% Magic mushrooms 0.6% Heroin and methadone 0.3% LSD
0.2% Crack 0.2% Anabolic steroids 0.1% Volatile substances 0.1% Source:
data from McManus S et al., Adult Psychiatric Morbidity in England,
2007, Copyright (2009), NHS Information Centre for Health and Social
Care.

rate (0.8%). Highest rates of drug use in the last year were seen in men
aged 25--34 years (28.9%) and women aged 16--24 years (21.9%). About 4%
of the UK population had used at least one Class A drug (opiate,
cocaine, lysergic acid diethylamide \[LSD\], or injected stimulant) in
the previous year (see Box 20.14). The European School Survey Project on
Alcohol and Other Drugs (2011) surveyed drug use in 15- to 16-yearolds
in 37 European countries. On average, 21% of boys and 15% of girls had
tried illicit drugs at least once in their lifetime. Again, cannabis was
by far the most commonly used drug. The country with the most frequent
cannabis use was the Czech Republic (42%), while those with the lowest
use were Albania and Bosnia (4%). The UK had the fifth highest rate
(25%). However, there was a 16% decrease in illicit drug use in
teenagers in the UK between 1995 and 2011.

Drug misuse and dependence Little is known for certain about the
prevalence of different types of drug misuse and drug dependence. In the
UK, information comes from two main sources---criminal statistics
(mainly based on offences involving the use and misuse of illicit drugs)
and community surveys. The Psychiatric Morbidity Survey reported that in
England the prevalence of drug dependence during the previous 12 months
was 4.1% (5.4% of men and 2.3% of women). Most of the dependence was on
cannabis

(3.4%). The highest frequency was in the 16--24-year age group (McManus
et al., 2009). Rates of drug dependence are much higher among the
homeless population and those in prison. For example, the British
Psychiatric Morbidity Survey found that 24% of people who were sleeping
rough met the criteria for drug dependence. Among remand prisoners, 51%
of men and 54% of women reported dependence on drugs before coming into
prison, whereas, among sentenced prisoners, 43% of men and 41% of women
reported drug dependence (Gill et al., 1996; Singleton et al., 2003).
The National Comorbidity Survey Replication in the USA (Kessler et al.,
2005b) found rather lower 12-month rates of drug dependence (0.4%), and
the rate of drug abuse was 0.8%. It is difficult to know whether the
differences between the UK and the USA in reported rates of drug
dependence are real variations in incidence or might instead reflect
differences in how the presence of drug dependence is assessed. Rates of
drug misuse and dependence are higher in disadvantaged areas of large
cities. Adolescents are at risk, particularly around school-leaving age.
A high proportion of attenders at drug-dependence clinics in large
cities are unemployed, with few stable relationships, and leading
disorganized lives. However, many young drug users remain in employment
and apparently regard their drug taking as part of normal recreational
activity for their particular peer group.

Causes of drug misuse There is no single cause of drug misuse. It is
generally argued that four factors are important: â

availability of drugs

â

a vulnerable personality

â

an adverse social environment

â

pharmacological factors.

The widespread availability of illicit drugs means that occasional use
in a young person can no longer be regarded as abnormal behaviour.
However, about 10% of those who experiment with drugs will go on to
develop problems with them (Robson, 2009). Once drug taking has started,
personal, social, and pharmacological factors play a role in determining
misuse and dependence. Studies of the aetiology of misuse of substances
other than alcohol are still at an early stage. For example, it is
unclear whether similar risk factors predict misuse of a range of
substances, including alcohol, or whether there is some specificity in
the mechanisms,

587

58

588

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs which leads certain
individuals to misuse particular substances.

Pharmacological factors

Availability of drugs

Many individuals use drugs without misusing them, and not all drug
misusers become drug-dependent. Therefore it is useful to study the
biological mechanisms underlying drug use, misuse, and dependence
separately. Drugs are used and misused because they have the ability to
serve as positive reinforcers---that is, they increase the frequency of
behaviours that lead to their use. Drugs act as positive reinforcers
because they cause positive subjective experiences such as euphoria or a
reduction in anxiety.

Drugs involved in misuse can be obtained in three main ways: 1. Legally
without prescription---nicotine and alcohol are obvious contemporary
examples, and in the nineteenth century much dependence on opioids
resulted from taking freely available remedies containing morphia. 2. By
prescription from doctors---in the first part of the twentieth century
much of the known dependence on opioids and barbiturates in western
countries was due to drugs obtained from this source; latterly,
benzodiazepine dependence was often acquired in this way. Currently,
there is concern about growing misuse of drugs prescribed to relieve
chronic pain, such as opiates and gabapentin. 3. From illicit sources
('street drugs').

Personal factors Of those who experiment with drugs, the users who go on
to develop problems appear to have some degree of personal vulnerability
before they begin taking drugs. They may live in disrupted families and
have started taking drugs at a relatively young age. Associated
behaviours include a poor school record, truancy, or delinquency. Traits
such as sensation seeking and impulsivity are also common. Many of those
who misuse drugs report depression and anxiety, but it is seldom clear
whether these are the causes or the consequences of drug misuse and
dependence. Some give a history of mental illness or personality
disorder in the family. Genetic factors are strongly implicated in a
variety of drug use disorders, but less so in drug use itself. This
suggests that drug use in general is largely dependent on factors such
as availability and social environment, but that genes contribute to the
propensity to develop harmful use and dependence (Bienvenu et al.,
2011).

Social environment The risk of drug misuse is greater in societies that
condone drug use of one kind or another. Within the immediate group,
there may be social pressures for a young person to take drugs to
achieve status. Thus drug use by individuals is influenced by substance
use by their peers or parents. There are also links between drug misuse
and indices of social deprivation, such as unemployment and homelessness
(Gill et al., 1996).

Use, misuse, and dependence

Neurobiological mechanisms An important neurobiological substrate that
mediates reinforcing effects is the midbrain dopamine system, the cell
bodies of which originate in the ventral tegmental area and innervate
the forebrain, particularly the ventral striatum. It has been proposed
that these dopamine pathways form part of a physiological reward system
and it is of interest therefore that at least some drugs of abuse,
particularly stimulants and alcohol, increase dopamine release in the
ventral striatum. This suggests that activation of midbrain dopamine
pathways may be a important property of some drugs that have a
propensity to be used and misused. Whether such a mechanism can account
for reinforcing effects of other misused drugs, such as cannabis, is
less clear (see Nutt et al., 2015). Although this hypothesis may explain
in part the social use of particular drugs, it does not account for the
misuse of drugs in some circumstances. Presumably this is a consequence
of interactions between the pharmacological properties of the drug, the
biological disposition and personality of the user, and the social
environment. Current neurobiological formulations of drug dependence
suggest that the switch from controlled drug taking to compulsive use
(misuse and dependence) is associated with a lessening of prefrontal
'reflective' processes and a corresponding increase in striatal activity
which underpins more habitual behaviours. These changes might explain
the ability of repeated drug administration in some people to 'hijack'
executive behaviour almost exclusively to serve the needs of the drug
habit, and the poor judgement and decisionmaking shown by people with
substance dependence. Learning and conditioning factors are likely to be
important in this context. It has been suggested that lower levels of
dopamine receptor availability in the midbrain, which is itself
associated with the trait of novelty-seeking, would make an individual
more likely

589

Other substance use disorders to attribute salience to drug-related cues
and thereby more likely to engage in drug misuse.

Neurobiology of tolerance and dependence The phenomena of tolerance and
withdrawal are believed to be a result of neuroadaptive changes in the
brain. These are part of a homeostatic process that counteracts the
acute pharmacological effects that occur when a drug is administered.
For example, many drugs that are misused for their anxiolytic and
hypnotic properties (e.g.Â barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and alcohol)
have, among their acute pharmacological effects, the ability to enhance
brain GABA function. During continued treatment with these agents,
adaptive changes occur in GABA- and benzodiazepine-receptor sensitivity
that tend to offset the effect of the drugs to facilitate GABA
neurotransmission. Such an effect could account for the phenomenon of
tolerance, with the result that an individual needs to take more of the
drug to produce the same pharmacological effect. If the drug is abruptly
discontinued, persistence of the adaptive changes in receptor function
could lead to a sudden decline in GABA activity. In fact, many of the
clinical features of withdrawal from anxiolytic drugs, such as anxiety,
insomnia, and seizures, can be explained on the basis of diminished
brain GABA function. Such an effect can also explain the well-known
phenomenon of cross-tolerance between anxiolytics and hypnotics and
alcohol, which makes it possible, for example, to treat alcohol
withdrawal with a benzodiazepine. Similar kinds of adaptive changes have
been proposed to account for the tolerance and withdrawal phenomena that
are seen with other drugs of misuse. For example, while acute
administration of opioids decreases the firing of noradrenaline cell
bodies in the brainstem, tolerance of this effect occurs during repeated
treatment, probably because of adaptive changes in the sensitivity of
opioid receptors. If opioids are now abruptly withdrawn, there is a
sudden increase in the firing of noradrenaline neurons and in the
release of noradrenaline in terminal regions. Increased noradrenergic
activity may account for several of the clinical features of acute
opioid withdrawal, including sweating, tachycardia, hypertension, and
anxiety. These studies have led to the use of the noradrenaline
autoreceptor agonists, clonidine and lofexidine, in the management of
opioid withdrawal (Lingford-Hughes et al., 2010). Although the positive
reinforcing actions of drugs are considered to be the major factor in
promoting drug use, withdrawal effects are likely to play an important
part once drug taking is established, because they are invariably
unpleasant, and individuals are likely to try

to prevent them by taking more of the drug. This 'negative
reinforcement' may complete the transition from impulsive to compulsive
drug use. It is also worth noting that for many months following the
cessation of a clear-cut withdrawal syndrome, dependent individuals may
experience a sudden intense desire to consume the drug. Often particular
psychological and social stimuli that were previously associated with
drug use may trigger intense craving associated with symptoms resembling
a withdrawal state. It has been proposed that a single exposure to the
drug during this period may rapidly lead to a full relapse to drug
dependence---the so-called reinstatement effect. An analogous effect has
been shown in previously drug-dependent animals, where a single priming
dose of the drug concerned can lead to a full recovery of drug-seeking
behaviours that had previously been extinguished. For a review of the
brain mechanisms involved in drug misuse and their implications for
treatment, see Lingford-Hughes et al.Â (2010).

Adverse effects of drug misuse Drug misuse has many undesirable effects,
both for the individual and for society.

Physical health Drug misuse can lead people to neglect their health, in
addition to the direct physical consequences of the substance itself.
These are discussed in more detail under the heading of individual
drugs. Intravenous drug use poses particular health risks. This practice
is very common with opioid use, but barbiturates, benzodiazepines,
amphetamines, and other drugs

Box 20.15 Some consequences of intravenous drug misuse Local Vein
thrombosis Infection of injection site Damage to arteries

Systemic Bacterial endocarditis Hepatitis B and C HIV infection
Accidental overdose

589

590

590

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs may be taken in this way.
Intravenous drug use has important consequences, which include both
local and general effects (see Box 20.15). The most serious
complications of intravenous drug use include HIV infection and
hepatitis. Rates of HIV infection among drug users in the UK are lower
than those found in some other European countries, and some attribute
this to the vigorous harm reduction policies in the UK (methadone
prescribing, needle exchanges, and education for drug users). However,
hepatitis C is a major concern, as preliminary studies suggest that this
infection has a prevalence of 50--80% among UK users who inject drugs.
Rates of hepatitis B are lower but still significant (30--50%).
Accidental drug overdose can occur by any route, but there is a far
higher risk of death from heroin overdose when the intravenous route is
used.

Substance dependence in women Substance misuse treatment services,
including those for alcohol-related disorders, may not be designed to
meet the special needs of women, because existing treatment models have
been developed for men. Clinicians need to take into account factors
such as the following: â

social and parenting responsibilities

â

possible history of victimization and sexual abuse

â

social barriers to obtaining medical care

â

the availability of female therapists.

Drug misuse in pregnancy and the puerperium It is not uncommon for drug
misusers to have limited contact with health care services until late
into pregnancy; this can occur because of limited ability to access
services, fear of the possible consequences, and the difficulties of
addressing dependence issues. Drug use in pregnancy increases the health
risks to both mother and fetus. When drugs are taken in early pregnancy,
there is a risk of increased rates of fetal abnormality. Opioids may
directly decrease fetal growth. When drugs are taken in late pregnancy,
the fetus may become dependent on them. The risk of fetal dependence is
high with heroin and related drugs, and after delivery the neonate may
develop serious withdrawal effects that require skilled care. If the
mother continues to take drugs after delivery, the safeguarding needs of
the infant will need to be considered, usually with close monitoring by
a care team to support the family and ensure the needs of the infant are
being met. Intravenous drug use may lead to infection of the mother with
HIV or other conditions that can affect the fetus. Engagement in
treatment and good antenatal care reduce the risks to both mother and
baby.

For a review of problem drug use in women, see Greenfield et al.Â (2010).

Psychiatric comorbidity There is a strong association between substance
misuse and psychiatric comorbidity (often described as dual diagnosis).
For example, people with substance misuse often have additional
diagnoses of personality disorder, depression, and anxiety. Sometimes
symptoms of mood disturbance may be a direct result of drug use. For
example, people who use stimulants can experience depression,
particularly during periods of acute withdrawal. In other cases the
relationship is more complex, with premorbid psychiatric disorder
interacting with substance misuse. Thus patients with primary
psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and
sociopathic personality disorder frequently misuse alcohol and illicit
drugs. This practice increases the morbidity of the underlying disorder
and heightens the risk of violence and selfharm. There is debate about
the best ways of delivering treatment services to such patients, but as
yet there is little firm evidence to provide guidance. The general
consensus is that an integrated service, where the same clinical team
deals with both psychiatric and substance misuse disorders, is likely to
be the best approach. However, implementing such a service model poses
challenges.

Social consequences of drug misuse There are three reasons why drug
misuse can lead to undesirable social effects. 1. Chronic intoxication
may affect behaviour adversely, leading to unemployment, motoring
offences, accidents, and family problems, including neglect of children.
2. Illicit drugs are generally expensive, so the user may steal or sell
sexual favours to obtain money. 3. Drug misusers often keep company with
one another, and those with previously stable social behaviour may be
under pressure to conform to a group ethos of antisocial or criminal
activity. The economic costs of problem drug use in the UK have been
estimated to be around Â£15 billion annually (British Medical
Association, 2013) (see Box 20.16).

Diagnosis of drug misuse It is important to diagnose drug misuse early,
at a stage when dependence may be less established and behaviour
patterns less fixed, and the complications of intravenous

591

Other substance use disorders

Box 20.16 Social costs of drug misuse in the UK Users: premature death,
physical and mental illness, low educational achievement, unemployment
Families: adverse effect on children, poverty, and deprivation Others:
victims of dangerous driving, victims of crime, victims of assault
Community: criminal activity related to drug dealing, environmental
impoverishment, health and crime risks to community Industry: sickness
absence, theft in the workplace, productivity losses, costs of security
Public sector: health care expenditure, criminal justice expenditure,
social services care and benefits

use may not have developed. Before describing the clinical presentations
of the different types of drugs, some general principles will be given.
The clinician who is not used to treating people who misuse drugs should
remember that they are in the unusual position of trying to help a
patient who may be attempting to deceive them. Patients who are misusing
heroin may overstate the daily dose to obtain extra supplies for their
own use or for sale to others. Furthermore, many patients take more than
one drug but may not say so. It is important to try to corroborate
patients' accounts of the amounts that they are taking by asking
detailed questions about the duration of drug taking, and the cost and
source of drugs, by checking the story for internal consistency, and by
external verification whenever possible.

offences, such as petty theft and prostitution, may also be indicators.

Medical presentation Dependent people may come to medical attention in
several ways. Some declare that they are dependent on drugs. Others
conceal their dependency, and ask for controlled drugs for the relief of
pain such as renal colic or dysmenorrhoea. It is important to be
particularly wary of such requests from temporary patients. Others
present with drug-related complications, such as cellulitis, pneumonia,
hepatitis, or accidents, or for the treatment of acute drug effects,
overdose, withdrawal symptoms, or adverse reactions to hallucinogenic
drugs. A few are detected during an admission to hospital for an
unrelated illness.

Taking a drug history When taking a drug history (see Box 20.17) from a
patient who is misusing drugs, the doctor should ask the patient to
describe their drug use the previous day and also to describe a typical
drug-using day (which drug, how often, and which route of use). A
typical week can be described if drugs are not used every day. The
doctor should ask about craving, withdrawal symptoms, and other features
of the dependence syndrome, such as increased tolerance of the drug and
the priority of drug-seeking over other duties and pleasures. The
patient should be asked specifically about risky behaviour, such as
dangerous injecting (into the groin or neck or infected injection
sites), and sharing injection equipment. A chronological history of the
development of use of each drug taken can then be obtained. Useful
milestones can include the first use of the drug, when the patient began
to use the drug daily, when withdrawal

Physical signs Certain physical signs lead to the suspicion that drugs
are being injected. These include needle tracks and thrombosis of veins,
especially in the antecubital fossa, wearing garments with long sleeves
in hot weather, and scars. Intravenous drug use should be considered in
any patient who presents with subcutaneous abscesses or hepatitis.

Behavioural signs Behavioural changes may also suggest drug misuse.
These include absence from school or work, and occupational decline.
Dependent people may also neglect their appearance, isolate themselves
from former friends, and adopt new friends in a drug culture. Minor
criminal

Box 20.17 Drug-using history Typical drug-using day or week Types and
quantities of drugs taken (including alcohol and nicotine) â Symptoms
experienced when drugs are unavailable â Tolerance and primacy of drug
habit â Risky behaviour â Developmental history of drug misuse â
Abstinence and relapse triggers â Medical and social complications â
Psychiatric and forensic history â â

591

592

592

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs symptoms were first
experienced, and when the patient first injected drugs. A history of
sharing injection equipment will be important when estimating the risk
of HIV or hepatitis. If patients have had periods of abstinence, it is
useful to ask which influences helped them to achieve this and what
factors led to relapse. A history of complications should include
adverse effects of the drug itself, as well as complications of the
route of administration. Any history of accidental overdose should also
be elicited. The patient should be asked about family, occupational, and
legal problems. Any past history of treatment should be elicited. There
are several possible goals in the treatment of drug misusers. Abstinence
is one, but safer drug use (harm reduction) may be a more realistic aim
for many. It is therefore important to obtain patients' views about
their drug use and the changes that they would like to make.

Laboratory diagnosis Whenever possible, the diagnosis of drug misuse
should be confirmed by laboratory tests. Urine testing is most commonly
used, as it is easier and less invasive than blood testing. Immunoassay
kits are available that are able to measure a wide range of misused
agents in a single urine sample with a reasonably long timeframe of
detection (Table 20.5). However, saliva has the advantage that samples
can readily be obtained under supervision and are therefore less easily
tampered with. It should be remembered that these 'point of care' tests
are for purposes of screening and, if inconsistent with the clinical
history, a confirmatory laboratory test using

Table 20.5 Detection of illicit substances in urine

a chromatographic approach should be requested. One issue is that
'false-positive' urine tests for illicit substances can be produced by
prescribed psychotropic medication through cross-reactions. For a review
see, Abraham and Luty (2010).

Prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation: general principles Prevention
Because treatment is difficult, considerable effort should be given to
prevention. For many drugs, important preventive measures such as
restricting availability and lessening social deprivation depend on
government, not medical, policy. However, the reduction of
overprescribing by doctors is important, especially with regard to
benzodiazepines and other anxiolytic drugs and opiates. Although
education programmes by themselves do not seem to be effective in
prevention, it is important that information about the dangers of drug
misuse should be available to young people in the school curriculum and
through the media. Another aspect of prevention is the identification
and treatment of family problems that may contribute to drug taking.
Family therapy and parental skills training are able to decrease the
uptake of illicit drugs in young people (Stockings et al., 2016). Some
young people are particularly vulnerable to drug misuse. This includes
those who have been in care, those who are homeless, and those who are
not in school due to either truancy or exclusion. Identification of
young people at risk of drug misuse should be followed by specific
psychosocial interventions that are designed to divert them away from
drug use (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2007).

Drug

Time limit for detection

Treatment

Amphetamines and analogues

2 days

Motivation and change

Buprenorphine and metabolites

8 days

Methadone (maintenance dosing)

7--9 days

Morphine

2 days

Codeine, dihydrocodeine

2 days

Cannabinoids (single use)

3--4 days

Cannabis (daily use)

20 days

Reproduced from Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 16(5), Abraham A,
Luty J, Testing for illicit drug use in mental health services, pp
369--379, Copyright (2010), with permission from The Royal College of
Psychiatrists.

When drug misuse has already begun, treatment is more effective if it is
given before dependence is established. At this stage, as at later
stages, the essential step is to motivate the patient to control their
drug taking. This requires a combination of advice about the likely
effects of continuing misuse, and help with any concurrent psychological
or social problems. The techniques of motivational interviewing
(Treasure, 2004) (see Box 20.8) may be useful here. The stages of change
model described by Prochaska and DiClemente (1986) can help the
clinician to encourage motivation effectively (see Box 20.18).

593

Other substance use disorders

Box 20.18 Stages of change model Pre-contemplation Misuser does not
believe that there is a problem, although others recognize it

Contemplation Individual weighs up the pros and cons and considers that
change might be necessary

Decision The point is reached where a decision is made to act (or not to
act) on the issue of substance misuse

can be given by the GP supported by a nurse or drugs worker from the
voluntary sector. In secondary care and in specialized drug treatment
services, patients continue to be managed by a multidisciplinary team
using the key worker system. Inpatient care is provided in psychiatric
hospitals, in psychiatric units in general hospitals, or in a small
number of specialist inpatient units. Individual counselling, group
therapy, and therapeutic communities are provided by a variety of
charitable organizations. All doctors in the UK who are treating drug
misusers for their drug problems should provide information on the
standard form to their local Regional Drug Misuse Database. Contact
numbers for this can be found in the British National Formulary.

Physical complications

Gains are maintained and consolidated. Failure may lead to relapse

The complications of self-injection may require treatment in a general
hospital. They include accidental overdose, skin infections, abscesses,
septicaemia, hepatitis, and HIV infection. Drug misusers will also need
help with general health problems such as nutrition and dental care.
Immunization against hepatitis B may be advisable.

Relapse

Principles of withdrawal

Return to previous pattern of behaviour

The withdrawal of misused drugs is sometimes called detoxification. For
many drugs, particularly opioids, withdrawal may sometimes be most
effectively undertaken in hospital (see below). Withdrawal from
stimulant drugs and benzodiazepines can often be an outpatient
procedure, provided that the doses are not very large and that
barbiturates are not taken as well. Nevertheless, the risk of depression
and suicide should be borne in mind.

Action Individual chooses a strategy for change and pursues it

Maintenance

However, relapse may be a positive learning experience, with lessons for
the future

Aims of treatment The ultimate aim of treatment of the drug-dependent
patient is a good personal and social adjustment in the absence of drug
use. However, drug withdrawal (or detoxification) by itself has no
effect on long-term outcome, so this process should be part of a wider
treatment programme. If withdrawal cannot be achieved, continued
prescribing of certain drugs (e.g.Â opioids) may be considered as part of
a harm reduction programme. In addition, psychological treatment and
social support are required. The general principles of treatment will be
outlined below, and later sections of the chapter will consider
treatment specific to individual drugs.

Treatment setting In the UK, drug misusers are treated in a number of
different settings, and there is increasing variation in the way that
care is delivered locally. A model of shared care in which drug misusers
are managed jointly by the GP and specialist services is being replaced
by a system with a wider range of care providers. For example, treatment

Drug maintenance Some clinicians undertake to prescribe certain drugs to
dependent people who are not willing to give them up. The usual
procedure is to prescribe a drug which has a slower action (and is
therefore less addictive) than the 'street' drug. For example, methadone
is prescribed in place of heroin. When this procedure is combined with
help with social problems and a continuing effort to encourage the
person to accept withdrawal, it is called maintenance therapy. The
rationale of this approach is twofold. 1. Prolonged prescribing will
remove the need for the patient to obtain 'street' drugs, and will
thereby reduce the associated physical and social damage. 2. Social and
psychological help, aided by the natural process of maturing, will give
the patient the confidence and skills to be able to give up drugs
eventually.

593

594

594

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs Maintenance drug treatment is
used in particular for patients with opioid dependence. If maintenance
drug therapy is used, it should be remembered that some drug-dependent
people convert tablets or capsules into material for injection, which is
a particularly dangerous practice. Furthermore, some attend a succession
of GPs in search of supplementary supplies of drugs. They may withhold
information about attendance at clinics or pose as temporary residents.
Some patients who receive maintenance drugs achieve a degree of social
stability, but others continue heavy drug misuse and deteriorate both
medically and socially. Patients who are on maintenance methadone are
more likely to be retained in treatment than those in drug-free
programmes. This may be important because the length of time spent in
treatment, regardless of type, is the best predictor of favourable
outcome. (The use of methadone maintenance treatment in the management
of opioid dependence is considered in more detail below.)

Harm reduction The increase in HIV and hepatitis C infection has
emphasized the importance of harm reduction programmes, of which
prescribing maintenance may be one component. The purpose of such
programmes is to increase the number of substance misusers who enter and
comply with treatment. The aim is to identify intermediate treatment
goals which, although not involving total abstinence, nevertheless
reduce the risk of drug misuse to the individual and society. For
example, even if a patient continues to misuse drugs, the risk of
hepatitis and HIV infection can be reduced by providing appropriate
education and practical help. Such interventions may result in the drug
misuser using safer routes of drug administration or sterile injection
equipment. Counselling and screening for hepatitis and HIV may also be
worthwhile, and hepatitis B vaccination should be offered to nonimmune
patients.

Psychosocial treatments Treatment for drug misuse should always include
psychosocial approaches. The usual way to deliver this is through a key
worker who institutes measures such as counselling, education, and
motivational interviewing. Practical help with benefits and information
about services can also be provided. All patients should be aware of
self-help and mutual aid groups such as Narcotics Anonymous, which can
be of great benefit to many individuals. Some patients are helped by
treatment in a therapeutic community in which there can be frank
discussion of the effects of drug taking on the person's

character and relationships within the supportive setting of the group
(for an outline of community therapy, see Chapter 24). More formal
psychological treatments, as described for the management of alcohol
misuse (see Box 20.11), can also be helpful, and have been reviewed by
the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2007). The
aim of such treatment is to increase recreational and personal skills so
that the patient becomes less reliant on drugs and the drug culture as a
source of satisfaction. Involvement of the patient's partner and family
in structured couple and family therapy is often helpful. As with
alcohol dependence, cognitive behavioural techniques can be used to
identify, in advance, situations that act as triggers for drug use. In
this way alternative methods of coping can be planned (relapse
prevention). It has already been mentioned that when a drug misuser is
confronted with a situation that contains personal cues for drug use,
they can experience acute discomfort associated with a strong desire to
use the drug. The technique of cue exposure aims, through repeated
exposure, to desensitize the drug misuser to these effects and thus
improve their ability to remain abstinent. Although contingency
management is not currently widely used in the UK, and is politically
sensitive, there is good evidence for its effectiveness in reducing drug
misuse, and it appears more effective than other psychosocial approaches
such as cognitive behaviour therapy. Contingency management provides a
variety of incentives in the form of vouchers, privileges, or modest
financial rewards to encourage individuals to modify their drug misuse
and increase health-promoting behaviours (National Institute for Health
and Clinical Excellence, 2007; Luty, 2015a).

Rehabilitation Many drug takers have difficulty in establishing
themselves in normal society. The aim of rehabilitation is to enable the
drug-dependent person to leave the drug subculture and to develop new
social contacts. Unless this can be achieved, any treatment is likely to
fail. Rehabilitation may be undertaken after treatment in a therapeutic
community. Patients first engage in work and social activities in
sheltered surroundings, and then take greater responsibility for
themselves in conditions that are increasingly similar to those of
everyday life. Hostel accommodation is a useful stage in this gradual
process. Continuing social support is usually required when the person
makes the transition to normal work and living.

59

Other substance use disorders

Dual-diagnosis patients As noted above, the management of patients with
both substance misuse and serious psychiatric illness, such as
schizophrenia or mood disorders, poses several additional challenges.
Such comorbidity is associated with an increased risk of violence and
suicide, and poorer clinical and social outcomes (National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence, 2011b). Patients with dual diagnoses are
particularly difficult to retain in treatment, and frequently present in
crisis with many unmet social needs. Drake et al.Â (2007) identified the
following components of a successful integrated treatment service for
patients with substance misuse and serious psychiatric illness: â

appropriate staff training

â

use of a recovery-based approach with expectation of recovery in the
longer term

â

multidisciplinary case management with assertive outreach to engage and
retain patients in treatment

â

some form of peer-orientated group intervention led by a professional
facilitator

â

emphasis on motivational interviewing, harm reduction, and skills
training

â

long-term community support, including daycare and residential care

â

pharmacotherapy (e.g.Â naltrexone and disulfiram), with particular
consideration of clozapine for those with schizophrenia and substance
misuse.

It is worth emphasizing that in many settings the cooccurrence of
serious mental illness and drug and alcohol misuse is the norm rather
than the exception. Recent guidance from the National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence highlights the importance of recognizing
patients with comorbid psychosis and substance misuse, and the
development of suitably integrated services to tackle both problems
(National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2011b).

Misuse of specific types of drug Opioids This group of drugs includes
morphine, heroin, codeine, and synthetic analgesics such as pethidine
and methadone. The pharmacological effects of opioids are mediated
primarily through interaction with specific opioid receptors, with
morphine and heroin being quite selective for the Î¼-opioid-receptor
type. The main medical use of opioids is for their powerful analgesic
actions; they are misused for their euphoriant and anxiolytic effects.
In the past morphine was misused widely in western countries, but it was
largely replaced as a drug of misuse

by heroin, which has a particularly powerful euphoriant effect,
especially when taken intravenously. However. the main source of illicit
opioid use currently comes from medically prescribed analgesics; in
fact, prescription opioids such as tramadol, oxycodone, and
dihydrocodeine are the second most commonly misused illicit substances
after cannabis. In the USA there are now more deaths from prescription
opioids than from heroin (Luty, 2014).

Epidemiology The Psychiatric Morbidity Survey reported that in
households in England the prevalence of illicit opiate use over the past
year was about 0.3%, and the rate of dependence was 0.1%. The lifetime
rate of illicit opiate use was almost 2% (McManus et al., 2009). Higher
rates would be expected in the homeless and in prisons.

Use and misuse The epidemiological data indicate that many people use
heroin without becoming dependent on it. However, there is no doubt that
repeated heroin use can lead to the rapid development of dependence and
marked physiological tolerance. As well as the intravenous route, opioid
users may employ other methods of administration---for example,
subcutaneous administration ('skin-popping') or sniffing ('snorting').
Heroin may also be heated on a metal foil and inhaled ('chasing the
dragon'). Heroin users may change their customary method of drug
administration from time to time. From the perspective of harm
reduction, methods that avoid intravenous administration are preferable.

Clinical effects As well as euphoria and analgesia, opioids cause
respiratory depression, constipation, reduced appetite, and low libido.
Tolerance develops rapidly, leading to the need for an increasing
dosage. Tolerance does not develop equally to all of the effects, and
constipation often continues when the other effects have diminished.
When the drug is stopped, tolerance diminishes rapidly, so a dose taken
after a period of abstinence has greater effects than it would have had
previously. This loss of tolerance can result in dangerous---sometimes
fatal---respiratory depression when a previously tolerated dose is
resumed after a drug-free interval (e.g.Â after a stay in hospital or
prison).

Withdrawal from opioids Withdrawal symptoms from opioids may include the
following: â

intense craving for the drug

â

restlessness and insomnia

â

pain in muscles and joints

595

596

596

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs â

running nose and eyes

Treatment of crises

â

abdominal cramps, vomiting, and diarrhoea

â

piloerection, sweating, dilated pupils, and raised pulse rate

â

disturbance of temperature control.

Opioid misusers may present in crisis to a doctor in any of three
situations. First, when their supplies have run out, they may seek drugs
either by requesting them directly or by feigning a painful disorder.
Although withdrawal symptoms are very unpleasant, so that the misuser
will go to great lengths to obtain more drugs, these symptoms are not
usually dangerous to an otherwise healthy person. Therefore it is best
to offer drugs only as the first step of a planned maintenance or
withdrawal programme. This programme is described in the following
sections. The second form of crisis is drug overdose. This requires
medical treatment, directed in particular towards any respiratory
depression caused by the drug. The third form of crisis is an acute
complication of intravenous drug usage, such as local infection,
necrosis at the injection site, or infection of a distant organ, often
the heart or liver.

These features usually begin about 6 hours after the last dose, reach a
peak after 36--48 hours, and then wane. Withdrawal symptoms rarely
threaten the life of someone in reasonable health, although they cause
great distress and so drive the person to seek further supplies of the
drug.

Methadone Methadone is approximately as potent, weight for weight, as
morphine. It causes cough suppression, constipation, and depression of
the central nervous system and of respiration. Pupillary constriction is
less marked. The withdrawal syndrome is similar to that of heroin and
morphine, and is at least as severe. Because methadone has a long
half-life (1--2 days), symptoms of withdrawal may begin only after 36
hours and reach a peak after 3--5 days. For this reason, methadone is
often used to replace heroin in patients who are dependent on the latter
drug.

The natural course of opioid dependence Longer-term follow-up studies of
opioid misusers have revealed that in most cases the disorder appears to
run a chronic relapsing and remitting course, with a significant
mortality (10--20%) over 10 years. Nevertheless, up to 50% of opioid
users have been found to be abstinent at 10-year follow-up, which
suggests a trend towards natural remission in survivors (Robson, 2009).
Deaths are not infrequently due to accidental overdosage, often related
to loss of tolerance after a period of enforced abstinence (see above).
Suicide is also a common cause of death. Deaths from HIV infection and
hepatitis have become more frequent in recent years. Factors associated
with a good outcome include substantial periods of employment and
marriage. Abstinence is often related to a change in life circumstances.
This is illustrated by the report of 95% abstinence among soldiers who
returned to the USA after becoming dependent on opioids during service
in the Vietnam War (Robins, 1993).

Prevention Because dependence develops rapidly and treatment of
dependent opioid misusers is unsatisfactory, preventive measures (see
'Prevention' above) are particularly important with regard to this group
of drugs.

Planned withdrawal (detoxification) The severity of withdrawal symptoms
depends on psychological as well as pharmacological factors. Therefore
the psychological management of the patient during withdrawal is as
important as the drug regimen. The speed of withdrawal should be
discussed with the patient to establish a timetable which is neither so
rapid that the patient will not collaborate nor so protracted that the
state of dependence is perpetuated. During withdrawal, much personal
contact is needed to reassure the patient; the relationship that is
formed in this way can be important in later treatment. The duration of
opioid

Box 20.19 Pharmacological management of opioid withdrawal If short-term,
non-opiate treatment is desired, use an Î±2-adrenoceptor agonist such as
lofexidine â Buprenorphine can be used for short-term opioid withdrawal
â Methadone treatment for withdrawal can be successful, but needs to be
carried out slowly with a gradual tapering of the dose â

Reproduced from Journal of Psychopharmacology, 26(7), LingfordHughes AR
et al., BAP updated guidelines: evidence-based guidelines for the
pharmacological management of substance abuse, harmful use, addiction
and comorbidity: recommendations from BAP, pp.Â 899-952, Copyright
(2012), with permission from SAGE Publications.

579

Other substance use disorders detoxification is usually about 4 weeks in
a residential setting and up to 12 weeks in a community setting. When
the dose is low, opioids can be withdrawn more quickly while giving
symptomatic treatment for the withdrawal effects (Box 20.19). Drugs such
as loperamide or metoclopramide can be useful for gastrointestinal
symptoms. Non-steroidal analgesics may be useful for aches and pains.
Another drug that may be useful is the Î±2-adrenoceptor agonist,
lofexidine. Lofexidine has a similar action to clonidine, but causes
less hypotension and is preferred for managing opiate withdrawal. When
the daily dose of heroin is high, it may be necessary to prescribe an
opioid, reducing the dose gradually. One approach is to use methadone,
which has a more gradual action. The difficulty lies in judging the
correct dose of methadone, because patients may either overstate their
use of heroin because they fear the withdrawal symptoms, or understate
it in an attempt to avoid censure. In addition, as noted below, the
strength of street drugs varies. Methadone should be given in a liquid
form to be taken by mouth. The initial methadone dose is normally 10--40
mg daily, depending on the patient's usual consumption. Users with
evidence of opioid tolerance may require dosing at the higher end of
this range. If 4 hours after an initial dose there is evidence of
withdrawal symptoms, a supplementary dose may be given, but caution is
needed because methadone is a long-acting drug, and accumulation and
toxicity could result. Street heroin varies in potency in different
places and at different times. Therefore, if possible, advice about the
equivalent dose of methadone should be obtained from a doctor with
experience of treating drug dependence. The rate of methadone reduction
depends on the clinical circumstances and the patient's clinical
responses. The most rapid regimen may take about 10 days to 3 weeks, but
slower reductions over several months may sometimes be appropriate.
Buprenorphine, a partial agonist at opioid receptors, can also be used
to manage opioid withdrawal. Again, tapering doses are used at a rate
that has been agreed with the patient. Buprenorphine is often well
tolerated, but care needs to be taken when starting treatment,
especially in the case of patients who are transferring from methadone.
This is because the partial agonist action of the drug may precipitate
acute withdrawal in patients who are transferring from higher doses of
methadone (more than 30 mg) or heroin. This can usually be avoided by
beginning treatment when the patient is already in mild withdrawal. When
opioid drugs are prescribed to drug-dependent patients, there is the
possibility of diversion of the

medication to the illegal market. This can be avoided by supervision of
consumption of each daily dose---for example, by nursing or pharmacy
staff. This practice also reduces the risk of overdose, and the daily
personal contact probably also has other therapeutic benefits. It is
generally regarded as good practice at least while treatment is being
established, although daily attendance can be difficult for patients who
are in full-time employment. In general, opiate detoxification can take
place in the community, but inpatient management should be considered
for patients who have not benefited from previous attempts at
detoxification in the community, or who need a high level of nursing and
medical care because of comorbid physical or psychiatric problems or
polydrug abuse, or those who have significant social problems. During
and after opiate withdrawal it is important to consider and institute a
suitable plan of psychosocial intervention, as outlined above (National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2007; Luty, 2015a).

Pregnancy and opioid dependence The babies of women who misuse opioids
are more likely than other babies to be premature and of low birth
weight. They may also show withdrawal symptoms after birth, including
irritability, restlessness, tremor, and a high-pitched cry. These signs
appear within a few days of birth if the mother was taking heroin, but
are delayed if she was taking methadone, which has a longer halflife in
the body. Low birth weight and prematurity are not necessarily directly
related to the drug, as poor nutrition and heavy smoking are common
among heroin misusers. Later effects have been reported, with the
children of opioid-dependent mothers being more likely, as toddlers, to
be overactive and to show poor persistence. However, these late effects
may result from the unsuitable family environment rather than from a
lasting effect of the intrauterine exposure to the drug. The pregnancies
of women who are in methadone maintenance programmes have a better
outcome than those of women who use opioids but are not in such
programmes. Some pregnant women request detoxification, but there are
significant risks to the baby if this is carried out in the first or
third trimester. The main aim of treatment in the first trimester is to
engage the mother in a multidisciplinary care programme that will
include stabilization on a suitable dose of methadone, avoidance of
illegal drug use, and a high level of antenatal care. Patients who are
receiving buprenorphine can remain on this treatment. Detoxification may
be carried out in the second trimester, employing small frequent

597

598

598

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs reductions of methadone or
buprenorphine (LingfordHughes et al., 2012).

Maintenance treatment for opioid dependence As described above,
withdrawal from opioids is the preferred treatment option, but if this
is not possible, maintenance treatment, usually with methadone, may
reduce the physical and social harm associated with the intravenous use
of illegal drug supplies. Instead of heroin, methadone is prescribed as
a liquid preparation formulated so as to discourage attempts to inject
it. Methadone maintenance treatment. Overall, patients who are receiving
methadone maintenance treatment are approximately three times more
likely to stay in treatment, and are about two-thirds less likely to use
illegal heroin (Lingford-Hughes et al., 2012). In addition, patients in
methadone maintenance programmes show less risky injecting behaviours
and lower rates of HIV infection. Methadone doses of 20--40 mg daily
have been widely advocated as appropriate for maintenance treatment, but
there is evidence that higher doses (60-- 120 mg daily) are associated
with lower rates of illegal opioid use and improved retention in the
therapeutic programme. The latter is associated with an improved
therapeutic outcome. The best approach is probably to have a flexible
dosing policy, bearing in mind the potential toxicity of methadone in
patients whose tolerance is unknown or difficult to assess. Generally it
is better to start treatment with lower doses initially (not more than
40 mg daily), and to increase the dose over a number of weeks, titrating
against the presence of withdrawal symptoms. It should be remembered
that methadone levels continue to increase for about 5 days after the
last dosage adjustment. There is also a growing evidence base for the
use of buprenorphine as an alternative to methadone for maintenance
treatment for opioid users, although there is less consensus on
appropriate dosing. In general, doses of 12--16 mg are used in
longer-term prescribing. The same principles of treatment apply as in
methadone prescribing. In controlled trials, maintenance methadone
treatment is superior to buprenorphine in retaining patients in
treatment; however, buprenorphine has a greater safety margin,
particularly in terms of adverse cardiac effects such as prolongation of
the QT interval. In practice, either buprenorphine or methadone can be
offered as maintenance treatment, the decision being guided by safety
considerations and patient choice (LingfordHughes et al., 2012). The
concerns about diversion of prescribed opioid drugs, and the risk of
overdose, have been described

above in the section on management of opioid withdrawal. They also apply
in maintenance treatment, and daily supervised consumption is commonly
continued for a proportion of patients in maintenance treatment. A UK
survey showed that supervision of methadone administration produced a
fourfold decrease in deaths caused by methadone overdose (Strang et al.,
2010). Naltrexone is a long-acting opioid antagonist that is used to
help to prevent relapse in detoxified opioiddependent patients. Although
naltrexone treatment may have a role in certain dependent individuals
who are highly motivated, such as doctors recovering from opioid
dependence, or patients engaged in structured programmes associated with
the criminal justice system, its benefit in the wider community of
opioid users is less well established (Lingford-Hughes et al., 2012).

Therapeutic community methods These forms of treatment aim to produce
abstinence by effecting a substantial change in the patient's attitudes
and behaviour. Drug taking is represented as a way of avoiding
pre-existing personal problems, and as a source of new ones. Group
therapy and communal living are combined in an attempt to produce
greater personal awareness, more concern for others, and better social
skills. In most therapeutic communities some of the staff have
previously been dependent on drugs, and so are often better able to gain
the confidence of patients in the early stages of treatment. For younger
populations, the use of a multimodal approach, including family
involvement and community support with psychotherapy and pharmacologic
interventions is important (National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence, 2007).

Anxiolytic and hypnotic drugs The most frequently misused drugs in this
group are now the benzodiazepines. Barbiturates are little prescribed
and their misuse has fallen. (It is worth noting, however, that sudden
cessation of longer-term barbiturate treatment can cause a particularly
serious withdrawal syndrome, akin to delirium tremens.) Other drugs with
sedative properties that are currently misused include gabapentin and
pregabalin. The clinical effects of these drugs are thought to result
from their ability, directly or indirectly, to facilitate brain GABA
function.

Benzodiazepines These drugs were in therapeutic use for many years
before it became apparent that their prolonged use could lead to
tolerance and dependence, with a characteristic withdrawal syndrome. The
withdrawal syndrome includes the following:

59

Other substance use disorders â

Anxiety symptoms---anxiety, irritability, tremor, and sleep disturbance.

sweating,

â

Altered perception---depersonalization, derealization, hypersensitivity
to stimuli, abnormal body sensations, and abnormal sensation of
movement.

â

Other features (rare)---depression, suicidal behaviour, psychosis,
seizures, and delirium tremens.

Epidemiology. Benzodiazepine use has been extremely widespread---for
example, it has been estimated that about 10% of the population of
Europe and the USA use benzodiazepines as anxiolytics or hypnotics. Over
the last few years there has been a decline in the prescription of
benzodiazepines for anxiety. Most long-term users are older women.
However, there is a significant misuse problem among younger people,
often associated with intravenous administration of very high doses and
polysubstance misuse. A significant proportion of people who are
dependent on alcohol are also dependent on benzodiazepines. The
Psychiatric Morbidity Survey reported that in households in England the
prevalence of illegal tranquillizer use during the previous year was
0.7%, while 0.3% of those surveyed described themselves as dependent on
tranquillizers (McManus et al., 2009). Dependence. Dependence on
benzodiazepines often results from prolonged medical use, but may also
result from the availability of benzodiazepines as street drugs because
of their euphoriant and calming effects. The withdrawal syndrome closely
resembles the anxiety symptoms for which the drugs are usually
prescribed. Thus if symptoms appear after the dose of benzodiazepine has
been reduced, the doctor may revert to a higher dosage in the mistaken
belief that these symptoms indicate a persistent anxiety disorder. It
has been estimated that about one-third of patients who take a
benzodiazepine at therapeutic doses for more than 6 months may become
dependent (Lingford-Hughes et al., 2012). Treatment. In mild dependence,
minimal interventions such as a letter from the GP providing information
and advising a reduction in dose can be effective. Treatment of more
established dependence usually consists of gradual withdrawal over a
period of at least 8 weeks. The addition of psychological therapies such
as group cognitive behavioural therapy can improve cessation rates.
Withdrawal appears to be more severe from benzodiazepines that have
short half-lives and high potency at the benzodiazepine receptor. For
this reason it is often suggested that patients who are taking such
compounds should be switched to longeracting drugs such as diazepam
before withdrawal is attempted.

Current advice is that the dose of benzodiazepine should be lowered by
about one-eighth every 2 weeks. However, if a patient experiences
troublesome withdrawal symptoms, the dose can be maintained or even
temporarily increased until the symptoms settle. If a patient has been
misusing benzodiazepines in very high doses, often in conjunction with
opioid misuse, a reduction to a therapeutic dose is a good initial aim.
In general, patients should be given no more than 30 mg diazepam daily,
which should be enough to prevent withdrawal seizures. Carbamazepine is
an alternative to benzodiazepines to control withdrawal symptoms. Many
patients experience their most troublesome withdrawal symptoms once the
benzodiazepine dose has been completely tapered off. Symptoms usually
subside over the next few weeks, although the time course can be
irregular and some symptoms, such as muscle spasm, may not appear until
other features of withdrawal have largely disappeared. A few patients
continue to experience withdrawal-like symptoms for months or even years
after cessation of benzodiazepines (prolonged withdrawal syndrome).
Prevention. The prevention of benzodiazepine dependence lies in the
restriction of prescribing. Psychological treatments are effective for
anxiety disorders (see Chapter 24), and non-pharmacological approaches
to insomnia are also beneficial (see Chapter 13). If benzodiazepines are
prescribed, this should be for the shortterm relief of symptoms that are
severely disabling or distressing. In some patients, who are already
long-term users at modest doses, the balance of benefit and risk will
favour continued prescribing, but these patients should be regularly
reviewed and advised to cut their dose of medication if they can. This
can be sufficient to persuade 20--40% of long-term benzodiazepine users
to reduce their daily dose or discontinue treatment. For further
information about benzodiazepine dependence and its treatment, see
Lingford-Hughes et al.Â (2012).

Gabapentin and pregabalin Pregabalin is licensed for the treatment of
generalized anxiety disorder (see Chapter 25) while both gabapentin and
pregabalin are used as anticonvulsants and for the treatment of
neuropathic pain. Both drugs are structural analogues of GABA, but they
do not affect GABAergic mechanisms directly, instead modifying
neurotransmitter release through interaction with the Î±2-Î´ subunit of
voltage-gated calcium channels. Both drugs produce prominent sedative
and anxiolytic effects and there is growing evidence of their misuse

599

60

600

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs and dependence, particularly
in people with a history of alcohol and other substance misuse, and in
prison settings. Some of the misuse arises from prescribing for licensed
indications; however, sales on the internet also are an important source
(Kapil et al., 2014). Misuse in combination with opiates is also quite
common. Sudden cessation of gabapentin and pregabalin can produce a
withdrawal syndrome. Agitation, confusion, and disorientation are the
most frequent symptoms, while sweating, gastrointestinal symptoms,
tachycardia, hypertension, and insomnia are also reported. Treatment
with gabapentin or pregabalin rapidly alleviates the syndrome, but
administration of benzodiazepines does not seem helpful. For a review of
pregabalin and gabapentin misuse, see Mersfelder and Nichols (2016).

Cannabis Cannabis is derived from the plant Cannabis sativa. It is
consumed either as the dried vegetative parts in the form known as
marijuana or grass, or as the resin secreted by the flowering shoots of
the female plant. Cannabis contains several pharmacologically active
substances, of which the most powerful psychoactive compound is
Î´-9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). It seems likely that the pharmacological
effects of cannabinols are mediated through interaction with specific
cannabinoid receptors in the central nervous system. Endogenous ligands
for these receptors include 2-arachidonoyl glycerol and arachidonoyl
ethanolamide (anandamide) (for a review of the pharmacology of cannabis,
see Lu and Mackie, 2016). Over the past decade more potent cannabis
preparations (known as 'skunk') have become widely available; these have
higher levels of THC and a greater risk of adverse effects.
Epidemiology. In some parts of North Africa and Asia, cannabis products
are consumed in a similar way to alcohol in western society. In North
America and Europe the intermittent use of cannabis by young people is
widespread. The Psychiatric Morbidity Survey reported that in households
in England the lifetime use of cannabis was about 23%, with 7.5% of
those surveyed reporting use in the past year, and 2.7% meeting the
criteria for cannabis dependence (McManus et al., 2009). Clinical
effects. The effects of cannabis vary with the dose, the person's
expectations and mood, and the social setting. Users sometimes describe
themselves as 'high' but, like alcohol, cannabis seems to exaggerate the
preexisting mood, whether that was exhilaration or depression. Users
report an increased enjoyment of aesthetic experiences, and distortion
of the perception of time and space. There may be reddening of the eyes,
dry mouth, tachycardia, irritation of the respiratory tract,

and coughing. Cannabis intoxication can lead to dangerous driving.
Adverse effects. No serious adverse effects have been demonstrated among
those who use cannabis intermittently in small doses. Although there is
no positive evidence of teratogenicity, cannabis has not been proved
safe during the first 3 months of pregnancy. Inhaled cannabis smoke
irritates the respiratory tract and is potentially carcinogenic. The
most common adverse psychological effect of acute cannabis consumption
is anxiety. Mild paranoid ideation is also not uncommon. At higher
doses, toxic confusional states and occasionally psychosis in clear
consciousness may occur. Cannabis and mental illness. It is well
established that cannabis can modify the course of an established
schizophrenic illness, with evidence from a systematic review that users
are more likely to experience more severe positive symptoms, more
relapses, and longer hospitalizations (Schoeler et al., 2016). The
question of whether cannabis use can predispose to the later development
of schizophrenia has been more controversial. Andreasson et al.Â (1987)
followed up 45,570 Swedish conscripts for 15 years. They found that the
relative risk of developing schizophrenia was 2.5 times higher in
individuals who used cannabis, and that the relative risk for heavy
users was six times higher. Although these data suggest that cannabis
could be a risk factor for the development of schizophrenia, it is also
possible that those who are predisposed to develop schizophrenia are
also predisposed to misuse cannabis. However, more recent prospective
cohort studies that have adjusted for various baseline confounding
factors such as history of mental illness, continue to demonstrate an
increased risk of new-onset psychotic symptoms in young people who use
cannabis. The increase in risk of psychosis is about twofold in
individuals without other risk factors for schizophrenia (rising from
about 7 in 1000 to 14 in 1000 in regular users). However, in people at
high risk of schizophrenia due, for example, to a strong family history,
a twofold increase in risk could be important, perhaps raising the risk
of psychosis from about 1 in 10 to 1 in 5 (Hall and Degenhardt, 2011).
There has also been concern that cannabis use among teenagers might
increase the risk of other poor psychosocial outcomes, such as mood and
anxiety disorders, cognitive impairment, poor educational performance,
job instability, traffic accidents, and uptake of more harmful illegal
drugs. Such associations have continued to be reported consistently;
however, the direction of causation is not always clear and confounding
by factors such as childhood adversity is difficult to exclude
completely (Hall, 2015). It is, of course, possible

601

Other substance use disorders that genes predisposing to cannabis misuse
might also predispose to mental illnesses such as depression and
schizophrenia---a possibility supported by recent GWAS studies (Walters
and Owen, 2016). Tolerance and dependence. There is evidence that
tolerance to the effects of cannabis can occur in individuals who are
exposed to high doses for a prolonged period of time, but it is less
evident in those who use small or intermittent doses. However, some
patients do report inability to control cannabis use despite personal
and social harm resulting from it. The lifetime risk of cannabis
dependence in those who have ever used it is estimated at about 9%,
compared to 32% for nicotine, 23% for heroin, 17% for cocaine, and 15%
for alcohol (Hall, 2015). Withdrawal from high doses of cannabis gives
rise to a syndrome of irritability, nausea, insomnia, and anorexia.
These symptoms are generally mild in nature. The best way to manage
cannabis dependence is unclear, but psychosocial interventions are
commonly provided. Although abstinence may be difficult to achieve,
treatment does appear to lower cannabis use and the associated harms.
For a review of the adverse effects of cannabis use, see Hall (2015),
and for an outline of the management of cannabis dependence, see
Winstock et al.Â (2010).

Stimulant drugs These drugs include amphetamines, and related substances
such as methylphenidate. Cocaine is also a stimulant drug, but is
considered separately in the next section.

Amphetamines Amphetamines play a significant role in the pharmacological
treatment of attention deficit disorder (see Chapter 16) and narcolepsy
(see Chapter 13), but have very little other use in medical practice.
The psychomotor stimulant effects of amphetamines are believed to result
from their ability to release and block the reuptake of dopamine and
noradrenaline. Epidemiology. Amphetamines are currently used rather less
than cocaine in the UK. The Psychiatric Morbidity Survey reported that
in households in England the lifetime use of amphetamines was about
8.6%, with 0.7% reporting use in the past year, and 0.2% of those
surveyed meeting the criteria for amphetamine dependence (McManus et
al., 2009). In the past, addiction to stimulant drugs arose chiefly from
injudicious prescribing. However, most amphetamines are now illegally
synthesized and used as a 'street drug', known as 'speed' or 'whizz'. As
well as being taken orally or intravenously, amphetamines can also be

'snorted' (taken like snuff). A pure form of amphetamine ('ice') can be
smoked or injected, and is said to produce particularly powerful
effects. Clinical effects. Apart from their immediate effect on mood,
amphetamines cause over-talkativeness, overactivity, insomnia, dryness
of the lips, mouth, and nose, and anorexia. The pupils dilate, the pulse
rate increases, and the blood pressure rises. With large doses there may
be cardiac arrhythmia, severe hypertension, cerebrovascular accident,
and, occasionally, circulatory collapse. At increasingly high doses,
neurological symptoms such as seizures and coma may occur. Acute adverse
psychological effects of amphetamines include dysphoria, irritability,
insomnia, and confusion. Anxiety and panic can also be present.
Obstetric complications include miscarriage, premature labour, and
placental abruption (see Box 20.20). Amphetamine-induced psychosis.
Prolonged use of high doses of amphetamines may result in repetitive
stereotyped behaviour (e.g.Â repeated tidying). A paranoid psychosis that
has been likened to paranoid schizophrenia may also be induced by
prolonged high doses. The features include persecutory delusions,
auditory and visual hallucinations, and sometimes hostile and
dangerously aggressive behaviour. Usually the condition subsides within
about a week, but occasionally it persists for months. It is not certain
whether these prolonged cases represent true drug-induced psychoses,
schizophrenia provoked by the amphetamine, or are merely coincidental.
Whatever the nature of the association, it is not uncommon for patients
with a history of amphetamine misuse to present to general psychiatric

Box 20.20 Some complications of amphetamine and cocaine misuse Medical
Cardiovascular---hypertension, stroke, arrhythmias, myocardial
infarction Infective---abscesses, septicaemia, hepatitis, HIV
Obstetric---reduced fetal growth, miscarriage, premature labour,
placental abruption Other---weight loss, dental problems, epilepsy,
general neglect

Psychiatric Anxiety, depression, antisocial behaviour, insomnia,
paranoid psychosis

601

602

602

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs services. The ability of
amphetamines to provoke psychosis has been one of the observations that
has supported the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia (see Chapter 11).
Tolerance and dependence. From the epidemiology of amphetamine use, it
seems that many recreational users do not progress to misuse and
dependence. In more persistent users, tolerance to amphetamines leads to
higher doses of the drug being taken. A withdrawal syndrome ('crash') of
varying severity follows cessation of amphetamine use. In mild cases it
consists mainly of low mood and decreased energy. In some cases,
particularly in heavy users, depression can be severe, and accompanied
by anxiety, tremulousness, lethargy, fatigue, and nightmares. Craving
for the drug may be intense, and suicidal ideation may be prominent.
Dependence on amphetamines can develop quickly. Dependence on stimulant
drugs may be recognized from a history of overactivity and high spirits
alternating with inactivity and depression. Whenever amphetamine use is
at all likely, a urine sample should be taken for analysis as soon as
possible because these drugs are quickly eliminated. Prevention and
treatment. Prevention of amphetamine misuse depends on restriction of
the drugs and careful prescribing. Doctors should be wary of newly
arrived patients who purport to suffer from narcolepsy. Treatment of
acute overdoses requires sedation and management of hyperpyrexia and
cardiac arrhythmias. Most toxic symptoms, including paranoid psychoses,
resolve quickly when the drug is stopped. An antipsychotic drug may be
needed to control florid symptoms. The treatment of amphetamine
dependence is difficult, as craving for the drug can be intense.
Abstinence is the usual goal and to achieve this a full range of social
and psychological interventions may be needed (see above).
Benzodiazepines may be helpful for managing acute distress caused by a
severe withdrawal syndrome. Antidepressants do not appear to be
effective in promoting abstinence, although they may be appropriate for
treatment of a persistent depressive disorder. Abstinencebased
programmes are not suitable for all misusers, and in view of the
considerable harm that is associated with repeated intravenous misuse,
some specialist centres have undertaken maintenance treatment with oral
dexamphetamine. While retrospective studies show a possible benefit, at
present there are no large randomized trials supporting this practice.
Psychosocial approaches such as cognitive behaviour therapy and
contingency management continue to be the mainstay of treatment
(Lingford-Hughes et al., 2012).

Cocaine Cocaine is a central nervous stimulant with effects similar to
those of amphetamines (described above). It is a particularly powerful
positive reinforcer in animals, and causes strong dependence in humans.
These latter effects probably stem from the ability of cocaine to block
the reuptake of dopamine into presynaptic dopamine terminals. This leads
to substantial increases in extracellular levels of dopamine in the
ventral striatum, and consequent activation of the physiological 'reward
system' (Lingford-Hughes et al., 2010). Cocaine is administered by
injection, by smoking, and by sniffing into the nostrils. The latter
practice sometimes causes perforation of the nasal septum. In
'freebasing', chemically pure cocaine is extracted from the street drug
to produce 'crack', which has a very rapid onset of action, particularly
when inhaled. Epidemiology. The Psychiatric Morbidity Survey reported
that in households in England the lifetime use of cocaine was about
6.3%, with 2.5% of those surveyed reporting use in the past year, and
0.4% meeting the criteria for cocaine dependence. Clinical effects. The
psychological effects of cocaine include excitement, increased energy,
and euphoria. This can be associated with grandiose thinking, impaired
judgement, and sexual disinhibition. Higher doses can result in visual
and auditory hallucinations. Paranoid ideation may lead to aggressive
behaviour. More prolonged use of high doses of cocaine can result in a
paranoid psychosis with violent behaviour. This state is usually
short-lived, but may be more enduring in those with a pre-existing
vulnerability to psychotic disorder. Formication ('cocaine bugs')---a
feeling as if insects are crawling under the skin---is sometimes
experienced by heavy cocaine users. The physical effects of cocaine
include increases in pulse rate and blood pressure. Dilatation of the
pupils is often prominent. Severe adverse effects of cocaine use include
cardiac arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, myocarditis, and
cardiomyopathy. Cocaine use has also been associated with
cerebrovascular disease, including cerebral infarction, subarachnoid
haemorrhage, and transient ischaemic attacks. Seizures and respiratory
arrest have been reported. Obstetric complications include miscarriage,
placental abruption, and premature labour. Tolerance and dependence. In
persistent users, tolerance of the effects of cocaine develops and a
withdrawal syndrome similar to that seen following withdrawal of
amphetamines can occur. After acute cocaine use, the 'crash' consists of
dysphoria, anhedonia, anxiety,

603

Other substance use disorders irritability, fatigue, and
hypersomnolence. If the preceding cocaine use has been relatively mild,
such symptoms resolve within about 24 hours. After more prolonged use,
the symptoms are more severe and extended, and are associated with
intense craving, depression, and occasionally severe suicidal ideation.
Craving for cocaine can re-emerge after months of abstinence,
particularly if the individual is exposed to psychological or social
cues previously associated with its use. Treatment. Acute intoxication
may require sedation with benzodiazepines or, in severe cases, an
antipsychotic agent. Concurrent medical crises such as seizures or
hypertension should be managed in the usual way. As with amphetamines,
the treatment of cocaine dependence is difficult because of the intense
craving associated with abstinence from the drug. For moderate cocaine
users it may be sufficient to provide psychological and social support
on an outpatient basis. Heavy and chaotic users with strong dependence
will need more intensive management, perhaps in a residential setting.
There is little evidence to support substitute pharmacological
treatments to date, although several approaches have been evaluated
(Lingford-Hughes et al., 2012). Various psychosocial approaches can be
helpful for patients with cocaine dependence. These include cognitive
behavioural therapies, contingency management, and programmes that
incorporate twelve-step approaches. With regard to individual treatment
programmes, it is worth noting that people who misuse cocaine often
misuse other drugs, such as opioids and alcohol.

MDMA ('ecstasy') The recreational use of 3,4
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), also known as 'ecstasy', increased
rapidly at the end of the twentieth century but might now be declining
to some extent. In 1998, about 5% of 16--24year-olds reported using
ecstasy in the past year, and in 2002 the number had risen to about 7%
(Aust et al., 2002). In 2007, the Psychiatric Morbidity Survey found a
corresponding figure of 3.4% (McManus et al., 2009). Lifetime use of
ecstasy in this survey across all ages was about 5%. Ecstasy is a
synthetic drug that is classified in the DSM-IV substance list as a
hallucinogen. However, it has stimulant as well as mild hallucinogenic
properties. It is usually taken in tablet or capsule form in a dose of
about 50--150 mg. Given in this way, its effects last for about 4--6
hours. Like amphetamines, ecstasy increases the release of dopamine, but
it also releases 5hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), which may account for its
hallucinogenic properties.

Clinical effects. Ecstasy produces a positive mood state, with feelings
of euphoria, sociability, and intimacy. It also produces sensations of
newly discovered insights and heightened perceptions. The physical
effects of ecstasy include loss of appetite, tachycardia, bruxism, and
sweating. Tolerance of successive doses of ecstasy develops quickly.
Weekend users describe a midweek 'crash' in mood, which may represent
withdrawal effects. Adverse reactions. Rarely, ecstasy can cause severe
adverse reactions, and deaths due to hyperthermia and its complications
have been reported in healthy young adults. Hyperthermia probably
results from the effect of ecstasy in increasing brain 5-HT release,
together with the social setting in which the drug is customarily taken
(crowded parties with prolonged and strenuous dancing). Deaths have also
been reported due to cardiac arrhythmias, although pre-existing cardiac
disease may have played a role. Intracerebral haemorrhage has occurred
in ecstasy users, probably as a consequence of hypertensive crises.
Cases of toxic hepatitis could reflect impurities in manufacture or an
idiosyncrasy in metabolism. The use of ecstasy has been associated with
acute and chronic paranoid psychoses. However, as with other
drug-induced psychotic states, it is not clear how far such disorders
represent idiosyncratic reactions of vulnerable individuals. There are
also reports of 'flashbacks', which are the recurrence of abnormal
experiences weeks or months after drug ingestion. Such effects have been
reported with other hallucinogens (see below). It is possible that
repeated use of ecstasy may increase the risk of adverse psychiatric
outcomes such as depression, anxiety, and depersonalization. In
experimental animals, including primates, repeated treatment with
ecstasy causes degeneration of 5-HT nerve terminals in the cortex and
forebrain. Therefore it is possible that such effects could occur in
humans, and some brain imaging studies have shown changes in serotonin
transporter binding that could equate to 5-HT terminal damage; however,
the findings are not consistent. Whether such a change could be
associated with long-term neuropsychological or psychiatric sequelae is
disputed, but there is evidence for memory impairments in former ecstasy
users (Parrott, 2013). Prevention and harm reduction. Although the risk
of serious harm following acute ecstasy use appears to be low, it is
important to inform potential users about the acute risks and the
potential long-term hazard of neurotoxicity, cognitive impairment, and
adverse longer-term psychiatric sequelae. Consumption of large doses and

603

604

604

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs pre-existing psychiatric
disorder are likely to be associated with increased risk of adverse
reactions. Education may also help users to avoid heatstroke by
encouraging them to take breaks from dancing and to consume sufficient
isotonic replacement fluid during vigorous exercise. However, the
consumption of large amounts of water has sometimes caused death due to
hyponatraemia. For a review of ecstasy and the complications of its use,
see Winstock and Schifano (2009) and Parrott (2013).

Hallucinogens Hallucinogens are sometimes known as psychedelics, but we
do not recommend this term because it does not have a single clear
meaning. The term psychotomimetic is also used, because the drugs
produce changes that bear some resemblance to those of psychotic
symptoms. However, the resemblance is not close, so we do not recommend
this term either. The synthetic hallucinogens include LSD,
dimethyltryptamine, and methyldimethoxyamphetamine. Of these drugs, LSD
is encountered most often in the UK. Hallucinogens also occur naturally
in some species of mushroom ('magic mushrooms'), and varieties
containing psilocybin are consumed for their hallucinogenic effects. The
mode of action of hallucinogenic drugs is unclear, but most act as
partial agonists at brain 5-HT2A receptors. Epidemiology. The
Psychiatric Morbidity Survey reported that in households in England the
lifetime use of LSD was 3.5%, while that of magic mushrooms was 5.0%.
The corresponding figures for use in the past year were 0.2% and 0.6%,
respectively (McManus et al., 2009). Clinical effects. The effects of
LSD have been most well studied, and will be described here. The
physical actions of LSD are variable. There are initial sympathomimetic
effects---heart rate and blood pressure may increase and the pupils may
dilate. However, overdosage does not appear to result in severe
physiological reactions. In predisposed individuals, the hypertensive
effects of hallucinogens can cause adverse myocardial and
cerebrovascular effects. The psychological effects develop within a
period of 2 hours after LSD consumption, and generally last from 8 to 14
hours. The most remarkable experiences are distortions or
intensifications of sensory perception. There may be confusion between
sensory modalities (synaesthesia), with sounds being perceived as
visual, or movements being experienced as if heard. Objects may be seen
to merge with one another or to move rhythmically. The passage of time
appears to be slowed, and experiences seem to have a profound meaning.

A distressing experience may be distortion of the body image, with the
person sometimes feeling that they are outside their own body. These
experiences may lead to panic, with fears of insanity. The patient's
mood may be one of exhilaration, distress, or acute anxiety. According
to early reports, behaviour could be unpredictable and extremely
dangerous, with users sometimes injuring or even killing themselves as a
result of behaving as if they were invulnerable. Since then there may
have been some reductions in such adverse reactions, possibly because
users are more aware of the dangers and take precautions to ensure
support from other people during a 'trip'. Whenever possible, adverse
reactions should be managed by 'talking down' the user, explaining that
the alarming experiences are due to the drug. If there is not time for
this, an anxiolytic such as diazepam should be given and is usually
effective. Tolerance of the psychological effects of LSD can occur, but
a withdrawal syndrome has not been described. It is uncertain whether
dependence occurs, but it is likely to be rare. It has been argued that
the use of LSD can cause long-term abnormalities in thinking and
behaviour, or even schizophrenia, but the evidence for this is weak.
However, flashbacks (i.e.Â the recurrence of psychedelic experiences
weeks or months after the drug was last taken) are a recognized event. A
number of medications, including benzodiazepines and anticonvulsants,
have been reported to be helpful in the management of flashbacks, but
there have been no controlled trials (Abraham, 2009). Recently, there
have been calls for a clinical reevaluation of psychedelic drugs such as
LSD, with claims that their adverse effects, particularly when taken in
safe and controlled conditions, have been overstated. It is also
suggested that, following their use, there can be an improved sense of
wellbeing and therapeutically relevant 'openness to change'. For an
expression of this view, see Carhart-Harris et al.Â (2016).

Phencyclidine and ketamine Phencyclidine and ketamine are sufficiently
different from the hallucinogens in their actions to require a separate
description. They can be synthesized easily, taken by mouth, smoked, or
injected. Phencyclidine was developed as a dissociative anaesthetic, but
its use was abandoned because of adverse effects such as delirium and
hallucinations. It is related to the currently used anaesthetic agent
ketamine. Ketamine is also misused, and has similar effects to those of
phencyclidine. However, ketamine has a shorter half-life than
phencyclidine and is less likely than the latter to be associated with
grossly disturbed behaviour.

605

Other substance use disorders Both phencyclidine and ketamine antagonize
neurotransmission at N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, which may
account for their hallucinogenic effects. The psychological effects of
ketamine in healthy volunteers have been used to model some of the
clinical symptoms and cognitive changes that are seen in patients with
schizophrenia, and are discussed in Chapter 11. Ketamine has also
aroused interest because of its unexpected ability to produce a striking
temporary remission of depression in treatmentrefractory patients.
Phencyclidine is widely available in the USA but is little used in the
UK. Most users of phencyclidine also use other drugs, particularly
alcohol and cannabis. Ingestion of phencyclidine may be inadvertent, as
it is often added to other street drugs to boost their effects. Ketamine
is growing in popularity and is mainly used in the 'club scene'
(Winstock and Schifano, 2009). Ketamine has a good safety profile when
used as an anaesthetic, for which purpose it is given intravenously.
Illicit use of ketamine can involve intravenous use or 'snorting'. When
taken by either of these routes the drug has short duration of action
(about 1--2 hours). Clinical effects. Small doses of phencyclidine
produce drunkenness, with analgesia of the fingers and toes, and even
anaesthesia. Intoxication with the drug is prolonged, the common
features being agitation, depressed consciousness, aggressiveness and
psychotic-like symptoms, nystagmus, and raised blood pressure. With high
doses there may be ataxia, muscle rigidity, convulsions, and absence of
response to the environment even though the eyes are wide open.
Phencyclidine can be detected in the urine for 72 hours after it was
last taken. If serious overdoses are taken, sympathomimetic crises may
occur with hypertensive heart failure, cerebrovascular accident, or
malignant hyperthermia. Status epilepticus may appear. Rhabdomyolysis
can lead to renal failure. Fatalities have been reported, due mainly to
hypertensive crisis but also to respiratory failure or suicide. Other
people may be attacked and injured. Chronic use of phencyclidine may
lead to aggressive behaviour accompanied by memory loss. Tolerance of
the effects of phencyclidine occurs, although withdrawal symptoms are
rare in humans. Animal studies suggest that dependence could occur in
heavy users (Abraham, 2009). Low doses of ketamine produce mood
elevation, while at higher doses the user experiences sensory and
perceptual distortions and out-of-body experiences similar to those
reported with LSD. Frightening hallucinations, thought disorder, and
confusion can also occur. These usually remit after a few hours.
Patients who are

admitted to hospital with ketamine intoxication show evidence of
sympathetic overactivity, with chest pain, tachycardia, and
palpitations. They may also experience nausea and vomiting, difficulty
in breathing, ataxia, mutism, and temporary paralysis. Rarely, severe
agitation and rhabdomyolysis can occur. Treatment of intoxication.
Treatment of acute phencyclidine intoxication is symptomatic, according
to the features listed above. Haloperidol, diazepam, or both may be
given. Caution should be exercised if using benzodiazepines alone,
because of the risk of further behavioural disinhibition. Chlorpromazine
should be avoided, as it may increase the anticholinergic effects of
phencyclidine and worsen the patient's mental state. Hypertensive crisis
should be treated with antihypertensive agents such as phentolamine.
Respiratory function must be carefully monitored because excessive
secretions may compromise the airway in an unconscious patient.
Treatment of ketamine intoxication is also supportive and symptomatic.
Antipsychotic drugs have little effect on the psychiatric symptoms, but
benzodiazepines are reported to be helpful. For reviews, see Abraham
(2009) and Winstock and Schifano (2009).

Volatile substances (solvents, inhalants) The misuse of volatile
substances (also known as solvents) is not new, but public concern about
widespread misuse first became apparent in the USA in the 1950s. Similar
concerns emerged in the UK in the early 1970s. Although public interest
has waned since then, there is a continuing high level of volatile
substance misuse, particularly among adolescents. The pharmacological
actions of volatile substances in the central nervous system are unclear
but, like alcohol, they may increase the fluidity of neuronal cell
membranes and are active at many different kinds of ion channel. This
seems to result in increases in brain GABA function and decreases in
NMDA receptor activity (Beckley and Woodward, 2013). Epidemiology.
Volatile substance misuse is a worldwide problem. The Psychiatric
Morbidity Survey (McManus et al., 2009) reported that in households in
England the lifetime use of volatile substances was about 1.4%, with
0.1% of those surveyed reporting use in the past year. However, the
survey did not include teenagers under the age of 16 years, among whom
current use may be highest. Amyl nitrite ('poppers') appears to be more
commonly used (see Box 20.14), but has a different pattern of use and is
not discussed here. Volatile substance misuse is highly prevalent among
the very young homeless populations in South American countries.

605

60

606

Chapter 20 The misuse of alcohol and drugs Volatile substance use occurs
mainly in young men, and is more common in individuals from lower
socioeconomic groups. Most of the young people who are known to use
volatile substances do so as a group activity, and only about 5% are
solitary users. There is some evidence that a subgroup of volatile
substance users have antisocial personality disorder and are likely to
use and misuse multiple substances. However, the epidemiological data
suggest that most individuals who use volatile substances do so only a
few times and then abandon the practice (Ives, 2009). Substances used
and methods of use. The volatile substances used are mainly solvents and
adhesives (hence the name 'glue-sniffing'), but also include many other
substances, such as petrol, cleaning fluid, aerosols of all kinds,
agents used in fire extinguishers, and butane. Toluene and acetone are
frequently used. In this chapter the term 'volatile substance' will be
used to denote all of these various substances. The methods of ingestion
depend on the substance, and include inhalation from the tops of
bottles, beer cans, cloths held over the mouth, plastic bags, and
sprays. Volatile substance use may be associated with the taking of
other illicit drugs, or with tobacco or alcohol consumption, which can
be heavy. Clinical effects. The clinical effects of volatile substances
are similar to those of alcohol. The central nervous system is first
stimulated and then depressed. The stages of intoxication are similar to
those of alcohol, namely euphoria, blurring of vision, slurring of
speech, incoordination, staggering gait, nausea, vomiting, and coma.
Compared with alcohol intoxication, volatile substance intoxication
develops and wanes rapidly (within a few minutes, or up to 2 hours).
There is early disorientation, and 40% of cases may develop
hallucinations, which are mainly visual and often frightening. This
combination of symptoms may lead to serious accidents. Adverse effects.
Volatile substance misuse has many severe adverse effects, of which the
most serious is sudden death. These fatalities occur during acute
intoxication, and about 100 such deaths occurred annually in the UK in
the 1990s, although there has been a decline subsequently, with 36
deaths being recorded in 2008 (Ghodse et al., 2010). Around 50% of the
deaths are due to the direct toxic effects of the volatile substance,
particularly cardiac arrhythmias and respiratory depression. The rest
are due to trauma, asphyxia (due to plastic bag over the head), or
inhalation of stomach contents. Chronic users may show evidence of
neurotoxic effects, and severe and disabling peripheral neuropathy

has been described in teenager misusers. Other neurological adverse
effects, particularly associated with toluene, include impaired
cerebellar function, encephalitis, and dementia. Volatile substance
misuse can also damage other organs, including the liver, kidney, heart,
and lungs. Gastrointestinal symptoms include nausea, vomiting, and
haematemesis. Tolerance and dependence. Dependence can develop if use is
regular, but physical withdrawal symptoms are unusual. When such
symptoms occur they usually consist of sleep disturbance, irritability,
nausea, tachycardia, and, rarely, hallucinations and delusions. With
sustained use over a period of 6--12 months, tolerance can develop.
Diagnosis. The diagnosis of acute volatile substance intoxication is
suggested by several features, including glue on the hands, face, or
clothes, a chemical smell on the breath, rapid onset and waning of
intoxication, and disorientation in time and space. Chronic misuse is
diagnosed mainly on the basis of an admitted history of habitual
consumption, increasing tolerance, and dependence. A suggestive feature
is a facial rash ('glue-sniffer's rash') caused by repeated inhalation
from a bag. Treatment. As noted above, for many users experimentation
with volatile substances is a temporary phase that does not appear to
lead to persistent misuse or dependence. Advice and support may be
sufficient for such individuals. However, a significant subgroup of
those who misuse volatile substances also misuse other substances, such
as alcohol and opioids. Such individuals are more likely to have an
antisocial personality disorder and to have experienced a chaotic and
abusive family life. Treatment of this group is difficult, and a full
range of psychological and social treatments is likely to be needed (see
above). There is no specific pharmacotherapy for volatile substance
misuse, but associated psychiatric disorders such as depression may
require treatment in their own right. Prevention. Prevention of volatile
substance misuse may best be directed at the large numbers of young
people who experiment with volatile substances as a result of curiosity
or peer pressure. Policies include the restriction of sales of volatile
substances to children and adolescents. Education, particularly
concerning the risk of severe injury and death (which can, of course,
occur in occasional or first-time users), seems to be worthwhile. Wider
social measures, such as the provision of improved recreational
facilities, have also been advocated. For a review of volatile substance
misuse, see Beckley and Woodward (2013).

670

Further reading

Table 20.6 Some examples of substances used as 'recreational' drugs Drug

Pharmacology

Intoxication syndrome

Spice ('Genie', 'Yucatan Fire')

Herbal mixture with addition of synthetic cannabinoids

Changes in mood and perception, cognitive impairment, psychosis, scleral
injection, hunger

Salvia ('Magic Mint', 'Mystic Sage')

Plant extract from Salvia divinorum. Active substance is salvinorin A,
an opiate kappa receptor agonist

Alterations in mood and somatic sensations. Striking changes in
perception of external reality, confusion, amnesia, anxiety

Mephedrone, ('Meow-Meow'), MDPV ('Vanilla Sky', 'Purple Wave')

Synthetic cathinone derivatives, related to active substance in khat.
Cause release of monoamine neurotransmitters, including dopamine

Euphoria, increased sociability, agitation, psychosis, seizures,
tachycardia chest pain, hyponatraemia

Reproduced from The Journal of Emergency Medicine, 44(6), Johnson LA,
Johnson RL and Portier RB, Current "legal highs", pp.Â 1108--1115,
Copyright (2013), with permission from Elsevier.

Legal highs The phrase 'legal high' refers to a substance with
psychotropic properties whose sale or use is not banned (or not yet
banned) by legislation. The recreational use of such substances appears
to be increasing in the UK and Europe. A European survey, conducted in
2011, found that between 5% and 10% of young people admitted taking a
legal high at least once in the previous year (Luty, 2014). Legal highs
can be purchased on the internet and may also be sold by dealers
together with more established illicit drugs. Because the development
and uptake of legal highs evolves quickly, with the aim of circumventing
usual regulatory channels, their effects, particularly in terms

of intoxication, may not be well recognized. Generally, legal highs are
designed to mimic effects of more traditional drugs of abuse. As one
substance is banned, manufacturers search for replacements with a
similar pharmacology that have not yet been caught in the regulatory
framework. Because of this, any description of available compounds is
always likely to be dated, but a few examples are given in Table 20.6.
The passage of legislation by the UK Government in 2016 (The
'Psychoactive Substances Act') is designed to lessen the use of legal
highs by making it an offence to produce or supply psychoactive
substances for human consumption. There are exceptions for approved
medical and scientific use. How well this legislation will work in
practice remains to be seen.

Further reading Gelder MG, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr, Andreasen NC and Geddes JR
(eds) (2009). Section 4.27: Substance use disorders. In: The New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2011). Alcohol-Use
Disorders: Diagnosis, assessment and management

of harmful drinking and alcohol dependence. Clinical Guideline 115.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, London. (A
periodically updated comprehensive review.) Robson P. (2009). Forbidden
Drugs. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (A very readable account of
illegal drugs, the reasons for their use, and treatment of misuse.)

607

608

609

CHAPTER 21

Suicide and deliberate self-harm Introduction 609

Suicide prevention 619

Suicide 609

Deliberate self-harm 620

The assessment of suicidal risk 615

The management of deliberate

The management of suicidal patients 617

self-harm 626

Introduction Suicide is among the ten leading causes of death in most
countries for which information is available and the second most common
cause of death in young people (Hawton, 2012). There are some
indications that the overall rate is decreasing (see Figure 21.1), and
the most recent figures confirm that this reduction has continued (World
Health Organization, 2014): between 2000 and 2012 the age-standardized
suicide rate has fallen by 26% internationally (23% in men and 32% in
women). However, these changes have not been uniform and range from a
decline of nearly 70% in some countries to an increase of over 250% in
others. In the UK, suicide is the third most important contributor to
life years lost after coronary heart disease and cancer. Over the past
50 years, several countries have reported a considerable increase in the
number of young men who kill themselves, although there have been some
signs that this trend may be reversing (Bridge et al., 2006). The
subject is important to all doctors who may at times encounter people
who are at risk for suicide, and who may also at

times be involved in helping family members or others after a suicide.
The importance of the subject is reflected in national and international
initiatives for suicide prevention (US Office of Surgeon General, 2012;
World Health Organization, 2012, 2014; Department of Health, 2012; Mann
et al., 2005). For every suicide it is estimated that more than 30
non-fatal episodes of self-harm occur. Depression, substance misuse, and
other mental health problems are more common in people who deliberately
harm themselves, and the rate of suicide in the year following an
episode of deliberate self-harm (DSH) is some 60--100 times that of the
general population (Hawton et al., 2003a). The rate of suicide is also
raised in the period following discharge from inpatient psychiatric
care. For these reasons, psychiatrists need to be particularly well
informed about the nature of DSH and suicidal behaviour, and about
strategies aimed at their prevention. For an overview of relevant
aspects of suicide and DSH, see Wasserman and Wasserman (2009).

Suicide The act of suicide Suicide has been defined as an act with a
fatal outcome, deliberately initiated and performed in the knowledge or

expectation of its fatal outcome. People who take their lives do so in a
number of different ways. In England and Wales, according to the Office
for National Statistics in 2008, hanging was the most commonly used
method

610

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm

25 20 Rate

610

15 10 5 0

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 Total 10.1 12.3 10.9
11.6 13.2 14.1 15.8 14 13.9 16 Males 21 24.7 16.6 17.5 14.9 16.7 20 23.2
24.1 21.4 Females 5.2 7.4 7 6.7 7.7 8 8 7.4 6.8 6.9 Year

Figure 21.1 Global suicide rates (per 100,000), by gender, for the
period 1950--95 (selected countries indicated in Table 21.1). Reproduced
from Figures and Facts about Suicide, pp.Â iv, Copyright (1999), with
permission from World Health Organization
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/1999/WHO\_ MNH_MBD_99.1.pdf accessed
26/03/12 with permission.

for suicide by men (53%), followed by drug overdose (16%),
self-poisoning by car exhaust fumes, drowning, and jumping. The
commonest methods for women were drug overdose (36%), hanging (34%), and
drowning (Wasserman and Wasserman, 2009). In the USA, gunshot and other
violent methods are more frequent than in the UK. Most completed
suicides have been planned. Precautions against discovery are often
taken---for example, choosing a lonely place or a time when no one is
expected. However, in most cases a warning is given. In a US study,
suicidal ideas have been expressed by more than two-thirds of those who
die by suicide, and clear suicidal intent by more than one-third. Often
the warning had been given to more than one person. Over 40% of people
who committed suicide had consulted their general practitioner in the
preceding weeks (Pirkis and Burgess, 1998). Data from the National
Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide (2015) suggest that
25--29% of suicides have been in recent contact with mental health
services.

The epidemiology of suicide The accuracy of the statistics Accurate
statistics about suicide are difficult to obtain because information
about the exact cause of a sudden death is not always available. For
example, in England and Wales, official figures depend on the verdicts
reached in coroners' courts. A verdict of suicide is recorded by a
coroner only if there is clear evidence that the injury was
self-inflicted and that the deceased intended to kill

himself. If there is any doubt about either point, a verdict of
accidental death or an open verdict is recorded. Open verdicts are more
often recorded when the method of self-harm is less active
(e.g.Â drowning compared with hanging) and when the deceased is younger
(Neeleman and Wessely, 1997). It is accepted that official statistics
underestimate the true rates of suicide. Local culture and customs, in
particular the stigma attached to suicide and the procedure and
requirements for classifying a death as suicide have a marked effect
(Hawton and van Heeringen, 2009). For instance, a ninefold to tenfold
underestimation of reported suicides has been suggested for India
(Gajalakshmi and Peto, 2007). An attempt has been made to overcome these
problems by reporting 'probable suicides', which combine deaths
attributed to suicide and 'open verdicts' (Schapira et al., 2001).

Differences in suicide rates For these reasons, caution should be
exercised when comparing rates of suicide in different time periods and
between different countries. Despite this, longstanding and fairly
stable differences in rates of suicide between different countries are
apparent. The finding of Sainsbury and Barraclough (1968) that, within
the USA, the rank order of suicide rates among immigrants from 11
different nations reflected those within the 11 countries of origin
supports these differences in national rates. The current suicide rate
in the UK (10.1 per 100,000 in men and 2.8 per 100,000 in women) is in
the lower range of those reported in western countries. Generally,
higher rates are reported in eastern and northern European countries,
and lower rates in Mediterranean countries. The suicide rates in the
former

61

Suicide Soviet Union have increased substantially since its break-up,
particularly among men (53.9 per 100,000 for the Russian Federation and
for Lithuania, and 63.3 per 100,000 for Belarus (World Health
Organization, 2010). Reported suicide rates are very low in Islamic
countries. The gender differences are less in Asian than in western
countries. Some methods of suicide reflect local culture; for example,
self-immolation or ritual disembowelment (Cheng and Lee, 2000), or
carbon monoxide poisoning produced by burning charcoal in Hong Kong
(Leung et al., 2002).

Changes in suicide rates Suicide rates have changed in several ways
since the beginning of the last century. Recorded rates for both men and
women fell during each of the two world wars. There were also two
periods during which rates increased. The first, during 1932 and 1933,
was a time of economic depression and high unemployment. However, the
second period, between the late 1950s and the early 1960s, was not.
Following this, from 1963 to 1974 the rates declined in England and
Wales but not in other European countries (with the exception of Greece)
or in North America. The decline in England and Wales has been
attributed to a change from coal gas, which has been the most common
method of suicide, to non-toxic North Sea gas.

Variations with the seasons In England and Wales, suicide rates have
been highest in spring and summer for every decade since 1921--1930. A
similar pattern has been found in other countries in both hemispheres.
The reason for these fluctuations is not known, although it has been
suggested that they relate to changes in the incidence of mood
disorders. Seasonal variations in suicide rates may be diminishing
(Ajdacic-Gross et al., 2008).

Demographic characteristics Suicide is about three times as common in
men as in women. The highest rates of suicide in both men and women are
in the elderly. Suicide rates are lower among the married than among
those who have never been married, and increase progressively through
widowers, widows, and the divorced. Rates are higher in the unemployed.
Rates of suicide are high among prisoners, especially among those on
remand (Fazel et al., 2005). Rates are particularly high in certain
professions, particularly those with access to lethal materials. The
rate in veterinary surgeons is four times the expected rate (Bartram and
Baldwin, 2010); in pharmacists and farmers

it is double the expected rate (Charlton et al., 1993); and it is also
higher in doctors, particularly female doctors (Meltzer et al., 2008).
Suicide among doctors is discussed further on page 615.

The causes of suicide Methods of investigation Hawton and van Heeringen
(2009) have helpfully divided risk factors into distal and proximal (see
Box 21.1). Investigations into the causes of suicide face several
difficulties. Information about the health and wellbeing of the deceased
at the time of suicide cannot be obtained directly. Prospective studies
of suicide are difficult to arrange because of its relative rarity. Two
strategies have been used to overcome these difficulties. 1. 'The
psychological autopsy'. Retrospective studies have pieced together the
circumstances that surrounded the suicide by examining records and
interviewing doctors, relatives, and friends who knew the deceased well.
2. Epidemiological studies have examined associations between social and
demographic factors and rates of suicide in different populations at
different times. Both approaches have methodological problems. However,
the psychological autopsy has helped to identify factors that precede
suicide, the proximal factors. The second approach has informed our
understanding

Box 21.1 Risk factors for suicide Distal Genetic loading Personality
characteristics (e.g.Â impulsivity, aggression) â Restricted fetal growth
and perinatal circumstances â Early traumatic life events â
Neurobiologicaldisturbances(e.g.serotonindysfunction and
hypothalamic--pituitary axis hyperactivity) â â

Proximal Psychiatric disorder Physical disorder â Psychosocial crisis â
Availability of means â Exposure to models â â

Reproduced from The Lancet, 373(9672), Hawton K, van Heeringen K,
Suicide, pp.Â 1372--1381, Copyright (2009), with permission from
Elsevier.

611

612

612

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm (Foster et al., 1997). Rates
are particularly high in borderline and antisocial disorder (Lieb et
al., 2004).

of social circumstances that may give rise to increased rates of
suicide, the distal factors.

Individual psychiatric and medical factors (proximal factors) The most
consistent finding of studies of proximal factors (see Table 21.1) is
that the large majority (90%) of those who die from suicide have some
form of mental disorder at the time of death, and psychiatric disorders
account for over 40% of the population risk (Cavanagh et al., 2003).
Similar results have been reported in several countries (Cheng and Lee,
2000), although in some rural regions the association of diagnosed
psychiatric disorder with suicide appears to be less strong
(Manoranjitham et al., 2010; Tong and Phillips, 2010). The most frequent
conditions include the following: â

â

Depression. About 4% of individuals with depression will die by suicide
and those who do are more likely to have a past history of self-harm and
to have had recent contact with mental health services, and have
experienced a sense of hopelessness (Coryell and Young, 2005). They are
also more often single, separated, or widowed, are older, and are more
often male. However, suicide risk is higher in the first episode of
depression, often related to alcohol use. A review of community studies
found suboptimal or no treatment for their illness in the majority
(Wasserman and Wasserman, 2009). Those receiving no treatment were 1.8
times more likely to commit suicide. In bipolar disorder the lifetime
risk is elevated to 10--15%, more often early on in the course of the
illness (Goodwin and Jamison, 2007). Personality disorder. This is
diagnosed in 40--50% of people who commit suicide, according to some
surveys

Table 21.1 Rates of mental disorders in five psychological autopsy
studies on completed suicides using DSM-III or DSM-III-R criteria
Depressive disorders

36--90%

Alcohol dependence or abuse

43--54%

Drug dependence or abuse

4--45%

Schizophrenic disorders

3--10%

Organic mental disorders

2--7%

Personality disorders

5--44%

Source: data from Lonnqvist JK, Epidemiology and causes of suicide. In:
Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJ Jr and Geddes JR (eds), The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn, Copyright (2009), Oxford
University Press.

â

Alcohol misuse. This is strongly associated with suicide risk,
especially in the presence of dependence (Conner and Duberstein, 2004).
The lifetime risk is 7% (Inskip et al., 1998; Wilcox, 2004). Among those
who are alcohol-dependent, suicide is more likely when the patient is
male, older, has a long history of drinking, and has a history of
depression and of previous suicidal attempts. Suicide risk is also
increased among those whose drinking has caused physical complications,
relationship problems, difficulties at work, or arrests for drunkenness
offences.

â

Drug misuse. This is relatively common among those who die by suicide,
particularly in the young (Wilcox, 2004).

â

Schizophrenia. The suicide rate is increased among young men early in
the course of the disorder, particularly when there have been relapses,
when there are depressive symptoms, and when the illness has turned
previous academic success into failure. The lifetime risk is estimated
at about 5% (see Chapter 11).

Other factors associated with suicide are a past history of DSH (see
page 622) and poor physical health, especially epilepsy, eating
disorders, especially anorexia nervosa (Chapter 13) and ADHD. For a
review, see Stenager and Stenager (2000).

Social factors Comparisons of the rates of suicide between and within
different countries have been conducted over a period of many years.
None has been more influential than that undertaken by Emile Durkheim at
the end of the nineteenth century (Durkheim, 1951). Durkheim examined
variations in the rate of suicide within France, and between France and
other European countries. He demonstrated that a range of social factors
have an impact on rates of suicide. Rates were lower at times of war and
revolution, and increased during periods of both marked economic
prosperity and economic depression. He concluded that social integration
and social regulation were central to the rate of suicide. Durkheim
described four types of suicide, including 'anomic' suicide. This refers
to suicide by a person who lacks ties with other people and no longer
feels part of society. (Durkheim's other types of suicide were egoistic,
altruistic, and fatalistic.) More recent studies have repeatedly
demonstrated that areas with high unemployment, poverty (Gunnell et al.,
1995), divorce, and social fragmentation (Whitley et al., 1999) have
higher rates of suicide. There is

613

Suicide evidence that the economic recession of 2008, with its following
austerity and rising unemployment, has been associated with a rise in
the male suicide rate even in relatively protected countries such as the
UK (Barr et al., 2012), with reports of even greater effects in those
most affected, such as Greece. The increased rates of suicide are most
marked in areas of greater unemployment (Barr et al., 2012) and among
men aged 45--54 (Appleby et al., 2015). Such studies cannot be used as a
means of examining the characteristics of individuals who kill
themselves, but they do provide important information about factors
within society that may affect the rate of suicide. Cross-cultural
evidence indicates wide variation in the meaning of suicide and social
attitudes to it, which appears to be associated with differences in
suicide rates (Stack, 2000). Another social factor that appears to
affect rates of suicide is media coverage of suicide. Suicide and
attempted suicide rates were shown to increase after television
programmes and films depicting suicide (Stack, 2003). The precise nature
of the media content may also be influential in increasing or decreasing
the risk of imitative behaviour (Niederkrotenthaler et al., 2010).

Biological factors A family history of suicide increases the risk at
least twofold (Qin et al., 2003), and genetic factors account for 45% of
variance in suicidal behaviour (Bondy et al., 2006). The genetic
mechanism may be largely independent of mechanisms giving rise to
psychiatric disorders (Roy et al., 2000), but related to impulsivity and
aggression. Suicidal behaviour has been linked to decreased activity of
brain 5-HT pathways. Markers of 5-HT function, such as cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) 5-HIAA and the density of 5-HT transporter sites, are
lowered in suicide victims. The association between underactivity of 5HT
pathways and suicidal behaviour appears to extend across diagnostic
boundaries, and may be related to increased impulsivity and aggression
in those with low brain 5-HT function. The link between 5-HT function
and suicidality has prompted genetic association studies in people with
suicidal behaviour. However, reliable associations with 5-HT-related and
other genes have not yet emerged (Antypa et al., 2013). For reviews of
the neurobiology and genetics of suicide, see Ernst et al. (2009) and
Niculescu et al.Â (2016).

Psychological factors Psychological factors in suicide have been derived
mainly by extrapolation from studies of non-fatal DSH, but the factors
may not be the same. Research has

indicated that hopelessness, impulsivity, dichotomous thinking,
cognitive constriction, problem-solving deficits, and overgeneralized
autobiographical memory are all associated with suicidal behaviour. All
of these could act by predisposing an individual to act impulsively
(Williams and Pollock, 2000).

Conclusion The associations considered above do not, of course,
establish causation, but they do suggest three sets of interacting
influences: 1. Medical factors, including depressive disorder, alcohol
misuse, and abnormal personality. 2. Psychological factors, of which
hopelessness is the strongest. 3. Social factors, especially social
isolation and poverty. Personality traits of impulsivity and aggression
could be important, and these may have a biological basis, possibly
related to dysregulation of the 5HT system.

Special groups Suicide among those in contact with psychiatric services
Given the strong association between mental disorder and suicide, it is
not surprising that many people who kill themselves are in contact with
psychiatric services. The National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and
Homicide, which was set up in 1997, collects information on all patients
who committed suicide while in contact with the mental health services
(National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide, 2015). Between
1997 and 2007, coroners recorded a verdict of suicide or an open verdict
in 54,808 deaths, of which 14,249 (26%) had been in contact with mental
health services during the preceding 12 months. During this period the
annual number of inpatients dying by suicide had decreased by 46% and
the number dying by strangulation or hanging had decreased by 69%.
Suicide after discharge from hospital occurred within 1 month in 43% of
238 patients studied, and nearly 50% of these suicides occurred before
the first follow-up appointment (Hunt et al., 2009). Figures from the
2015 Inquiry indicate that the rate of suicide by patients in contact
with mental health services has increased considerably. These figures
are complicated by the fact that there are more patients overall so they
are not rates. A striking increase has been in the number of suicides of
patients under the care of Crisis Resolution/Home Treatment teams. There
are now three times as many

613

614

614

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm suicides under the care of
these teams as inpatient suicides, and in 37% of these the patient had
been under their care for less than a week. The first week after
discharge is the period of highest risk. These findings indicate that
the following measures are necessary. â

Support patients intensively during the first few weeks after discharge
from hospital. The first follow-up should take place within 7 days of
discharge.

â

Plan in advance the steps that should be taken if the patient ceases to
cooperate with treatment.

â

Monitor the side effects of drugs, and change to one with fewer side
effects if these seem likely to lead to refusal to continue with the
medication.

â

Ward design. Since hanging was a common method of suicide by inpatients,
wards are regularly inspected to eliminate 'ligature points'.

when the person is better informed---for example, when it has been
explained to them that death from cancer need not be as painful as they
formerly believed.

Older people In most countries the highest rate of suicide is among
people aged over 75 years. The most frequent methods are hanging among
men, and drug overdose among women (Harwood et al., 2000). In addition
to active self-harm, some older adults die from deliberate selfneglect
(e.g.Â by refusing food or necessary treatment). As in younger age
groups, depression is a strong predictor of suicide in the elderly.
Other risk factors are social isolation, bereavement, and impaired
physical health (Harwood et al., 2006). Personality is also important,
especially anxious and obsessional traits (Harwood et al., 2001). For
further information about suicide in the elderly, see Harwood and Jacoby
(2000).

'Rational' suicide

Children and adolescents

Despite the findings reviewed above, suicide can be the rational act of
a mentally healthy person. Several European countries (e.g.Â Switzerland,
the Netherlands, Belgium) have recognized this and made changes in their
law to allow those with a long-term illness to take their own life with
help from friends, family, or even medical practitioners. An established
and well-documented decision is generally required, together with
confirmation that the individual does have capacity. The law has not yet
changed in the UK, but interpretation of recent cases and parliamentary
activity indicates that there soon may be a change. The major concern is
to draft a bill with wording to protect elderly people from pressure
from family who are either burdened by their care or likely to benefit
financially by their death. Public opinion has certainly shifted towards
a recognition that reasonable people may, in some circumstances, want to
end their own lives. Lack of personal autonomy and perceived dignity due
to infirmity and chronic pain are the commonest reasons advanced by
those who pursue this path. It is a good general rule to assume, until
further enquiry has proved otherwise, that a person who talks of suicide
has an abnormal state of mind. If the assumption is correct---and it is
sometimes difficult to identify a depressive disorder when the person is
first seen---the patient's urge to die is likely to diminish when their
abnormal mental state recovers. Moreover, even when the decision to die
was arrived at rationally, it is still reasonable to attempt to prevent
the person from selfharm. This is because a decision about suicide may
have been made rationally but on the basis of incomplete information or
mistaken assumptions. It may change

Children Suicide is rare in children. In 1989, the suicide rate for
children aged 5--14 years was estimated to be 0.7 per 100,000 in the USA
and 0.8 per 100,000 in the UK. Little is known about the factors that
lead to suicide in childhood, except that it is associated with severe
personal and social problems. Children who have died by suicide have
usually shown antisocial behaviour. Suicidal behaviour and depressive
disorders are common among their parents and siblings (Shaffer, 1974).
Shaffer distinguished two groups of children. The first group consisted
of children of superior intelligence who seemed to be isolated from less
educated parents. Many of their mothers were mentally ill.Â Before death,
the children had appeared depressed and withdrawn, and some had stayed
away from school. The second group consisted of children who were
impetuous, prone to violence, and resentful of criticism (Shaffer et
al., 2000).

Adolescents Suicide rates among adolescents have increased in recent
years. In England and Wales the increase has mainly been in male
adolescents aged 15--19 years (McClure, 2000), and the principal methods
among males have been hanging, and poisoning with car exhaust fumes
(Hawton et al., 1999). The risk factors are similar to those in adults,
with high rates of comorbid psychiatric disorders (Bridge et al., 2006).
A psychological autopsy study (Houston et al., 2001) showed that about
70% of adolescents who killed themselves had had psychiatric disorders,
mainly depressive and personality disorders, which were sometimes

615

The assessment of suicidal risk comorbid. Many of them had misused
alcohol or drugs. The suicide was often the culmination of longterm
difficulties with relationships and other psychosocial problems.
Approximately two-thirds of these individuals had made a previous
suicide attempt.

Ethnic groups Rates among immigrants closely reflect those in their
countries of origin. In the UK, there is particular concern about
possible high rates of suicide among Asian women (Ahmed et al., 2007).

High-risk occupational groups Doctors. The suicide rate among doctors is
higher than that in the general population, and the excess is greater
among female doctors (Meltzer et al., 2008). Many reasons have been
suggested for the excess, including the ready availability of drugs,
increased rates of addiction to alcohol and drugs, the stresses of work,
reluctance to seek treatment for depressive disorders, and the selection
into the medical profession of predisposed personalities. A
psychological autopsy study of 38 working doctors who had died by
suicide (Hawton et al., 2004) found psychiatric disorder---mainly
depressive disorder and/ or drug or alcohol misuse---in about two-thirds
of cases, and problems at work in a similar proportion. About one-third
of cases had relationship problems, and about a quarter had financial
problems. Self-poisoning with drugs was more common than in the general
population, and 50% of the anaesthetists used anaesthetic agents. Rates
have been reported to be higher in anaesthetists, community health
doctors, general practitioners, and psychiatrists (Hawton et al., 2001).
Much of this increased risk is accounted for by female doctors. It is
not known whether this relates more to factors in the individual
(contributing to specialty choice and to suicide rate) or to the nature
of the work. However, significant personal and mental health problems,
beyond work stress, are generally identifiable in those who do commit
suicide (Hawton et al., 2004a).

Veterinary surgeons have the highest suicide rates of any professional
group. The reasons for this are unclear, but are likely to closely
parallel those identified for doctors, and include managerial issues, a
high workload, and possibly the impact of regularly euthanizing sick
animals (Platt et al., 2010). Farmers also have high rates of suicide.
Possible causes include the ready availability of means of self-harm
(e.g. poisons and firearms), together with work stress and financial
difficulties (Malmberg et al., 1999). Students, contrary to popular
belief, are not a highrisk group, with rates close to their age group in
the general population.

Suicide pacts In suicide pacts, two (or occasionally more) people agree
that at the same time each will take his or her own life. Completed
suicide pacts are uncommon. In Far Eastern countries, those involved are
usually lovers aged under 30 years, and in western countries they are
usually interdependent couples aged over 50 years. Suicide pacts have to
be distinguished from cases where murder is followed by suicide
(especially when the first person dies but the second is revived), or
where one person aids another person's suicide without intending to die
himself or herself. The psychological causes of these pacts are not
known with certainty. Usually the two people have a particularly close
relationship but are socially isolated from others. Often a dominant
partner initiates the suicide (Brown and Barraclough, 1997). Mass
suicide is occasionally reported. For example, 913 followers of the
People's Temple cult died at Jonestown, Guyana, in 1978, and 39 members
of the Heaven's Gate Cult in California died in 1997. These tragic
events are generally initiated by a charismatic leader who has strong
convictions and is sometimes deluded. Sometimes there is evidence to
suggest murder followed by suicide within the group. There have been
several cases in which the internet has been used to arrange suicide
pacts (Naito, 2007).

The assessment of suicidal risk General issues Every doctor should be
able to assess the risk of suicide. There are two requirements. The
first is a willingness to make direct but tactful enquiries about the
patient's intentions. There is no convincing

evidence that asking a patient about suicidal inclinations makes
suicidal behaviour more likely. On the contrary, someone who has already
thought of suicide is likely to feel better understood when the doctor
raises the issue, and this feeling may reduce the risk.

615

61

616

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm The second requirement is to
be alert to factors that predict suicide. However, prediction based on
these factors has a low sensitivity and specificity. Even if the risk is
correctly assessed as high, it is difficult to predict when the suicide
will take place. The limitations of prediction have been illustrated by
a study by Goldstein et al.Â (1991). They tried to develop a statistical
model to predict the suicides from among a group of high-risk hospital
patients, but failed to identify a single one of the 46 patients who
later committed suicide. The same conclusion was drawn by Kapur and
House (1998).

Assessment of risk The most obvious warning sign is a direct statement
of intent.It cannot be repeated too often that there is no truth in the
idea that people who talk of suicide do not do it. On the contrary,
two-thirds of those who die by suicide have told someone of their
intentions. However, a difficulty arises with people who talk repeatedly
of suicide. In time their statements may no longer be taken seriously,
being discounted as manipulation. However, some who repeatedly make such
threats do eventually kill themselves. Just before the act, there may be
a subtle change in their way of talking about dying, sometimes in the
form of oblique hints instead of former more open statements. Risk is
assessed further by considering factors that have been shown to be
associated with suicide (see page 611). Factors that point to greater
risk include the following: â

marked hopelessness

â

a history of previous suicide attempts: around 40--60% of those who die
by suicide have made a previous attempt

â

social isolation

â

older age

â

depressive disorder, especially with severe mood change with insomnia,
anorexia, and weight loss

â

alcohol dependence, especially with physical complications or severe
social damage

â

drug dependence

â

schizophrenia, especially among young men with recurrent severe illness,
depression, intellectual deterioration, or a history of a previous
suicide attempt

â

chronic painful illness

â

epilepsy

â

abnormal personality.

Completing the history When these general risk factors have been
assessed, the rest of the history should be evaluated. The interview
should be conducted in an unhurried and sympathetic way that allows the
patient to admit any despair or selfdestructive intentions. It is
usually appropriate to start by asking about current problems and the
patient's reaction to them. Enquiries should cover losses, both personal
(e.g.Â bereavement or divorce) and financial, as well as loss of status.
Information about conflict with other people and social isolation should
also be elicited. Physical illness should always be enquired after,
particularly any painful condition in the elderly. (Some depressed
suicides have unwarranted fears of physical illness as a feature of
their psychiatric disorder.) When assessing previous personality, it
should be borne in mind that the patient's self-description may be
coloured by depression. Whenever possible, another informant should be
interviewed. The important points include mood swings, impulsive or
aggressive tendencies, and attitudes towards religion and death.

Mental state examination The assessment of mood should be particularly
thorough, and cognitive function must not be overlooked. The interviewer
should then assess suicidal intent. It is usually appropriate to begin
by asking whether the patient thinks that life is too much for them, or
whether they no longer want to go on. This first question can lead to
more direct enquiries about thoughts of suicide, specific plans, and
preparations for suicide, such as saving tablets. It is important to
remember that severely depressed patients occasionally have homicidal
ideas---they may believe that it would be an act of mercy to kill other
people, often their partner or a child, to spare them intolerable
suffering. Such homicidal ideas should always be taken extremely
seriously.

Assessment of risk among inpatients The suicide of a hospital inpatient
is always of particular concern, and it is important to be able to
identify those at risk. Unfortunately, the general guiding risk factors
noted above are present in so many of those admitted that they
differentiate poorly between degrees of risk.

671

The management of suicidal patients

The management of suicidal patients General issues

Management in hospital

Having assessed the suicidal risk, the clinician should make a treatment
plan and try to persuade the patient to accept it. The first step is to
decide whether the patient should be admitted to hospital or treated as
an outpatient or day-patient. This decision depends on the intensity of
the suicidal intention, the severity of any associated psychiatric
illness, and the availability of social support outside hospital. If
outpatient treatment is chosen, the patient should be given a telephone
number so that they can obtain help at any time if they feel worse.
Frustrated attempts to find help can be the last straw for a patient
with suicidal inclinations. If the immediate risk of suicide is judged
to be high, inpatient care is likely to be required unless there is an
effective crisis management team available, or reliable relatives who
wish to care for the patient themselves, understand their
responsibilities, and are able to fulfil them. Such a decision requires
an exceptionally thorough knowledge of the patient and their problems,
and of the relatives. It is best if in doubt to play safe. If hospital
treatment is essential and the patient refuses it, admission under a
compulsory order will be necessary. In most countries imminent suicide
risk is sufficient for detention for observation, but the duration and
conditions will vary. Readers should be aware of and follow the legal
requirements of the jurisdiction in which they work.

The obvious first requirement is to prevent patients from harming
themselves. These arrangements require adequate staffing and a safe ward
environment. A policy (see Box 21.3) should be agreed with all staff
members when the patient is admitted. Ward arrangements. Ward design
should minimize the availability of means of self-harm. This includes
preventing access to open windows and other places where jumping could
lead to serious injury or death, removing ligature points from which
hanging could take place (e.g.Â by boxing in pipework), preventing access
to ward areas in which self-injury would be easier to enact, and
removing potentially dangerous personal possessions such as razors and
belts. If the risk is high, special nursing arrangements may be needed
to ensure that the patient is never alone. The management policy (see
Box 21.3) should be:

Management in the community

If intensive supervision is needed for more than a few days, the patient
may become irritated by it and try to

The management of patients who have been identified as being at risk of
suicide but do not require admission involves continuing assessment of
the suicidal risk, and agreed plans for appropriate treatment and
support (see Box 21.2). Where they are available and the patient
consents to this, relatives or other carers should be involved. The key
worker should liaise closely with other members of the community team to
ensure that there will be a prompt and appropriate response if the
patient or the carers ask for additional help. If medication is
required--- for example, to treat a depressive disorder---the drug that
is least dangerous in overdose should be chosen. The choice should be
discussed with the general practitioner, and small quantities should be
prescribed. When appropriate, medication should be kept safely by the
carer. Both patients and carers need to know how to obtain immediate
help in an emergency.

â

reviewed carefully at frequent intervals until the danger passes

â

explained to and agreed with each new shift of staff, especially when
the review has led to changes in the plan

â

explained to and, if possible, agreed with the patient. If the patient
does not agree to necessary parts of the plan, the reasons for these
should be carefully explained. If the patient still refuses to
collaborate, and the risk is high, compulsory treatment may be required.

Box 21.2 Care of the potentially suicidal patient in the community Full
assessment of patient and proposed carers Organization of adequate
social support Regular review of the suicide risk and the arrangements
Safe psychiatric medications given in adequate dosage using less toxic
drugs Small prescriptions Involvement of relatives in the safe storage
of tablets Arrangements for immediate access to extra help for patient
and carers

617

618

618

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm

Box 21.3 Care of the suicidal patient in hospital General requirements

During admission

Safe ward environment An adequate number of well-trained staff Good
working relationships among staff, and between staff and patients Agreed
policies for the observation, assessment, and review of patients

Regular review of risk and plans Agreed plans for the level of
supervision Clear communication of assessments and plans between staff,
especially when shifts change Agree action to be taken if the patient
leaves the ward without notice or permission

On admission

At discharge

Assess risk Agree the level of observation Remove any objects that might
be used for suicide Discuss and agree plans with the patient Agree a
policy for visitors (number, duration of visit, and what they need to
know)

Agree date and plan for aftercare in advance of discharge Discuss and
agree the plan with the patient and those involved in their care
Prescribe in adequate but non-dangerous amounts Arrange follow-up, and
agree action to be taken if the patient does not attend

evade it. Staff should anticipate this, ensure that treatment of any
associated mental illness is not delayed, and support the patient
intensively while waiting for the treatment to have an effect. However
determined the patient is to die, there is usually some small remaining
wish to go on living. If the staff adopt a caring and hopeful attitude,
those remaining positive feelings can be encouraged, generating a more
positive view of the future. The patient can then be helped to see how
an apparently overwhelming accumulation of problems can be dealt with
one by one. The risk of suicide is higher during periods of home leave
arranged to test readiness for discharge. It is also greater during the
period immediately before discharge and in the first few weeks after
discharge (see page 613). Therefore the discharge plan should include
early reassessment, effective psychological and social support, and
rapid response to any need for extra help. Plans for leave and for
discharge should be discussed with the patient and their concerns
elicited. If appropriate, the plans should be modified. However
carefully patients are cared for, suicide will happen, despite all the
efforts of the staff. The doctor then has an important role in
supporting others,

particularly nurses who have come to know the patient particularly well.
Although it is essential to review every suicide carefully to determine
whether useful lessons can be learned, this process should never become
a search for a scapegoat.

The relatives When a patient has died by suicide, the relatives require
not only the support that is appropriate for any bereaved person, but
also help with the common responses of anger, guilt, and a feeling that
they could have done more to prevent the death. Barraclough and Shepherd
(1976) found that relatives usually reported that the police conducted
their enquiries in a considerate way, but that the public inquest was
very distressing. Subsequent newspaper publicity caused further grief,
reactivating the events surrounding the death and increasing feelings of
stigma. Sympathetic listening, explanation, and counselling are likely
to help relatives with these difficulties. Anger is often a part of this
grief, and should be met by a willingness to listen and to provide full
information. Wertheimer (2001) has reviewed the consequences of suicide
for relatives.

619

Suicide prevention

Suicide prevention In population terms, suicide is a rare event. In
Western Europe it accounts for approximately one to two deaths per
10,000 people per year. Therefore a controlled trial of an intervention
to reduce suicide would require many thousands of participants. Such
trials have not been conducted. However, there is some evidence from
observational studies to suggest measures that could affect the rate of
suicide in the population (see Box 21.4). Such possible measures will be
discussed next. For further information, see Hawton (2000b).

Service changes Educating primary care physicians. The effectiveness of
interventions based in primary care is equivocal. The Gotland study
evaluated the impact of teaching all the island's GPs about the
diagnosis and treatment of affective disorder. The suicide rate fell
significantly below both the long-term suicide trend, but 3 years after
the project ended it had returned almost to baseline values (Rutz et
al., 1992). The researchers concluded that the programme had been
effective, but that it would need to be repeated every 2 years to have
long-term benefits, and that it appeared to benefit only females. A
similar finding was demonstrated in Hungary (Szanto et al., 2007).
Improving psychiatric services. Earlier recognition and better treatment
of the psychiatric disorders might be expected to reduce suicide rates.
However, it has proved difficult to demonstrate this empirically.
Targeting high-risk groups. The usual clinical approach is to provide
additional help for high-risk groups, such as patients who have recently
received inpatient psychiatric treatment and those who have recently
deliberately harmed themselves. (Crisis services are discussed below.)
Long-term medication. Although the continued prescribing of
antidepressants during the period following an episode of depression
reduces the risk of a subsequent episode of depression, a reduction in
suicidal behaviour has not been demonstrated. However, there is
accumulating evidence that lithium prophylaxis reduces suicide rates
(Cipriani et al., 2013), and some evidence that clozapine may reduce
suicide attempts among people with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder (see page 296). Prescribing less toxic antidepressants.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are less toxic in
overdose than tricyclic antidepressants. On the other hand, SSRIs

have been reported to cause the emergence or worsening of suicidal ideas
in young people, possibly because they can cause agitation and insomnia
initially. Although it is not possible to reach a decisive conclusion on
the basis of the available evidence, it seems that the overall risk of
suicide associated with SSRIs is similar to that with tricyclic
antidepressants (Cipriani et al., 2005). A US study demonstrated an
increased rate of suicide attempts in the month before antidepressant
medication was prescribed (Simon et al., 2006). In addition, there is
some evidence from epidemiological studies that increased prescribing of
less toxic antidepressants such as SSRIs is associated with a decrease
in population suicide rates, although this has been contested (Isacsson
et al., 2010). Until the evidence is conclusive, the most appropriate
drug should be decided for individual patients, and their progress
monitored and support provided during the first few weeks of treatment.
Counselling services. In the UK, the best known service for people who
are suicidal is the Samaritan organization, which was founded in London
in 1953 by the Reverend Chad Varah. People who are in despair are
encouraged to contact a widely publicized telephone number. The help
that is offered ('befriending') is provided by nonprofessional
volunteers, who have been trained to listen sympathetically without
attempting to take on tasks that are in the province of a professional.
It is often quoted that people who telephone the Samaritans have a
higher suicide rate in the ensuing year than the general population
(Barraclough and Shea, 1970). This finding is difficult to interpret.
Undoubtedly the Samaritans attracts people at risk for suicide, and it
remains unclear how far the help that is offered may be beneficial. Even
if this is so, the Samaritans provide valuable support for many lonely
and despairing people.

Box 21.4 Suicide prevention Better and more accessible psychiatric
services Restriction of the means of suicide Encouragement of
responsible media reporting Educational programmes Improved care for
high-risk groups Crisis centres and telephone 'hotlines'

619

620

620

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm

Population strategies Reducing the availability of methods of suicide
The ease with which people can access lethal methods of self-harm may
affect the rate of suicide using those methods, and may have some effect
on suicide rates in general. If the available methods are less harmful,
more people will be resuscitated. No matter what changes are made,
however, people who are determined to kill themselves can eventually
find the means to do so. Several changes have been made. Detoxification
of gas. In Britain, between 1948 and 1950, poisoning by domestic coal
gas accounted for 40% of reported suicides among men and 60% of those
among women. Following the introduction of less toxic North Sea gas, the
number of suicides using this method decreased dramatically, and the
national rate of suicide also fell. Kreitman (1976) argued that the
removal of coal gas was responsible for this change, but some care is
indicated as rates were falling worldwide. Detoxification of car exhaust
fumes. The fitting of catalytic converters to motor vehicles to reduce
the toxicity of car exhaust fumes appears to have reduced the number of
deaths using this method (Routley, 2007). Restricting amounts of
analgesics. In the UK, government legislation has limited the amount of
paracetamol, salicylates, and their compounds that an individual can buy
at one time. There is evidence that this legislation has reduced
suicides from overdoses of these drugs (Hawton et al., 2004b). Removing
and preventing access to hazards. In hospital wards and police and
prison cells, ligature points from which hanging could take place should
be removed or enclosed (see page 617). Physical barriers on bridges,
train platforms, and other potentially dangerous places may reduce the
number of suicides at these places

(Bennewith et al., 2007). Campaigns are currently under way to restrict
access to lethal pesticides that are used in rural communities in the
developing world (Mishara, 2007). Improving access to mental health
care. A review of the implementation of the national suicide strategy
has demonstrated a significant reduction in suicides in those known to
mental health services by the introduction of 24-hour crisis services
(While et al., 2012).

Other measures More responsible media reporting. Sometimes people copy
methods of suicide that have received widespread media coverage. For
this and other reasons, reporters and editors have been encouraged to
report suicide responsibly. In 2006, following a submission from the
Samaritans, the Press Complaints Commission added a new subclause to the
section 'Intrusion into Grief and Shock', which now states that 'when
reporting a suicide, care should be taken to avoid excessive detail
about the method used' (Press Complaints Commission, 2007). Social
policy. Given the repeatedly demonstrated association between
unemployment and suicide, it has been argued that policies aimed at
reducing rates of unemployment may help to reduce the rate of suicide
(Lewis et al., 1997). Factors such as increasing social isolation may
also need to be tackled in this way. Although the means of fulfilling
such strategies are far from clear, and it would be difficult to
evaluate their effectiveness, such calls remind us of the relationship
between social policy and health. Public education. Campaigns to educate
the public about mental illness and its treatment have included outreach
to schools, which has involved teaching about solving problems and
seeking help when distressed. The value of such approaches is uncertain.
Some screening has been tried in schools but suffers from an excessive
false-positive rate (Gould et al., 2005).

Deliberate self-harm Until the 1950s, little distinction was made
between people who killed themselves and those who survived after an
apparent suicidal act. In the UK, Stengel (1952) was the first to
identify epidemiological differences between the two groups. He proposed
the term 'attempted suicide' to describe self-injury that the person
could not be sure to survive. Subsequent studies of the motivation for
such episodes found that the intention of many of the survivors had not
been to die. As a result, several

terms---deliberate self-poisoning, parasuicide, and deliberate
self-harm---were introduced to describe episodes of intentional
self-harm that did not lead to death and may or may not have been
motivated by a desire to die (see Box 21.5). Kreitman (1977) defined
this behaviour as 'a non-fatal act in which an individual deliberately
causes self-injury or ingests a substance in excess of any prescribed or
generally recognized dosage.' The Royal College of Psychiatrists
encourages the use of the term

621

Deliberate self-harm 'self-harm', and 'non-suicidal self-injury' (NSSI)
has also been proposed. In this chapter, the term 'deliberate selfharm'
(DSH) will be used to describe such incidents. Acts that end in suicide
and acts of DSH overlap one another. Some people who had no intention of
dying succumb to the unintended effects of an overdose. Others who
intended to die are revived. Importantly, many people were ambivalent at
the time of the act, uncertain whether they wished to die or to survive.
It should be remembered that, among people who have been involved in
DSH, the suicide rate in the subsequent 12 months is about 100 times
greater than in the general population. It remains high for many years,
with over 5% committing suicide within 9 years (Owens et al., 2002).
Therefore DSH should not be regarded lightly.

often take this drug. Antidepressants (both tricyclics and SSRIs) are
taken in about 25% of episodes. About 50% of people consume alcohol in
the 6 hours before the act (Hawton et al., 2007).

Methods of deliberate self-injury Deliberate self-injury accounts for
about 10% of all DSH presenting to general hospitals in the UK. The
commonest method of self-injury is laceration, usually cutting of the
forearms or wrists; it accounts for about 80% of the self-injuries that
are referred to a general hospital. (Self-laceration is discussed
further below.) Other forms of self-injury include jumping from a height
or in front of a train or motor vehicle, shooting, and drowning. These
violent acts occur mainly among older people who intended to die
(Harwood and Jacoby, 2000).

The act of deliberate self-harm

Deliberate self-laceration

Methods of deliberate self-poisoning

There are three forms of deliberate self-laceration:

In the UK, about 90% of the cases of DSH that are referred to general
hospitals involve a drug overdose, and most of them present no serious
threat to life. The type of drug used varies somewhat with age, local
prescription practices, and the availability of drugs. The most commonly
used drugs are the non-opiate analgesics, such as paracetamol and
aspirin. Paracetamol is particularly dangerous because it damages the
liver and may lead to the delayed death of patients who had not intended
to die. It is particularly worrying that younger patients, who are
usually unaware of these serious risks,

1.  Deep and dangerous wounds inflicted with serious suicidal intent,
    more often by men.
2.  Self-mutilation by schizophrenic patients (sometimes in response to
    hallucinatory voices) or people with severe learning difficulties.
3.  Superficial wounds that do not endanger life, more often inflicted
    by women. Only the last group will be described here. Usually, the
    act of laceration is preceded by increasing tension and
    irritability, which diminish afterwards.

Box 21.5 Terms for non-fatal self-inflicted harm Attempted suicide

Self-poisoning or self-injury

Used widely (especially in North America) for episodes where there was
at least some suicidal intent, or sometimes without reference to intent.
Repetitive bodily harm may be excluded.

Self-harm by these methods regardless of suicidal intent.

Deliberate\* self-harm Used in UK for all episodes survived, regardless
of intent. North American usage refers to episodes of bodily harm
without suicidal intent, especially if repetitive. Usually excludes
overdoses and methods of high lethality.

Parasuicide Episodes survived, with or without suicidal intent
(especially in Europe) or episodes without intent. Repetitive bodily
harm may be excluded.

Self-mutilation Serious bodily mutilation (such as enucleation of eye)
without suicidal intent. Repetitive superficial bodily harm without
suicidal intent (synonymous with North American term 'deliberate
self-harm'). Also known as self-injurious behaviour, self-wounding.
Sometimes the term is used to describe both the above meanings and also
stereotypical self-harm in intellectually disabled people. \*The
adjective 'deliberate' is now not favoured by patients in the UK.
Reproduced from The Lancet, 366(9495), Skegg K, Self-harm, pp.Â 1471--83,
Copyright (2005), with permission from Elsevier.

621

62

622

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm After the act, the patient
often feels shame and disgust. Some of these individuals report that
they lacerated themselves while in a state of detachment from their
surroundings, and that they experienced little or no pain. The
lacerations are usually multiple, made with glass or a razor blade, and
inflicted on the forearms or wrists. Some also injure themselves in
other ways (e.g. by burning with cigarettes, or inflicting bruises).
Self-cutters who attend hospital are more often men (Hawton et al.,
2004c). People who cut themselves superficially do not always seek help
from the medical services, and many of these people are young females,
often with problems of low self-esteem, and sometimes impulsive or
aggressive behaviour, unstable moods, difficulty in interpersonal
relationships, and problems with alcohol and drug misuse.

The epidemiology of deliberate self-harm DSH is the main risk factor for
completed suicide. Although there is no national DSH register, there are
several local registers that track its incidence. In the early 1960s, a
substantial increase in DSH began in most western countries. In the UK,
the rates varied during the 1970s and 1980s and increased again through
the 1990s. A national suicide prevention strategy in 2002 aimed to
reduce suicide by 20% by 2010. DSH has been falling during this decade,
particularly in males, and this parallels falling suicide rates (Bergen
et al., 2010). Current estimates of the rate of DSH in the UK suggest a
figure of about 4 per 1000 per year. The rates in most European
countries are lower (see Kerkhof, 2000), and there are remarkable
international variations which defy a simple explanation (Skegg, 2005).

Variations according to personal characteristics DSH is more common
among younger people, with the rates declining sharply in middle age
(see Figure 21.2). The Oxford Suicide Centre report for 2013
demonstrates the persistence of this distribution (Hawton et al., 2013).
Over recent years, the proportion of men presenting following DSH has
risen. In the 1960s and 1970s the female-to-male ratio was about 2:1,
whereas recent studies show much smaller differences. The peak age for
men is older than that for women. For both sexes, rates are very low
under the age of 12 years. DSH is more prevalent in those of lower
socioeconomic status and who live in more deprived areas. Rates are
higher for both men and women among the divorced, and among teenage

wives, and younger single men and women (Hawton et al., 2003b). Rates of
DSH in the elderly have changed little in recent years. Their
characteristics seem to be more similar to those of individuals who kill
themselves than of younger people who harm themselves deliberately
(Harwood and Jacoby, 2000).

Causes of deliberate self-harm Precipitating factors People who harm
themselves deliberately report more stressful life events, especially
quarrels with a partner, girlfriend, or boyfriend.

Predisposing factors Familial and developmental factors may predispose
to DSH. These have been studied in great detail, often drawing on large
samples (Skegg, 2005). The whole range of adverse early circumstances
(abuse, parental divorce, parental discord, or mental illness) is
associated with an increased risk, particularly in adolescents and young
patients (Beautrais, 2000; Brent et al., 2002). Economic and social
environment. Rates of DSH are higher among the unemployed. However,
unemployment is related to other social factors associated with DSH,
such as financial difficulties, and it is difficult to determine whether
unemployment is a direct cause. Rates of DSH are also higher in areas of
socioeconomic deprivation (Hawton et al., 2001). Personality disorder.
In the UK (Haw et al., 2001) and other countries (e.g.Â Suominen et al.,
1996), personality disorder is identified in almost 50% of patients who
deliberately self-harm. Borderline personality disorder has been
reported to be common, but other studies have found anxious, anankastic
(obsessional), and paranoid personality disorders more frequently (Haw
et al., 2001). Impulsiveness, and poor skills in solving interpersonal
problems, may also predispose to DSH. Ill health. A background of poor
physical health is common. Sociological and cultural factors. Rates of
self-harm vary enormously between different cultures, probably
reflecting societal attitudes towards such behaviour (Schmidtke et al.,
1996). Echoing Durkheim's groundbreaking study, a professed religious
faith does appear to reduce the risk of self-harm, as it does with
suicide (Statham et al., 1998; Dervic et al., 2004). Sexual orientation,
particularly homosexuality in men, has been associated with higher rates
(Skegg et al., 2003), though whether this is still so is not clear.

623

Deliberate self-harm Age groups, by gender, Oxford, 2014 250 225 200

Males

175

Females Both sexes

Number

150 125 100 75 50 25 0

\<15

15--19 20--24 25--29 30--34 35--39 40--44 45--49 50--54 55--59 60-64
65--69 70--74 Age group

75+

Figure 21.2 Age groups of deliberate self-harm patients by gender in
2002. Reproduced from Self-harm in Oxford 2014, Centre for Suicide
Research, Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, by permission
of Professor KE Hawton, Oxford University, UK.

Psychiatric disorder It used to be held that, with the exception of
adjustment disorder, psychiatric disorder was uncommon among people who
harmed themselves deliberately. However, if standardized assessments are
used, psychiatric disorder has been detected in about 90% of patients
who DSH who are seen in hospital (Suominen et al., 1996; Haw et al.,
2001). Even allowing for the lower thresholds of standardized
instruments this does indicate a need for vigilance. Depressive disorder
is the most frequent diagnosis in both sexes, followed by alcohol and
drug abuse in men, and anxiety disorders in women. Comorbidity is
frequent, especially between psychiatric disorder and personality
disorder.

Motivation and deliberate self-harm The motives for DSH are usually
mixed and often difficult to identify with certainty. Even when patients
know their own motives, they may try to hide them from other people. For
example, people who have taken an

overdose in response to feelings of frustration and anger may feel
ashamed and say instead that they wished to die. Conversely, people who
truly intended to kill themselves may deny it with the intention of
repeating it. For this reason, when individuals are assessed, more
emphasis should be placed on a common-sense evaluation of their actions
leading up to self-harm than on their subsequent accounts of their
motives. Useful information has, however, been obtained by questioning
groups of patients about their motives., A study in 13 European
countries found similar reported motives in all of the study sites
listed in Box 21.6 (Hjelmeland et al., 2002). Only a few patients stated
that the act was premeditated. About 25% said that they wished to die.
Some stated that they were uncertain whether they wanted to die or not,
others that they were leaving it to 'fate' to decide, and yet others
that they were seeking a temporary escape. Another group admitted that
they were trying to influence someone---for example, that they were
seeking to make a relative feel guilty for having failed them in some
way. This motive of influencing other people was first emphasized by
Stengel and Cook (1958), who wrote that these people hoped to

623

624

624

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm

Box 21.6 Reasons given for deliberate self-harm To die To escape from
unbearable anguish To obtain relief To change the behaviour of others To
escape from a situation To show desperation to others To get back at
other people/make them feel guilty To get help Source: data from Hawton
K and Taylor T, Treatment of suicide attempters and prevention of
suicide and attempted suicide. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor
JJ Jr and Geddes JR (eds), The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry,
Copyright (2009), Oxford University Press.

call forth 'action from the human environment'. This behaviour has since
been referred to as 'a cry for help'. Although some acts of DSH result
in increased help for the patient, others may arouse resentment,
particularly when they are repeated, prompting 'a cry for help' to be
rephrased as 'a cry of pain' (Williams and Pollock, 2000).

The outcome of deliberate self-harm

â

between 1 in 200 and 1 in 40 commit suicide within 1 year

â

about 1 in 15 commits suicide within 9 years or more.

These risks are compiled from several countries, so they cannot be
compared directly with the general population rate of about 1 in 10,000
people per annum in the UK. Nevertheless, the risk is clearly greatly
increased. Among people who deliberately harm themselves, the risk of
eventual suicide is even greater among those who are older, male,
depressed, or alcohol-dependent. Use of a dangerous or violent method
also indicates a high risk. However, a non-dangerous method of self-harm
does not necessarily indicate a low risk of subsequent suicide, partly
because the patient may have incomplete knowledge of the dangerousness
of the available methods (see Box 21.8). It is more difficult to predict
which patients will die by suicide following previous self-harm because
the rate of suicide, although higher than that in the general
population, is still quite low, and the predictive factors have low
specificity.

Results of treatment after deliberate self-harm Although randomized
controlled studies have shown decreases in psychopathology and
improvements in

Repetition of self-harm In the weeks after DSH, many patients report
changes for the better. Those with psychiatric symptoms often report
that they have become less intense. This improvement may result from
help provided by professionals, or from improvements in the person's
relationships, attitudes, and behaviour. Some people do not improve and
harm themselves again, in some cases fatally. A systematic review of 90
studies (Owens et al., 2002) concluded that, among people who have
engaged in DSH: â

about one in six repeats the DSH within 1 year

â

about one in four repeats the DSH within 4 years.

Factors associated with repetition of attempted suicide are listed in
Box 21.7.

Suicide following deliberate self-harm People who have intentionally
harmed themselves have a much increased risk of later suicide. The same
systematic review (Owens et al., 2002) concluded that among these
people:

Box 21.7 Factors associated with risk of repetition of attempted suicide
Previous attempt(s) Personality disorder Alcohol or drug abuse Previous
psychiatric treatment Unemployment Lower social class Criminal record
History of violence Age 25--54 years Single, divorced, or separated
Reproduced from Hawton K and Taylor T, Treatment of suicide attempters
and prevention of suicide and attempted suicide. In: Gelder MG,
Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJ Jr and Geddes JR (eds), The New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry, Copyright (2009), with permission from Oxford
University Press.

625

Deliberate self-harm â

Box 21.8 Risk factors for suicide after self-harm Older age Male sex
Past psychiatric care Psychiatric disorder Social isolation Repeated
self-harm Avoiding discovery at time of self-harm Medically severe
self-harm Strong suicidal intent Substance misuse (especially in young
people) Hopelessness Poor physical health Reproduced from The Lancet,
366(9495), Skegg K, Self-harm, pp.Â 1471--83, Copyright (2005), with
permission from Elsevier.

social problems after various treatments, there is less evidence that
treatment prevents the repetition of DSH. One reason for this lack of
evidence is that several kinds of treatment have been investigated, and
the numbers in most studies have been rather low. Hawton conducted a
meta-analysis of 20 randomized controlled trials (of 10 different
interventions), with repetition of DSH as an outcome measure (Hawton,
2005). His conclusions were as follows. â

A trend towards greater reduction of repetition was found for
problem-solving therapies, although this was only statistically
significant in one out of six randomized controlled trials. One study
that used a selfhelp manual found no benefit.

â

Brief psychodynamic interpersonal therapy has been shown in one
randomized controlled trial to reduce self-reported attempts at
self-harm more than treatment as usual (Guthrie et al., 2001).

â

For patients with borderline personality disorder, rates of repetition
were lower with dialectical behaviour therapy than with standard
aftercare (based on a single trial).

â

The provision of emergency contact cards (allowing immediate access to
help) showed some benefits, but not in all studies and probably only for
first-attenders. There was some suggestion that such cards may be
detrimental for repeat attenders.

The provision of increased intensity of care with outreach showed modest
benefit, but only for the home visit/outreach component.

An Australian study showed some benefit, in terms of decreased
repetition rates, from sending a series of postcards to patients over a
12-month period after an episode of self-harm (Carter et al., 2007).
However, this was not confirmed by a similar study in New Zealand
(Beautrais et al., 2010).

Special groups Mothers of young children Mothers of young children
require special consideration because of the known association between
DSH and child abuse. It is important to ask about the mother's feelings
towards her children, and to enquire about their welfare. In the UK,
information about the children can usually be obtained from the general
practitioner, who may ask their health visitor to investigate the case.
Caring for young children can put strains on already shaky
relationships, and there is evidence of an increased risk of partner
violence against vulnerable young mothers (Vaughn et al., 2015).

Children and adolescents DSH among children and adolescents increased in
the 1990s in many parts of the developed world. It is difficult to
obtain the exact rates because many of these acts are minor drug
overdoses or self-injuries that do not reach the medical services
(Hawton et al., 2002). It is generally agreed that DSH is rare among
preschool children, and becomes increasingly common after the age of 12
years. Except in the youngest age groups, it is more common among girls.
Methods. Drug overdose is the most common method among those attending
hospital. Self-cutting is common, especially among females, although it
less often results in attendance at hospital. More dangerous forms of
self-injury are more frequent among males (Hawton et al., 2003c).
Motivation. It is difficult to determine the motivation for self-harm in
young children, especially as a clear concept of death is not usually
developed until around the age of 12 years. It is probable that only a
few younger children have any serious suicidal intent. Their motivation
may be more often to communicate

625

62

626

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm distress, to escape from
stress, or to influence other people. Epidemics of DSH occasionally
occur as a result of imitative behaviour among adolescents (de Wilde,
2000). Causes. DSH in adolescents is associated with family breakdown,
familial psychiatric disorder, and child abuse, or simply not feeling
'heard' or validated within the family environment (Sinclair and Green,
2005). It is often precipitated by social problems---for younger
adolescents most often family problems, for older ones difficulties with
boyfriends or girlfriends, and for both age groups problems with
schoolwork. Among adolescents it is also associated with alcohol and
drug misuse (especially among males), violence and being the victim

of violence, mood disorder, and personality disorder (Hawton et al.,
2003c). Outcome. For most children and adolescents, the outcome of DSH
is relatively good, but a significant minority continue to have social
and psychiatric problems, and to repeat acts of DSH. A poor outcome is
associated with poor psychosocial adjustment, a history of previous DSH,
and severe family problems. Management. When children or adolescents
harm themselves, it is better for them to be assessed by child and
adolescent psychiatrists rather than members of the adult DSH service.
Treatment usually involves the family, and is directed to the causal
problems and to the coping skills of the child or adolescent.

The management of deliberate self-harm The organization of services The
care of patients with DSH involves a variety of services, including
primary care teams, ambulance services, emergency department staff, and
social services. All of these staff require training to enable them to
respond appropriately and to make the necessary decisions, including how
to assess immediate risk, to obtain informed consent, and to assess
capacity to consent and in what circumstances necessary care can be
given without consent. The organization of the medical and surgical
response to these patients is beyond the scope of this book; for such
information, see National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2004b).
Arrangements for psychosocial assessment vary and a debate has long
persisted about who should assess these patients. Whatever arrangement
is made, it is important to ensure that all patients do receive a
psychosocial assessment as well as an assessment of the medical effects
of the self-harm (see below). Each hospital site should have a code of
practice detailing the arrangements for psychosocial assessment agreed
by general medical and psychiatric services and known to those who work
there. Provision should be available for the special needs of patients
from ethnic minorities. Children and adolescents should, whenever
possible, be assessed by staff who have been trained in the assessment
and care of young people and who are familiar with the problems of
confidentiality and consent that can arise in such cases. If possible,
patients over the age of 65 years should be assessed by staff who are
familiar with the special

problems of the elderly, and who are aware of the greater risk of
completed suicide in this age group.

The assessment of patients after deliberate self-harm General aims
Assessment is concerned with three main issues: 1. The immediate risks
of suicide. 2. The subsequent risks of further DSH. 3. Current medical
or social problems. The assessment should be conducted in a way that
encourages patients to undertake a constructive review of their problems
and of the ways in which they could deal with them themselves. It is
important to encourage self-help, because many of these people are
unwilling to be seen again by a psychiatrist. Usually the assessment has
to be carried out in an accident and emergency department or a ward in a
general hospital, where there may be little privacy. Whenever possible,
the interview should be conducted in a side room so that it will not be
overheard or interrupted. If the patient has taken an overdose, the
interviewer should first make sure that they have recovered sufficiently
to be able to give a satisfactory history. If consciousness is still
impaired, the interview should be delayed. Information should also be
obtained from relatives or friends, the family doctor, and any other
person (such as a social worker) who is already attempting to

672

The management of deliberate self-harm help the patient. Wide enquiry is
important, as sometimes information from other sources may differ
substantially from the account given by the patient. For a review of
general hospital assessment, see Hawton (2000b).

Specific enquiries The interview should address five questions. 1. What
were the patient's intentions when they harmed themself? 2. Do they now
intend to die? 3. What are their current problems?

By reviewing the answers to these questions, the interviewer can form a
judgement of the patient's intentions at the time of the act (see Box
21.9).

Do they now intend to die? The interviewer should ask directly whether
the patient is pleased to have recovered or wishes that they had died.
If the act suggested serious suicidal intent and if the patient now
denies such intent, the interviewer should try to find out by tactful
questioning whether there has been a genuine change of resolve.

4.  Is there a psychiatric disorder?

What are their current problems?

5.  What helpful resources are available?

Many patients will have experienced a mounting series of difficulties in
the weeks or months leading up to the act. Some of these difficulties
may have been resolved by the time that they are interviewed, sometimes
as a result of the act of self-harm---for example, a partner who had
threatened to leave the patient may have decided to stay. The more
serious the problems that remain, the greater is the risk of a fatal
repetition. This risk is particularly strong if the problems include
loneliness or ill health. The review of problems should be systematic
and should cover the following:

Each of these questions will now be considered in turn.

What were the patient's intentions when they harmed themself? Patients
sometimes misrepresent their intentions. For this reason the interviewer
should reconstruct, as fully as possible, the events that led up to the
act of self-harm to find the answers to five subsidiary questions. â

â

Was the act planned or carried out on impulse? The longer and more
carefully the plans have been made, the greater is the risk of a fatal
repetition. Were precautions taken against being found? The more
thorough the precautions were, the greater is the risk of a further
fatal overdose. Of course, events do not always take place as the
patient expected---for example, a partner may arrive home earlier than
usual so that the patient is discovered alive. In such circumstances it
is the patient's reasonable expectations that are of importance in
predicting the future risk.

â

Did the patient seek help? Serious intent can be inferred if there were
no attempts to obtain help after the act.

â

Was the method thought to be dangerous? If drugs were used, what were
they and what amount was taken? Did the patient take all of the drugs
available? If self-injury was used, what form did it take? Not only
should the actual dangerousness of the method be assessed, but also the
dangerousness anticipated by the patient, which may be inaccurate. For
example, some people wrongly believe that paracetamol overdoses are
harmless, or that benzodiazepines are dangerous.

â

Was there a 'final act' (e.g.Â writing a suicide note or making a will)?
If so, the risk of a further fatal attempt is greater.

â

intimate relationships with the partner or another person

â

relationships with children and other relatives

â

employment, finances, and housing

â

legal problems

â

social isolation, bereavement, and other losses

â

physical health.

Drug and alcohol problems can be considered either at this stage of the
assessment or later when the psychiatric state is reviewed.

Is there a psychiatric disorder? It should be possible to answer this
question from the history and from a brief but systematic examination of
the mental state. Particular attention should be directed to depressive
disorder, alcoholism, anxiety disorder, and personality disorder.
Schizophrenia and dementia should also be considered, although they will
be found less often. Adjustment disorders are diagnosed in many
individuals in response to major life changes and stresses
(e.g.Â bereavement, relationship break-up, migration). The presence of an
obvious precipitating event does not rule out the presence of a
psychiatric disorder.

627

628

628

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm

What helpful resources are available? These include capacity to solve
problems, material resources, and the help that others are likely to
provide. The best guide to patients' abilities to solve future problems
is their record of dealing with difficulties in the past---for example,
the loss of a job or a broken relationship. The availability of help
should be assessed by asking about friends and confidants, and about any
support the patient is receiving or can be expected to receive from the
general practitioner, social workers, or voluntary agencies.

Is there a continuing risk of suicide? The interviewer now has the
information required to answer this important question. The answers to
the first five questions outlined above are reviewed: â

Did the patient originally intend to die?

â

Do they intend to do so now?

â

Are the problems that provoked the act still present?

â

Is there a psychiatric disorder?

â

Is additional support available, and is the patient likely to accept it?

Having reviewed the answers to these questions, the interviewer compares
the patient's characteristics with those that are found in people who
have died by suicide. These characteristics are summarized in Box 21.9.

Is there a risk of further non-fatal self-harm? The predictive factors
are summarized in Box 21.7. All of the points should be considered
before deciding on the risk.

What treatment is required and will the patient agree to it? If the risk
of suicide is judged to be high, the procedures are those outlined in
the first part of this chapter (see page 617). Around 5--10% of patients
who DSH require admission to a psychiatric unit; most need treatment for
depression or alcoholism, and a few for schizophrenia. Some need a
period of respite from overwhelming stress. If admission to hospital is
not indicated, a plan of management has to be agreed with the patient
and any potential carers. If the patient refuses the offer of help,
their care should be discussed with the general practitioner before they
are allowed to return home (see below and Box 21.10). For most patients
it is useful to provide an emergency telephone number that allows
immediate

Box 21.9 Factors that suggest high suicidal intent Act carried out in
isolation Act timed so that intervention is unlikely Precautions taken
to avoid discovery Preparations made in anticipation of death
(e.g.Â making a will, organizing insurance) Preparations made for the act
(e.g.Â purchasing the means of suicide, saving up tablets) Communicating
intent to others beforehand Extensive premeditation Leaving a note Not
alerting potential helpers after the act Admission of suicidal intent
Reproduced from Hawton K and Taylor T, Treatment of suicide attempters
and prevention of suicide and attempted suicide. In: Gelder MG,
Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJ Jr and Geddes JR (eds), The New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry, Copyright (2009), with permission from Oxford
University Press.

access to advice or an urgent appointment should there be a further
crisis.

Management after the assessment Patients who have harmed themselves are
often reluctant to accept further help, and it is important to conduct
the assessment interview in a way that fosters a therapeutic
relationship. Plans should be discussed with the patient, and, if they
are not agreed, an alternative plan that is mutually acceptable should
be negotiated. Patients' needs fall into three groups: 1. A small
minority need admission to a psychiatric unit for treatment. 2. About
one-third have a psychiatric disorder that requires treatment in primary
care, or from a psychiatric team in the community. 3. The remainder need
help with various psychosocial problems, and assistance with improving
their ways of coping with stressors. This help is needed even when the
risk of immediate suicide or nonfatal repetition is low, as continuing
problems

629

The management of deliberate self-harm

Box 21.10 Patients who harm themselves and refuse treatment Note that
there are international differences in laws and practices. â The most
senior experienced doctor available should see the patient and discuss
the proposed treatment, the alternatives, and the patient's concerns. It
is often helpful to involve the patient's relatives or close friends.
Sympathetic, patient discussion of the person's concerns is often
followed by consent. â A patient who has harmed himself or herself but
is alert and conscious should be presumed to have the mental capacity to
refuse medical advice unless shown otherwise. This capacity should be
assessed (see page 78, Box 4.2) as soon as possible. All staff should be
able to perform this assessment, but, where possible, incapacity should
be confirmed by a psychiatrist. If appropriate, assessment for
compulsory treatment should be arranged. â When a patient is assessed as
mentally incapable (e.g. because of persistent intoxicating effects of
overdose), staff have a responsibility under common law to act in that
person's best interests. This may include taking the patient to
hospital, keeping them there for assessment, and giving immediate
life-saving treatment.

â

increase the risk of later repetition. Apart from practical help,
problem-solving is usually the best approach, starting with the problems
identified during the assessment interview. Unfortunately, such help is
often refused.

much information as possible from other sources before allowing the
patient to leave. The problem should be discussed with the general
practitioner and community mental health team if they are involved. If
the risk of suicide is judged to be high, it may be necessary to keep
the patient until an assessment is made for detention under a compulsory
order.

The general principles of care are summarized in Box 21.11. If the
episode of self-harm is associated with problems in a specific
interpersonal relationship, it is often helpful to interview the other
person involved if the patient agrees, first alone and then together
with the patient. This joint interview can lead to an improved dialogue
between the couple, and this may help to decrease the risk of acute
repetition.

Some special problems of management Patients who refuse assessment
Patients who refuse to be interviewed, or who seek to discharge
themselves, have very high rates of repetition (Crawford and Wessely,
1998). It is essential to gather as

Staff should remember that mental capacity may change over time, and
attempts should be made to explain each new procedure or treatment and
to obtain consent before it is carried out. â When, after full
discussion, a competent patient continues to refuse to consent and there
are no grounds for compulsory treatment, a further attempt should be
made to find an acceptable alternative plan. If the attempt does not
succeed, the consequences of the decision should be explained clearly,
and the discussions recorded fully in the notes. If the patient insists
on leaving, they have to be allowed to go, but they should be encouraged
to return, and given an emergency contact number and options for further
treatment. The situation should be discussed as soon as possible with
the patient's general practitioner. â It is generally appropriate to
attempt to contact the patient on the following day and repeat the offer
of help. The case should be discussed with the general practitioner to
decide who should make the contact. For further guidance, see National
Institute for Clinical Excellence (2004b).

Frequent repeaters Some patients take overdoses repeatedly at times of
stress. Often the behaviour seems intended to reduce tension or gain
attention. However, when overdoses are taken repeatedly, relatives often
become unsympathetic or even overtly hostile, and staff of hospital
emergency departments may feel frustrated. These patients usually have a
personality disorder and many insoluble social problems. Unfortunately,
neither counselling nor intensive psychotherapy is usually effective.
All of those involved in the patient's management should agree a care
plan which should seek to reward constructive behaviour. An opportunity
for continuing support by one individual should be arranged. However,
whatever

629

630

630

Chapter 21 Suicide and deliberate self-harm

Box 21.11 General principles of care after self-harm Monitor patient for
further suicidal or self-harm thoughts Identify support available in a
crisis â Come to a shared understanding of the meaning of the behaviour
and the patient's needs â Treat psychiatric illness vigorously â Attend
to substance abuse â Help patient to identify and work towards solving
problems

Enlist support of family and friends where possible Encourage adaptive
expression of emotion â Avoid prescribing quantities of medication that
could be lethal in overdose â Assertive follow-up in an empathic
relationship â Affirm the values of hope and of caring for oneself

â

â

â

â

help is arranged, the risk of eventual death by suicide is high. Since
the UK government initiative to provide better care for personality
disordered patients (National Institute for Mental Health in England
\[NIMHE\], 2003), most services have established dedicated services for
those with borderline personality disorders (Chapter 15), which can
often be of particular value to these patients if they will accept
referral.

Repeated self-cutting The management of self-laceration presents many
problems. Patients often have difficulty in expressing their feelings in
words, so formal psychotherapy may not be helpful. Simple efforts to
gain the patient's confidence and increase their self-esteem are more
likely to succeed. Assessment should include a behavioural analysis of
the sequences of events that lead to self-cutting. This may help to
formulate ways in which treatment could either interrupt the chain of
events that leads to self-cutting, or replace the cutting with an
alternative method of obtaining relief.

Reproduced from The Lancet, 366(9495), Skegg K, Self-harm, pp.Â 1471--
83, Copyright (2005), with permission from Elsevier.

Medication appears to have a limited role, although atypical
antipsychotic agents such as risperidone or olanzapine in low dose may
be valuable as a short-term measure to reduce tension. Many people who
cut themselves have significant personality difficulties. Treatment
should be directed towards these problems, although it may be difficult
and prolonged. Admission to a psychiatric unit is occasionally
necessary, but carries risks, and is advised against unless absolutely
necessary (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
2009b). If the patient is admitted, a clear and detailed policy is
needed, as self-cutting is very often difficult to manage in an
inpatient unit, and indeed may be imitated by other patients. Referral
to the newly established 'complex needs' services for personality
disordered patients makes more sense for such patients. Simple referral
is rarely enough, but energy invested in supporting engagement with such
psychotherapy services is time well spent.

Further reading Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr and Geddes JR
(eds) (2009). Section 4.15. Suicide. In: The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (The four chapters
in this section comprehensively review deliberate self-harm and
suicide.)

Hawton K et al.Â (2013). Self-Harm in Oxford 2013. Centre for Suicide
Research, University of Oxford, Oxford. Wasserman D and Wasserman C
(eds.) (2009). Oxford Textbook of Suicidology and Suicide Prevention.
Oxford University Press, New York.

631

CHAPTER 22

Psychiatry and medicine Introduction 631 Psychiatry, medicine, and
mind--body dualism 631

Somatic symptoms not explained by somatic pathology 638

Psychiatric disorders in medical settings 633

Somatoform and dissociative disorders 646

Comorbidity: the co-occurrence of psychiatric

Psychiatric services in medical settings 658

and medical conditions 635 Management of psychiatric disorder in the
medically ill 637

Psychiatric aspects of medical procedures and conditions 660 Psychiatric
aspects of obstetrics and gynaecology 668

Introduction This chapter considers the relevance of psychiatry to the
rest of medical practice. It covers two related, but distinct, areas.
The first is the application of psychiatric knowledge and expertise in a
general medical setting. The second covers the psychiatric conditions
associated with specific medical disorders. The chapter is organized as
follows:

3.  Medically unexplained symptoms: somatic symptoms unexplained by
    medical conditions.

4.  Psychiatry, medicine and the concept of mind--body dualism.

This chapter should be read in conjunction with the chapters on
stress-related disorders (Chapter 7) and neuropsychiatry (Chapter 14);
aspects of psychiatry and medicine in children are discussed in Chapter
16.

2.  Psychiatric disorders in medical settings.

3.  Somatoform and dissociative disorders.

4.  Services and consultation--liaison psychiatry.

5.  Psychiatric aspects of specific medical conditions.

6.  Psychiatric aspects of obstetrics and gynaecology.

Psychiatry, medicine, and mind--body dualism Patients usually attend
their doctors because of symptoms that are causing distress and/or
dysfunction; that is, when they have an illness. Medical assessment is
directed to making a diagnosis of the illness, and this diagnosis is
used to guide the plan of management. The diagnosis is conventionally
defined as either medical or psychiatric.

Medical diagnosis Most medical diagnoses are based on symptoms and
physical signs and the results of biological investigations that
together indicate the presence of bodily pathology (abnormal structure
and/or function), which is referred to as disease. Not all medical
diagnoses are arrived at in

632

632

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine this way (e.g.Â migraine) and
ultimately a medical diagnosis is a label for a condition that is
conventionally treated by medical doctors and listed in classifications
of disease such as ICD-10.

Psychiatric diagnosis Psychiatric diagnosis was discussed in Chapter 2
and the following brief account is intended to remind the reader of that
discussion. A psychiatric diagnosis, like a medical one, is essentially
a label for a condition that is conventionally treated by doctors,
sometimes psychiatrists, but often by other practitioners too.
Psychiatric diagnoses are listed in the classifications of diseases,
along with medical diagnoses but, although some have associated physical
pathology, many do not. Because they generally lack known pathology,
they are generally referred to as disorders rather than diseases. In the
past, psychiatric diagnoses have been regarded as 'mental' in nature, in
contrast to the 'physical' nature of medical diagnoses. This distinction
reflects the absence of gross pathology in most psychiatric disorders,
and the fact that these conditions usually present with disturbed mental
states or behaviour rather than physical symptoms. Presentations with
physical symptoms are considered later in this chapter.

Medicine, psychiatry, and dualism Underlying this division of illnesses
into physical and mental is the assumption that a parallel distinction
can be made in healthy people---that there is 'mind--body dualism', an
idea commonly attributed to the philosopher Descartes. So-called
Cartesian dualism had, and continues to exert, a profound influence on
western medical thinking (Miresco and Kirmayer, 2006). Whilst this
division has some utility it can also be problematic.

Limitations of dualism Dualism is at best an oversimplification. It can
be convincingly argued that there are no such things as purely

physical or psychological conditions, whether in health or illness. The
associated assumption that psychological symptoms indicate
psychopathology and physical symptoms physical pathology leads to the
categories shown in Table 22.1. Two of these, disease and disorder, have
been considered; the other two---comorbidity and somatization---will be
considered next. Comorbidity means the co-occurrence of two disorders.
The term has been extended in the table to describe the co-occurrence of
prominent mental symptoms and bodily pathology since these patients are
usually given both a psychiatric and a physical diagnosis (Kisely and
Goldberg, 1996). In practice neither of these diagnoses may lead to
effective treatment because a focus on either may lead to neglect of the
other. An example is the widespread neglect of depression in patients
with medical disease (Moussavi et al., 2007; Walker et al., 2013a).
Somatization. Some patients have somatic symptoms but no evidence of
bodily pathology. It is unclear whether their illness should be
categorized as medical (with presumed but unidentified somatic
pathology) or as psychiatric (with assumed psychopathology). In the past
these conditions were generally given the medical diagnosis of
functional illness (function is abnormal but there is no pathology). In
psychiatric practice these conditions would usually be called a
somatoform disorder. This latter diagnosis implies that: (i) the somatic
symptoms are caused by psychopathology; and (ii) there is a hypothetical
process---somatization---by which the psychopathology has caused the
bodily symptoms. Such patients can therefore receive both a medical
diagnosis (functional disorder) and a psychiatric diagnosis (somatoform
disorder), with the resulting confusion and controversy being well
illustrated by literature about the condition called chronic fatigue
syndrome (CFS) or myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) (see below). In DSM5,
somatoform disorder has been abandoned because of significant overlap
between the different disorders and the perceived lack of utility of the
boundary between medically explained and medically unexplained symptoms
(Sharpe, 2013). DSM-5 now refers to them as somatic symptom disorders.
It has also reduced the number of these disorders and subcategories to
avoid

Table 22.1 Traditional 'dualistic' categories of mental and physical
illness Psychological symptoms

Physical symptoms

Bodily pathology

Comorbidity

Medical disease

Psychopathology

Psychiatric disorder

Somatization

63

Psychiatric disorders in medical settings the problematic overlaps.
Since the term somatoform disorder is used in ICD-10, it will continue
to be used in this chapter.

Practical consequences of dualism One consequence of this way of
thinking is the professional and organizational separation of medicine
and psychiatry, which in turn contributes to its persistence. This makes
it difficult to provide integrated care for patients with comorbidity
and those with somatoform disorders. One organizational response to this
problem has been the establishment of psychological medicine (also known
as liaison psychiatry) services to general hospitals (see below).

An integrated approach New scientific knowledge, such as the
demonstration of a neural basis to many psychiatric disorders, has shown
that crude dualistic thinking is untenable. Evidence for the effect of
psychiatric disorder on the outcome of medical conditions such as
myocardial infarction (Meijer et al., 2011) and cancer (Walker et al.,
2013a)

has pointed to the same conclusion. Such integration is strengthened by
evidence that the same psychological interventions can be effective in
reducing fatigue in CFS (White et al., 2011), where the underlying
medical condition is uncertain, or in multiple sclerosis (Van Kessel et
al., 2008), where it is clear. Mind and brain are now increasingly
regarded as two sides of the same coin. This paradigm shift implies that
psychiatric disorders are no more distinct from medical conditions than
the higher nervous system is from the rest of the body (Sharpe and
Carson, 2001). For the present, however, Cartesian dualism continues to
shape everyday thinking and practice. Illnesses are given separate
medical and psychiatric diagnoses linked to separate knowledge bases and
distinct systems of care. The psychiatrist working in medical settings
needs to be aware of these problems and help by ensuring that both the
biological and psychological and social aspects of illness are
considered in every case. This is referred to as the 'biopsychosocial'
approach, proposed many years ago by Engel (1977) (and which is
implicitly, if not explicitly, adopted throughout this book). The
factors to consider in a biopsychosocial formulation are shown in Box
22.1. They can be divided further into predisposing, precipitating, and
perpetuating causes. The last group of causes is the usual target for
treatment, while the first two are relevant to prevention.

Psychiatric disorders in medical settings Although common in all
settings, the type and presentation of psychiatric disorders differs
from one medical setting to another. The most common diagnoses in each
setting are shown in Table 22.2.

Epidemiology General practice. The most common psychiatric disorders in
general practice are the somatoform disorders (somatic symptom disorder
in DSM-5), depression, anxiety and stress-related disorders, and
substance misuse. Patients with psychosis are uncommon (Ansseau et al.,
2004). Casualty departments. Deliberate self-harm is the major
psychiatric problem in casualty departments. Although only a minority of
these patients have persistent psychiatric disorders, many have
stress-related disorders and some have depressive disorders.
Intoxication and delirium related to alcohol and drugs are also

common, particularly in inner-city hospitals and among people involved
in accidents. Some patients with somatoform disorders, and a few with
factitious disorders, are frequent attenders at casualty departments
(Wooden et al., 2009). Medical and surgical outpatient clinics. About a
third of people attending medical and surgical outpatient clinics have a
psychiatric disorder (Maiden et al., 2003). Half of these have
depressive and anxiety disorders, and most of the remainder have
somatoform disorders. In both groups, adequate recognition and treatment
of the psychiatric disorder should be an integral part of management,
since it has been shown to improve outcome: depression is a common cause
of apparent worsening of a medical condition. Medical and surgical
wards. About 20% of medical and surgical inpatients have a depressive or
anxiety disorder coexisting with their medical disease, 10% have a
significant alcohol misuse problem, and at least a quarter

633

634

634

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Table 22.2 The relative prevalence of common psychiatric disorders in
medical settings other than psychiatry General practice

Casualty

Medical/surgical outpatients

Medical /surgical inpatients

Depression/anxiety

++

++

+++

+++

Delirium

--

- 

--

+++

Alcohol misuse

++

+++

++

+++

Psychosis

- 
- 

--

--

Somatoform disorders

+++

- 

+++

++

- rare; + uncommon; ++ common; +++ very common.

of elderly inpatients have an episode of delirium (Saxena and Lawler,
2009). Some patients with severe somatoform disorders undergo multiple
investigations and even surgery before the diagnosis is made.

Presentation of psychiatric disorder in medical settings Although
psychiatric disorders commonly present in medical settings with
psychological symptoms or behavioural disturbance, other less obvious
presentations are common. These are as: (a) somatic symptoms; (b) a
medical management problem and/or difficulties with adherence to
treatment; (c) an apparent exacerbation of a medical condition.

Box 22.1 The biopsychosocial formulation Biological factors Disease
Physiology

Psychological factors Cognition Mood Behaviour

Social factors Interpersonal Social and occupational Relating to the
health care system

Psychiatric disorder presenting with somatic symptoms A significant
minority of patients seen in general practice and in hospital outpatient
clinics have somatic symptoms that cannot be explained by medical
disease, and many of these have a psychiatric disorder (Steinbrecher et
al., 2011). Somatic symptoms due to depressive and anxiety disorders.
Depression is associated with somatic symptoms, such as fatigue, weight
loss, and pain, which may lead to referral to a medical specialty.
Anxiety is associated with symptoms of autonomic arousal, such as
palpitations, and with breathlessness and sensory symptoms. A World
Health Organization (WHO) collaborative study of patients presenting to
primary care in 14 countries found a strong association between somatic
symptoms and depressive and anxiety disorders in all centres, despite
different cultures and health services. Also, there was a linear
relationship between number of somatic symptoms and the presence of
depression and anxiety disorder (Simon et al., 1999). Among the anxiety
disorders, panic disorder is an especially important cause of medically
unexplained symptoms, such as chest pain, dizziness, and tingling.
Somatoform disorders. Medically unexplained somatic symptoms in the
absence of a depressive or anxiety disorder are either diagnosed as
medically unexplained symptoms or as somatoform disorders. Somatoform
disorders are diagnosed when there is a strong suspicion of a
psychogenic cause, not just as a diagnosis of exclusion. DSM-5
emphasizes the burden of symptoms rather than whether they are
unexplainable or not on the basis of an identifiable medical condition
(see above; also Sharpe, 2013). This change may begin to influence
practice during the next few years; however, currently most clinicians
cling to the concept of somatoform disorders.

635

Comorbidity: the co-occurrence of psychiatric and medical conditions

Psychiatric disorder presenting as apparent worsening of a medical
condition

Refusal of treatment is sometimes the first pointer to a psychiatric
disorder.

An exacerbation of complaints about symptoms or disability associated
with a chronic medical condition is sometimes caused by a comorbid
depressive disorder.

Comorbidity: the co-occurrence of psychiatric and medical conditions
Comorbidity of psychiatric disorders with medical conditions is
important. For example, an eating disorder may greatly complicate the
treatment of diabetes, and depression is a risk factor for increased
mortality and morbidity following myocardial infarction.

in patients with ischaemic heart disease (Surtees et al., 2008),
diabetes (Holt et al., 2014), and cancer (Walker et al., 2013b). Anxiety
and depression are also risk factors for non-compliance with medical
treatment (Rieckmann et al., 2006).

Epidemiology

The causes of psychiatric comorbidity in the medically ill

Psychiatric disorder is present in as many as a third of patients with
serious acute, recurrent, or progressive medical conditions. It is
difficult to ascertain the exact proportion because standard criteria
for the diagnosis of psychiatric disorder include some symptoms that can
also be caused by medical illness; for example, fatigue and poor sleep.
Although modifications have been suggested to make the criteria more
appropriate for use with people with physical as well as psychiatric
disorder, none is wholly satisfactory. It is best to start with standard
criteria and then use knowledge of the medical condition to decide which
of the symptoms that point to psychiatric disorder could have originated
in this other way. However, this approach requires skilled interviewers
and is difficult to achieve on a large scale. Suicide is easier to
identify and there is an increased risk in the medically ill as compared
with the general population. There are associations with cancer,
multiple sclerosis, and a number of other conditions (Webb et al.,
2012). Common associations between psychiatric and physical illness are
shown in Box 22.2. Epidemiological surveys consistently reveal extensive
comorbidity between physical illness and mental health problems (Jacobi
et al., 2004).

The importance of psychiatric comorbidity in the medically ill A
comorbid psychiatric disorder can greatly affect the impact and outcome
of medical conditions; for example,

Psychiatric disorder may be present in medical patients for three main
reasons: 1. By chance, as both are common. 2. The psychiatric disorder
may have caused the medical condition; for example, alcohol dependence
causing cirrhosis of the liver. 3. The medical condition may have caused
the psychiatric disorder, either through an action of the disease or its
treatment on the brain, or as a reaction to the psychological impact of
the medical condition or its treatment, or as a result of the social
effects of the

Box 22.2 Psychiatric disorders that are common in the medically ill
Adjustment disorder Major depression Anxiety disorders Acute stress
disorder Post-traumatic stress disorder Somatoform disorder Substance
misuse Eating disorder Sleep disorder Factitious disorder Sexual
disorders

635

63

636

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine medical condition or its treatment
(for example, loss of employment). These factors interact with the
person's premorbid vulnerability.

Box 22.3 Medical conditions that may cause psychiatric disorder directly

The medical condition and its treatment Biological mechanisms. In
addition to delirium and dementia, a number of other psychiatric
disorders may be caused by effects of the medical condition on the
brain. Conditions that may act in this way include acute infection,
endocrine disorders, and some forms of malignancy. This resulting
psychiatric condition is referred to as an 'organic' mental disorder
(see Chapter 2). The principal medical conditions that may act in this
way are listed in Box 22.3. Medical treatment may also cause psychiatric
disorder by its effect on the brain. Table 22.3 lists some commonly used
drugs that may produce psychiatric disorder as a side effect. Other
treatments associated with psychiatric disorder include radiotherapy,
cancer chemotherapy, and mutilating operations such as mastectomy.
Psychological and social mechanisms. The most common means by which a
medical condition can cause psychiatric disorder is by its psychological
impact. Certain types of medical condition are particularly likely to
provoke serious psychiatric consequences. These include life-threatening
acute illnesses and recurrent progressive conditions. Psychiatric
disorder is more common in chronic medical illness when there are
distressing symptoms such as severe pain, persistent vomiting, and
breathlessness; and where there is significant disability (Katon et al.,
2007). Patients at risk for both acute and persistent psychiatric
disorder in the course of medical illness include those who: â

have developed psychological problems in relation to stress in the past

â

have suffered other recent adverse life events

â

are in difficult social circumstances.

The reactions of family, friends, employers, and doctors may affect the
psychological impact of a medical condition. They may reduce the
consequences by their support, reassurance, and other help, or they may
increase it by their excessive caution, contradictory advice, or lack of
sympathy.

Depression Carcinoma Infections Neurological disorders (see Chapter 14)
Diabetes, thyroid disorder, Addison's disease Systemic lupus
erythematosus

Anxiety Hyperthyroidism Hyperventilation Phaeochromocytoma Hypoglycaemia
Drug withdrawal Some neurological disorders (see Chapter 14)

Prevention of psychiatric disorder in the medically ill There are three
main strategies. â

Identify those at risk.

â

Minimize the negative effect of illness by providing good medical and
nursing care.

â

Detect, and treat effectively, the early stages of any psychiatric
disorder.

Prevention should focus on those suffering illnesses or undergoing
treatments that are known to be associated with the development of
psychiatric disorder, and on patients who are psychologically vulnerable
as evidenced, for example, by a previous history of psychiatric
disorder.

Effectiveness of psychiatric treatments in the medically ill Clinical
experience indicates that psychiatric treatments are generally effective
in patients who are also medically ill.Â There was, however, limited
evidence from randomized controlled trials because comorbid patients are
usually excluded---but there are now more trials of antidepressants in
medically ill patients

673

Management of psychiatric disorder in the medically ill

Table 22.3 Some drugs with psychological side effects Drug

Side effect

Antiparkinsonian agents Anticholinergic drugs

Delirium, visual hallucinations

L-Dopa

Delirium, depression, psychotic symptoms

Cardiovascular drugs Methyldopa

Tiredness, weakness, depression

Clonidine Sympathetic blockers

Impotence, mild depression

Digitalis

Delirium, mood disturbance

Diuretics

Weakness, apathy, and depression (owing to electrolyte depletion)

Analgesics Salicylamide

Confusion, agitation, amnesia

Phenacetin

Dementia with chronic abuse

Other examples Isoniazid

Acute organic syndrome and mania

Steroids

Irritability, mania, depression

Mefloquine

Psychotic symptoms, abnormal dreams, insomnia, depression, anxiety

and a clearer indication of their value (Taylor et al., 2011). Clinical
experience also suggests that psychological treatments such as cognitive
behaviour therapy are effective in medically ill patients, and again
there is now some limited evidence from clinical trials (Van Kessel et
al., 2008). There is better evidence for the

benefits of 'collaborative care', in which medical and psychiatric
treatment are coordinated. This is especially in the management of
chronic medical conditions (Katon, 2003) where there is evidence of
considerably reduced treatment costs, primarily because of shorter
inpatient stays (Koopmans et al., 2005).

Management of psychiatric disorder in the medically ill Assessment
Assessment is as for psychiatric disorder in other circumstances, but
with the additional need to: â

Be well informed about the medical condition and its treatment.

â

Distinguish anxiety and depressive disorders from normal emotional
responses to physical illness and its treatment. Symptoms that seldom
occur in normal distress (such as hopelessness, guilt, loss of interest,
and severe insomnia) help to make the distinction.

â

Be aware that medical conditions and their treatment may cause symptoms
such as fatigue and loss of appetite that are commonly used to diagnose
psychiatric disorder.

â

Explore the patient's understanding and fears of the medical condition
and its treatment.

General considerations The nature of the medical condition and its
treatment should be explained clearly and the opportunity provided for
patients to express their worries and fears.

637

638

638

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine The treatment for the associated
psychiatric disorder is conducted using the methods appropriate for the
same disorder in a physically healthy person. Careful consideration
should be given to possible interactions between the proposed
psychiatric treatment and the medical condition and its treatment.
Treatment can often usually be given by the general practitioner or
medical specialist, but more complex cases require the skills of a
psychiatrist.

Medication Anxiolytic and sedative drugs can give valuable shortterm
relief when distress is severe. The indications

for antidepressants are the same as those for patients who are not
physically ill.Â The side effects and possible interactions of the
psychotropic drugs with other medication should be considered carefully
before prescribing.

Psychological treatments Explanation and advice are part of the
treatment of every patient. Cognitive behaviour therapy may be chosen to
reduce distress, increase adherence to treatment, reduce
disproportionate disability, and to modify lifestyle risk factors.

Somatic symptoms not explained by somatic pathology distress as bodily
symptoms. More recently, the term has been used to describe the disorder
as well as the process producing it. Some current usage is even broader,
covering the perception of bodily sensations as symptoms and the
behaviour of consulting about them. Most usage accepts, explicitly or
implicitly, Stekl's original idea that these physical symptoms are an
expression of psychopathology; for example, 'a tendency to experience
and communicate psychological distress in the form of somatic symptoms
and to seek medical help for them' (Lipowski, 1988). Some definitions of
somatization reject Stekl's view and use criteria that require physical
symptoms to be accompanied by anxiety or mood disorder diagnosed
according to standard criteria. Also, current research suggests that
emotional distress and somatic symptoms are positively related rather
than inversely related, as they would be if they were alternative
expressions of an underlying psychopathology. Because there is no agreed
definition, and because of the unsubstantiated aetiological assumptions,
the term somatization is unsatisfactory.

Somatic symptoms that are not clearly associated with physical pathology
are common in the general population and in patients in all medical
settings (Mayou and Farmer, 2002). Although most of these symptoms are
transient, a minority are persistent and disabling, and a cause of
frequent medical consultations. Some conditions that may give rise to
somatic symptoms are shown in Box 22.3. As noted already, the most
common association of physical symptoms with psychiatric disorder is
with anxiety and depressive disorders, and some conditions meet the
criteria for a somatoform disorder. A few of these patients have a
factitious disorder, and a very small number indeed are malingering.
However, many of those who present to doctors with unexplained somatic
symptoms do not meet the diagnostic criteria for any of these
conditions. Even in these undiagnosed cases, however, psychological and
social factors are often important as causes of the symptoms and as
reasons for seeking help, and psychological measures are often helpful.

Terminology

â

Somatoform disorder is the term used originally in DSM-III to describe a
group of disorders, including traditional psychiatric diagnoses such as
hysteria and hypochondriasis, and newly proposed categories, including
somatization disorder. In DSM-5, somatoform disorders have been replaced
with the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorders in an attempt to do away
with the influence of mind/ body dualism.

â

Functional somatic symptoms is the term used often by physicians. It
refers to a condition caused by a

Many terms have been used to describe medically unexplained somatic
symptoms, and none is wholly satisfactory. These terms include hysteria,
hypochondriasis, somatization, somatoform symptoms, functional somatic
symptoms, and functional overlay. Some of these terms will now be
considered further. â

Somatization. The term was introduced at the beginning of the twentieth
century by Stekl, a German psychoanalyst, to describe the expression of
emotional

639

Somatic symptoms not explained by somatic pathology disturbance of
bodily function without any known pathology. The term is relatively
acceptable to patients, but the use of word functional (as opposed to
organic) has been criticized. â

Box 22.4 Physiological sources affecting bodily sensations

Medically unexplained symptoms. This term has the advantage of
describing a clinical problem without implying any assumptions about its
causes. However, it has been criticized as implying that understanding
of the condition is not possible. Despite this limitation we use it in
this chapter.

Sinus tachycardia and benign arrhythmias Effects of fatigue Hangover
Effects of overeating Effects of prolonged inactivity Autonomic effects
of anxiety Effects of lack of sleep

Epidemiology Medically unexplained symptoms are common in the general
population and in people attending primary care; and they are more
frequent in women than in men (Guthrie, 2008). Although most of these
symptoms are recognized as not serious and although most are
short-lived, a sizeable minority lead to distress, functional
disability, and role impairment with more time off work, consulting
doctors, and taking medication (Harris et al., 2009).

in childhood; for example, poor parenting and various forms of abuse. â

Social circumstances. Medically unexplained symptoms are associated with
poor socioeconomic circumstances and acute or chronic adversity.

â

Personality. Some people with medically unexplained symptoms have had
concerns about bodily health going back to adolescence or earlier, and
these can be viewed as part of their personality.

Aetiology

Perpetuating factors include:

Although unexplained by any physical pathology, something is known about
the causes of medically unexplained symptoms. Most arise from
misinterpretation of the significance of normal bodily sensations: they
are interpreted as a sign of disease. Concern leads to the focusing of
attention on the sensations and this leads to even greater concern,
apprehension, and anxiety, which exacerbate and maintain the symptom.
For example, awareness of increased heart rate when excited or anxious
may lead to worry about heart disease, restriction of daily activities,
and repeated requests for investigation and reassurance. Good
communication by clinical staff can help to counter the effects of such
misinterpretations. Box 22.4 lists sources of bodily sensations that may
be misinterpreted as symptoms of disease. Predisposing factors include:

â

Behavioural factors, such as repeatedly seeking information about
illness, and inactivity.

â

Emotional factors, especially chronic anxiety and depression.

â

The reactions of others, including doctors as well as family and
friends. Doctors may inadvertently prolong the problem by failing to
give clear, relevant information which takes account of the patient's
individual fears and other concerns.

â

Beliefs about illness shape a person's response to sensations and
symptoms. These beliefs may be related to personal experience of illness
in earlier life, to involvement in the illness of family or friends, or
to portrayals of illness in the media (see Box 22.5).

â

Adverse experiences in childhood. Adults with medically unexplained
symptoms commonly report adversities

See Kanaan et al.Â (2007) for a review of the causes of unexplained
symptoms.

Box 22.5 Experiences that may affect the interpretation of bodily
sensations Childhood illness, with encounters with medical services, and
absence from school During childhood, illness of close family members
Physical illness in adult life In adult life, illness among family and
friends Accounts of illness in the media Other sources of information
about illness

639

640

640

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Medically unexplained symptoms Classification The classification of
medically unexplained symptoms has been considered from two
perspectives. 1. The medical approach has been to identify patterns of
physical symptoms such as irritable bowel syndrome and fibromyalgia. The
syndromes differ somewhat in different countries; for example, low blood
pressure syndrome is accepted in Germany, and mal de foie in France, but
neither is accepted in England. These are descriptive syndromes, not
aetiological entities, and they overlap with other disorders. Diagnostic
criteria have been produced for some of these syndromes and these
criteria are useful in research and service planning. 2. The psychiatric
approach. The alternative approach is to attempt to identify psychiatric
syndromes that are the basis of the symptoms. These include anxiety and
depressive disorders, somatoform disorder, and factitious disorder. A
psychiatric and a medical diagnosis can be made in the same patients;
for example, a patient with chest pain and no heart disease may receive
a medical diagnosis of 'non-cardiac chest pain' and a psychiatric
diagnosis of panic disorder, both describing the same symptoms.

investigations and of the way these have been explained to the patient.
The psychiatrist explores the nature and significance to the patient of
the unexplained symptoms, and completes the usual psychiatric history
and a mental state examination, with particular attention to: â

Previous concerns about illness.

â

Current beliefs about illness.

â

Personality.

â

Social and psychological problems.

â

Detection of a depressive or anxiety disorder.

Information should be sought from other informants as well as from the
patient.

Management The basic plan of management is the same for all medically
unexplained symptoms, but individual treatment plans should take account
of the patient's special concerns, the type of unexplained symptoms, and
any associated psychiatric disorder. The management of CFS and some
other special functional medical syndromes is discussed below. The
management of somatoform disorders is described later in the chapter.
After completing the basic procedures outlined in Box 22.6, many
patients will be reassured. Those who

Prevention Until we know more of the causes of medically unexplained
symptoms, there is no solid basis for prevention. While a reduction in
predisposing factors in the population, such as childhood abuse and poor
parenting, might have some effect, if they were achievable, it is more
plausible to address factors such as poor communication by doctors (Ring
et al., 2004) and inadequate treatment of depression and anxiety in
patients who present with somatic complaints. See Hotopf (2004) for a
fuller discussion of prevention.

Assessment An adequate medical assessment is essential. At the end of
this the physician should explain: â

The purpose and results of all investigations carried out, and why it
has been concluded that there is no medical cause for the symptoms.

â

That the symptoms are nevertheless accepted as real and that it makes
sense to seek other causes.

If the patient is then referred to a psychiatrist, the latter should be
informed about the results of the

Box 22.6 Basic approaches to medically unexplained symptoms Emphasize
that the symptoms are real and familiar to the clinician. â Explain the
role of psychosocial factors in all medical conditions. â Offer and
discuss a psychosocial explanation of the symptoms. â Allow adequate
time for the patient and partner/ family to ask questions. â Agree a
treatment plan to include: â Treatment of any minor medical problem
contributing to the symptoms â Treatment of any associated psychiatric
disorder (commonly anxiety or depression) â If appropriate, improve
fitness by graded activity â If appropriate, diary keeping to explore
the relationship between symptoms and possible psychosocial causes. â

641

Somatic symptoms not explained by somatic pathology are not reassured
may seek repeated investigation and reassurance. Therefore, when all
medically necessary investigations have been completed, the clinician
should explain thoroughly why no further investigation is required.
After these initial discussions, it is seldom helpful to engage in
repeated arguments about the causes. Most patients are willing to accept
at least that psychological as well as biological factors may influence
their symptoms, and this acceptance can provide a basis for
psychological management. Keeping a diary to explore the relationship of
symptoms to psychosocial causes can be more convincing than further
explanation. Much can usually be achieved by the primary care team, and
by the physicians using these basic procedures. However, chronic and
recurrent problems may need to be referred to a psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist for further treatment of associated psychiatric disorder,
possibly involving cognitive therapy or dynamic psychotherapy. The
psychiatrist can also help to coordinate any continuing medical care,
especially when this involves several specialties and professions.
Further treatment should be based on the formulation of the person's
individual problems. The treatment plan might include, for example,
antidepressant medication, anxiety management, and cognitive therapy to
change the inaccurate beliefs about the origin and significance of
symptoms. Regarding the evidence about the effectiveness of treatments
for medically unexplained symptoms, there have been some trials of
medication and of cognitive behaviour therapy, some of which are cited
in the course of this chapter. Antidepressant medication has been shown
to benefit several kinds of medically unexplained symptoms, including
fibromyalgia and irritable bowel syndrome. Facial pain may be helped by
tricyclics. This benefit is especially (but not exclusively) in patients
with marked depressive symptoms (Somashekar et al., 2013). Cognitive
behaviour therapy is moderately effective in the treatment of
non-cardiac chest pain, irritable bowel, and CFS. Treatment delivered by
psychologists has greater benefit than that given by primary care
physicians (Gerger et al., 2015).

primary care, which demonstrate that doctors are as active in proposing
biological explanations and tests as these patients are in asking for
them. For fuller information about the management of medically
unexplained symptoms, see Isaac and Paauw (2014).

Chronic fatigue syndrome Many terms have been used to describe this
syndrome, whose most prominent feature is chronic disabling fatigue: the
terms include postviral fatigue syndrome, neurasthenia, and myalgic
encephalomyelitis (ME). The descriptive term chronic fatigue syndrome
(CFS) is now preferred. The diagnosis requires that the illness must
have lasted for least 6 months and that other causes of fatigue have
been excluded (Fukuda et al., 1994). CFS has a long history. In the
nineteenth century the symptoms were diagnosed as neurasthenia, and in
ICD-10 the syndrome can still be recorded in this way, an option that is
chosen widely in China and some other countries. The diagnostic criteria
for CFS overlap with those for a number of other psychiatric disorders,
including depression, anxiety, somatoform disorders, and fibromyalgia.
CFS remains a highly contested disorder with a powerful lobby against
any psychiatric interpretation. The persistence of this conflict
exemplifies the problems with defining these disorders. Recently the US
Institute of Medicine has proposed renaming CFS as 'systemic exertion
intolerance disease', with the aim of improving acceptance and
understanding of the patient experience and stimulating research into
the pathophysiology of key symptomatology (Anonymous, 2015).

Clinical features The central features are fatigue at rest and prolonged
exhaustion after minor physical or mental exertion. These features are
accompanied by muscular pains, poor concentration, and other symptoms
from the list in Box 22.7. People with this condition are commonly most
concerned to avoid activity. Frustration, depression, and loss of
physical fitness are common.

Prognosis

Epidemiology

The prognosis for less complex cases of fairly recent onset is good, but
for chronic, multiple, or recurrent conditions it is much less so. For
such cases the realistic goal may be to limit disability and requests
for unnecessary medical investigation. Doctors need to recognize that
they may also contribute to this process. Bensing and Verhaak (2006)
review evidence from studies in

Surveys of the general population indicate that persistent fatigue is
reported by up to a quarter of the population at any one time. The
complaint is common amongst people attending primary care and medical
outpatient clinics. However, only a small proportion of people who
complain of excessive fatigue meet the diagnostic criteria for CFS.
Estimates of prevalence are around 0.5% of

641

642

642

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Box 22.7 Case definition of chronic fatigue syndrome Inclusion criteria
Clinically evaluated, medically unexplained, fatigue of at least 6
months' duration that is: â of new onset (not lifelong) â not a result
of ongoing exertion â not substantially alleviated by rest â a
substantial reduction in previous level of activities The occurrence of
four or more of the following symptoms: â subjective memory impairment â
sore throat â tender lymph nodes â muscle pain â joint pain â headache

the general population with a marked (20--40-fold) predominance of
females (Prins et al., 2006). CFS in children is considered in Chapter
16.

â â

Exclusion criteria Active, unresolved, or suspected disease Psychotic,
melancholic, or bipolar depression â Psychotic disorders â Dementia â
Anorexia or bulimia nervosa â Alcohol or other substance misuse â Severe
obesity â â

Reproduced from Annals of Internal Medicine, 121(12), Fukuda K et al,
Chronic fatigue syndrome: a comprehensive approach to its definition and
management, pp.Â 953--9, Copyright (1994), with permission from The
American College of Physicians.

An alternative approach to aetiology is to consider predisposing,
precipitating, and perpetuating factors: â

Predisposing factors include a past history of major depressive disorder
and perhaps personality characteristics such as perfectionism.

â

Precipitating factors include viral infection and life stresses.

â

Perpetuating factors may include neuroendocrine dysfunction, emotional
disorder, attribution of the whole disorder to physical disease, coping
by avoidance, chronic personal and social difficulties, and
misinformation from the media and other sources.

Aetiology The aetiology of CFS is controversial. Suggested factors
include: â

â

â

Biological causes. Several biological causes have been proposed,
including chronic infection, immune dysfunction, a muscle disorder,
neuroendocrine dysfunction, and ill-defined neurological disorders.
Despite strong claims for several specific causative agents, evidence is
lacking. For example, Lyme disease (Lyme borreliosis) has been said to
produce chronic fatigue, myalgia, and impaired concentration, but there
are no reliable data to support a link (Stanek et al., 2012).
Psychological and behavioural factors. These appear to be important,
especially concerns about the significance of symptoms, the resulting
focusing of attention on symptoms, and avoidance of physical mental and
social activities that worsen them. Many patients are depressed and/or
anxious. However, not all are, and the intense opposition to a
psychological understanding in some patients is very striking. Social
factors. Stress at work is sometimes important. Belief that there must
be a physical cause may be influenced by the stigma attached to a
psychiatric diagnosis, and by some of the information provided by
patient groups and practitioners.

unrefreshing sleep post-exertional malaise lasting more than 24 hours

Course and prognosis For established cases, the long-term outcome has
been considered poor. However, it must be remembered that most studies
of prognosis relate to patients referred to specialist centres who may
have experienced fatigue for a long time before the referral. Also, most
studies refer to prognosis before modern treatments (see below) were
widely used. A recent long-term study found a sixfold increase in
suicide, but no overall excess mortality, in CFS (Roberts et al., 2016).

Treatment Many treatments have been suggested but very few are of proven
efficacy. There have been several randomized controlled trials of
cognitive behavioural therapy and of graded exercise regimes, which have
shown the benefits of these procedures over standard medical care alone,
and over relaxation therapy.

643

Somatic symptoms not explained by somatic pathology The PACE study
(White et al., 2011) and its follow up (Sharpe et al., 2015) indicate a
strong advantage to cognitive behavioural therapy and graded exercise
rather than 'living within the dictates of the disorder' as recommended
by many CFS groups.

Management Assessment As with all medically unexplained conditions,
assessment should exclude treatable medical or psychiatric causes of
chronic fatigue. It is important to enquire carefully about depressive
symptoms, especially as patients may not at first reveal them. Although
extensive medical investigations are unlikely to be rewarding, the
psychiatrist can usefully collaborate with a physician when assessing
these patients. The formulation should refer to any relevant
aetiological factors (see above).

Starting treatment The six basic steps are to: 1. Acknowledge the
reality of the patient's symptoms and the disability associated with
them. 2. Provide appropriate information about the nature of the
syndrome to the patient and to the family. 3. Present the aetiological
formulation as a working hypothesis to be tested, not argued over. 4.
Treat identifiable depression and anxiety. 5. Encourage gradual return
to normal functioning by overcoming avoidance and regaining the capacity
for physical activity. 6. Help with any occupational and other practical
problems.

Medication When there is a definite evidence of a depressive disorder,
antidepressant drugs should be prescribed in usual doses. Clinical
experience suggests that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)
drugs are best tolerated. Antidepressant drugs are also useful in
reducing anxiety, improving sleep, and reducing pain. Low-dose tricyclic
antidepressants may have a role here.

Psychological treatment On the simplest level, these include education
about the condition, and the correction of misconceptions about cause
and treatment. Cognitive behavioural methods include addressing
misconceptions about the nature of the condition and excessive concerns
about activity; and encouraging a gradual increase in activity.
Associated

personal or social difficulties can be addressed using a problem-solving
approach. See Harvey and Wessely (2009) for review of CFS.

Irritable bowel syndrome Irritable bowel syndrome is characterized by
abdominal pain or discomfort, with or without an alteration of bowel
habits, persisting for longer than 3 months in the absence of any
demonstrable disease.

Epidemiology The condition occurs in as many as 10% of the general
population (Wilson et al., 2004), the majority of whom do not consult a
doctor.

Aetiology The cause of the syndrome is uncertain, although there appears
to be a disturbance of bowel function and sensation. Depressive and
anxiety disorders are common among people who attend gastroenterology
clinic with irritable bowel syndrome, especially among those who fail to
respond to treatment.

Treatment People with mild symptoms usually respond to education,
reassurance about the absence of serious pathology, change in diet and,
when required, antimotility drugs. More severe and chronic symptoms may
need additional treatment. Cognitive behavioural therapy has been shown
to be of benefit, and so have tricyclic antidepressants, although SSRIs
do not seem effective (Hookway et al., 2015). See Cashman et al.Â (2016)
for a review of irritable bowel syndrome.

Fibromyalgia The term fibromyalgia refers to a syndrome of generalized
muscle aching, tenderness, stiffness, and fatigue, often accompanied by
poor sleep. A physical sign of multiple specific tender points has been
described, but it is probably non-specific. Women are affected more than
men, and the condition is more common in middle age. The aetiology is
uncertain, but there is a marked association with depression and
anxiety. A network metaanalysis shows limited evidence for the efficacy
of either pharmacological or psychological therapy, but a combination of
antidepressant, aerobic exercise, and cognitive behavioural therapy
shows some promise (Nuesch et al., 2013). See Clauw (2014) for a review
of fibromyalgia.

643

64

644

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Factitious disorder DSM-5 defines factitious disorder as the
'Falsification of physical or psychological signs or symptoms, or
induction of injury or disease, associated with identified deception'.
The category is divided further into that imposed on the self and that
imposed on another. It distinguishes single episodes from those that are
recurring but no longer distinguishes on the basis of psychological or
physical symptoms. In factitious disorder, symptoms are feigned to
enable the person to adopt a sick role and obtain medical care (in
malingering, symptoms are feigned to obtain other kinds of
advantage---see below). The term Munchausen's syndrome denotes an
extreme form of this disorder (described below).

Epidemiology The prevalence of factitious disorder is not known with
certainty, but it accounts for about 1% of referrals to consultation
liaison services. The disorder usually begins before the age of 30
years. 'Illness deception' in physical disorder, covering both
factitious disorder and malingering, is considered relatively common,
albeit mild, in occupational health services, where one study (Poole,
2010) found it in 8% of consecutive attendees.

Aetiology The cause is uncertain, in part because many affected
individuals give histories that are inaccurate. There is often a history
of parental abuse or neglect, of chronic illness in early life with many
encounters with the medical services, sometimes long periods in
hospital, and sometimes alleged medical mismanagement. Previous
substance misuse, mood disorder, and personality disorder are other
common features. Many patients have worked in medically related
occupations.

Prognosis This is variable but the condition is usually longlasting. Few
patients accept psychological treatment, but some improve during
supportive medical care. In some cases there is evidence of other
disturbed behaviours, including abuse of children and (on the part of
those working in health professions) harm to patients.

Management Assessment When factitious disorder is suspected, the
available information should be reviewed carefully, including the
history given by informants as well as that provided by the patient. A
psychiatrist may be able to assist in this assessment, and in cases of
doubt further specialist medical

investigation may be needed. Additional evidence may be obtained by
careful observation of the patient, but the ethical and legal aspects of
any proposal to make covert observations should be considered most
carefully.

Starting treatment When the diagnosis has been made, the doctor should
explain to the patient the findings and discuss their implications. This
should be done in a way that conveys an understanding of the patient's
distress and makes possible a discussion of potential psychosocial
causes. Although some patients admit at this point that the symptoms are
self-inflicted, others persistently deny this. One should not simply
assume in this case that the patient is being deliberately misleading.
Examining these patients often yields a sense of self-deception where
the process lies somewhere between conscious (fabulist) and unconscious
processes. In these cases, management should still be directed to
helping the patient identify and overcome associated psychological and
social difficulties, in the hope that improvement in such problems may
be followed eventually by a lessening of the factitious disorder. Staff
who have been caring for the patient while the investigations were being
carried out, may become angry when they discover that the patient has
deceived them. Such feelings make management more difficult and the
psychiatrist should play a part in resolving them through discussion,
and by explaining the nature and severity of the patient's psychosocial
problems. All closely involved staff should be involved in agreeing a
treatment plan which defines what future medical care, and what help
with the associated problems is needed, both for the patient and/or the
family. Special risks and difficult ethical problems may arise when the
patient is a healthcare worker---see Box 22.8. See Bass and Halligan
(2014) for a review of factitious disorder.

Munchausen's syndrome Richard Asher (Asher, 1951) suggested the term
Munchausen's syndrome for an extreme form of factitious disorder, in
which patients attend hospital with a false but plausible and often
dramatic history suggesting serious acute illness. Often the person is
found to have attended and deceived the staff of many other hospitals,
and to have given a different false name at each. Many of these people
have scars from previous (negative) exploratory operations. People with
this disorder may obstruct efforts to obtain information about them, and
some interfere with diagnostic investigations. When further information
is

645

Somatic symptoms not explained by somatic pathology

Box 22.8 Health care workers with factitious disorder Highly publicized
cases of serious physical harm to patients caused by a small number of
health care workers with factitious disorder, or by those producing
factitious disorder by proxy, have aroused great public concern. It is
essential, therefore, in the management of these patients to consider
the risk to others if the patient continues to work in health care.
These infrequent cases can present difficult medicolegal problems. If
the diagnosis is in doubt, it may be judged necessary to seek additional
evidence by searching the patient's belongings for items (such as
needles

obtained, especially that about previous hospital attendance, the
patient often leaves. The aetiology and longterm outcome of this
puzzling disorder are unknown.

Fabricated or induced illness Fabricated or induced illness (FII;
sometimes known as factitious disorder by proxy or Munchausen disorder
by proxy) is a rare form of child abuse. A parent or carer, usually the
child's mother, exaggerates or gives false accounts of symptoms in their
child, and may fake or deliberately induce signs of illness and seek
repeated medical investigations and needless treatment for the child.
The first cases were described by Meadow in 1977 (Meadow, 1985). The
signs reported most commonly are neurological signs, bleeding, and
rashes. Some children collude in the production of the symptoms and
signs. The perpetrators (usually mothers) often have a severe
personality disorder, including pathological lying, and many suffer from
somatoform disorder themselves. Early abusive experiences are common
(Bass and Jones, 2011). Hazards for the children include disruption of
education and social development. The prognosis is usually poor for both
children and perpetrators, and there is a significant mortality.
Occasional cases of murder of children by professional carers have been
described as an extreme form of this disorder. FII is a child protection
issue. Hence possible cases need to be investigated by a
multiprofessional team, including social care and police, and the
diagnosis should be made with great caution, and only after detailed
investigation. In the UK, a number of high profile legal cases have
highlighted the danger of diagnosis on insufficient positive evidence
and without adequate exclusion of other causes of the child's symptoms.

or medication) that could have been used to simulate symptoms. In
general, it is unethical to search patients' belongings without first
explaining the reason and obtaining permission. If the patient refuses
to be searched, and there is a serious risk to others should the
diagnosis be missed, it is usually appropriate to obtain advice from one
or more experienced professionals, including a medicolegal opinion.
Advice may be needed also when judging risk, when the risk is serious,
and when the patient refuses to allow discussion with the employers in
deciding whether to breach confidentiality.

Malingering Malingering is not a medical diagnosis but a description of
behaviour. The term denotes the deliberate simulation or exaggeration of
symptoms for the purpose of obtaining some gain, such as financial
compensation. The distinction from factitious disorder and from
somatoform disorder can be difficult because it requires an accurate
understanding of the person's motives (Bass and Halligan, 2014).
Malingering is infrequent and is most often encountered among prisoners,
the military, and people seeking compensation for accidents. Several
kinds of clinical picture have been described: â

malingered medical conditions and disability;

â

malingered psychosis, seen in those wishing to obtain admission to
hospital for shelter or to prolong their stay in hospital, and in
criminal defendants trying to avoid standing trial or to influence
sentencing;

â

malingered or exaggerated post-traumatic stress disorder;

â

malingered cognitive deficit.

Ganser's syndrome (see page 657) is thought by some to be a form of
malingering.

Assessment Assessment depends on careful history-taking and clinical
examination, and a watch for discrepancies in the person's behaviour.
Lawyers or insurers sometimes use surveillance by video or other means
to detect the behaviour but, for ethical reasons, clinicians seldom do.
Psychological tests have been used to aid detection, but none is of
proven validity.

645

64

646

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Management When malingering is certain, the patient should be informed
tactfully and his situation discussed nonjudgementally. He should be
encouraged to deal more

appropriately with any problems that led to the behaviour and, in
appropriate cases, offered some brief facesaving intervention as a way
to give up the symptoms. See Eastwood and Bisson (2008) for review.

Somatoform and dissociative disorders Classification in this area is
problematic and confusing, with significant differences between ICD-10
and DSM, and between DSM-IV and DSM-5. Because of this, we discuss
DSM-IV as well as ICD-10 and DSM-5 approaches. Somatoform and
dissociative disorders are considered together in this chapter because
they were classified together in DSM-IV. Apart from this, the disorders
are not closely linked. Some of the key terms used are defined in Box
22.9. Note also that, although somatoform disorder has been replaced by
somatic symptom disorder in DSM-5, this change is not yet widely
accepted practice, and may lead to confusion in discussion with medical
colleagues in the near future. For this reason we have retained the term
somatoform disorder. See Mayou (2014) for discussion.

Classification In DSM-IV, the overall term somatoform disorder was used
to denote a group of conditions (listed in Table 22.4) characterized by
physical symptoms occurring without an adequate physical cause. In DSM-5
the new term somatic symptom disorder emphasizes the burden of symptoms,
rather than their unclear aetiology (Sharpe, 2013). In ICD-10, these
disorders are not allocated a separate category; instead they are
classified within the broader category of neurotic, stress-related, and
somatoform disorders. A further confusing difference between the
classifications concerns the status of conversion disorder and its
relationship to somatoform and dissociative disorders. In ICD-10, the
category is dissociative (conversion) disorders; that is, conversion
(Box 22.9) is viewed, in effect, as synonymous with dissociation. In
DSM-IV, conversion disorder was classified as a specific subtype of
dissociative disorder. However, in DSM-5, conversion disorder is
classified as a type of somatoform disorder, and has the alternative
name of functional neurological symptom disorder. This emphasizes the
essential importance of the neurological examination and recognition
that the relevant psychological factors may not be demonstrable at the
time of diagnosis. Here, we follow the DSM-IV convention. See Table
22.4.

Somatoform disorder This section is concerned only with the groups of
unexplained physical symptoms classified within the somatoform disorder
category. The defining feature is the presence of: physical symptoms
suggesting a physical disorder for which there are no demonstrable
organic findings or known physiological mechanisms, and for which there
is strong evidence, or a strong presumption, that the symptoms are
linked to psychological factors or conflicts.

Many people experience such symptoms, and they are associated with
significant distress and disability. However, there is doubt about the
value of grouping together under this one rubric conditions which are
dissimilar in many ways and which overlap (are comorbid)

Box 22.9 Some definitions Somatoform disorders. A generic term used in
DSMIV for a group of disorders characterized by physical symptoms that
are not explained by organic factors. Somatic symptom disorders. The
DSM-5 replacement for somatoform disorders. It emphasizes the disability
from symptoms, not whether they lack a physical explanation.
Dissociation. A hypothetical mechanism whereby psychological processes
relating to consciousness are split or fragmented. Dissociation is
discussed further in Chapter 7 under Stress-related disorders.
Dissociative symptoms. Symptoms that have been thought to arise through
the mechanism of dissociation. Conversion. A term introduced by Freud
for a hypothetical mechanism by which psychological stress leads to (is
converted into) physical symptoms. Conversion disorder. A term for
conditions that may result from conversion; conditions that in the past
were called hysteria.

674

Somatoform and dissociative disorders

Table 22.4 Categories of somatoform disorders in disorders in ICD-10,
DSM-IV, and DSM-5 ICD--10

DSM-IV

DSM-5

Somatization disorder

Somatization disorder

Somatic symptom and related disorders

Undifferentiated somatoform disorder

Undifferentiated somatoform disorder

Somatic symptom and related disorders

Hypochondriacal disorder

Hypochondriasis

Illness anxiety disorder

Somatoform autonomic dysfunction

No category

No category

Persistent pain disorder

Pain disorder associated with psychological factors (and a general
medical condition)

Somatic symptom disorder with predominant pain or psychological factors
affecting other medical conditions

Other somatoform disorders

Somatoform disorders not otherwise specified

Unspecified somatic symptom disorder

No category

Body dysmorphic disorder

Moved to obsessive compulsive and related disorders

No category

Conversion disorder

Functional neurological symptom disorder

Neurasthenia

No category

No category Factitious disorder moved to somatic symptom disorder and
related disorders

Source: data from The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural
disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright
(1992), World Health Organization; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-IV, Copyright (2000), American Psychiatric
Association; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric Association.

with anxiety disorders and depressive disorders (Sharpe and Mayou,
2004). Also, two of the conditions--- hypochondriasis and somatization
disorder---are so enduring that it has been suggested that they should
be classified as personality disorders. (Hypochondriasis as a term has
been abandoned in DSM-5, as it was considered to have become too
pejorative. It has been replaced with 'illness anxiety disorder',
although such patients may also sometimes be diagnosed as having a
somatic symptom disorder.)

Classification in DSM-IV, DSM-5 and ICD-10

being called for a time 'the American neurosis'). It is included in
ICD-10 because it is an international classification and the category is
used in some Far Eastern countries. â

Conversion disorder is a somatoform disorder in DSMIV (and a somatic
symptom disorder in DSM-5), but is not used to describe a specific
disorder in ICD-10.

â

Body dysmorphic disorder does not exist as a category in ICD-10;
instead, it is listed as a type of hypochondriacal disorder.

There are also problems which both classifications share: â

Although there are broad similarities, there are also two important
differences between the subtypes of somatoform disorder in ICD-10,
DSM-IV, and DSM-5 (see Table 22.4).

Diagnostic criteria within the group are based on a mixture of
principles---aetiology, symptom count, consultation, and response to
medical treatment.

â

Neurasthenia is not included in DSM-IV or DSM-5 because the category is
seldom used in the USA (despite being first popularized there by George
Beard and

Diagnostic criteria for hypochondriacal disorder were derived largely
from patients attending hospitals and do not apply readily to many of
the people with unexplained medical symptoms in the community.

â

Many cases in the community did not meet the diagnostic criteria for any
specific somatoform disorder in

â

647

648

648

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine DSM-IV and had to be placed in
non-specific categories, leading to the change in name to somatic
symptom disorder in DSM-5. â

The seemingly small differences between DSM-IV and ICD-10 criteria
resulted in large differences in estimates of prevalence of somatoform
disorder as a whole and of the subcategories.

Conversion disorder Conversion disorder was a term introduced in DSM to
replace the older term hysteria; as noted, in DSM-5 it is now also known
as functional neurological symptom disorder. The term refers to a
condition in which there are isolated neurological symptoms that cannot
be explained in terms of known mechanisms of pathology and in which
there has been a significant psychological stressor. The study of such
symptoms has a long history. Some understanding of this history provides
helpful background to understand the present status of the concept of
conversion disorder (Box 22.10); more broadly, the evolution of thinking
about hysteria was important for Freud's ideas which in turn greatly
influenced twentieth-century psychiatry.

Epidemiology The prevalence of conversion disorder in the general
population is difficult to determine, and estimates vary widely. A
review of five studies indicated an incidence rate of 5--12 per 100,000
per annum, with the lowest rates in a study of psychiatric practice, in
keeping with the view that many of these patients are not referred to
psychiatrists. Estimates of prevalence vary even more, but with figures
around 50 per 100,000. The few studies that examined change over time do
not support the belief that the condition is disappearing (Akagi and
House, 2002).

Aetiology The aetiology is unknown, reflected in the wide range of
theories with few research findings to support them. For review, see
Lehn et al.Â (2016). â

Psychodynamic theories use the explanatory concept of conversion of
emotional distress into physical symptoms, which often have a symbolic
meaning.

â

Social factors appear to be major determinants of the onset and
development of conversion symptoms.

â

Neurophysiological mechanisms: little is known of the neural basis of
conversion disorder. Functional neuroimaging shows alterations in brain
activation related to how adverse events are processed, and in the links
between emotion, memory, and body schema (Aybek et al., 2014).

â

Cognitive explanations: Brown (2002) suggested that the symptoms are
caused by the chronic activation of representations of the symptoms
stored within memory, the process being driven by attention directed to
these representations.

â

Cultural explanations: some of the phenomena classified as conversion
disorder in western countries may, in some other cultures, be accepted
as possession states (see below).

Clinical features In DSM-IV, conversion disorder was divided into four
subtypes (with motor symptoms, with sensory symptoms, with seizures or
convulsions, and mixed). In DSM-5 the coding simply indicates the
predominant symptom (e.g.Â speech, swallowing, seizures). Conversion
symptoms do not normally reflect the appropriate physiological or
pathological mechanisms. They are also highly responsive to suggestion
and may vary considerably in response to the comments of other people,
especially doctors. Symptoms may be 'reinforced' by measures such as
providing a wheelchair for the patient who has difficulty walking.
Patients with conversion disorders may seem surprisingly unconcerned
about the nature and implications of the symptoms ('belle
indifference'). This belle indifference is not invariable. The original
psychoanalytical understanding focused on the concepts of primary and
secondary gain. Secondary gain implies a significant external benefit or
avoidance of unwanted responsibilities from the symptoms. The primary
gain was the relief obtained by the conversion of the mental distress
generated by a hypothesized neurotic conflict into physical symptoms,
thereby allowing the conflict to remain unconscious. Secondary gains are
usually prominent in conversion disorders, but are also common in other
psychiatric---and physical---disorders.

Prognosis Prognosis for subsequent neurological disorder Owing to the
limited numbers of studies and their high heterogeneity, there is a lack
of rigorous empirical evidence to identify relevant prognostic factors
in patients presenting with persistent medically unexplained symptoms.
However, it seems that a more serious condition at baseline is
associated with a worse outcome (Olde Hartman et al., 2009). Most of the
patients seen in general practice or hospital emergency departments with
conversion disorders of recent onset recover quickly. Disorders lasting
longer

649

Somatoform and dissociative disorders

Box 22.10 A brief history of hysteria There are descriptions of hysteria
in ancient Greek medical texts. The disorder was thought to result from
abnormalities of position or function of the uterus, hence the name.
This view persisted until the seventeenth century. Gradually, the idea
became accepted that hysteria is a disorder of the brain and, by the
nineteenth century, the importance of predisposing constitutional and
organic causes was recognized. It was accepted also that the usual
provoking cause was strong emotion. In the later years of the nineteenth
century, the studies of hysteria by Charcot, a French neurologist
working at the SalpÃªtriÃ¨re Hospital in Paris, were particularly
influential. Charcot believed at first that the symptoms of hysteria
were caused by a functional disorder of the brain, and that this
disorder also rendered patients susceptible to hypnosis. As a result of
his susceptibility, new symptoms could be induced in these patients by
suggestion, and existing ones could be modified. Later, Charcot became
interested in the idea of his former pupil, Janet, that the basic
disorder in hysteria is not suggestibility but a tendency to
dissociation. By this Janet meant that the patients had lost the normal
integration between various parts of mental functioning, and that it did
not require a prior organic lesion---anyone could be hypnotized. Janet
believed that this dissociation led to a loss of awareness of certain
aspects of psychological functioning that would otherwise be within
awareness. Janet's ideas were influential for a while but never had the
impact of those of Freud.

than a year are likely to persist for many years. Slater's widely cited
1965 follow-up described the development of a physical and psychiatric
disorder in a high proportion of patients. Slater's sample was highly
atypical even for his tertiary clinic. A more recent follow-up of
patients attending the same hospital found a very low incidence of
physical or psychiatric diagnoses. A systematic review has demonstrated
that misdiagnosis has steadily declined over the past several decades
and is now only in the region of about 4% (Stone et al., 2005). When the
diagnosis of conversion disorder was made, it remained stable over time.

Prognosis for subsequent psychiatric disorder Although subsequent
neurological disorder is uncommon in these patients, psychiatric
morbidity is high. Usually the psychiatric symptoms are present when the
patients were first seen.

Freud visited Charcot in the winter of 1895--1896 and was impressed by
demonstrations of the susceptibility of patients to hypnosis, and of the
power of suggestion. On his return to Vienna, Freud and his colleague
Breuer studied patients with hysteria, published in the seminal
monograph Studies on Hysteria (1893--1895). They proposed that hysteria
was caused by emotionally charged ideas, usually sexual, which had
become lodged in the patient's unconscious mind as a result of some past
experience, and which were excluded from conscious awareness by
repression. Freud adopted the word 'conversion' to refer to the
hypothetical process whereby this hidden, unexpressed, emotion was
transformed into physical symptoms. He summarized this idea in the
phrase 'hysterics suffer mainly from reminiscences'. In the years that
followed, Freud came to believe that this original formulation was wrong
and had been based on fabricated accounts ('screen memories'), and from
then on he wrote no more on hysteria. Hysteria was thought to be a
declining problem in developed countries and the erroneous view that
many apparent cases were in fact unrecognized organic disease was put
vigorously by Slater (1965). Subsequent changes of opinion are
considered on page 648. For the history of hysteria see Shorter (1992);
for the history of the concept of conversion see Mace (2001).

Predictors of prognosis Predictors of good outcome are short history and
young age; predictors of poor outcome are long history, personality
disorder, and receipt of disability benefit or involvement in litigation
(Gelauff et al., 2014).

Treatment For acute conversion disorders seen in primary care or
hospital emergency departments, reassurance and suggestion of
improvement are often sufficient, together with immediate efforts to
resolve any stressful circumstances that provoked the reaction (Box
22.11). The doctor should be sympathetic and positive, and provide a
socially acceptable opportunity for rapid return to normal physical
functioning; for example, by arranging a brief course of physiotherapy.
The patient should feel that the problem is accepted as deserving
assessment, that it is common, and that a good outcome can be

649

650

650

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Box 22.11 Treatment of acute conversion disorder Obtain medical and
psychiatric history from patient and informants â Carry out appropriate
medical and psychiatric examination and arrange investigations for
physical causes â Reassure that the condition is temporary, well
recognized and, for motor disorders, due to a problem of converting
intention into action â Avoid reinforcing symptoms or disability â Offer
continuing help with any related psychiatric or social problems â

expected. The therapist should discuss any personal difficulties that
have been identified, and suggest that they deserve attention in their
own right. Where symptoms have persisted for more than a few weeks more
elaborate treatment is required. The general approach is to focus on
removing any factors that are reinforcing the symptoms and disability
and on encouraging normal behaviour. It should be explained that the
symptoms and disability (as in remembering, or moving his arm) are not
caused by physical disease but by an inability to convert willed
intention into action; and that sensory problems are caused by an
inability to become aware of sensory information, and not by a lesion
interfering with sensory pathways. This problem is provoked by
psychological factors. Patients should be told also that they can regain
control of the disturbed function and, if necessary, offered help to do
so---usually through physiotherapy. Psychotherapists often call this
providing a 'licence for change'. Attention is then directed away from
the symptoms and towards problems that have provoked the disorder. Staff
should show concern for the patient, but at the same time should
encourage self-help. They should not make undue concessions to patients'
disabilities; for example, a patient who cannot walk should be
encouraged to walk again, not be provided with a wheelchair. The
approach should be supportive and sympathetic: it should not appear in
any way uncaring or punitive. To achieve this end, there must be a clear
plan so that all members of staff adopt a consistent approach to the
patient. Medication can play a role in the treatment of these disorders
if there are prominent and significant depressive or anxiety symptoms.
Cognitive behaviour therapy

appears to be of little specific value, although it may act as a
non-specific aid to recovery. It is essential that measures to reduce
symptoms are accompanied by help with any associated personal and social
difficulties. Brief and focused psychological treatments are helpful,
but more intensive therapy risks complex transference reactions. Those
who do not improve should be reviewed thoroughly for undiscovered
physical illness. All patients, whether improved or not, should be
followed carefully for long enough to exclude any organic disease that
might have been missed at the original assessment. For review of
treatment of conversion disorder, see Lehn et al.Â (2016).

'Epidemic hysteria' Occasionally, dissociative (or conversion) disorder
spreads within a group of people as an 'epidemic'. This spread happens
most often in closed groups of young women; for example, in a girls'
school, a nurses' home, or a convent. Often anxiety has been heightened
by some fear of an epidemic of disease present in the neighbourhood.
Typically, the epidemic starts in one person who is highly suggestible,
histrionic, and a focus of attention in the group. Gradually, other
cases appear, first in the most suggestible, before spreading. The
symptoms are variable, but fainting and dizziness are common. Outbreaks
among schoolchildren have been documented.

Somatization disorder In 1962, psychiatrists in St Louis (Perley and
Guze, 1962) described a syndrome of chronic multiple somatic complaints
without any identified organic cause, which they regarded as a form of
hysteria. They named it Briquet's syndrome after a nineteenth-century
French physician who wrote a monograph on hysteria. A similar syndrome,
called somatization disorder, was introduced in DSM-III. The core
feature was multiple somatic complaints of long duration, beginning
before the age of 30 years. A similar category is found in ICD-10. In
DSM5 the disorder has been abandoned and is absorbed into the broader
somatic symptom disorder category.

Hypochondriasis The term hypochondriasis is one of the oldest medical
terms, originally used to describe disorders believed to be due to
disease of the organs situated in the hypochondrium. It was defined in
DSM-IV (and ICD-10, under the heading of hypochondriacal disorder) in
terms of conviction and/or fear of disease unsupported by the results

651

Somatoform and dissociative disorders of appropriate medical
investigation. As noted earlier, it has been abandoned in DSM-5 and
replaced by 'illness anxiety disorder', but hypochondriasis as a
diagnostic entity has been under sustained attack for decades without
disappearing and is likely to be encountered often in discussion with
colleagues. DSM-IV described the condition as a: preoccupation with a
fear or belief of having a serious disease based on the individual's
interpretation of physical signs of sensations as evidence of physical
illness. Appropriate physical evaluation does not support the diagnosis
of any physical disorder that can account for the physical signs or
sensations or for the individual's unrealistic interpretation of them.
The fear of having, or belief that one has a disease, persists despite
medical reassurance.

The criteria exclude patients with panic disorder or delusions, and
require that symptoms have been present for at least 6 months.

Epidemiology Attempts to estimate prevalence have been hindered by the
absence of standardized assessment. Whilst some primary care surveys
have estimated a prevalence of around 5%, the WHO multicentre primary
care survey (Gureje et al., 1997) found a prevalence of 0.8%, or 2.2%,
despite using a less restrictive definition. This later definition
omitted the criterion 'persistent refusal to accept medical reassurance'
but retained the triad of illness worry, associated distress, and
medical help-seeking. Comorbidity with depression and anxiety disorders
is frequent.

Prognosis Evidence about course and prognosis is limited. A review of
medically unexplained symptoms, somatization, and hypochondriasis (Olde
Hartman et al., 2009) failed to find prognostic factors other than
severity of disorder at baseline associated with a worse outcome. One
study found that personality predicted the time to remission in
hypochondriasis (Greeven et al., 2014).

Aetiology The cause is unknown. Cognitive formulations suggest that
there is faulty appraisal of normal bodily sensations, which are
interpreted as evidence of disease. Misinterpretation is maintained by
continually seeking reassurance and examining or rubbing the supposedly
affected part.

Treatment Since the disorder is chronic or recurrent, management is
difficult (Starcevic, 2015). Care should be exercised to ensure that a
hypochondriacal presentation of

depression is not missed and left untreated. Repeated reassurance is
unhelpful and may prolong the patient's concerns. Investigations should
be limited to those indicated by the medical priorities and not extended
to satisfy the patient's demands. Misinterpretations of the significance
of bodily sensations should be corrected, and encouragement given to
constructive ways of coping with symptoms. Trials have shown more
benefit for hypochondriacal symptoms from cognitive behavioural
treatment than from short-term dynamic psychotherapy or routine medical
care (SÃ¸rensen et al., 2011). See Noyes (2009) for a review of
hypochondriasis.

Body dysmorphic disorder Body dysmorphic disorder is the DSM term for a
subgroup of the broader but ill-defined syndrome of dysmorphophobia,
which was first described by Morselli in 1886 as 'a subjective
description of ugliness and physical defect which the patient feels is
noticeable to others'. In DSM-5, the term body dysmorphic disorder
denotes dysmorphophobia that is not better accounted for by another
psychiatric disorder. The preoccupation with the imagined defect in
appearance is usually an overvalued idea, but individuals 'can receive
an additional diagnosis of delusional disorder, somatic type' (Chapter
12); there is also overlap with hypochondriasis and
obsessive--compulsive disorder. In DSM-5, body dysmorphic disorder is
classified with 'obsessive compulsive and related disorders' while in
ICD-10 it is subsumed within the category of hypochondriacal disorder.
Patients with dysmorphophobia are convinced that some part of their body
is too large, too small, or is misshapen. To other people the appearance
is normal, or there is a trivial abnormality. In the latter case, it may
be difficult to decide whether the preoccupation is disproportionate.
The common concerns are about the nose, ears, mouth, breasts, buttocks,
or penis, but any part of the body may be involved. Patients may be
constantly preoccupied with and tormented by their mistaken beliefs. It
seems to them that other people notice and talk about the supposed
deformity. They may blame all their other difficulties on it: if only
their nose/ breasts were a better shape, they would be more successful
in their work, social life, or sexual relationships. Time-consuming
behaviours which aim to re-examine, improve, or hide the perceived
defect are frequent. Social impairment is considerable. There is
substantial comorbidity, especially with major depression and social
phobia. The condition usually begins in adolescence. It is chronic,
though it often fluctuates over time. It is probable

651

652

652

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine that there is some improvement over
many years but there have been no long-term prospective studies. The
severe cases described in the psychiatric literature are infrequent, but
less severe forms of dysmorphophobia are more common, especially among
those seeking plastic surgery or consulting dermatologists. As with the
more severe cases, many meet diagnostic criteria for other disorders.

Assessment Assessment should include questions about the nature of the
preoccupations with appearance and of the ways in which this has
interfered with personal and social life. Diagnosis can be difficult
because some sufferers fail to reveal the precise nature of their
symptoms because of embarrassment. This failure may result in
misdiagnosis as social phobia, panic disorder, or obsessive--compulsive
disorder.

Treatment When body dysmorphic disorder is secondary to a psychiatric
disorder such as major depression, the latter should be treated in the
usual way. The treatment of primary body dysmorphic disorder is often
difficult. It is essential to establish a working relationship in which
the patient feels that the psychiatrist is sympathetic, understands the
severity of the problems, and is willing to help. Since many patients
will be requesting surgery, it is important to explain the lack of
success of this approach and suggest that there are other effective
treatments. There is some modest support with SSRIs (Phillips, 2008),
and for cognitive behaviour therapy (Wilhelm et al., 2014). Counselling
and practical help should be provided for any occupational, social, or
sexual difficulties that accompany the condition. Although some patients
are helped by this approach coupled with continued support, many are
not. Cosmetic surgery is often successful for patients with conditions
other than dysmorphophobia. Surgery is usually contraindicated, however,
for people who have body dysmorphic disorder, many of whom are very
dissatisfied after the operation. Selection for surgery therefore
requires careful assessment of the patient's expectations. Those with
the most unrealistic hopes generally have poorer prognoses. Assessment
is difficult, and collaboration between plastic surgeons, psychiatrists,
and psychologists is valuable. Unintended rebuffs by surgeons or
psychiatrists can increase the difficulties of management.

Somatoform pain disorder This term was used to denote patients with
chronic pain that did not appear to be caused by any physical

or specific psychiatric disorder. DSM-IV emphasized that the essential
feature of this disorder is pain that is the predominant focus of the
clinical presentation and is of sufficient severity to cause distress or
impairment of functioning. It also proposed that neither organic
pathology nor pathophysiological mechanism has been found to account for
it or that it was grossly disproportionate to any identified causes.
DSM-5 takes a radically different approach, not dichotomizing the
origins of pain but accepting that physical and psychological factors
are essential aspects of all chronic pain. The diagnosis is based on the
need for intervention rather than the purported aetiology. In DSM-5 some
individuals with chronic pain can still be diagnosed as having somatic
symptom disorder with predominant pain. Others, however, may be
diagnosed within the new category of 'psychological factors affecting
other medical conditions'. This diagnosis prioritizes the intervention
needed to manage the very special experience of an identified medical
disorder that is present.

Epidemiology Pain is widely reported in surveys of the general
population. Most people report pain that is transient, but a minority
describe persistent or recurrent pain leading to disability (Gureje et
al., 1998). Pain is the most common symptom among people who consult
doctors. Acute pain usually has an organic cause, but psychological
factors can affect the subjective response to pain whatever the main
cause. In general practice, pain is a common presenting symptom of
emotional problems. In psychiatric practice, it has been reported that
pain is experienced by about one-fifth of inpatients and over half of
outpatients. Pain is particularly associated with depression, anxiety,
panic, and somatoform disorders. Patients with multiple pains are
especially likely to have associated psychiatric disorder (Gureje et
al., 1998).

Aetiology Chronic pain occurs in many conditions, including neurological
or musculoskeletal disorders. It often has both physical and
psychological causes (Bushnell et al., 2013). A 'pain-prone disorder'
has been suggested as a variant of depressive disorder, but there is
little evidence for this. It is more likely that in these cases the pain
arises from personal and social factors, and that beliefs about pain are
important in maintaining it (Linton, 2000). Chronic pain may impose
great burdens on the patient's family; also, the attitude of family
members and other caregivers can influence the perception of pain, its
course, and the response to treatment.

653

Somatoform and dissociative disorders

Assessment The assessment of a patient complaining of pain of unknown
cause should include: â

Thorough investigation of possible physical causes. When the results of
this investigation are negative, it should be remembered that pain may
be the first symptoms of a physical illness that cannot be detected at
an early stage.

â

Full description of the pain and the circumstances in which it occurs.

â

Search for symptoms of a depressive or other psychiatric disorder.

â

Description of pain behaviours---for example, the presentation of
symptoms, requests for medication, and responses to pain.

â

Exploration of the patient's beliefs about the causes and implications
of the pain.

Treatment The management of chronic pain should be individually planned,
comprehensive, and involve the patient's family. Skill is required to
maintain a working relationship with patients unwilling to accept an
approach that uses psychological treatments as part of the treatment of
pain. Any associated physical disorder should be treated and adequate
analgesics provided. The treatment of pain associated with a psychiatric
disorder is the treatment of the primary condition. Psychological care
is directed to assessing: â

The presence of any associated mental disorder. This assessment should
be made on positive findings and not solely because no specific organic
cause has been identified. If depressive illness is present it should be
treated vigorously. Tricyclic antidepressant medication is effective in
some patients with chronic pain even without evidence of a depressive
disorder. Duloxetine, gabapentin, and pregabalin may also be helpful
(Finnerup et al., 2015).

â

Whether psychological techniques are indicated to modify the pain or any
associated behaviours. Cognitive behavioural treatment aims to encourage
the use of distraction, relaxation, and other ways of coping with the
pain, and to reduce social reinforcement of pain-related behaviour. In a
meta-analysis these treatments had a significant though modest effect
(Morley et al., 2013).

Multidisciplinary pain clinics bring together expertise in somatic and
psychological treatments for pain. See Grandhe et al.Â (2016) for a
review of treatment approaches to chronic pain.

Specific pain syndromes Many kinds of pain are common in the population.
This section is concerned with headache, facial pain, back pain, and
pelvic pain.

Headache Patients with chronic or recurrent headache are sometimes
referred to psychiatrists. There are many physical causes of headache,
notably migraine, which affects about one in ten of the population at
some time of their life. Many patients attending neurological clinics
have headaches for which no physical cause can be found. The commonest
of these is 'tension' headache, which is usually described as a dull
generalized feeling of pressure or tightness extending around the head.
It is frequently of short duration and is relieved by analgesia or a
good night's sleep, but may occasionally be constant and unremitting.
Some patients describe depressive symptoms and others describe anxiety
in relation to obvious life stresses. Psychological factors seem to
contribute to aetiology, but there is no evidence that the headaches
result from increased muscle tension, and vascular mechanisms are more
likely. Most patients with headaches for which no physical cause can be
found are reassured by an explanation of the negative results of
investigations. Antidepressants and stress management both produce
modest improvement (Bendtsen, 2015).

Facial pain Facial pain has many physical causes; there are at least two
forms in which psychological variables appear to be important. The more
common is temporomandibular dysfunction (Costen's syndrome or facial
arthralgia). There is a dull ache around the temporomandibular joint,
and the condition usually presents to dentists. 'Atypical' facial pain
is a deeper aching or throbbing pain, which is more likely to present to
neurologists. Patients with either of these symptoms are often reluctant
to see a psychiatrist, but several trials suggest that some
antidepressants can relieve symptoms even when there is no evidence of a
depressive disorder. Cognitive behaviour therapy has been found to
enhance the effect of the usual dental care for temporomandibular
disorders (Litt et al., 2009). See Shepherd et al.Â (2014) for a review
of psychological aspects of facial pain.

Back pain Back pain is the second leading cause for visits to primary
care doctors and a major cause of disability. Most acute pain is
transient, but in about a fifth of patients

653

654

654

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine it persists for more than 6 months.
Psychological and behavioural problems at the onset predict a poor
outcome (Linton, 2000). Treatment includes the provision of accurate
information about the cause and outcome of the condition, limited use of
analgesics, and a graded increase in activity. Patients who fail to
improve with these measures should be offered a combined programme of
psychological and physical treatment. Cognitive and behavioural
approaches may have some effects in chronic low back pain (Fersum et
al., 2013); the evidence for antidepressants is inconclusive but, as
with other pain syndromes, low-dose tricyclic antidepressants can also
be helpful (Williamson et al., 2014).

Chronic pelvic pain Pelvic pain is one of the most common symptoms
reported by women attending gynaecology clinics. It is a feature of
several gynaecological disorders, notably endometriosis. However, in
other cases pain often persists despite negative investigations, and
psychological factors appear to be significant causes of the pain and
the disability, which often includes sexual dysfunction. Multimodal
treatment approaches, often including behavioural modification and
stress management, have been developed (Shah et al., 2015).

Dissociative disorders The essential feature of dissociative disorders
is a disruption of the usually integrated functions of consciousness,
memory, identity, or perception. This disturbance may be sudden or
gradual, transient or chronic. Dissociation is a crucial concept in the
development of psychiatry and a history of the term is reviewed briefly
in Box 22.12.

Types of dissociative disorder The types of dissociative disorders
recognized in ICD10 and DSM-5 (Spiegel et al., 2013) are shown in Table
22.5. The inclusion in ICD-10 of the bracketed term 'conversion' in the
title of the group, reflects the previous convention of classifying
these conditions with the conversion disorders (see above). Some authors
consider that these disorders are well established and common (Carota
and Calabrese, 2014), while some doubt the evidence base for the
category (Merskey, 2000).

Dissociative amnesia The essential feature is an inability to recall
important personal memories, usually of a stressful nature, that is too
extensive for normal forgetfulness. Dissociative

Box 22.12 A brief history of dissociation The term dissociation is
associated particularly with the French philosopher and psychiatrist,
Janet (1859-- 1947), who worked for a time with Charcot at the
SalpÃªtriÃ¨re in Paris (see Box 22.10). Janet studied aspects of sensory
perception and mental integration in hysteria and other neuroses, and
used the term 'dÃ©sagregation psychologique' (translated as dissociation)
to describe the breakdown of this integration. For a while Janet's ideas
were influential; however, his theories were overshadowed by those of
Freud. In the 1970s interest in dissociation revived as a result of
studies of the effects of psychological trauma, especially among Vietnam
war veterans. These studies documented symptoms occurring in response to
traumatic events, and suggested a common origin in the mechanism of
dissociation, a new name of dissociative symptoms (see Table 22.5), and
a new diagnostic category of dissociative disorders.

amnesia occurs alone and during the course of other dissociative
disorders and of post-traumatic stress disorder, acute stress disorder,
and somatization disorder. The diagnosis is made only when these other
conditions are not present. Dissociative amnesia must be distinguished
from amnesia having a medical cause. It has been described in two
forms: 1. Circumscribed amnesia traumatic event.

for

a

single

recent

2.  Inability to recall long periods of childhood. Amongst patients who
    present in this way, some have concurrent organic disease. See
    Staniloiu and Markowitsch (2014) for review.

Dissociative fugue Dissociative fugue is no longer a separate diagnosis
in DSM-5 but a specifier for dissociative amnesia. It is extremely rare,
with a loss of memory coupled with wandering away from the person's
usual surroundings. These people usually deny all memory of their
whereabouts during the period of wandering, and some deny knowledge of
personal identity. Many dramatic case histories have been published. The
disorder must be distinguished from organic disorder, including epilepsy
and substance intoxication.

65

Somatoform and dissociative disorders

Table 22.5 DSM-5 and ICD-10 classification of dissociative disorder
DSM-5

ICD--10

Dissociative disorders

F44 Dissociative (conversion) disorders

Dissociative amnesia

Dissociative amnesia

Dissociative amnesia with fugue

Dissociative fugue

Dissociative identity disorder

Multiple personality disorder

Depersonalization/derealization disorder

(classified in F48.1) Dissociative (conversion) disorder not otherwise
specified

Other specified dissociative disorders

Dissociative stupor Trance and possession disorders Ganser's syndrome

Source: data from Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition, Copyright (2013), American Psychiatric Association; The
ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, Copyright (1992), World Health
Organization.

Dissociative identity disorder In this disorder (widely known by the
ICD-10 term 'multiple personality disorder') there are sudden
alternations between two patterns of behaviour, each of which is
forgotten by the patient when the other is present. One pattern is the
person's normal personality, while the other 'personality' is an
integrated array of emotional responses, attitudes, memories, and social
behaviour, which contrasts, often strikingly, with the normal. Sometimes
there is more than one additional 'personality'. The criteria for the
DSM-5 diagnosis are shown in Box 22.13. The condition is probably rare,
but it has been reported more frequently in certain periods, notably
around the end of the nineteenth century. These variations over time
probably reflect the changing interests of doctors rather than true
changes in prevalence. In the course of past 40 years there has been
another increase in the number of reported cases, especially in the USA.
It is not certain whether this change is real, and epidemiological
studies do not provide the answer because they report such widely
varying prevalence rates. The disorder has been highly controversial
and, along with the associated 'recovered memory syndrome', generates
fierce debate and legal challenges. Patients who meet the criteria in
Box 22.13 often meet the criteria for other diagnoses, including
schizophrenia, personality disorder, and substance abuse. Many also have
symptoms of anxiety and depression. The relationship between
dissociative identity disorder and these other conditions would be
clarified by longterm follow-up studies, but no systematic studies of
this kind have been reported.

Two issues have dominated the discussion of aetiology: 1. The role of
severe trauma. Clinical experience and research find that many of those
with the disorder describe severe physical or sexual abuse taking place
in childhood. It has been suggested that dissociation began as a
psychological defence mechanism that

Box 22.13 DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for dissociative identity disorder A
Disruption of identity by two or more distinct personality states.
Involves a marked discontinuity in sense of self and agency, plus
alterations in behaviour affect, cognition, which may be observed by
others or reported by the individual. B Recurrent gaps in recall of
everyday events, personal information, or traumatic events. C Symptoms
cause clinically significant distress or impairment. D Not a normal part
of a broadly accepted religious or cultural practice. E Not attributable
to intoxication or other medical condition (e.g.Â complex partial
seizures). Note: in children, the symptoms are not attributable to
imaginary playmates or other fantasy play. Source: data from Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Copyright
(2013), American Psychiatric Association.

655

65

656

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine reduced distress at the time of the
original trauma but had unfortunate lasting consequences.

Differential diagnosis

2.  Iatrogenic factors. It has been argued that the widespread publicity
    given to some people with multiple personality, the credulity of
    some therapists, and the use of hypnosis, have been responsible for
    at least some instances of the disorder.

Before diagnosing depersonalization disorder, any primary disorder must
be excluded, especially temporal lobe epilepsy, schizophrenia,
depressive disorder, another dissociative disorder, and anxiety
disorders (Sierra et al., 2012). Most patients who present with
depersonalization will be found to have one of these other conditions.

For review, see Dorahy et al.Â (2014).

Aetiology

Depersonalization disorder Depersonalization disorder is characterized
by an unpleasant state in which external objects or parts of the body
are experienced as changed in their quality, and feel unreal or remote.
In DSM-5 derealization has been incorporated into depersonalization, and
the condition is termed depersonalization/derealization disorder.
Transient symptoms of depersonalization are quite common as a minor
feature of other syndromes (see Chapter 1), and the symptoms of
depersonalization disorder occur occasionally in association with other
psychiatric disorders (see differential diagnosis, below). However,
primary depersonalization disorder is rare. How rare is uncertain
because estimates of the prevalence vary so widely that no useful
conclusion can be reached (Reutens et al., 2010). Although classified as
a dissociative disorder in DSM-5, it is not certain whether dissociation
is indeed the causal mechanism (see aetiology, below). In ICD-10 this
uncertainty is recognized by giving depersonalization disorder its own
place in the classification, separate from the dissociative disorders.

Clinical picture The central features are a feeling of being unreal and
an unreal quality to perceptions. Emotions seem dulled and actions feel
mechanical. Paradoxically, this lack of feeling is experienced as
extremely unpleasant. Insight is retained into the subjective nature of
their experiences. These symptoms may be intense, and accompanied by
dÃ©jÃ  vu and by changes in the experience of passage of time. Some
patients complain also of sensory distortions affecting a single part of
the body (usually the head, the nose, or a limb), a feeling which some
describe as if made of cotton wool. Two-thirds of the patients are
women. The onset is often sudden, in adolescence or early adult life,
with the condition starting before the age of 30 years in about half the
cases. Once established, symptoms may persist for years, though with
periods of partial or complete remission.

The causes of a primary depersonalization disorder are not known. Apart
from the possible association with schizoid personality disorder, no
definite constitutional factors have been identified. Jay et al.Â (2014)
suggest that depersonalization is due to excessive inhibition of the
insula by ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. At the same time, autonomic
responses to unpleasant stimuli are reduced, suggesting inhibition of
emotional processing, which could lead to a subjective sense of
emotional numbing.

Prognosis The rare primary depersonalization disorder has not been
followed systematically; clinical experience indicates that cases
lasting longer than a year have a poor long-term outcome.

Treatment When depersonalization is secondary to another disorder,
treatment should be directed to the primary condition. Supportive
interviews can help the patient to function more normally despite the
symptoms, and any stressors should be addressed. No specific
pharmacological or psychological treatments are well established. In
this, as in other conditions that are difficult to treat, it is
important to resist the temptation to give ineffective treatments to
appear to be doing something for the patient. It is better to give
adequate time for supportive care. For review, see Reutens et
al.Â (2010).

Other dissociative syndromes in ICD-10 ICD-10 contains three further
dissociative syndromes which are absent from DSM-5; in the latter they
would be coded as 'dissociative disorder NOS' (Table 22.5).

Dissociative stupor In dissociative stupor, patients show the
characteristic features of stupor. They are motionless and mute, and
they do not respond to stimulation, but they are aware of their
surroundings. Dissociative stupor is rare. It is essential to

675

Somatoform and dissociative disorders exclude other possible conditions,
namely schizophrenia, depressive disorder, mania, and organic brain
diseases.

Ganser's syndrome Ganser's syndrome is a very rare condition with four
features: â

giving 'approximate answers' (see below) to questions designed to test
intellectual functions

â

psychogenic physical symptoms

â

hallucinations

â

apparent clouding of consciousness.

The syndrome was described in 1898 by Ganser in prisoners, but it is not
confined to them. The term 'approximate answers' denotes answers (to
simple questions) that are plainly wrong but are clearly related to the
correct answer in a way that suggests that the latter is known. For
example, when asked to add two and two a patient might answer five. The
obvious advantage to be gained from the condition, coupled with the
approximate answers, suggests malingering. However, the condition is
often maintained so consistently that unconscious mental mechanisms have
been thought to play a part. For some naÃ¯ve individuals this may
represent their only way of communicating effectively their distress. It
is important to exclude an organic brain disease or schizophrenia; the
former should be considered particularly carefully when muddled thinking
and visual hallucinations are part of the clinical picture. For a
review, see Dwyer and Reid (2004).

aspects of the immediate environment; for example, to the priest
carrying out a religious ceremony. The affected person may repeatedly
perform the same movements, or adopt postures, or repeat utterances.

Miscellaneous other syndromes associated with dissociation Cultural
syndromes Certain patterns of unusual behaviour, restricted to certain
cultures, have been thought to reflect psychological mechanisms of
dissociation. Some of these behaviours can be classified as
'cultural-bound syndromes'. This term has been criticized because of its
'ethnocentric' implications---that all mental disorders are best, or
only, understood from a European perspective. It is applied to syndromes
in non-western cultures but not to syndromes which are found
particularly in western cultures---for example, eating disorders and
CFS. Many of the early descriptions were associated with explicit or
implicit racist ideas, and these terms should be used with
circumspection. Examples of cultural syndromes include the following: â

Latah, which is found among women in Malaya, is characterized by
echolalia, echopraxia, and other kinds of abnormally compliant
behaviour. The condition usually follows a frightening experience.

â

Amok has been described among men in Indonesia and Malaya. It begins
with a period of brooding, which is followed by violent behaviour and
sometimes dangerous use of weapons. Amnesia is usually reported
afterwards. It is unlikely that all patients with this pattern of
behaviour are suffering from a dissociative disorder; the others may be
suffering from mania, schizophrenia, or a postepileptic state.

â

Arctic hysteria (Piblokto) is seen among the Inuit, more often in the
women. The affected person tears off her clothing, screams and cries,
runs about in distress, and may endanger her life by exposure to cold.
Sometimes the behaviour is violent. The relationship of this syndrome to
dissociative disorder is not firmly established, and there may be more
than one cause.

Trance and possession disorder Trance and possession states are
characterized by a temporary loss of the sense of personal identity and
of full awareness of the surroundings. Such states are induced
temporarily in willing participants in religious or other ceremonies,
and also recreationally in 'raves', often aided by drug use. When they
arise in this way, the states are not recorded as disorders. According
to DSM-5, a dissociative trance involves: . . . acute narrowing or
complete loss of awareness of immediate surroundings that manifests as
profound unresponsiveness or insensitivity to environmental stimuli. . .
.. accompanied by minor stereotyped behaviours of which the individual
is unaware or cannot control . . . is not a normal part of a broadly
accepted cultural or religious practice.

Some cases resemble multiple personality disorder, in that the person
behaves as if taken over by another personality for a brief period. When
the condition is induced by religious ritual, the person may feel taken
over by a deity or spirit. The focus of attention is narrowed to a few

It has been suggested that these cultural syndromes are becoming less
common or altering in presentation as a result of globalization
(Ventriglio et al., 2016).

Recovered memories and false-memory syndrome These conditions are
described on page 158.

657

658

658

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Factitious dissociative identity disorder There is wide agreement, even
among those who believe that dissociative identity disorder is common,
that both

factitious and malingered presentations are also common (Dorahy et al.,
2014).

Psychiatric services in medical settings Psychiatric services for
general hospitals are named and organized in several ways.
Consultation--liaison psychiatry (sometimes known as C--L psychiatry or
as liaison psychiatry) is the traditional term. In consultation work,
the psychiatrist gives opinions on patients referred by physicians and
surgeons; in liaison work the psychiatrist is a member of a medical or
surgical team, and offers advice about any patient to whose care he
feels able to contribute. However, in contemporary psychiatry, the term
psychological medicine is often preferred, reflecting an increasing
integration of psychiatry into general medicine rather than just
consulting or liaising with it (Sharpe, 2014). Behavioural medicine is
the term for similar arrangements provided by clinical psychologists
rather than psychiatrists. Psychosomatic medicine is a term used widely
in the past in some countries, and which is still current in Germany. It
has been revived in the USA as the name for consultation--liaison
psychiatry as a recognized subspecialty (Gitlin et al., 2004).

The make-up of services Consultation and liaison units vary in their
size and organization. Some are staffed entirely by psychiatrists, and
others by a multidisciplinary team of psychiatrists, nurses, social
workers, and clinical psychologists. A few services have inpatient beds
for patients who are both medically and psychiatrically ill.Â In some
North American hospitals with large consultation--liaison services, up
to 5% of all admissions are referred to psychiatrists. In the UK and
many other countries, a smaller proportion of inpatients are referred,
most being emergencies, especially those with deliberate self-harm (see
Chapter 21). Most of the literature on consultation-- liaison psychiatry
has focused on inpatients, but most of the patients referred are from
outpatient clinics and emergency departments. Consultation--liaison
psychiatry is increasingly concerned with the provision of psychiatric
and psychological assessment, and the collaborative management of
patients with either medically unexplained symptoms

or psychiatric disorders comorbid with chronic medical illness. A major
challenge is to find ways of extending these overstretched services to
similar patients treated in primary care. For further information about
consultation and liaison psychiatry and psychosomatic medicine, see
Leentjens et al.Â (2011).

Psychiatric consultation in a medical setting The consultation has two
parts: the assessment of the patient, and communication with the patient
and with the doctor who is making the referral. Assessment is similar to
that of any other patients referred for a psychiatric opinion with the
addition that it is necessary to take into account their medical
condition and treatment, and their willingness to see a psychiatrist.

First steps Having received the request for a consultation, the
psychiatrist should make sure that the referring doctor has adequately
discussed the psychiatric referral with the patient and that the latter
has agreed to see the psychiatrist. Before interviewing the patient, the
psychiatrist should read the relevant medical notes and ask the nursing
staff about the patient's mental state and behaviour. The psychiatrist
should find out what treatment the patient is receiving, and if
necessary consult a work of reference about the side effects of any
drugs.

The assessment interview In most respects, the assessment is as
described in Chapter 3, but it is modified to reflect the circumstances
(see also Chapter 3, page 55). Thus, at the start of the interview the
psychiatrist should make clear to the patient the purpose of the
consultation. It may be necessary to discuss the patient's concerns
about seeing a psychiatrist (for example, it does not imply that they
are 'mad' or that the referring doctor disbelieves them) and to explain
how the interview may contribute to the treatment plan (by adding
another kind of expertise to their medical care).

659

Psychiatric services in medical settings

Clinical notes In the past, the psychiatrist would usually keep a
separate, detailed, record of the assessment and conclusions, with a
much briefer entry being made in the medical notes, which contained only
the essential information and conclusions. However, it is now usual for
each patient to have only one medical record, and thus no separate
psychiatric notes. Nevertheless, it is important that the psychiatrist
includes a concise, clear summary that will be understandable to the
medical team, within the full record of the assessment.

Writing the response to the referral It is often appropriate to discuss
the proposed plan of management with the medical and nursing team
managing the patient before writing a final opinion. In this way the
psychiatrist can make sure that recommendations are feasible and
acceptable, and that answers have been given to the questions asked
about the patient. The entry in the medical notes should be along the
lines of a letter to a general practitioner (see page 65). It is
important to make clear the nature of any immediate treatment that is
recommended, and who is to carry it out. If the assessment is
provisional until other informants have been interviewed, the
psychiatrist should state when the final opinion will be given. The note
should be signed legibly, and should tell the ward staff where the
psychiatrist or a deputy can be found should further help be required.

Management Treatment is similar to that of a similar psychiatric
disorder in a medically well patient. However, when psychiatric drugs
are prescribed, special attention should be paid to the possible effects
of the patient's medical condition on their metabolism and excretion,
and to any possible interactions with other drugs that the patient is
taking. The plan should be based on a realistic assessment of the amount
of supervision available on a medical or surgical ward, for example, for
a depressed patient with suicidal ideas. With support from a
psychiatrist the nursing staff can manage most brief psychiatric
disorders that arise in a general hospital, although some support may be
needed from a psychiatric nurse (who may be a member of the
consultation--liaison team).

Continuing care The psychiatrist may need to review the patient's
progress whilst in hospital. After discharge it is important to attempt
to ensure continuity of care by speaking or writing to the general
practitioner. According to the

needs of the case, care may be continued by the general practitioner, or
the liaison psychiatrist may continue to see the patient, or care may be
transferred to the community psychiatric team.

Some common emergency problems General approach The successful
management of any psychiatric emergency depends importantly on the
initial clinical interview. The aims are those of any assessment
interview: to establish a good relationship with the patient, elicit
information from the patient and other informants, and observe the
patient's behaviour and mental state. A relaxed, sympathetic, and firm
approach helps to calm the situation enough for the doctor to reach an
understanding of the patient's concerns and suggest a plan that the
patient will agree. In an emergency, it may not be possible to conduct a
full assessment interview, but the assessment should be as systematic
and as complete as the circumstances permit.

The anxious patient Panic attacks. The somatic symptoms of a panic
attack are frequent reasons for an emergency presentation. Common
features include non-cardiac chest pain, tingling in the extremities,
and the effects of hyperventilation (see page 162). Most patients can be
talked through an episode of panic, and hyperventilation responds to
rebreathing into a paper bag. Occasionally a small dose of a
benzodiazepine is needed to control the anxiety. Followup with treatment
for panic disorder may be required. Severe generalized anxiety may
complicate any medical presentation. Attendance at an emergency
department can be a frightening experience and the consequent anxiety
may be made worse by the response of unaware staff. It is usually
possible to reduce the anxiety by explaining what is happening in a
sympathetic manner. Occasionally a small dosage of a benzodiazepine may
be necessary to control the anxiety. See also Chapter 3 for assessment
of anxious patients.

The angry or aggressive patient It can be very upsetting to clinicians
and other carers when the person they are trying to help responds with
anger. When this happens, it is essential to keep calm and avoid doing
or saying anything that may increase the person's anger, and to be
careful about physical safety (see below). The clinician should try to
find out and understand why the person is angry. Sometimes it

659

60

660

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine is helpful to comment on the anger
and to ask directly why the person is so upset. It is always unwise
either to show anger in return or to be unduly submissive. It may be
necessary to apologize for the problem that has caused the anger, for
example, if the patient has been kept waiting for a long time. If the
patient is potentially violent, it is essential to arrange for adequate
but unobtrusive help to be available. Physical contact (including
physical examination) should not be attempted unless the purpose has
been clearly understood by and agreed with the patient. If restraint
cannot be avoided, it should be accomplished quickly by an adequate
number of people using the minimum of force. Staff should not attempt
single-handed restraint. Extreme caution is, of course, required if the
patient could be in possession of an offensive weapon. See also Chapter
18 for discussion of prevention and management of violence in
psychiatric settings.

Emergency drug treatment of disturbed or violent patients Diazepam
(5--10 mg) may be useful for a patient who is frightened. For more
severely disturbed patients intramuscular lorazepam can be used;
intramuscular haloperidol (2--5 mg) can also be used for those who are
psychotic and who have previously been exposed to antipsychotics. For
further details, see Chapter 25. For treatment of delirium, see Chapter
14. When the patient has become calm, medication may be continued in
smaller doses, usually three to four times a day and preferably by
mouth, using

syrup if the patient will not swallow tablets. The dosage depends on the
patient's weight and on the initial response to the drug. Careful
observations by nurses of the physical state and behaviour are necessary
during this treatment.

Problems in consent to treatment General principles relating to consent
to treatment are discussed in Chapter 4. Psychiatrists can often be
asked to advise on issues around the competency of patients, and are
sometimes asked to advise about patients who are refusing to accept
medical or surgical treatment. There are several reasons why patients
may be unwilling to accept treatment that is recommended to them. They
may not have understood the information they have been given, they may
be frightened or angry, or, occasionally, they may have a mental illness
that interferes with their ability to make an informed decision. It has
to be accepted that a conscious mentally competent adult has the right
to refuse treatment even after a full and rational discussion of the
reasons for carrying it out. When the patient's condition is such that
he cannot give consent, then, in the UK and many other countries, the
doctor in charge of the patient has the right to give immediate
treatment in life-threatening emergencies. The medicolegal issues are
summarized in Box 22.14. See Boland et al.Â (2000) for a review of the
management of psychiatric syndromes in intensive care units.

Psychiatric aspects of medical procedures and conditions Genetic
counselling Genetic counselling about the reproductive risks of
hereditary disease is mainly given to couples contemplating marriage, or
planning or expecting a child. Psychiatrists used to be involved in this
but it is now the responsibility of medical geneticists, not least
because of rapid developments in the range and methods of testing
available. However, psychiatrists do need to keep up to date with the
increasing number of clinical situations in which genetic counselling
may be indicated (see Chapter 5). Counselling includes: â

providing information about risks

â

helping people to cope with concerns about the diagnosis

â

enabling patients to take informed decisions about family planning.

Occasionally medical geneticists may request the collaboration or advice
of psychiatrists, particularly when potential parents appear to be
significantly distressed by the advice and unable to concentrate on
making decisions.

Psychiatric aspects of surgical treatment Preoperative problems Patients
about to undergo surgery are often anxious, and those who are most
anxious before operation are likely

61

Psychiatric aspects of medical procedures and conditions

Box 22.14 Medicolegal and ethical issues: patients who refuse to accept
advice about emergency treatment â

In life-threatening emergencies where it is not possible to obtain the
patient's consent (consciousness is impaired, or there is evidence of
psychiatric disorder which cannot be immediately assessed), opinions
should be obtained from medical and nursing colleagues, and, if
possible, from the patient's relatives. Detailed records should be kept
of the reasons for the decision. It is essential for all doctors to know
the law about these matters in the country in which they are practising.

to be anxious afterwards. Most studies of psychological preparation for
surgery have shown that it can reduce postoperative distress, especially
when the preparation includes measures to improve coping. Psychiatrists
may be asked to assess patients before surgery. Common reasons for such
a request include: â

clarification of the role of emotional factors in the patient's physical
complaints

â

uncertainty about the patient's cognitive state and capacity to provide
informed consent

â

help in the management of current psychiatric problems

â

help in predicting the patients' response to surgery and their capacity
to cooperate with postoperative treatment and rehabilitation.

Psychiatric problems in the postoperative period Delirium Delirium is
common after major surgery, especially in the elderly. Whether delirium
develops depends on the type of surgery, the type of anaesthetic, the
presence of postoperative physical complications, and the type of
medication. Delirium is associated with increased mortality and longer
stay in hospital (see Chapter 14).

Pain Psychiatrists are sometimes asked to advise on the management of
patients with unusually severe postoperative pain. Patients who are
given greater control over the timing of analgesia usually experience
less pain and make less use of analgesia. Some are helped by anxiety
management, and others by help in resolving anger

â

If a patient has a mental disorder that impairs the ability to give
informed consent, it may be appropriate to use legal powers of
compulsory assessment and treatment of the mental disorder. In the UK,
the powers for compulsory treatment of a mental disorder do not give the
doctor a right to treat concurrent physical illness against the
patient's wishes. However, after successful treatment of the psychiatric
disorder, the patient may decide to give informed consent for the
treatment of the physical illness. See also Chapter 4.

arising, for example, from disagreements with the staff who are caring
for them.

Long-term psychological problems after surgery Adjustment problems are
particularly common after mastectomy and laryngectomy, and after surgery
that has not led to the expected benefit. Psychiatrists can sometimes
contribute to the management of such problems, especially when the
surgery is part of the treatment of a relapsing, chronic, or progressive
disorder. The psychiatrist may help to discover psychosocial factors
that are impeding adjustment, and to help the patient resolve or come to
terms with the problems. Some patients require antidepressant
medication. See Hales et al.Â (2009) for review.

Plastic surgery People with physical deformities often suffer
embarrassment and distress, and this may markedly restrict their lives
as children and as adults. When such patients are psychiatrically
healthy, plastic surgery usually gives good results. Even when there is
no major objective defect to match the concerns about appearance,
cosmetic surgery to the nose, face, and breasts is usually successful.
Nevertheless, psychological assessment can contribute to assessment
before plastic surgery: the outcome is likely to be poor in patients who
have delusions about their appearance, dysmorphophobia, or greatly
unrealistic expectations, or have been dissatisfied with previous
surgery. See Van Soest et al.Â (2009) for a review.

Bariatric surgery There is a high prevalence of psychiatric disorders
amongst candidates for bariatric surgery. There is also

661

62

662

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine evidence that psychiatric symptoms
decrease postsurgery, although these improvements may not persist. See
Muller et al.Â (2013) for review.

Limb amputation Limb amputation has different psychological consequences
for young and for elderly people. Young adult amputees, such as those
losing a leg in a road accident or in military action,
characteristically show denial at first, and may later experience
depression and phantom limb pains which resolve slowly. Children and
adolescents seem to have a similar outcome. Older people usually undergo
amputation after prolonged problems associated with vascular disease.
Such patients do not commonly report severe distress immediately after
the operation, but they often develop phantom limb pain. Some have
difficulty with the prosthesis and show a degree of functional
incapacity disproportionate to their physical state.

Organ transplantation These operations have considerable associated
psychiatric consequences related to the nature of the surgery, and the
need for continuing intensive medical care. Selection for
transplantation. The selection process can be stressful, and so can the
wait for a suitable organ, though the latter tends to be less so for
kidney transplants because there is the alternative of continuing
dialysis during the waiting period. There are few psychological
contraindications for these operations, mostly relating to inability to
cope with the demands of the necessary long-term postoperative care.
After operation, transplantation is associated with the same psychiatric
and emotional problems that occur after other major surgery, especially
anxiety, delirium, and depression. There are also some problems specific
to a particular type of transplant; for example, liver transplantation
has the highest rate of preoperative and postoperative neuropsychiatric
complications. These problems are sufficiently frequent and serious to
justify psychiatric liaison with transplant units to support staff and
train them to recognize and respond appropriately to patients who have
such problems (Heinrich and Marcangelo, 2009).

Diabetes mellitus Diabetes is a chronic condition requiring prolonged
medical supervision and informed self-care, and many physicians
emphasize the psychological aspect of

treatment. It is associated with an increased prevalence of psychiatric
disorder. Moreover, type 2 diabetes is two to three times more common in
patients with severe mental disorder, related both to shared disease
mechanisms and the effects of antipsychotic drugs (Holt and Mitchell,
2015), highlighting the need for psychiatrists to be aware of the
features and management of diabetes. For review of the psychiatric
aspects of diabetes, see Ducat et al.Â (2014).

Psychological factors and diabetic control Psychological factors are
important in established diabetes because they influence its control,
and it is now generally accepted that good control of blood glucose is
the most important single factor preventing longterm complications.
Psychological factors can impair control in two ways. First, stressful
experiences can lead to endocrine changes. Second, many diabetics do not
adhere well to their treatment regime, especially at times of stress,
and this is an important cause of 'brittle' diabetes.

Problems of being diabetic Psychological and social problems may be
caused by restrictions of diet and activity, the need for self-care, and
the possibility of serious physical complications such as vascular
disease and impaired vision. Although most diabetic people overcome or
adapt to such problems, an important minority have difficulties.
Adherence to regimes for testing, diet, and insulin is often
unsatisfactory so that glycaemia control is less than optimal. Problems
of this kind are particularly likely in adolescents with type 1
diabetes.

Other problems Associated eating disorder. Control of diabetes is more
difficult when the diabetic person has an eating disorder, in particular
when insulin is part of the treatment regimen, since it can be misused
to lose weight. Associated medical complications. Psychosocial problems
are more than usually common in diabetics who have severe medical
complications such as loss of sight, renal failure, and vascular
disease. Diabetic neuropathy is often very painful and can restrict
activities. Sexual problems are common among diabetics. Two kinds of
impotence occur in diabetic men. The first is psychogenic impotence of
the kind found in other chronic debilitating diseases. The second kind
is more common in diabetes, and may pre-date other features of the
disease. It is thought to be associated with pelvic

63

Psychiatric aspects of medical procedures and conditions autonomic
neuropathy and vascularity, while endocrine factors may play a part.
Pregnancy is a difficult time for diabetic women, with problems in the
control of diabetes and increased risks of miscarriage and fetal
malformations.

Organic psychiatric syndromes in diabetic patients Delirium. The first
evidence of developing diabetic coma is sometimes an episode of
disturbed behaviour, starting either abruptly or insidiously. The cause
of the behaviour becomes clearer as other prodromal symptoms develop,
including thirst, headaches, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. The
pulse is rapid and blood pressure is low. Dehydration is marked and
acetone may be smelt on the breath. Dementia. Diabetes is a risk factor
for dementia (see Chapter 14).

Psychiatric aspects of diabetes management Diabetes has been the object
of considerable psychiatric research, involving a range of psychological
treatments and particularly in adolescent and brittle diabetics.
Possible measures include: treatment for depressive disorder; blood
glucose awareness training to improve the ability to recognize and act
on fluctuations in blood glucose concentrations; weight management
programmes; cognitive behavioural approaches to improve self-care; help
with psychosocial problems; and treatment of sexual dysfunction.
Tricyclic antidepressants may be helpful in relieving the pain of
neuropathy. See Plack et al. (2010) for a review of psychological care
of patients with insulin-dependent diabetes.

Other endocrine disorders Many endocrine disorders, most conspicuously
thyroid and adrenal dysfunction, have been associated with psychiatric
complications. Box 22.15 summarizes some of the more common
associations, together with aspects of steroid therapy. See Harrison and
Kopelman (2009) for a review of the psychiatric aspects of endocrine
disorder.

Other metabolic and autoimmune disorders Psychiatric aspects of systemic
lupus erythematosus and autoimmune encephalitis are covered in Chapter
14. For other metabolic and medical disorders, such as

the porphyrias, sarcoidosis, and myasthenia gravis, see Harrison and
Kopelman (2009).

Cardiac disorders It has long been suggested that emotional disorder
predisposes to ischaemic heart disease. Dunbar (1954) described a
'coronary personality'. Recent research has concentrated on several
possible risk factors, including chronic emotional disturbance, social
and economic disadvantage, overwork and other chronic stress, and the
so-called 'type A personality'. The latter consists of hostility,
excessive competitive drive, ambitiousness, a chronic sense of urgency,
and a preoccupation with deadlines (Friedman and Rosenman, 1959).
Although type A behaviour has been widely accepted as an independent
risk factor for ischaemic heart disease, recent evidence has cast doubt
on this conclusion. However, there is evidence that cardiac patients
with 'type D' personality (high levels of distress and negative affect)
have a poorer outcome (Denollet et al., 2010).

Angina Angina is often precipitated by emotions such as anxiety, anger,
and excitement. It is a frightening symptom, and some patients become
overcautious despite reassurance and encouragement to resume normal
activities. Angina is sometimes accompanied by atypical chest pain and
breathlessness caused by anxiety or hyperventilation, and it is
important to identify this rather than increasing medical anti-angina
therapy.

Myocardial infarction Patients often respond to the early symptoms of
myocardial infarction with denial, and consequently delay seeking
treatment. In the first few days in hospital, acute organic mental
disorders and anxiety symptoms are common. Recent research has
concentrated on the replicated finding that depression, anxiety, and
social isolation are important risk factors for both a lower quality of
life (Dickens et al., 2006) and for a 22% increased risk of death after
myocardial infarction (Meijer et al., 2013). Some survivors of cardiac
arrest suffer cognitive impairment. When such impairment is mild, it may
show up later as apparent personality change or as behavioural symptoms,
which may be attributed wrongly to an emotional reaction to the illness.
When patients return home from hospital, they commonly report
non-specific symptoms such as fatigue, insomnia, and poor concentration,
as well as excessive concern about somatic symptoms and an unnecessarily
cautious attitude to exertion. Most patients overcome

663

64

664

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Box 22.15 Psychiatric aspects of other endocrine disorders and steroid
therapy Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis). May present with psychiatric
symptoms such as anxiety, irritability, emotional lability, and
difficulty in concentrating. These, together with hyperactivity,
fatigue, and tremor, may make differential diagnosis from anxiety
disorder difficult. Treatment of thyroid dysfunction usually results in
improvement of the psychiatric symptoms. Hypothyroidism (myxoedema).
Cognitive impairment and other psychiatric disorders are common. Mood
disorder may take a rapid-cycling form. Replacement therapy may reverse
the mood symptoms but neuropsychiatric problems may persist. See
Dugbartey (1998) for a review. Hyperadrenalism (Cushing's syndrome).
Depressive symptoms are common. Their severity is not closely related to
plasma cortisol concentrations, and personality and stressful
circumstances may play a part. Psychological symptoms usually improve
quickly when

the medical condition is controlled. Paranoid symptoms also occur,
especially in those with the most severe illness. See Pivonello et
al.Â (2015). Steroid therapy. Affective symptoms, especially euphoria or
mild mania, are frequent. Paranoid symptoms are less common. The
severity of the mental disorder is not closely associated with dosage.
Symptoms usually improve when the dosage is reduced but, when severe,
lithium prophylaxis should be considered for patients who need to
continue steroid treatment after a mood disorder has been controlled.
Withdrawal of corticosteroids may cause lethargy, weakness, and joint
pain. Anabolic steroids. Anabolic--androgenic steroids are widely used
by athletes. Significant mood disturbances and increased aggression have
been reported (Oberlander and Henderson, 2012).

these problems and return to a fully active life. A few continue with
emotional distress and social disability out of proportion to their
physical state, often accompanied by atypical somatic symptoms. Such
problems are more common in patients with longstanding psychiatric or
social problems, overprotective families, and myocardial infarction with
a complicated course. The finding that depression and social isolation
are associated with increased mortality after myocardial infarction has
led to research to evaluate interventions to treat them. In the large
trials so far completed, nursing support to combat social isolation was
ineffective. Cognitive behaviour therapy, medication, and exercise all
show some efficacy in treating depression after myocardial infarction,
but antidepressants must be used with caution, and tricyclic
antidepressants are best avoided. Reductions in cardiac events and
mortality have not been demonstrated reliably (Shapiro, 2015).

Non-cardiac chest pain is very common among patients in primary care and
in cardiac outpatient clinics. Most patients are reassured by a thorough
assessment, but a significant minority continue to complain of physical
and psychological symptoms and to limit their everyday activities.
Follow-up studies of patients with chest pain and normal coronary
angiograms have consistently found subsequent mortality and cardiac
morbidity to be little greater than those without cardiac disease, but
persistent disability to be common. Many causes have been suggested for
atypical cardiac symptoms, including pain originating in the chest wall,
oesophageal reflux and spasm, microvascular angina, mitral valve
prolapse, and psychiatric disorder. In most patients chest pain appears
to be due to minor noncardiac physical causes or to hyperventilation,
which are misconstrued as heart disease and associated with anxiety. The
aetiology is as for other medically unexplained symptoms. The most
common psychiatric concomitant is panic disorder; less common are
depressive disorder and hypochondriasis. Management should follow the
principles described in Chapter 8, with a particular emphasis on the
treatment of hyperventilation, graded increase in activity, and
discussion of beliefs about the cause of the pain. Cognitive behaviour
therapy may be effective in the management of anxiety with
hyperventilation. Depressive disorder should be treated with
antidepressant medication. See George et al.Â (2016) for a review.

Non-cardiac chest pain During the American Civil War, Da Costa described
a condition which he called 'irritable heart'. This syndrome consisted
of a conviction that the heart was diseased, together with palpitations,
breathlessness, fatigue, and inframammary pain. This combination has
also been named 'disorderly action of the heart', 'effort syndrome', and
'neurocirculatory asthenia'. The symptoms were originally thought to
indicate a disorder of the functioning of the heart.

65

Psychiatric aspects of medical procedures and conditions

Sensory disorders Deafness Deafness may develop before speech is learned
(prelingual deafness) or afterwards. Profound early deafness interferes
with speech and language development, and with emotional development.
Prelingually deaf adults often maintain their own social groups and
communicate by sign language. When they have problems, it appears that
these are more often diagnosed as behaviour problems and social
maladjustment than emotional disorder. These problems are managed best
by those with special knowledge of the effects of deafness. Deafness of
later onset has less severe effects than those just described. However,
the acute onset of profound deafness can be extremely distressing,
whilst milder restriction of hearing may cause depression and
considerable social disability. Kraepelin was the first to suggest that
deafness is an important factor in the development of persecutory
delusions. Subsequent evidence supports an association between deafness
and paranoid disorders in the elderly (see Chapter 12). See Landsberger
et al.Â (2013) for a review.

Tinnitus Tinnitus is very common, but few patients seek treatment and
most are able to live a normal life. Persistent tinnitus may be
associated with low mood. Some patients are helped by devices that mask
tinnitus with a more acceptable sound. Antidepressant medication may
improve mood and reduce the intensity of the tinnitus. Cognitive and
behavioural methods may enable people to accept their tinnitus and to
minimize their social handicaps and perhaps protect against the
increased risk of suicide in this disorder. For review, see Langguth et
al. (2013).

Blindness Although it imposes many difficulties, blindness in early life
need not lead to abnormal psychological development in childhood or to
unsuccessful later development. In previously sighted people, the later
onset of blindness often causes considerable distress. Initial denial
and subsequent depression are common, as are prolonged difficulties in
adjustment. See Berman and Brodaty (2006).

Infections Psychological factors may affect the course of recovery from
an acute infection (Hotopf et al., 1996). In a classic

early study, psychological tests were completed by 600 people who
subsequently developed Asian influenza. Delayed recovery from the
influenza was no more common among people whose initial illness had been
severe, but it was more frequent among those who had obtained more
abnormal scores on the psychological tests before the illness (Imboden
et al., 1961). More recent findings of research on viral illness in
general practice and infectious mononucleosis have reported similar
conclusions. In addition, some infectious diseases (for example,
hepatitis A, influenza, and brucellosis) are frequently followed by
periods of depression and fatigue. The possible role of infections, such
as Lyme disease, as a cause of chronic fatigue was discussed on page
642. Viral encephalitis is discussed in Chapter 14.

HIV infection HIV infection affects the brain at an early stage and the
disease has a chronic progressive course associated with a wide range of
psychiatric consequences. With modern combined antiretroviral therapy,
most patients with AIDS lead relatively healthy lives for substantial
periods; indeed, their life expectancy is no longer significantly
reduced. The nature of the physical symptoms, their progressive course,
and the reactions of other people all explain why emotional distress is
common in people with HIV infection. A further reason is that some of
those at high risk for HIV (for example, drug abusers) may have other
psychological problems. Effects on the family may be considerable,
especially where the partner and or one or more of the children are
infected. Women might first find out about their diagnosis when
pregnant, and so will have to navigate the difficult adjustment of
having a potentially life-limiting condition at the same time as
preparing to become a parent and their concerns about how the infection
might affect their parenting as well as the physical and psychological
health of their child. Psychiatrists can contribute to the care of AIDS
patients by providing counselling and specialist treatment for
neuropsychiatric and other psychiatric complications. Reactions to
testing. Although HIV antibody testing is worrying for most of those who
undergo it, the distress is usually short-lived whatever the outcome of
the test. People who have persistent and unjustified worries about
having AIDS require psychiatric help of the kind appropriate for other
illness fears. Psychiatric problems, including adjustment disorder,
depressive disorder, and anxiety disorder, are frequent at the time of
diagnosis, although they may occur at any stage of the disease. People
with previous psychological problems, longstanding social difficulties,
or lack of social support are especially vulnerable.

665

6

666

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine Suicide and deliberate self-harm may
occur in people who are concerned about the possibility of HIV infection
as well as in people with proven disease. Among the latter, the risk is
greater in those with advanced symptoms. However, it is not certain how
much greater is the risk of suicide and deliberate self-harm in AIDS
patients than in the general population. Neuropsychiatric disorders
occur secondary to the complications of immune suppression and as a
result of the direct effects of HIV on the brain (Saylor et al., 2016).
Minor cognitive disorders are frequent. HIV-associated dementia
(AIDS--dementia complex), HIV encephalopathy, and subacute encephalitis
occur late in the illness in around a third of patients. There is
usually an insidious onset with progression to profound dementia. HIV
infection can also result in neurological symptoms and dementia in those
who do not have AIDS. Delirium may occur when there is an opportunistic
infection or cerebral malignancy (Dilley and Fleminger, 2009). Social
consequences are considerable because of the public fears of the
condition and stigma. Cultural differences in acceptance or rejection,
and in the availability of family and other support, are major
determinants of quality of life. Problems in relation to illicit drug
use are considered in Chapter 20. The disorganized lives of some
HIV-positive drug users and their personal and social problems can make
treatment of HIV difficult. Ethical problems are related to
confidentiality. They include the importance of maintaining
confidentiality, disclosure to third parties who are at risk of
infection, disclosure to insurers and to employers, and protection of
the public from risk of transmission from HIVinfected health care
workers.

Cancer The psychological consequences of cancer are similar to those of
any other serious physical illness: â

Delay in seeking medical help because of fear or denial.

â

Response to the diagnosis, which may be anxiety, shock, anger,
disbelief, or depression. Sometimes the response is severe enough to
meet the criteria for a psychiatric disorder, usually an adjustment
disorder or sometimes a depressive disorder. The risk of suicide is
increased, particularly in the year after diagnosis (Hem et al., 2004).

â

Later consequences. Major depression occurs throughout the course of
cancer and appears to be more frequent in those suffering pain.
Prevalence estimates

for depression in cancer range from 5% to 15%, with higher rates in
palliative care settings (Walker et al., 2013a). â

The progression and recurrence of cancer are often associated with
increased psychiatric disturbance, which may result from a worsening of
physical symptoms such as pain and nausea, from fear of dying, or from
the development of an organic psychiatric syndrome.

â

Delirium and dementia may arise from brain metastases, which originate
most often from carcinoma of the lung, but also from tumours of the
breast and alimentary tract, and from melanomas. Occasionally, brain
metastases produce psychiatric symptoms before the primary lesion is
discovered (see also Chapter 14).

â

Neuropsychiatric problems (paraneoplastic syndromes) are sometimes
induced by certain kinds of cancer in the absence of metastases, notably
by ovarian teratomas, lung tumours, and Hodgkin's lymphoma. The
mechanism is thought to be an autoimmune response or secretion of
psychoactive substances by cancer cells (see Chapter 14).

Treatment for cancer may cause psychological disorder. Emotional
distress is particularly common after mastectomy and other mutilating
surgery. Radiotherapy causes nausea, fatigue, and emotional distress.
Chemotherapy often causes malaise and nausea, and anxiety about
chemotherapy may cause anticipatory nausea before the treatment. The
latter may be helped by behavioural treatments in addition to antiemetic
medication. Family and other close relatives of cancer patients may
experience psychological problems, which may persist even if the cancer
is cured. Nevertheless, many patients and relatives make a good
adjustment to cancer. The extent of their adjustment depends partly on
the information they receive.

Treatment for psychological consequences of cancer In the past doctors
were reluctant to tell patients that the diagnosis was cancer, but most
patients prefer to know the diagnosis and how it will affect their
lives. However, the information must be communicated well; otherwise
there may be problems in achieving a psychological adjustment.
Depression and anxiety disorders are often missed in these patients, and
systematic screening has been recommended (Andersen et al., 2014), but
is often not carried out in practice (Shaw et al., 2016).

67

Psychiatric aspects of medical procedures and conditions Depression in
cancer patients can be effectively treated (Walker et al., 2013b). A
significant improvement in depressive symptoms, and an improved quality
of life, was reported using an integrated collaborative care model that
includes psychological therapy and antidepressants (Sharpe et al.,
2014). Earlier findings suggesting specific reaction types
(e.g.Â 'fighting spirit') or targeted psychotherapy have not been
confirmed by later work.

Childhood cancer Childhood cancer presents special problems.
Communication of the diagnosis is particularly difficult but it is
generally better to explain the diagnosis in terms appropriate to the
child's stage of development. The child often reacts to the illness and
its treatment with behaviour problems. Many parents react at first with
shock and denial, and may take months to accept the full implications of
the diagnosis. Some mothers develop an anxiety or depressive disorder,
and other family members may be affected. In the early stages of the
illness parents are usually helped by advice about practical matters,
and later by discussions of their feelings, which often include guilt.
Adult survivors of cancer in childhood or adolescence appear to be at
risk of social difficulties.

Accidents Psychiatric associations Psychiatric disorder predisposing to
accidents. This is often through cognitive impairment occurring, for
example, in alcohol or drug intoxication, delirium, or dementia, and
less so in depression and some personality disorders. Psychiatric
disorder caused by accidents includes adjustment disorder, anxiety and
depressive disorders, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Avoidance of
situations associated with the accident is common and may be severe
enough to meet diagnostic criteria for phobic anxiety disorder. Head
injury may cause specific cognitive disorders and personality change
(see page 378).

Associations with particular kinds of accident Criminal assault can have
especially severe and persistent consequences for victims (Kilpatrick
and Acierno, 2003). Victims' problems are discussed further on page 527.
Road traffic accidents are the leading cause of death in people aged
under 40 years and a major cause of physical morbidity. Psychiatric
factors contributing to

road accidents include the misuse of alcohol and drugs, psychiatric
illness, suicidal and risk-taking behaviour, and the side effects of
some prescribed psychotropic drugs. Psychiatric consequences include
acute stress disorder, anxiety and depressive disorders, posttraumatic
stress disorder, phobias of travel, and disorders caused by brain
injury. Some of these conditions are transient, but others persist and
may cause considerable disability. Most of those affected do not seem to
have been psychologically vulnerable before the accident (Chossegros et
al., 2011). Occupational injury. The psychiatric consequences of
occupational injury resemble those of other accidents. It is sometimes
alleged that hopes of compensation or other benefits help to maintain
the symptoms and disability---see 'Compensation neurosis', below. Spinal
cord injury. Around a quarter of patients admitted to a spinal injury
unit suffer from psychiatric problems requiring treatment. Depression is
common in the period immediately after a spinal cord injury, but usually
improves with time. Nevertheless, suicide appears to be more common
among these patients than in the general population. Burns. In children,
burns are associated with overactivity, learning disability, child
abuse, and child neglect. In adults, burns are associated with alcohol
and drug misuse, deliberate self-harm, and dementia. Severe burns and
their protracted treatment may cause severe psychological problems.
Hamburg et al.Â (1953) described three stages: â

Stage 1 lasts days or weeks; denial is common. The most frequent
psychiatric disorders are organic syndromes. At this stage the relatives
often need considerable help.

â

Stage 2 is prolonged and painful; here denial recedes and emotional
disorders are more common. Patients need to be helped to withstand pain,
to express their feelings, and gradually accept disfigurement.

â

Stage 3: the patient leaves hospital and has to make further adjustments
to deformity or physical disability and the reaction of other people to
their appearance.

Post-traumatic stress disorder is common among those with severe burns,
and persistent anxiety and depression occur in more than a third (Palmu
et al., 2011). The outcome is worse for patients with burns affecting
the face. Such patients are likely to withdraw from social activities.
These patients need considerable support from the staff of the burns
unit, but only a minority also require referral to a psychiatrist.

667

68

668

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

'Compensation neurosis' The term compensation neurosis (or accident
neurosis) refers to psychologically determined physical or mental
symptoms occurring when there is an unsettled claim for compensation. It
was believed that such psychological factors were important in claims
for persistent physical disability after occupational injuries and road
accidents. Compensation claims were thought to prolong symptoms and that
settlement was followed by recovery, although evidence has

failed to substantiate this extreme view (Margoshes and Webster, 2000).
In fact, many accident victims do not claim compensation, and few become
involved in prolonged litigation. However, it does appear that time off
work and disability are affected by the type of accident, social
factors, and the prospect of compensation, social security, or other
benefits. See Malt (2009) for a review of the psychiatric aspects of
accidents, burns, and other trauma.

Psychiatric aspects of obstetrics and gynaecology Pregnancy Psychiatric
disorder is more common in the first and third trimesters of pregnancy
than in the second. In the first trimester unwanted pregnancies are
associated with anxiety and depression. In the third trimester there may
be fears about the impending delivery or doubts about the normality of
the fetus. Psychiatric symptoms in pregnancy are more common in women
with a history of previous psychiatric disorder and probably also in
those with serious medical problems affecting the course of pregnancy,
such as diabetes. It is sometimes said that psychiatric disorders are
less common in pregnant than non-pregnant women, but this is not borne
out by systematic reviews of depression (Gavin et al., 2005) and anxiety
(Goodman et al., 2014) disorders. Maternal depression during pregnancy
is associated with an increased rate of premature delivery and some
other adverse perinatal outcomes (Jarde et al., 2016), highlighting the
need for effective screening to improve detection and thence treatment
(O'Connor et al., 2016). Management of depression in pregnancy involves
careful assessment, consideration of treatment options, and providing
the woman with accurate information about risks and benefits (Box
22.16). In particular, care must be taken when using antidepressants, as
with all psychotropic drugs, during pregnancy (Chisolm and Payne, 2016).
Nevertheless, if the woman has a history of recurrent moderate to severe
depression and has been effectively maintained on antidepressant
medication, it is generally better to continue this treatment during
pregnancy because the risk of relapse is high if medication is
withdrawn, and because of the risks to the fetus of untreated maternal
depression (Jarde et al., 2016).

Women with a history of less severe depression can often withdraw
antidepressant medication successfully (Yonkers et al., 2011). Women not
taking antidepressant medication who become depressed during pregnancy
should be provided with psychoeducation and psychological treatment in a
stepped care manner, depending on the severity of their condition. If
the depression is severe, or if a moderate depressive episode fails to
respond to psychological

Box 22.16 Depression in pregnancy Offer all pregnant women information
about depression, its significance for her and her baby, and the
recommended treatment options â Women with a history of recurrent
depression of moderate to severe intensity who are successfully
maintained on antidepressant treatment may be advised to continue
treatment â Women who experience the onset of a mild-- moderate
depressive episode should be offered education and psychological
treatment using a stepped care approach â Women with severe depression
or those with moderate depression not responding to psychological
treatment should be offered antidepressant medication, usually an SSRI
other than paroxetine â The absolute risks of harms to the fetus from
antidepressants in pregnancy are low and need to be placed in the
context of the risks of untreated depression in the mother â

69

Psychiatric aspects of obstetrics and gynaecology management,
antidepressant medication should be offered, usually an SSRI (Vigod et
al., 2016). Indeed, generally the risks of SSRI treatment in pregnancy
are low and are outweighed by those of untreated depression. However,
self-limiting neonatal withdrawal syndromes have been described,
although the incidence across studies varies widely. SSRI use in later
pregnancy may also be associated with a small increase (1--2 per 1000
live births) in the risk of pulmonary hypertension of the newborn, a
potentially fatal condition (Huybrechts et al., 2015). Paroxetine has
been associated with cardiac defects and should therefore be avoided in
pregnancy; other antidepressants appear to be safe in this respect
(Huybrechts et al., 2014). For review of depression in pregnancy, see
Vigod et al.Â (2016).

Hyperemesis gravidarum About half of all pregnant women experience
nausea and vomiting in the first trimester. In the past it was sometimes
suggested that these symptoms, as well as the severe condition of
hyperemesis gravidarum, have a psychological basis, but there is no
evidence for this.

the family doctor and the gynaecologist, without involving a
psychiatrist. Nevertheless, psychiatric opinions are still sought at
times, not only about the grounds for termination of pregnancy but also
for an assessment of the likely psychological effects of termination in
a particular patient (Morris et al., 2012). Most of the evidence
suggests that the psychological consequences of termination are usually
mild and transient (Fergusson et al., 2009).

In vitro fertilization The process of in vitro fertilization (IVF) is
often protracted and, not surprisingly, associated with emotional
distress (Rockliff et al., 2014). However, postpartum depression is no
more common than in women following spontaneous pregnancy (Gressier et
al., 2015).

Spontaneous abortion Approximately a fifth of diagnosed pregnancies do
not progress beyond 20 weeks, mainly because of fetal defects. Distress
is common after miscarriage, although most women improve rapidly (Broen
et al., 2005).

Pseudocyesis

Antenatal death

Pseudocyesis is a rare condition in which a woman believes that she is
pregnant when she is not, and develops amenorrhoea, abdominal
distension, and other changes similar to those of early pregnancy. The
condition is more common in younger women. Pseudocyesis usually resolves
quickly once diagnosed, but some patients persist in believing that they
are pregnant. Recurrence is common. Only rarely is the condition
associated with a psychiatric disorder.

Antenatal death (stillbirth) causes an acute bereavement reaction and,
for some women, long-term psychiatric problems, as well as concern about
future pregnancy. It is believed by many midwives that parents should be
helped to mourn by encouraging them to hold the baby, to name it, and to
have a proper funeral. However, the evidence regarding this issue is
weak (Hennegan et al., 2015). Parents may need some continuing support
and the next pregnancy may be a particularly worrying time. The risk of
stillbirth is higher in women with a psychiatric history, but this may
reflect factors such as antenatal care attendance rather than the
psychiatric disorder itself (King-Hele et al., 2009).

Couvade syndrome In this syndrome, the partner of the pregnant woman
reports that he is experiencing some of the symptoms of pregnancy,
complaining of nausea, morning sickness, and often of toothache. These
complaints generally resolve after a few weeks.

Termination of unwanted pregnancy In the past, psychiatrists in the UK
were often asked to see pregnant women who were seeking a therapeutic
abortion on the grounds of mental illness. The provisions of current
legislation in the UK and many other countries now make it generally
more appropriate for decisions to be made by

Caesarian section Caesarian section has been said to have adverse
psychological consequences for parents and infants. Most of the research
has failed to test this association because it has not separated the
effects of surgery from other adverse factors. However, it would seem
sensible to pay particular attention to parental support and to initial
bonding. See Brockington (2009) for a review of the psychiatric aspects
of pregnancy.

669

670

670

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Postpartum mental disorders These disorders can be divided into minor
mood disturbance (maternity blues), puerperal psychosis, and chronic
depressive disorders of moderate severity.

Minor mood disturbance---'maternity blues' Amongst women giving birth to
a normal child, between half and two-thirds experience brief episodes of
irritability, lability of mood, and episodes of crying. Lability of mood
is particularly characteristic, taking the form of rapid alternations
between euphoria and misery. The symptoms reach their peak on the third
or fourth day postpartum. Patients often speak of being 'confused', but
tests of cognitive function are normal. Although frequently tearful,
patients may not be feeling depressed at the time but tense and
irritable. 'Maternity blues' is more frequent among primigravida. The
condition is not related to complications at delivery or to the use of
anaesthesia. 'Blues' patients have often experienced anxiety and
depressive symptoms in the last trimester of pregnancy; they are also
more likely to give a history of premenstrual tension, fears of labour,
and poor social adjustment. Both the frequency of the emotional changes
and their timing suggest that maternity blues may be related to
readjustment in hormones after delivery, although this has not been
established. No treatment is required because the condition resolves
spontaneously in a few days.

Postpartum psychosis (puerperal psychosis) In the nineteenth century,
puerperal and lactational psychoses were thought to be specific entities
distinct from other mental illnesses. Later psychiatrists such as
Bleuler and Kraepelin regarded the puerperal psychoses as no different
from other psychoses, and neither ICD-10 nor DSM-5 have a specific
diagnostic category for puerperal psychosis. Nevertheless, the term
continues to be used widely by clinicians and patients. For a review,
see Jones et al.Â (2014).

Epidemiology The incidence of postpartum psychoses has been estimated at
1--2 per 1000 births. This incidence is substantially above the expected
rate for psychoses in non-puerperal women of the same age. Puerperal
psychoses are more frequent in primiparous women and in those who have
suffered previous major psychiatric illness. In particular, women with a
history of bipolar disorder have a 20% risk of puerperal relapse.
However, about half of women who develop puerperal psychosis

do not have any form of 'high-risk' history (Jones et al., 2014).
Puerperal illnesses are reported to be more common in developing than in
developed countries; the excess may reflect cases with an organic
aetiology.

Aetiology There is a genetic predisposition, which overlaps with that of
bipolar disorder, but apart from a possible susceptibility locus on
chromosome 16, no specific genes or genetic pathways have been
identified. The early onset of puerperal psychoses has led to
speculation that they might be caused by the dramatic hormonal changes
that follow delivery. There is, however, no evidence that hormonal
changes in women with puerperal psychoses differ from those in other
women in the early puerperium. Hence if endocrine factors do play a
part, they would seem to act only as precipitating factors in
predisposed women. Immunological factors have also been implicated. The
sleep deprivation associated with childbirth may play a role since
disrupted sleep can precipitate mania in vulnerable individuals.

Clinical features The onset of puerperal psychosis is often within 2-- 3
days of delivery, and usually within the first 1--2 weeks. A sudden
onset and rapid deterioration is typical. Three types of clinical
picture are observed: delirium, mood disorder, and schizophreniform
disorder. Delirium was common in the past, but is now much less frequent
since the incidence of puerperal sepsis was reduced by antibiotics.
Nowadays affective psychoses predominate, either bipolar disorder with
mania or mixed features, or depressive psychosis. Schizophreniform
disorders presenting for the first time occur, but are rare. The
clinical features of these syndromes are similar to those of the
corresponding non-puerperal syndrome. Insomnia and overactivity are
often early features. Perplexity and confusion are common.

Management Assessment should be prompt and pay attention to the
potential risks to mother and baby (Spinelli, 2009). As well as the
usual psychiatric assessment it is essential to ascertain the mother's
ideas concerning the baby. Severely depressed or psychotic patients may
have delusional ideas that the child is malformed, imperfect in some
way, or evil. These false ideas may lead to attempts to kill the child
to spare it from future suffering, or to protect others. Infanticide is
extremely rare, but suicide, though also uncommon, is a leading cause of
maternal death. Treatment usually requires inpatient care, often under
the Mental Health Act. If available, admission is

671

Psychiatric aspects of obstetrics and gynaecology often best to a mother
and baby unit, where the child can remain with the mother to minimize
adverse effects on maternal bonding. Once the admission is arranged, all
contacts between mother and baby should be supervised, at first, by
nursing staff and thereafter reviewed in the light of clinical progress.
Child protection considerations should always be an integral part of
management. As with other psychoses, antipsychotics are a mainstay of
treatment, with antidepressants also used if depressive symptoms are
prominent. Adjunctive benzodiazepines are helpful for insomnia and sleep
disturbance. Lithium may also be worth considering if there is a clear
bipolar component, though it is advised that women taking lithium should
not breastfeed. Where pharmacological treatment and psychological
support do not resolve symptomatology, the early use of ECT, which can
be rapidly effective in puerperal psychosis, should be considered. For
review, see Bergink et al.Â (2015).

Prognosis Over 75% of women have a good outcome after puerperal
psychosis. Recovery usually occurs within a few months. After a
puerperal psychosis there is a high (at least 35%) risk of relapse after
the next delivery (Wesseloo et al., 2016), and almost 70% of women will
have a non-puerperal recurrence, usually of bipolar disorder (Blackmore
et al., 2013). Given these risks, women with a history of puerperal
psychosis should be offered preconception care and regular psychiatric
support during and immediately after each pregnancy. In this instance,
the benefits of maintenance medication (antipsychotics and mood
stabilizers) often outweigh the risks. However, sodium valproate should
be avoided, as in all women of childbearing age, unless no other
treatment is effective or tolerable. For review, see Jones et
al.Â (2014).

Postnatal depression Less severe depressive disorders are much more
common than the puerperal psychoses. Systematic reviews suggest a point
prevalence of 5% in the first 3 months after delivery, rising to 19% if
minor depression is included (Gavin et al., 2005). It is estimated that
about a third of these cases start during pregnancy. Higher figures have
been reported in low- and middle-income countries. Tiredness,
irritability, and anxiety are often more prominent than depressive mood
change, and there are often phobic and obsessional symptoms concerning
fears about harming the baby. It is important to distinguish such
obsessional thinking from delusional beliefs related to puerperal
psychosis, as discussed above.

Most patients recover after 2--6 months, but up to 30% still have some
depressive symptoms in the year following childbirth. There is a high
risk (about 40%) of depressive relapse subsequently, either postnatally
or at other times. For review, see Howard et al.Â (2014a).

Aetiology Clinical observation suggests that postnatal disorders are
often precipitated in vulnerable mothers by the psychological adjustment
required after childbirth, as well as by the loss of sleep and the hard
work involved in the care of the baby. There is little evidence of a
specific biological basis different from depression in other situations.
The main risk factors are a previous history of depression (especially
when accompanied by obstetric complications) and indications of social
adversity. Low levels of partner or other support, relationship
difficulties, and domestic violence are also risk factors. Unintended
pregnancy is associated with a twofold increase in postnatal depression
(Abajobir et al., 2016).

Management Despite the medical and other care given to women after
childbirth, many postpartum depressions are undetected or, if detected,
untreated. Therefore those providing care to mother and baby need to be
alert to the possibility of depression. Screening appears to decrease
the prevalence of postnatal depression (O'Connor et al., 2016), and the
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale performs reasonably well as a
screening tool. Many women can be treated effectively in primary care,
with non-directive counselling and help with solving practical problems
(Clarke et al., 2013). A small proportion need specific psychological
interventions or antidepressant medication, and a few with severe or
complex problems require referral to psychiatric services. Evidence
shows efficacy of psychological and pharmacological therapies comparable
to depressive episodes in other situations. Exposure of the infant to
drug via breast milk needs to be considered but is generally low with
SSRIs such as sertraline. For review, see Larsen et al.Â (2015).

Other psychiatric disorders in the postnatal period There has been much
less emphasis on other disorders in the postnatal period, but research
indicates that anxiety disorders, eating disorders, and post-traumatic
stress disorder can all present at this time and require treatment. For
review, see Howard et al.Â (2014a,b).

671

672

672

Chapter 22 Psychiatry and medicine

Effects of maternal mental health on the child Maternal psychiatric
disorders, especially depression, during pregnancy and in the postnatal
period have significant effects on the development of the child (Goodman
et al., 2011). For example, both antenatal and postnatal depression in
the mother are associated with an increased risk in the child for
emotional problems, behavioural difficulties, disorganized attachment,
and depression. Postnatal depression also impacts on intellectual
development in the child, although the longterm effects on cognitive
functioning are uncertain. Although most studies have focused on
mothers, there is increasing evidence that paternal depression shows
similar associations with child development. The mechanisms linking
parental mental health with child health and development are complex.
They likely include an interplay of genetic, epigenetic, biological, and
social factors, acting both as mediators and moderators of risk. A
number of interventions to reduce the adverse effects of parental
psychiatric disorder on the health of children have been tested.
Treatment of maternal perinatal disorders has yielded a mixed pattern of
results, with not all studies showing benefits for the child even when
the mother has been treated successfully. Greater effects on the child
have emerged from specific parenting interventions, including
home-visiting programmes to improve the quality of interactions and the
attachment between mother and infant. There are no data regarding
effects of interventions in fathers. For further discussion, see Chapter
16. For review, see Stein et al.Â (2014).

Psychiatric aspects of gynaecology Premenstrual syndrome and
premenstrual dysphoric disorder These categories denote a group of
psychological and physical symptoms starting a few days before and
ending shortly after the onset of a menstrual period. The psychological
symptoms include anxiety, irritability, mood lability, food cravings,
and depression; the physical symptoms include breast tenderness,
abdominal discomfort, and a feeling of distension. Premenstrual syndrome
(PMS) is not included in current classifications of psychiatric
disorder, but premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is included in
DSM-5 within the 'Depressive disorders' chapter. For a diagnosis of
PMDD,

there must be a minimum of five symptoms, including affective ones,
which are clearly related to menstruation. Both PMS and PMDD should be
distinguished from the much more frequent occurrence of similar symptoms
that are not strictly premenstrual in timing. For review, see Ryu and
Kim (2015).

Epidemiology The frequency of PMS in women of reproductive age is
estimated at 30--40%, and 3--8% for PMDD. Such estimates should be
interpreted with caution. First, there is a problem of definition. Mild
and brief symptoms are frequent premenstrually, and it is difficult to
decide when they should be classified as PMS. Second, information about
symptoms is often collected retrospectively by asking women to recall
earlier menstrual periods, and this is an unreliable way of establishing
the time relationships. Prospective ratings are more likely to be
accurate. Third, the description of premenstrual symptoms is subjective
and may be influenced by knowledge that the enquiry is concerned
specifically with the premenstrual syndrome.

Aetiology The aetiology is uncertain. Biological explanations have been
based on ovarian hormones (excess oestrogen, lack of progesterone),
pituitary hormones, and disturbed fluid and electrolyte balance. None of
these theories has been proved. Various unproven psychological
explanations have been based on possible associations of the syndrome
with neuroticism or with attitudes towards menstruation.

Treatment PMS has been treated with progesterone, and also with oral
contraceptives, bromocriptine, diuretics, and psychotropic drugs. There
is no convincing evidence that any of these is effective, and treatment
trials suggest a high placebo response (up to 65%). Psychological
support and encouragement may be as helpful as medication. For PMDD,
SSRIs and oral contraceptives are considered the treatment of choice,
with the latter primarily improving the physical symptoms. Cognitive
behaviour therapy and lifestyle modifications also have a role (Lustyk
et al., 2009). See O'Brien et al.Â (2011) for a review of premenstrual
syndromes and their treatment.

The menopause In addition to the physical symptoms of flushing,
sweating, and vaginal dryness, menopausal women often complain of
headache, dizziness, and depression. It is

673

Further reading not certain whether depressive symptoms are more common
in menopausal women than in non-menopausal women (RÃ¶ssler et al., 2016).
Nevertheless, amongst patients who consult general practitioners because
of emotional symptoms, a disproportionately large number of women are in
the middle-age group that spans the menopausal years. Depressive and
anxiety symptoms at the time of the menopause could have several causes.
Hormonal changes have often been suggested, notably deficiency of
oestrogen, but a causal role has not been established. Psychiatric
symptoms at this time of life could equally well reflect changes in the
woman's role as her children leave home, her relationship with her
husband alters, and her own parents become ill or die. There are no
specific treatments for depression associated with the menopause, and it
should be treated in the usual fashion. For review, see Llaneza et
al.Â (2012).

Further reading Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJ Jr and Geddes JR
(eds.) (2009). New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. (See Sections 4.6.3, 4.9, and 5.)

Hysterectomy The alleged relationship between hysterectomy and
psychiatric disorder has been controversial. A systematic review
concluded that hysterectomy is associated with an improvement in
depressive symptoms and no effect on anxiety symptoms (Darwish et al.,
2014). Moreover, patients who are free from psychiatric symptoms before
hysterectomy seldom develop them afterwards (Gath et al., 1982).

Sterilization Considerations similar to those for hysterectomy apply to
these procedures. Although retrospective studies suggested that
sterilization leads to psychiatric disorder and sexual dysfunction,
prospective enquiry has contradicted this. Indeed, sexual relationships
are more likely to improve than worsen, and definite regrets are
unusual. For review of psychiatric aspects of obstetrics and
gynaecology, see Brockington (2009).

673

674

675

CHAPTER 23

Global psychiatry The global burden of mental illness 675

Resources and service development

Socioeconomic deprivation and chronic adversity 676

considerations 677 Specific populations of concern 679

In this chapter the basic concerns of the global mental health movement
are described:

of the global population who have limited access to services despite
their high need.

â

The prevalence of psychiatric illness across the globe, with an emphasis
on low- and middle-income countries (LMICs).

â

The influence of increased psychosocial adversity in LMICs on the
prevalence and treatment of mental illness.

â

The question of resources, and the challenge of how to make treatments
available to the large proportion

The term neurological, mental health, developmental, and substance use
(NMDS) disorders is often used in the context of global health. NMDS
disorders constitute a large proportion of the global burden of disease,
and increasing recognition of this fact provides important momentum to
the emerging field of global mental health (Patel and Prince, 2010).
Other aspects of psychiatry that differ between countries and cultures
are discussed elsewhere in the book, as summarized in Box 23.1.

The global burden of mental illness With the use of Disability Adjusted
Life Years (DALY), the importance of neurological and psychiatric
disorders as a global contributor of disease has become undeniable; by
2010, NMDS disorders were estimated to account collectively for more
than 29% of the global burden of disease in LMICs (Table 23.1)
(Silberberg et al., 2015). In tandem with increased global life
expectancy, non-communicable diseases have become the major cause of
death and disability, with the burden of NMDS increasing by around 40%
in the past two decades (Whiteford et al., 2013). There are many
challenges to the improvement of mental health care across the globe
(Collins et al., 2011). They include: â

Lack of knowledge and evidence on: â the positive and negative
influences on the develop-

ment of mental illness in LMICs, including the impact of poverty,
violence, war, migration, and disaster;

â the most effective and cost-effective forms of man-

agement in low-resource settings. For example, how to better integrate
with primary care treatment approaches; developing interventions that
can be delivered by non-mental health professionals, and appropriate use
of medication. â

Systemic difficulties in: â work force capacity. There are fewer
opportunities

in LMICs to train, practice, and conduct research in psychiatry. This is
often referred to as the mental health gap (mhGAP) between what is
needed for mental health services and what is available (World Health
Organization, 2010); â health system and policy responses. Care for
those

with mental illness often falls well below those with physical illness,
with legislation needed to protect

67

676

Chapter 23 Global psychiatry

Box 23.1 Areas relevant to global psychiatry discussed in other chapters
Classification (Chapter 2) Diagnosis in different cultural contexts
(page 32)

Schizophrenia (Chapter 11) Migration and ethnicity (page 277)

Assessment (Chapter 3) Patients from another culture (page 57)

Misuse of alcohol and drugs (Chapter 20) Religion, tolerance, and
ethnicity (page 570) Epidemiology of substance misuse disorders (page
586)

Aetiology (Chapter 5) Social sciences: transcultural studies (page 98)
Reactions to stressful experiences (Chapter 7) Refugees and victims of
torture (page 148) Anxiety and obsessive--compulsive disorders (Chapter
8) Transcultural variations in anxiety disorders (page 184) Depression
(Chapter 9) Transcultural factors (page 198)

their rights and to ensure that there are facilities equipped to manage
their care. Compared to a number of other major contributors to the
global burden of disease, many NMDS disorders manifest in early life and
so interventions should incorporate a life-course approach to ensure
that children and families are considered, and that their educational
and

Suicide and deliberate self-harm (Chapter 21) Differences in suicide
rates (page 610) Psychiatry and medicine (Chapter 22) Trance and
possession disorders (page 657) Cultural syndromes (page 657)
Psychiatric services (Chapter 26) Members of ethnic minorities and
migrants (page 797) Refugees (page 798)

occupational needs are also prioritized (Patton et al., 2016).
Furthermore, the impact of NMDS extends beyond the patient to other
family members and communities, requiring health system-wide changes to
offer improved treatment together with attention to the widespread
social exclusion, discrimination, and stigma those with mental illness
can experience in LMICs.

Socioeconomic deprivation and chronic adversity There is growing
international evidence that mental ill health and poverty interact, such
that those who live in poverty have increased risk of mental illness,
and those living with a mental illness will drift into or remain in
poverty (Lund et al., 2011). An important element to breaking this cycle
is to address both the social causes of mental illness and the
disabilities and economic deprivation that are a consequence of mental
illness. There are marked demographic and urban shifts taking place in a
number of LMICs. These shifts place increasing stress on systems of
governance and care, and can have important impacts on the development
of mental illness and the provision of psychiatric services, given the
poor availability of specialist services. The increasing proportion of
older adults living in high-income countries (Chapter 19) is markedly
different to the large proportions of children in many LMICs. Indeed,
over 80%

of children and adolescents live in LMICs (Fazel et al., 2014). Global
urbanization will be most prominent in LMICs in the next decades, with
90% of the projected population growth and urbanization concentrated in
Asia and Africa (UN Population Division, 2015). As areas transition
economically to higher income brackets, associated socioeconomic
deprivation can also occur, with income inequality becoming more
prominent, further impacting on potential risk factors for mental
illness. These include changing community structures, more fractured
families with reductions in support for young families, changing gender
roles, changing diets (with increasing non-communicable diseases such as
type 2 diabetes), and the leap into technology with marked social media
use, especially by young adult populations. The psychological impacts of
all of these factors and their interactions are poorly studied (Patton
et al., 2016).

67

Resources and service development considerations

Table 23.1 Proportions of age-standardized estimated disability adjusted
life years (\>0.5%) attributable to mental health, substance-use and
non-communicable neurological disorders by high-income and low- and
middle-income countries Disorder

Absolute DALYs\* as global per thousand people (Rank\*\*)

Percentage in highincome countries (developed)

Percentage in LMICs (developing)

Mental health (all)

185,200

11.1

6.73

Major depressive disorder

63,200 (2)

3.42

2.39

Anxiety disorders

26,830 (9)

1.60

0.98

Schizophrenia

15,000 (11)

0.85

0.49

Bipolar disorders

12,870 (17)

0.63

0.50

Dysthymia

11,100 (16)

0.6

0.42

Drug-use disorders

20,000 (19)

1.53

0.67

Alcohol-use disorders

17,640 (22)

1.52

0.56

Cerebrovascular disease and strokes

102,200

5.97

3.79

Neurological disorders (all)

73,800

4.42

2.71

Migraine

22,360 (6)

1.21

0.84

Epilepsy

17,400 (23)

0.44

0.75

Alzheimer's disease and other dementias

11,350 (21)

1.75

0.22

Other neurological disorders

17,870

0.53

0.76

Mental health and behavioural disorders

Substance-use disorders

Neurological disorders: non-communicable

- DALY is defined as a measure of overall disease burden and expressed
  as the sum of years of potential life lost due to ill health,
  disability, or premature mortality. \*\* Number in brackets specifies
  where the disorder comes in the DALY ranking of all neurological,
  psychiatric and substance abuse disorders. For further details of
  categories and estimates, see Silberberg et al.Â (2015). Adapted from
  Nature, 527(7578), Silberberg D et al., Brain and other nervous system
  disorders across the lifespan---global challenges and opportunities,
  pp.Â S151--4, Copyright (2015), with permission from Nature Publishing
  Group, reproduced under the Creative Commons License 4.0.

Finally, people with serious mental disorders and disabilities bear a
disproportionate burden of human rights abuses, with limited basic
entitlements, such as freedom and the denial of the right to care. The
need to address

them has been equated to a global emergency on a par with the worst
human rights scandals in the history of global health (Patel et al.,
2011).

Resources and service development considerations The barriers to
providing better mental health care to large swathes of the global
population, which include poorly resourced services and the lack of the
most basic human rights for the mentally unwell, have been referred to
as a 'failure of humanity' (Kleinman, 2009).

Health systems in LMICs need increased resources to scale up care.
Budgetary allocations for mental health care are still significantly out
of proportion to the burden posed by mental health problems (Eaton et
al., 2011). Furthermore, there is a need to ensure that the

677

678

678

Chapter 23 Global psychiatry increasing resources for developing
services account for the unique needs of people who are particularly
vulnerable, notably children and those affected by serious mental
disorders and disabilities. The challenges facing the implementation of
packages of care in LMICs include: â¢ the lack of priority for mental
health over the other health needs of countries; â¢ high levels of
poverty and social deprivation; â¢ diverse cultural settings; â¢ broader
health system challenges such as weak coordination between national and
local authorities, inadequate medication supply, and weak health
management information systems; â¢ burden on the front-line health care
workers; â¢ shortages of human resources; â¢ inflexible bureaucracy; â¢
lack of accountability among the implementing agencies; â¢ demand-side
constraints, including limited community awareness, high levels of
stigma and discrimination against people living with mental illness, and
diverse explanatory models, which may influence the acceptability and
uptake of services (Lund et al., 2016). Integration of mental health
into existing systems of primary and physical health care must be viewed
as a priority given the significant resource limits of current mental
health provision. An analysis of data from the WHO Atlas projects
identified widespread, systematic, and long-term neglect of resources
for mental health care in LMICs (Saxena et al., 2006, 2007). In 2007, it
was estimated that one-third of all countries have no national policy or
plan to improve mental health and reduce the burden of mental disorders.
And, of those countries with a policy, almost 40% had not revised them
for two decades; there were similar figures regarding legislation to
protect the rights of those requiring involuntary treatment for serious
mental illnesses. The mhGAP guidelines mentioned earlier (World Health
Organization, 2010) highlight how important it is to ensure that
treatments used are based on evidence of efficacy. Unfortunately, the
use of scarce resources for ineffective treatments and inefficient
models of care is not uncommon and needs to be reduced. Delivery of
effective treatments depends crucially on the development of human
resources, especially among the frontline health workforce. This often
requires innovative solutions, and methods should be developed to share
these practices (Kakuma et al., 2011).

Lay mental health workers The mhGAP has focused attention on task
shifting: the delegation of responsibilities to lower level cadres who
are supported and supervised by more senior professionals; for example,
using lay health workers to deliver psychological interventions in LMICs
(Chibanda et al., 2015). In South Africa, a study using trained
community lay health workers improved the quality of mother--infant
engagement (Cooper et al., 2002). Similarly, in Pakistan, it was
possible to integrate a cognitive behaviour therapy intervention in the
routine work of community health workers, resulting in better outcomes
than usual care in reducing depression (Rahman et al., 2008). In India,
a trained lay counsellor-led collaborative stepped care intervention
improved recovery from depressive and anxiety disorders among patients
attending primary health care facilities (Patel et al., 2010). In Chile,
a multicomponent stepped-care intervention was more effective than usual
care for depression at a public health care level (Araya et al., 2006).
Finally, Murray et al.Â (2014) have developed a 'common elements'
approach to treatment of mood, post-traumatic stress, or anxiety
problems, where lay workers were trained to deliver a treatment
intervention using a transdiagnostic approach for which early data
showed a decrease in clinical symptoms with good retention in treatment,
suggesting acceptability. It has been piloted in the USA, Iraq, and on
the Thai--Burma border.

Integration into primary health care The challenge of scaling up mental
health services in LMICs is less one of what to implement than one of
how to implement. There is already robust evidence for a range of
cost-effective interventions, but little evidence on how these may be
delivered in diverse low-resource settings. A key element is to increase
the capacity to treat common mental disorders within primary health care
settings. The Programme for Improving Mental health carE (PRIME) (Lund
et al., 2016) was a large multisite study in five LMICs to develop
district mental health care plans. They highlighted some key components,
including having shared objectives; the need for participation and
engagement with local stakeholders; focusing on community, health
facility, and health organization levels; challenges of overburdened
primary health care systems; and the limited impact of training without
systemic changes in the form of new mental health resources (usually in
the form of an experienced mental health professional to provide
support), referral pathways, improved medication supply, and
reorientation of health facility managers (Hanlon et al., 2015).

679

Specific populations of concern

Specific populations of concern HIV/AIDS pandemic People living with
HIV/AIDS have a prevalence of over 30% of mental disorders (depression,
anxiety, and related conditions) in LMICs. The rates are higher than for
non-HIVinfected individuals (Brandt, 2009; see also Chapter 22), and
these disorders contribute significantly to poor HIV disease outcomes,
such as increased HIV treatment failure and increased risk of HIV
acquisition (Chibanda et al., 2015). The identification of highly active
antiretroviral treatments and the welcome expansion in access to them
has resulted in a new global health challenge resulting from these
chronic mental disorder comorbidities of HIV. A large treatment gap, in
particular for depression, exists in sub-Saharan Africa, where the ratio
of mental health professionals to the population in sub-Saharan Africa
is 1 per 2.5 million for psychologists, 1 per 1 million for mental
health nurses and 1 per 2 million for psychiatrists. There are some
promising results for the effectiveness of cognitive behaviour therapy
for common mental disorders in HIV/ AIDS-affected populations, but the
evidence is limited. In considering the needs of mothers, 90% of the
global number of pregnant women with HIV live in subSaharan Africa
(Stein et al., 2014). Being diagnosed with HIV during pregnancy, which
is when many African women learn of their diagnosis, increases the risk
of depression. It is a cause for concern that women who are depressed
are less likely to adhere to antiretroviral therapy, which is critical
for the mother's survival and to prevent transmission of HIV to the
child.

Perinatal mental illness Evidence is emerging that poor perinatal
maternal mental health, especially depression in women at socioeconomic
disadvantage, is linked to poor infant growth and stunted development
(Stein et al., 2014; Howard et al., 2014; see Chapter 16). Postnatal
depression in LMICs is associated with high rates of diarrhoeal diseases
in children, which could contribute to their poor growth. Furthermore,
comorbidity is more common in LMICs, likely increasing the adverse
consequences of perinatal mental illness. There is evidence that
perinatal depression raises the risks for children even into late
adolescence in terms of increased rates of depression. Of particular
concern is the extent to which outcomes for children are moderated by
persistent maternal disorder and socioeconomic disadvantage. Perinatal
mental illness might also account for a substantial proportion of

maternal deaths in low-income countries if suicide were properly
classified and reported. There is evidence that trained non-specialist
health workers can provide effective interventions for postnatal
depression in LMICs. Several randomized controlled trials in LMICs
showed that psychological interventions delivered by local community
health workers can have a positive effect on parenting and child
development. A study in Pakistan used a form of cognitive behavioural
therapy together with parenting support that began during pregnancy
(Rahman et al., 2008). No effect was noted on child growth, the
principal outcome, but rates of postnatal depression were reduced, and
parents reported decreased rates of children's diarrhoea, increased
rates of immunization, and increased play with children. In Jamaica, an
intervention targeting child rearing and parenting self-esteem led to
improvements in both maternal depressive symptoms and infant global
development compared with standard care (Baker-Henningham et al., 2008).
As a final example, in a socioeconomically disadvantaged South African
community, an intervention focused on helping mothers to attend to the
details of the infant's communication and to respond to sensitively led
improvements in the quality of mother--child interaction and increased
rates of secure attachment (Cooper et al., 2009).

Children and adolescents Children and adolescents comprise more than a
third of the global population. Addressing their mental health needs
more effectively than is currently the case might alleviate suffering,
improve educational attainment in childhood, and potentially reduce the
burden of mental disorders in adulthood (Kieling et al., 2011; Patton et
al., 2016). Schools provide a potentially valuable location for mental
health support services given the scarcity of dedicated mental health
services for children in LMICs, since schools exist in almost all urban
and rural contexts (Fazel et al., 2014). For example, the School HeAlth
Promotion and Empowerment programme (SHAPE) intervention in India
successfully trained lay school health counsellors to conduct physical
health screening (visual and hearing) as well as mental health
interventions. The programme included skilled supervision of the
counsellors, the provision of which diminished over time as the
counsellor's skills improved, and also incorporated whole school
interventions around violence and bullying (Rajaraman

679

680

680

Chapter 23 Global psychiatry et al., 2012). The intervention had a
number of impacts noted from qualitative interviews, including
parentreported improved behaviour and success noted following individual
counselling sessions, which were accessed by about 6% of students. The
Lancet Commission on adolescent health and wellbeing (Patton et al.,
2016) highlighted how the current lack of mental health provision leaves
adolescents vulnerable to the harmful consequences of the current
societal economic and cultural changes taking place, as well as noting
the equally positive opportunities to improve their health and wellbeing
if their health needs are better addressed. Better childhood health and
nutrition, extensions to education, delays in family formation, and new
technologies offer positive possibilities, but global trends of concern
include those promoting unhealthy lifestyles and commodities, youth
unemployment, less family stability, environmental degradation, armed
conflict, and mass migration, all of which pose major threats to
adolescent wellbeing. Of note, just over half of adolescents grow up in
multi-burden countries, characterized by high levels of all types of
health problems, including diseases of poverty (HIV and other infectious
diseases, undernutrition, and poor sexual and reproductive health),
injury and violence, and non-communicable diseases. The Commission
argued that the most powerful actions are intersectoral, multilevel, and
multicomponent, involving young people themselves. For more information
on the background and issues relevant to child and adolescent psychiatry
across the globe, see Rahman et al.Â (2015) and Patton et al.Â (2016).

Humanitarian emergencies Natural disasters, conflicts, and other
humanitarian disasters provide not only a high need but also a unique
opportunity to scale up care to the affected population.

Further reading Patel V and Minas H (2013) Global Mental Health:
Principles and Practice. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

The prevalence of mental health and psychosocial problems in these
situations is high. Most frequently, mental health researchers in
humanitarian settings have focused on identifying rates of
post-traumatic stress disorder and other common mental disorders.
However, severe mental disorders (e.g.Â psychotic disorders),
non-specific forms of psychological distress, and psychosocial problems
specific to young people are also important (Reed et al., 2012).
Evidence also exists of the effect of deteriorated environmental
conditions on mental health and wellbeing in humanitarian settings,
including undermined social support networks, loss of opportunities for
generating income, and lack of respect for human rights. Interventions
in these settings have been reported in a systematic review (Tol et al.,
2011). In 160 reports, the five most commonly reported activities were
basic counselling for individuals (39%); facilitation of community
support of vulnerable individuals (23%); provision of child-friendly
spaces (21%); support of communityinitiated social support (21%); and
basic counselling for groups and families (20%). Most interventions took
place and were funded outside national mental health and protection
systems. Two studies showed promising effects of strengthening community
and family supports. Studies on refugee children have shown that
interventions delivered within the school setting can be successful in
helping children overcome difficulties associated with forced migration
(Tyrer and Fazel, 2014), as well as specific trauma-focused
interventions (Fazel et al., 2015). With increasing appreciation of the
importance of mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS),
international guidelines have been agreed integrating key components of
mental health interventions into humanitarian assistance programmes
(Inter-Agency Standing Committee, 2007). The key factors include
preparedness steps to be taken before emergencies occur, minimum
responses to be implemented during the acute phase of the emergency, and
comprehensive responses to be implemented once the minimum responses
have been applied.

681

CHAPTER 24

Psychological treatments Introduction 681

Individual dynamic psychotherapies 697

How psychological treatments developed 682

Treatment in groups 700

Classification of psychological treatments 683

Psychotherapy with couples and families 703

Common factors in psychological treatment 684

Psychotherapy for children 704

Counselling and crisis intervention 685

Psychotherapy for older people 705

Supportive psychotherapy 686

Treatments of mainly historical and cultural

Interpersonal psychotherapy 687 Cognitive behaviour therapy 688

interest 706 Ethical problems in psychological treatment 707

Introduction This chapter is concerned with various kinds of
counselling, psychotherapy, behavioural and cognitive therapies, and
some related techniques. The UK is almost unique in having a separate
faculty and specialist training in psychotherapy for psychiatrists. In
most countries, psychotherapy is considered a core aspect of a
psychiatrist's role, fundamental to their professional identity. It is
no longer routine for trainee psychiatrists to be trained fully in one
or other form of psychotherapy, but rather they gain an overview. It
will be obvious, however, that much of what follows below is inevitably
woven into the daily practice of psychiatry. Expectations of this
competence are likely to vary in the near future, but it is unlikely to
disappear. The subject is large, and some basic principles underly this
chapter. â

Psychological treatment is not given in isolation, and this chapter
complements the chapters on physical treatment and services.

â

This chapter focuses on the general nature of the treatments; their use
in specific disorders is covered in the relevant chapters.

â

Psychological treatments are often combined with medication, considered
in more detail with the relevant disorders.

â

Many different techniques are considered here, so one will be described
in detail.

â

Supervised experience is essential before any of these treatments can be
used with patients.

Terminology. The word psychotherapy is used in two ways. It can denote
all forms of psychological treatment, including counselling and
cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT). More traditionally it indicates
established psychotherapies (usually broadly psychodynamic) that require
a specific and elaborate training. These usually involve personal
therapy, and exclude counselling and CBT. Psychological treatment is
used for the broader sense and psychotherapy is used more precisely; for
example, 'brief dynamic psychotherapy'.

682

682

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments

How psychological treatments developed The use of psychological healing
is as old as the practice of medicine---parallels have been drawn with
the ceremonial healing in temples in ancient Greece. In psychiatry,
psychological treatment evolved towards the end of the eighteenth
century with developments in hypnosis. Anton Mesmer (1734--1815),
physician, challenged the prevailing practice of 'casting out devils' in
1775. He proposed that the body could be influenced by magnetism,
initially actual magnets, but more importantly the therapist's force of
personality or 'animal magnetism' (Burns, 2013). 'Mesmerism' was renamed
hypnosis by a Manchester doctor, James Braid, who believed it was
related to sleep (Braid, 1843). Treatment with hypnosis was revived in
France by the eminent neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot (1825-- 1893). He
treated many patients suffering from hysteria and recognized that it
worked by suggestion. Freud visited Charcot to study hypnosis, and used
it with his patients back in Vienna. He used hypnosis not to modify
symptoms directly, but to release the emotions associated with repressed
conflicts that he believed to be their cause. Freud's revolutionary
advance was his recognition that patients could recall forgotten events
and conflicts without hypnosis. Recall was achieved by the patient lying
on a couch and being encouraged to let their mind wander with the
therapist out of sight--- 'free association'. In time he attended to the
intensity of the relationship with his patients---'transference'. These
discoveries formed the basic technique of psychoanalysis and
subsequently of the larger group of dynamic psychotherapies. Freud
published vivid accounts of his new treatment and elaborated his
increasingly complex theories, collecting a group of followers. Some of
these later broke away, forming their own 'schools' of dynamic
psychotherapy. These developments will be described briefly. More
detailed descriptions are widely available, and for a brief overview see
Burns (2006) and Burns and Lundgren (2015).

Early departures from Freud's original group Alfred Adler left Freud's
group in 1910; he stressed social factors in personal development and
rejected the libido theory. He also stressed social factors in personal
development, introducing the term 'inferiority complex'. His 'individual
analysis' focused on current problems and

solutions, and was highly influential with American analysts. Carl Jung
emphasized the inner world of fantasy, and the interpretation of
unconscious material, deduced from dreams, paintings, and other artistic
productions. Jung believed that part of the content of the unconscious
mind was common to all people (the 'collective unconscious') and was
expressed in universal images which he called archetypes. The Jungian
relationship between therapist and patient is more equal, and the
therapist is more active and reveals more about himself (Storr, 2000).
The neo-Freudians formed in the USA in the 1930s from predominantly
Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany. While they accepted that the origins
of neurosis were in childhood, they rejected Freud's emphasis on early
infantile sexuality and considered family and social factors more
important. Melanie Klein in London adapted psychoanalytical techniques
for use with very young children. She interpreted their play and
originated the 'object relations' school of psychoanalysis. 'Object' is
a confusing term here as it refers both to people (e.g.Â the mother), to
parts of that person (e.g.Â the mother's breast), and, most importantly,
to their internal psychological representation. Klein's language is
excessively dramatic, emphasizing strong instinctual feelings of love
and hate. She described emotional development, moving through a
'paranoid-schizoid position' to the 'depressive position'. Klein has
been widely influential, particularly for therapists working with
severely ill patients (see Segal, 1963). Attachment theory originated in
the work of John Bowlby, a British analyst. The theory is that infants
need a secure relationship with their parents in reality---not just in
fantasy. Insecure attachments can lead to difficulty in establishing
relationships, and emotional problems later. Bowlby's ideas had a
considerable effect on the care of children, such as the need to
maintain contact with the parents when a child is admitted to hospital.
For a review of the historical development of attachment theory, see
Holmes (2000). Brief psychodynamic psychotherapy. Ferenczi saw the need
to develop treatments shorter than psychoanalysis. He did this by
setting time limits, making the role of the therapist less passive, and
planning the main themes of treatment. These innovations have found
their way into the brief dynamic psychotherapy that is used today.

683

Classification of psychological treatments The trend has continued
towards briefer treatment that attends more to the patient's current
problems than to those in the past. Interpersonal therapy (see page
687), directed to current interpersonal problems in depressed patients,
and cognitive analytic therapy (see page 698), using cognitive therapy
techniques within a framework of psychodynamic understanding, are two
current forms.

The development of cognitive behaviour therapy Behaviour therapy.
Interest in a treatment based on scientific psychology arose in the
early twentieth century. Watson and Rayner (1920) in the USA used
learning principles in the treatment of children's fears, and aversion
therapy for alcoholism. Maudsley psychologists in the 1930s used
learning principles in treatments for phobic disorders. Joseph Wolpe in
South Africa published Psychotherapy by Reciprocal Inhibition (Wolpe,
1958), describing a treatment for neurotic disorders, based on learning
theory and making use of relaxation. In the USA, Skinner (1953) proposed
operant conditioning in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. Wolpe's
ideas were adopted in the UK, and Skinner's ideas were

initially more influential in the USA. These approaches converged, and
practice in the two countries is now similar. There has always been an
emphasis on evaluation for these new methods. The first clinical trial
was reported in 1978 (Gelder et al., 1978), followed by several trials
establishing a strong evidence base for behavioural methods. Cognitive
therapy began with the work of A. T. Beck, a US psychiatrist who was
dissatisfied with psychoanalytical psychotherapy for depressive
disorders. Beck noted recurring themes in the thinking of depressed
patients, and he concluded that these themes were an essential part of
the disorder and had to be changed by challenging them in specific ways
(see Box 24.8.). US psychologists were also dissatisfied with operant
conditioning and its 'black-box' approach. They proposed that the
recurrent thoughts played a part in maintaining distress, with
suggestions of how these thoughts might be controlled (Meichenbaum,
1977). Cognitive behaviour therapy. These cognitive approaches were
integrated with behaviour therapy to produce CBT. The strong evidence
base, clearly described procedures, and relatively brief treatment time
of CBTs have made them the preferred psychological treatment for many
disorders.

Classification of psychological treatments Several simple
classifications of psychological treatments have been proposed. Two are
given here, with a further classification given below, with hints to
identify their use in most healthcare systems. 1. Classification by
technique: â

Eclectic

â

Psychodynamic

â

Cognitive behavioural

â

Other (e.g.Â systems theory).

2.  Classification by number of patients taking part: â

Individual therapy

â

Couple therapy

â

Family therapy

â

Small and large group therapy

These two classifications can be combined---for example, individual
cognitive behavioural or psychodynamic group therapy.

Psychotherapy in public services Psychological treatment is the
principal treatment for some psychiatric disorders, alone or with
medication. Counselling, crisis intervention, and CBTs are used in this
way when they have been shown to be effective in clinical trials.
Dynamic psychotherapy, because there is limited evidence of its efficacy
and because training is long and expensive, is less available. This is
especially so of long-term psychodynamic therapy. 'Subthreshold'
conditions are now generally offered counselling, and psychodynamic
treatment for them now occurs mainly in private practice. Planning their
uses within a public health service has generated a third
classification: A Simple psychological aspects of all health care. This
refers to skills and techniques to help individuals to adjust to
stressful situations or confront difficult decisions. These are often
considered aspects of a good doctor-- patient relationship.

683

684

684

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments B Moderately complex and provided by
most mental health professionals. This includes simpler CBT and brief
dynamic psychotherapies. These treatments are usually an identified part
of the management plan that includes medication and social measures.

C Highly complex and provided by formally trained therapists. This group
includes the more complex psychodynamic and CBTs. These are used to
treat more severe or complex disorders, alone or as part of a wider plan
of management.

Common factors in psychological treatment Different psychological
treatment methods achieve results that are broadly equal and are greater
than placebo. The features that psychotherapies share may be more
important than their differences. Jerome Frank (1967) identified them
and they are listed in Box 24.1.

Transference and countertransference Therapeutic relationships are
inevitably emotional but they can sometimes become very intense. These
powerful emotions were labelled 'transference' and 'countertransference'
by Freud because he believed their force derived from earlier, key
relationships that had been 'transferred' to them. Transference and
countertransference features mark all psychological treatments, and
therapists overlook them at their peril.

Transference often becomes increasingly intense as treatment progresses,
and is especially strong when patients reveal intimate personal
problems. Transference can be positive, with warm feelings, or negative,
with critical or hostile feelings. What is characteristic of them is
their excess. Initially considered an impediment, transference, and its
resolution, is now seen as an essential part of successful treatment.
Countertransference refers to intense feelings in the therapist towards
the patient. Analysts debate whether the term countertransference should
be restricted to 'neurotic' or distorted responses, or whether it can
include all emotional responses. Transference problems may arise from
excessive dependency on or idealization of the therapist and make it
difficult to end treatment, with a resurgence of symptoms. However,
dependency is a normal feature of much therapy and does not necessarily
cause difficulties.

Box 24.1 Common factors in psychotherapy The therapeutic relationship.
The most important of the common factors in psychotherapy but can become
too intense.

of poor concentration. Information should be as simple as possible,
expressed clearly, repeated, and perhaps written down.

Listening. Listening attentively shows concern for the patient's
problems and develops the helping relationship in which the patient
feels understood.

Providing a rationale. All psychotherapies provide some explanation for
the current problem, which improves the patient's confidence. It may be
by direct explanation (as in short-term psychotherapy), or fostered
indirectly (as in much long-term psychotherapy).

Release of emotion. Helpful early in treatment, but repeated release is
seldom useful. Intense and rapid emotional release is called abreaction.
Restoration of morale. Many patients have suffered repeated failures,
and may feel helpless. Improved morale enables the patient to begin to
help himself or herself. Providing information. Patients may remember
little of what they have been told about their condition because

Advice and guidance. These are part of all psychotherapy, whether direct
as in brief therapies or indirect as in long-term therapies. Suggestion.
All psychological treatment contains an element of suggestion, which is
powerful during the early stages.

685

Counselling and crisis intervention

Counselling and crisis intervention Counselling There is no distinct
boundary between psychotherapy and counselling. Broadly speaking,
counselling is less formal and less extensive (fewer sessions) than
psychotherapy. Counsellors have shorter training than psychotherapists
and are more open and equal in their relationships. Often counselling is
focused on a specific problem (bereavement, drug abuse) rather than an
attempt to permanently alter personality or uncover obscure conflicts.
Counselling is more widespread than formal psychotherapy, and
counselling skills are a valued part of the professional identity of
nurses and social workers. It is widely provided by voluntary bodies,
often by unpaid staff. These voluntary bodies, such as the Samaritans,
Cruise, and Relate in the UK, maintain a high profile and are easily
accessible. Counselling incorporates the non-specific factors shared by
psychotherapies (see Box 24.1). The relationship between the counsellor
and the person who is being counselled is believed to be the primary
therapeutic agent in all counselling, but the relative importance of
giving information, allowing the release of emotion, and exploring the
situation, vary. Counselling developed from Carl Rogers' client-centred
approach. In this the counsellor largely restricts his interventions to
helping the client understand their feelings better by reflections back
to the emotional content of the client's utterances, often simply
repeating the last statement with an interrogative tone. They rarely
seek clarification of facts nor offer explanations. The approach is
optimistic in tone and actively encouraging but focused on increasing
selfawareness, 'That seems to make you angry' (reflection of feelings)
or 'You were disappointed' (repeating for clarification the last
statement). Rogerian, or client-centred, counselling is widely available
in primary care and voluntary agencies but has been largely replaced in
secondary mental health care by the more structured and focused
procedures.

Approaches to counselling Problem-solving counselling is highly
structured, particularly suitable for problems related to stressful
circumstances or when life problems are exacerbating or maintaining
other disorders. Basic counselling is combined with a systematic
approach to the resolution of problems. The patient is helped to:

â

identify and list problems causing distress

â

consider courses of action to solve or reduce problems

â

select a problem and course of action that appear feasible and likely to
succeed

â

review the results and select another problem if successful, or another
course of action if not.

Interpersonal counselling was developed by Klerman et al. (1987) from
interpersonal therapy (described on page 687), and has many similarities
to the problem-solving approach. Attention is focused on current
problems in personal relationships within the family, at work, and
elsewhere. These problems are considered under four headings---loss,
interpersonal disputes, role transitions, and interpersonal deficits.
Using a problem-solving approach, the therapist encourages patients to
consider alternative ways of coping with these difficulties, and to try
these out between sessions. For a review see Blanco et al.Â (2009).
Psychodynamic counselling places more emphasis on unconscious processes
by which previous relationships influence current feelings and
relationships. The patient's emotional reactions (transference) are used
to understand problems in other relationships. Its developmental
approach fits well in student health centres.

Counselling for specific purposes Debriefing Debriefing for survivors of
disasters has become a worldwide phenomenon. Surviors are encouraged to
recall the distressing events, with emphasis on emotional release, and
responses to the immediate problems. Evidence from clinical trials is
discouraging, suggesting that this approach may prolong ruminations
(Mayou et al., 2000) and distract from essential social supports and the
traditional advice to 'get back on the horse as soon as possible'. NICE
guidance (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2013a)
specifically advises against its routine use.

Counselling for relationship problems Couples are encouraged to talk
constructively about problems in their relationship. The focus is on the
need for each partner to understand the point of view, needs, and
feelings of the other, and also to identify positive aspects of the
relationship and potential strategies to move forward. A 'safe space' to
explore can prevent a spiral down into mutual recrimination.

685

68

686

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments

Bereavement counselling Bereavement counselling draws heavily on
following the identified stages of normal grief (see page 155, Box
7.9.). It combines an opportunity for emotional release (including
anger), information about the normal course of grieving, and sensitive
encouragement about viewing the body and disposing of clothing. It also
involves advice on practical problems of living without the deceased
person.

Counselling about health risks Genetic counselling and counselling about
the risks of sexually transmitted disease are probably not counselling
as we generally understand it. These focus on giving information and
providing an opportunity for reflection. However, to be effective
counselling skills such as sensitivity and respect are essential.

Counselling in primary care In primary care, many patients are referred
to practice counsellors and IAPT (Improving Access to Psychological
Therapies) workers who have received a relatively limited training but
often have no background in health or social care professions. GP
counsellors use various methods of brief treatment, although most often
they employ non-directive Rogerian approaches, usually 4--6 sessions.
Although very popular, the effectiveness of counselling in primary care
is modest (Bower et al., 2003). IAPT workers are trained in basic CBT.

Crisis intervention Crisis intervention was originally conceived to use
the crisis as an entry to longer-term problems but now is used mainly to
cope with current crises. It originated

in dealing with disasters (Lindemann, 1944); Caplan, 1961), and draws on
Caplan's four stages of coping: 1. Emotional arousal with efforts to
solve the problem. 2. Increasing arousal leading to a disorganization of
behaviour. 3. Trials of alternative ways of coping. 4. Exhaustion and
decompensation. Crisis intervention seeks to limit the reaction to the
first stage, or to avoid the fourth stage.

Problems leading to crisis Common problems include: â

Loss and separation, such as bereavement or divorce, but also during
severe illness.

â

Role changes, such as marriage, parenthood, or even a new job.

â

Relationship problems, such as those between sexual partners, or between
parent and child.

â

Conflicts, arising from pressing but impossible choices.

Crisis intervention methods The methods used in crisis intervention (see
Box 24.2) resemble interpersonal counselling and problem-solving
counselling, but with a greater emphasis on reducing arousal. Treatment
starts as soon as possible after the crisis and consists of a few
sessions over a period of days or, at most, a few weeks. The focus is on
current problems, although relevant past events can be considered. High
levels of emotional arousal interfere with problem-solving, and the
first aim of treatment is to reduce arousal. Reassurance and ventilation
of emotions are usually effective, but anxiolytic medication is often
used.

Supportive psychotherapy Supportive psychotherapy is one of the most
difficult but also one of the most important skills that any
psychiatrist must acquire. It is used to help a person to cope with
enduring difficulties such as chronic mental or physical illness, and in
the care of the dying (page 152). Supportive therapy is based on the
common factors of psychological treatment (see Box 24.1). Its basic
elements, listed in Box 24.3, are: â

The therapeutic relationship. A trusting and supportive relationship is
central in sustaining patients with

long-term difficulties. The most common anxiety voiced by staff is the
risk of excessive dependence. An effective relationship is most often
achieved by an acceptance of the realistic need for dependence. After
all, the patient is seeing you because they 'need' you. We, after all,
have achieved our independence through the successful resolution of our
own dependence. â

Listening. As in all forms of psychological treatment, the patient must
feel that they have their doctor's full attention and sympathy while he
is with them, and that their concerns are being taken seriously.

678

Interpersonal psychotherapy during the first session. Indeed, the
patient may need to receive information gradually, giving time to absorb
it. Most patients indicate, directly or indirectly, how much detail they
wish.

Box 24.2 Crisis intervention Treatment is immediate, brief, and
collaborative

Stage 1

â

Emotional release and its acceptance can be helpful.

â

Encouraging hope is important, but unrealistic reassurance can destroy
trust. Reassurance should always be specific, offered only when the
patient's concerns have been fully understood. A positive approach
builds on encouraging the patient to exploit their assets and
opportunities.

â

Persuasion. Doctors can use their powers of persuasion to help patients
to take difficult but necessary decisions and actions.

Reduce arousal Focus on current problems Encourage self-help

Stage 2 Assess problems Consider solutions Test solutions

Stage 3 Consider future coping methods

â

Information and advice are important, but their timing should be
considered carefully. Information should be accurate, but it is not
necessary to explain everything

Self-help groups can give valuable support to some patients and to
relatives, more effective because it comes from others who have
struggled with the same problems. Support groups vary enormously, and it
is important have some familiarity with a particular group before
recommending it. For an account of supportive treatment, see Bloch
(2006).

Interpersonal psychotherapy Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) was
developed as a structured psychological treatment for the interpersonal
problems of depressed patients (Klerman et al., 1984). IPT fully
embraces the medical model, encouraging the patient to recognize that
depression is an illness and that they are suffering from it. The
treatment is highly structured. The number and content of treatment
sessions are planned carefully. The initial

Box 24.3 Basic procedures of supportive treatment Develop a therapeutic
relationship Listen to the patient's concerns Inform, explain, and
advise Allow the expression of emotion Encourage hope Review and develop
assets Encourage self-help

assessment period lasts from one to three sessions. Interpersonal
problems are considered under the following four headings: 1.
bereavement and other loss 2. role disputes 3. role transitions 4.
'interpersonal deficits' such as loneliness. Each problem is considered
using specific situations, and alternative ways of coping are evaluated.
Clear goals are set and progress towards them is monitored, with new
coping strategies tried out in homework assignments. In the middle phase
of treatment, specific methods are used for each of the four kinds of
problem listed above. For grief and loss, the methods resemble grief
counselling (page 156). For interpersonal disputes and role transitions,
patients are helped to identify clearly the issues in the dispute, as
well as any differences between their own values and those of the
relevant others. They are helped to recognize their own contributions to
problems that they ascribe

687

68

688

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments to that person. Interpersonal
deficits are addressed by analysing present relationship problems and
previous attempts to overcome them, and then discussing alternatives. In
the final two or three sessions, future problems are anticipated and
considered.

Several clinical trials have shown that IPT is effective for depressive
disorders in adults and adolescents (Mufson et al., 2004), dysthymia
(Markowitz, 2003), and bulimia nervosa. For an account of IPT, see
Blanco et al. (2009).

Cognitive behaviour therapy All psychiatric disorders have cognitive and
behavioural components, and both have to change if the patient is to
recover. With other treatments, change comes about indirectly---for
example, as mood improves with antidepressant therapy, or as conflicts
become resolved with psychotherapy. CBT aims to change cognitions and
behaviour directly. Unlike dynamic psychotherapy, it is not concerned
with the origins of the disorder, but what is maintaining it now.
Behaviour therapy focuses on what provokes symptoms or abnormal
behaviour. Avoidance is particularly important in phobic and anxiety
disorders, as it prevents the normal extinction of the anxiety response.
Many behaviours are maintained by their consequences. For example, the
reduction in anxiety following escape from stressful situations
reinforces the phobic avoidance. Reinforcement also entrenches symptoms,
such as when parents pay more attention to a child's noisy and unruly
behaviour. Cognitive therapy generally focuses on two kinds of abnormal
thinking---automatic thoughts and dysfunctional beliefs and attitudes.
Automatic thoughts are often stereotyped and exaggerated responses to
stressors such as 'everybody despises me' after mild criticism. They
provoke an immediate emotional reaction, usually of anxiety or
depression, and undermine self-esteem. Dysfunctional beliefs and
attitudes determine the way in which situations are perceived and
interpreted. Three factors are thought to maintain dysfunctional beliefs
and attitudes. 1. Attending selectively to evidence that confirms them,
and ignoring or discounting evidence that contradicts them. For example,
patients with social phobias attend more to the critical behaviour of
others than to signs of approval. 2. Thinking illogically in stereotyped
ways (Box 24.4). 3. Safety-seeking behaviour, believed to reduce an
immediate threat, but perpetuates the fear.

General features of cognitive behaviour therapy Core features of CBT. â

The patient is an active partner. The patient takes an active part in
treatment, with the therapist acting as an expert adviser who asks
questions, and offers information and guidance.

â

Socratic questioning. Automatic thoughts are challenged by questioning
them---are there other ways of understanding what is happening? What are
the implications of thinking this way?

â

Attention to provoking and maintaining factors. The patient keeps daily
records to identify factors that precede or follow the disorder and
which may be provoking or maintaining it. This kind of assessment is
sometimes called the ABC approach, the initials referring to
Antecedents, Behaviour, and Consequences.

â

Attention to ways of thinking, revealed by recording thoughts associated
with the behavioural or emotional disturbances.

Box 24.4 Examples of illogical thinking Overgeneralization. Drawing
general conclusions from single instances (e.g.Â 'He does not love me, so
no one will ever love me'). Selective abstraction. Focusing on a single
unfavourable aspect of a situation and ignoring favourable aspects.
Personalization. Blaming themselves for the actions of other people.
All-or-nothing thinking. Viewing people or situations as
'black-and-white'.

689

Cognitive behaviour therapy â

â

Treatment as investigation ('collaborative empiricism'). Therapeutic
procedures are usually presented as experiments which, even if they
fail, help reveal more about the condition. Homework assignments and
behavioural experiments. Patients practise new behaviours between
sessions with the therapist, or carry out experiments to test
explanations suggested by the therapist (Box 24.5).

â

Highly structured sessions. At each session, an agenda is agreed, and
progress since the last session is reviewed, including any homework. New
topics are considered, the following week's homework is planned, and the
main points of the session are summarized.

â

Monitoring. Assessment includes checking daily records kept by the
patient, and often includes rating scales.

â

Treatment manuals describe procedures and how they are applied. Manuals
ensure that therapists stick to effective procedures.

Assessment for cognitive behaviour therapy Topics to be covered As well
as a full psychiatric history, certain additional topics are addressed
(see Box 24.6). For each of the

Box 24.5 An agoraphobic patient's record of a behavioural experiment
Situation: Shopping in a crowded supermarket. My predictions: I shall
panic and feel dizzy. Unless I tense my stomach muscles and breathe
deeply, I shall faint. Experiment: When anxious, do not tense stomach
muscles or breathe deeply. Outcome: I did panic quite badly. I felt
dizzy, but less so than usual. I did not faint. What I learned: I did
not faint despite a severe panic, and without actions to prevent
fainting. I may be wrong thinking I shall faint whenever I panic;
tensing and deep breathing may not help. My therapist could be right in
thinking that deep breathing makes me feel more dizzy. What I should do
next: Repeat the experiment next time I go shopping.

Box 24.6 Topics to be considered during assessment for cognitive
behaviour therapy 1. A description of each problem, including behaviour,
thoughts, and emotions associated with it â Where it occurs most often â
Common prior events â Response to these events â What follows the
problem 2. Factors that alleviate or worsen the problem 3. Maintaining
factors â Avoidance â Safety behaviours â Selective attention â Ways of
thinking â The responses of others

presenting problems, the therapist enquires about antecedents,
behaviour, and consequences (the ABC approach). The term 'behaviour' is
used to include thinking and emotion, as well as actions. By considering
the sequence ABC on several occasions, regular patterns of thinking and
responding are identified. The therapist focuses on the patient's
reasons for their beliefs, which is essential for planning experiences
that will change them.

Sources of information Self-monitoring: records of thoughts, behaviours,
and experiences over days or weeks, made in real time. The record sheet
usually has columns for symptoms, thoughts, emotions, and actions, plus
the day and time at which they occurred. Events immediately preceding
the problem are noted, as well as those occurring at the time and
afterwards. Observations during treatment sessions: the patient may be
asked to imagine situations in which problems arise, and to report
accompanying thoughts and emotions. Symptoms resembling the disorder may
be induced (e.g. panic-like symptoms produced by hyperventilation), and
accompanying thoughts and emotions noted. Special interviewing: some
patients need help to become aware of their maladaptive beliefs.
Laddering involves a series of questions, each about the answer to the
previous question. For example, a patient with an eating disorder might
be asked what would happen if she were to gain weight, and she answers
that she would

689

690

690

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments lose her friends. To the question
'Why?' she might reply that she would be unlikeable. To a further
question 'Why?' she might say that only thin people are attractive and
popular.

The formulation The information obtained in these various ways is
combined with the usual psychiatric history in a formulation consisting
of: â

the type of events that provoke symptoms

â

any special features of these events

â

background factors

â

maintaining factors, including avoidance, safety behaviours, and ways of
thinking.

The formulation is guided by a cognitive model of the disorder. The
therapist discusses the formulation with the patient and may build it
up, step by step, perhaps using a diagram on paper or whiteboard. The
formulation is modified in light of the discussion.

imagining the phobic situations vividly enough to induce anxiety.
Exposure can be gradual, progressing through a series of increasingly
difficult situations (desensitization), or abrupt and intensive
(flooding). In practice, exposure is usually paced between these two
extremes, preferably in practice rather than in imagination.

Desensitization In desensitization the patient is helped to: 1.
Construct a hierarchy of situations that provoke increasing degrees of
anxiety. About 10 items are chosen with an equal increment of anxiety
between them. Sometimes two or more hierarchies can be constructed if no
obvoius theme links the stressful situations. 2. Enter or imagine
entering the situations on each step of the hierarchy until achieved
without anxiety. 3. Use relaxation while entering or imagining the
situation to reduce the anxiety response, and enhance the imagery.

Flooding

Behavioural techniques There are many behavioural techniques, some for a
single disorder (such as the enuresis alarm; see page 692), and others
such as exposure that can be used for a variety of disorders. Here we
describe the more commonly used methods. Evidence for them is considered
in the relevant chapters for the particular disorders.

Relaxation training This is the simplest behavioural technique, and is
mainly useful for subthreshold states of anxiety, for stress-related
disorders such as initial insomnia (Viens et al., 2003), and for mild
hypertension (Yung and Keltner, 1996). In 'progressive relaxation',
patients are trained to relax individual muscle groups one by one, and
to regulate their breathing (Jacobson, 1938). Relaxation is used in
anxiety disorders with good effects (Ãst and Breitholtz, 2000) and can
be learned in part from pre-recorded instructions or in a group.
However, it has to be practised regularly, and many patients lack the
motivation to do this.

Exposure Exposure is used to reduce avoidance behaviour, especially in
the treatment of phobic disorders. For simple phobias it is often
sufficient to use exposure alone, but for complex phobic disorders
exposure is usually combined with cognitive procedures (page 000).
Exposure can be carried out in practice by confronting the actual
situations that provoke anxiety or in imagination by

In flooding, the patient enters the most feared situation from the
start, and remains there until the anxiety has diminished. The process
is repeated with other nearmaximal stimuli. The experience is
distressing and the results are no better than those obtained with
desensitization, so flooding is seldom used.

Exposure in routine practice Sessions last for about 45 minutes of
entering a feared situation every day, either alone or with a relative
or friend. Usually anxiety diminishes with each exposure. Sometimes, if
the anxiety becomes overwhelming, the treatment has to restart from a
less stressful situation. Disengagement from anxiety-provoking
situations by thinking of other things is a commonly encountered
defence.

Exposure with response prevention This is a treatment for obsessional
rituals. The pressure for rituals decreases if they can be resisted for
periods of about an hour. 1. The therapist explains the rationale for
treatment and agrees targets for exposure, such as to touch a
'contaminated' object such as a door handle and not to wash their hands
for the next hour. A more advanced target might be to do all the
household cleaning without washing their hands until the task is
completed. Patients need to feel confident that every task will be
agreed in advance and that they will never be faced with the unexpected.

691

Cognitive behaviour therapy 2. The therapist may demonstrate the
necessary exposure, a procedure known as modelling.

â

identify factors that reduce restraints on anger, especially the use of
alcohol

3.  Initially the therapist accompanies and supports the patient during
    prevention, but later the patient does this on their own.

â

discover and practise alternative ways of dealing with situations that
provoke anger---for example, delaying their response until anger can be
brought under control ('count to 10').

4.  With progress the patient practises entering previously avoided
    situations that normally provoke rituals. This is called exposure.
    The obsessional thoughts that accompany rituals usually improve as
    the rituals are brought under control. Obsessional thoughts that
    occur without rituals are more difficult to treat. Habituation
    training is a form of mental exposure treatment in which patients
    dwell on the obsessional thoughts for long periods or listen
    repeatedly to a recording of the thoughts spoken aloud for an hour
    or more. Alternatively, thought stopping, is used (see distraction
    techniques on page 692).

Social skills training Some aspects of social behaviour include skills
that can be learned---for example, making eye contact, or starting a
conversation. These skills can be improved through modelling, guided
practice, role-play and video feedback. The training is mainly useful
for socially anxious people to improve self-confidence and in the
management of adolescents with autism and Asperger's syndrome. It was
also, for a time in the 1970s and 1980s, intensively pursued within
rehabilitation for people with psychoses (Leff et al., 1982). Although
it failed to deliver the expected reductions in relapse, the techniques
were adapted successfully with families to reduce high expressed
emotion.

Assertiveness training Assertiveness training is a form of social skills
training in which patients practise appropriate self-assertion. By a
combination of coaching, modelling, and role reversal, patients are
encouraged to practise appropriate verbal and non-verbal behaviour, and
to judge the level of self-assertion that is appropriate to various
situations. Assertiveness training has, surprisingly, been found helpful
not just with timid people but also with aggressive individuals, as it
teaches a more appropriate way of channelling anger.

Anger management In this form of social skills training, patients are
helped to: â

identify situations that lead to anger

â

identify attitudes that lead to anger that is out of proportion

Self-control techniques All behavioural treatments aim to increase
patients' control over their own behaviour. Self-control techniques
attempt to do this directly without the intermediate step of changing
thoughts or emotions as in cognitive therapy. Self-control techniques
are based on operant conditioning principles, and on the studies by
Bandura (1969) of the role of self-reward in social behaviour.
Overeating and excessive smoking are examples of target behaviours.
Self-control training is usually part of a wider cognitive behaviour
programme. Self-control treatment has three stages: 1. Self-monitoring.
Daily records are kept of the problem behaviour and the circumstances in
which it arises. Keeping a record enhances motivation by demonstrating
the severity of the problem. These records are subsequently used to
assess progress. 2. Self-evaluation. Achievements to be rewarded are
agreed with the patient, and progress is monitored by the patient. 3.
Self-reward. A system of reward points that can be accumulated to earn a
material reward such as a week without smoking may be rewarded by going
out for dinner.

Contingency management Contingency management, like self-control
techniques, provides rewards for desired behaviour and removes
reinforcement from undesired behaviour. However, instead of relying on
self-monitoring and selfreinforcement, in contingency management another
person monitors the behaviour and provides the reinforcers. The latter
are usually social reinforcers, such as indications of approval or
disapproval, or enjoyable activities earned by accumulating points.
Contingency management in the form of token economies was used mainly in
the treatment of children and people with learning disability in
residential settings, but is now seldom used because of its limited
effect and generalizability. More recently, direct financial rewards
have been given for changes in behaviour in various public health
initiatives (Marteau et al., 2009), including in mental health (Burton
et al., 2010). Direct payments have been

691

692

692

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments shown to increase adherence to
antipsychotic maintenance management (Priebe et al., 2013), but this
approach meets stern resistance. Contingency management involves four
stages. 1. Define and record the behaviour. The behaviour to be changed
is defined and another person (usually a nurse or a parent) is trained
to record it. 2. Identify the stimuli and reinforcements. The events
that regularly precede the behaviour are identified. Similarly, the
events that immediately follow the behaviour, reinforcers. Those
involved may be quite unaware of their role in stimulating or
reinforcing such behaviours. 3. Change the reinforcement. Reinforcement
is directed away from the problem behaviours and towards desired
behaviours. For example, parents are helped to attend less when their
child shouts and more when he is quiet---always a difficult thing to
keep up.

â

saccadic eye movements induced by asking the patient to follow rapid
side-to-side movements of the therapist's finger.

Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) remains
controversial, particularly with regard to whether the eye movements
contribute to its efficacy (Russell, 2008). A review (Silver et al.,
2008) suggests that it is effective, although the quality of the
evidence is relatively poor.

Behavioural techniques that are no longer in general use

4.  Monitor progress. Records are kept of the frequency of the problem
    and desired behaviours.

Biofeedback has not been proved to add to the effects of relaxation
alone. Aversion therapy, one of the earliest behavioural techniques, was
developed in the 1930s as a treatment for alcohol dependence. Negative
reinforcement was used to suppress unwanted behaviour. Its effects are
temporary, and it was criticized as being more of a punishment than a
treatment.

Enuresis alarms

Cognitive techniques

This behavioural treatment is based on classical conditioning and was
developed specifically for nocturnal enuresis (page 469). The original
'pad and bell' comprised two metal plates under the sheets attached to a
battery and a buzzer, activated if the child passed urine. Nowadays a
small sensor is attached to the pyjamas. The noise of the alarm wakes
the child, who must then rise to empty his bladder and, if necessary,
change the bed sheet. With repetitions the child begins to wake before
his bladder empties involuntarily.

Four methods are commonly used to bring about cognitive restructuring
(i.e.Â change in cognitions).

Complex behavioural techniques Habit reversal Habit reversal is a
complex procedure that is generally used to treat tics, Tourette's
syndrome, and stuttering. The classical treatment has five
components---training in becoming aware of the onset of the behaviour,
monitoring the behaviour, training in initiating competing responses
that are incompatible with the behaviour, relaxation, and social
support.

Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing This treatment was
developed for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). It has three
components: â

exposure using imagined scenes of the traumatic events

â

a cognitive component in which the patient attempts to replace negative
thoughts associated with the images with positive ones

1.  Distraction, or focusing attention away from distressing thoughts.
    This is done by attending to something in the immediate environment
    (e.g.Â the objects in a shop window), by engaging in a demanding
    mental activity (e.g.Â mental arithmetic), or by producing a sudden
    sensory stimulus (e.g.Â snapping a rubber band on the wrist), called
    'thought stopping.'
2.  Neutralizing. The emotional impact of anxietyprovoking thoughts can
    be reduced by rehearsing a reassuring response (e.g.Â 'My heart is
    beating fast because I feel anxious, not because I have heart
    disease'). Patients may carry a 'prompt card' on which the
    reassuring thoughts are written.
3.  Challenging beliefs. The therapist produces evidence that
    contradicts the patient's beliefs. However, such beliefs persist
    and, for these, if they are severe, CBT is indicated. CBT therapists
    do this by asking questions, as in Box 24.7, and arranging
    behavioural experiments, as in Box 24.5.
4.  Reassessing the patient's responsibility. We all overestimate our
    responsibility for events that have many determinants. Constructing
    a pie chart that shows all of the determinants can help reassess
    such responsibility. Allocating appropriately sized sectors to other
    identified factors before entering their own contribution
    demonstrates that there is less room for the patient's contribution
    than had been supposed.

693

Cognitive behaviour therapy

Box 24.7 Useful questions for challenging beliefs What is your evidence
for this belief? Is there an alternative way of looking at the
situation? How might other people think if they were in the same
situation? Are you focusing on what you felt rather than on what
happened? Are you forgetting relevant facts? Are you focusing on
irrelevant matters? Are you overestimating how likely this is? Are you
applying higher standards to yourself than you would to others? Are you
thinking in black-and-white terms when you should be considering shades
of grey? Are you overestimating your responsibility for the outcome?
What is the worst that could happen? How bad would this be? What if the
worst should happen? Could you cope? Are you underestimating what you
can do to deal with the situation? Adapted from Clark DM,
Cognitive--behaviour therapy for anxiety disorders. In: MG Gelder, NC
Andreasen, JJ LÃ³pez-Ibor Jr, Geddes JR, (eds.), The New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry, Copyright (2000), with permission from Oxford University
Press.

Cognitive behavioural treatments CBT is now the most widely used
psychological treatment internationally. It dominates UK provision for a
range of disorders---mainly anxiety and depression, but also eating
disorders, and it has even been used in psychosis. It has a coherent
theory and a set of practices based on a collaborative approach between
patient and therapist over a limited (often predetermined) number of
sessions. The approaches are succinctly explained by Westbrook et
al.Â (2011).

Treatments for anxiety disorders In anxiety disorders, cognitive
techniques are combined with exposure. The importance of exposure
relates to avoidance behaviour, more in the phobic disorders and less in
generalized anxiety disorders. Three kinds of cognition are considered
in treatment: 1. Fear of fear: general concerns about the effects of
being anxious (e.g.Â losing control).

2.  Fear of symptoms: concerns about specific symptoms (e.g.Â fears that
    palpitations are a sign of heart disease).
3.  Fear of negative evaluation: concerns that other people will react
    unfavourably to the patient. The balance of these cognitions varies
    in different anxiety disorders. In generalized anxiety disorder,
    fear of fear and general worry predominate (page 167). In social
    phobia, fears of negative evaluation are particularly important, as
    are concerns about blushing and trembling. In agoraphobia, fear of
    fear (especially thoughts that the person will faint, die, or lose
    control) and fears about the symptoms of a panic attack are central.
    Treatment involves the techniques outlined above---giving
    information, questioning the logical basis of the fears, and
    arranging behavioural experiments. Information about the physiology
    of anxiety helps patients to attribute symptoms such as dizziness
    and palpitations correctly, instead of to physical illness, often
    heart disease. The illogical basis of the fears is discovered by
    questioning the patient's own evidence for the beliefs. Behavioural
    experiments are devised to test the patient's beliefs and the
    alternative explanation suggested by the therapist. Anxiety
    management is a general treatment for anxiety disorders. It has six
    stages:
4.  Assessment. The patient keeps a diary record of: â

the frequency and severity of symptoms

â

the situations in which they occur

â

avoidance behaviour.

2.  Information about the physiology of anxiety and any other matters
    that will correct misconceptions.
3.  Explanation of the various vicious circles of anxiety.
4.  Relaxation training as a means of controlling anxiety.
5.  Exposure to situations that provoke anxiety.
6.  Distraction to reduce the impact of anxiety-provoking thoughts.
    Treatment for panic disorder is focused on the belief that physical
    symptoms of anxiety are evidence of a serious physical condition,
    usually heart disease. These beliefs create a vicious circle in
    which anxiety symptoms such as tachycardia generate additional
    anxiety, and this further increases the physical symptoms. Treatment
    consists of:
7.  Explanation of how physical symptoms are part of the normal response
    to stress, and how fear of these symptoms sets up a vicious circle
    of anxiety.
8.  Record keeping. Patients record the anxious cognitions that precede
    and accompany their panic attacks.

693

694

694

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments 3. Demonstration. The therapist
demonstrates that: â physical symptoms can provoke anxious thoughts
(e.g.Â by asking the patient to induce such symptoms by over-breathing or
strenuous exercise and noting the accompanying thoughts and fears) â
these thoughts can induce anxiety (e.g.Â by asking the patient to focus
their mind on the cognitions and observe the effect).

This demonstration that physical symptoms lead to anxious thoughts,
which in turn lead to anxiety, helps to validate the vicious circle
account of the aetiology of panic attacks. 4. Safety-seeking behaviours.
Attention is given to safety behaviours, and to any dysfunctional
beliefs that make ordinary situations stressful. 5. Behavioural
experiments to test the patient's ideas against those proposed by the
therapist. 6. Cognitive restructuring follows the observation that
symptom changes affect the severity of the panic attacks. Repeating the
sequence gradually leads to control of the panic attacks. Treatment for
PTSD includes attention to the characteristic intrusive visual images in
the condition. Patients repeatedly imagine the situations depicted in
these images, as they would do in systematic desensitization. They try
to change the content in small steps to images that are less
distressing. Research into the use of imagery in CBT and in
desensitization has become a focus for several treatment initiatives in
PTSD and beyond (Hackmann et al., 2011). Patients are also helped to
integrate and process the fragmentary and distressing recollections of
the traumatic events. (Treatment for PTSD is considered further on page
147.) Overall, CBT is the psychological treatment of choice for anxiety
disorders (Olatunji et al., 2010). For a review of the current status
and practice, see Clark and Beck (2011).

1.  Patients identify intrusive thoughts (e.g.Â 'I am a failure') by
    writing down their thoughts when their mood is low.
2.  Therapists uncover dysfunctional beliefs and assumptions by asking
    questions such as those shown in Box 24.7. A typical belief of a
    depressed patient is 'Unless I always try to please other people,
    they will not like me.'
3.  Patients record their activities and identify if it was pleasurable
    and if it was accompanied by a sense of mastery and achievement. If
    the patient is severely depressed, the monitoring of thoughts is
    deferred and attention is focused on activities. The resulting
    'activity schedule' is used to encourage activities that have been
    identified as leading to pleasure and mastery. The schedule also
    helps to bring a sense of order and purpose. At this stage the
    therapist helps the patient to reduce the need to make decisions,
    which are difficult for someone who is severely depressed. If the
    patient is less severely depressed, treatment begins with an
    explanation of the cognitive model of depression, and an attempt is
    made to reduce intrusive thoughts. This is done through distraction
    and by rehearsing reassuring alternatives (e.g.Â 'Even though I think
    my work is bad, my boss praised me yesterday'). To help the patient
    to concentrate on the positive statement, the alternative can be
    written on a prompt card. As treatment proceeds, more time is spent
    in challenging depressive cognitions using the techniques outlined
    in Box 24.8 combined with behavioural experiments. The following
    points are important in relation to cognitive therapy for
    depression. â

Reviewing evidence. Depressed patients are particularly prone to focus
on evidence that supports their negative ideas, and to overlook evidence
that contradicts them. The therapist should help the patient to give
appropriate weight to the positive evidence.

â

Considering alternatives. Depressed patients often reject positive
alternatives to their thoughts and beliefs. The therapist can help the
patient to consider alternatives by asking questions such as 'What do
you think that another person would think about this situation?' or
'What would you think if another person had done what you have done?'
(For additional questions, see Box 24.8.) Behavioural experiments are
used to challenge beliefs and assumptions.

â

Considering consequences. Patients should be helped to see the
consequences of thinking negative thoughts. For example, the thought
that everything

Cognitive behaviour therapy for depressive disorders Cognitive therapy
for depressive disorders was developed by A. T. Beck (1976). It is a
complex procedure intended to alter three aspects of the thinking of
depressed patients---negative intrusive thoughts, beliefs and
assumptions that render ordinary situations stressful, and errors of
logic that allow these beliefs and assumptions to persist despite
evidence to the contrary. Monitoring is of three kinds.

695

Cognitive behaviour therapy

Box 24.8 Logical errors in depressive disorders Exaggeration: magnifying
small mistakes and thinking of them as major failures. Catastrophizing:
expecting serious consequences from minor problems (e.g.Â thinking that a
relative who is late home has been involved in an accident).
Overgeneralizing: thinking that the bad outcome of one event will be
repeated in every similar event in future (e.g.Â that having lost one
partner, the person will never find a lasting relationship). Ignoring
the positive: dwelling on personal shortcomings or on the unfavourable
aspects of a situation while overlooking the favourable aspects.

is hopeless may prevent them from attempting even small changes that
could accumulate beneficially. â

Considering errors of logic (Box 24.8). The patient should be helped to
ask questions such as 'Am I thinking in black-and-white terms?', 'Am I
drawing too wide conclusions from this single event?', 'Am I blaming
myself for something for which I am not responsible?', or 'Am I
exaggerating the importance of events?' These questions are asked in
relation to specific ideas, beliefs, and situations.

â

Considering beliefs. As depression improves, more attention is given to
the patient's beliefs, as abnormal beliefs can lead to relapse.
Laddering (page 689) can uncover such beliefs. Useful questions include
'In what ways is this idea helpful?', 'In what ways is it unhelpful?'
and 'What alternatives are there?'

â

'Mindfulness.' People who are prone to depression may have a cognitive
set in which thoughts and feelings are experienced as events rather than
as aspects of the self. Modifying this set reduces the risk of relapse.
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) is an 8-week programme
conducted in groups of 8--15 patients (Segal et al., 2012), designed to
modify these cognitive routines and reduce the risk of relapse. MBCT in
addition to standard care significantly reduces the relapse rate in
patients suffering from recurrent major depression (Chiesa and Serretti,
2010), and is recommended by the National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence (2009a). The contribution of the specific
'mindfulness' component of treatment is unclear.

Cognitive behaviour therapy for bulimia nervosa Currently CBT therapists
emphasize the applicability of their approach for all eating disorders
and believe the strict distinction between bulimia nervosa and anorexia
nervosa is unhelpful and the same approach (CBT-E) should be applied.
Evidence for effectiveness is strong for bulimia nervosa but weaker for
anorexia nervosa. See Chapter 13 for review of the evidence for, and
contemporary approaches to, psychological treatment for eating
disorders. The treatment of bulimia nervosa with CBT is based on the
idea that the central problems are excessive concern about shape and
weight, and low self-esteem. This leads to extreme dieting, followed by
binge eating and often by self-induced vomiting and abuse of laxatives
and diuretics. This vicious circle can be interrupted by: â

restoring a regular pattern of eating three meals a day

â

increasing restraint on binge eating

â

discussing ideas about shape, weight, and self-esteem.

The therapist attends first to the disordered pattern of eating before
attempting to modify cognitions. He explains the cognitive model and
relates it to the patient's experience. He emphasizes the importance of
regular meals, the causal role of long periods of fasting, and the
adverse effects of repeated vomiting, and of repeatedly taking laxatives
and diuretics. The patient keeps a record of what they eat, when they
eat, and when they induce vomiting or take laxatives and diuretics. The
situations that provoke binge eating are recorded. With this
information, the patient is better able to control the urge to overeat
and, subsequently, the bouts of vomiting. The patient takes a number of
precautions to help them to control their eating: â

Meals are eaten in a place separate from that in which food is prepared
or stored.

â

A limited amount of food is available at each meal--- for example, two
slices of bread are put on the table, rather than a whole loaf.

â

A small amount of food is left on the plate and then thrown away, to
mark the end of the meal.

â

When shopping for food, a list is made in advance and purchases are
strictly limited to the items and quantities on the list.

The therapist strongly discourages frequent checking of weight and of
appearance, as both habits maintain the disorder. Because patients often
binge when they are unhappy, lonely, or bored, they are helped to find
other ways of

695

69

696

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments dealing with unpleasant emotions.
For example, they might seek out friends, listen to music, or simply go
out for a walk. Vomiting usually stops when the binges are under
control. The dangers of abuse of laxatives and diuretics are emphasized
once more, and the patient is strongly encouraged to dispose of all such
drugs safely. When eating is under better control, attention turns to
cognitions. The patient records these together with the eating
behaviour. Relevant cognitions are concerned not only with body shape
and weight, but also with self-esteem. Examples of these cognitions
include the following:

Box 24.9 Self-help for bulimia nervosa Monitoring â â

A daily record of eating, binges, and vomiting Weighing no more than
once a week

Regular planned meals â

Three normal-sized meals a day Three small between-meal snacks

â

to be fat is to be a failure

â

â

dieting is a sign of strong will and self-control

Stop binges

â

it is necessary to be thin if one is to be happy and successful.

Such beliefs persist because of the illogical ways of thinking (see Box
24.4). Identifying these illogical ways of thinking is not to deny that
many of them receive strong social endorsement. The fact that many
people agree with such cognitions does not mean that the thinking is not
wrong. The questioning used to identify cognitions and illogical
thinking resembles that described in Box 24.7. Treatment also exists in
a self-help format that can be effective with well-motivated patients
(Box 24.9).

Control vomiting â

Urge to vomit declines as binges stop

Control purging â

Reduce laxatives/diuretics, if necessary, in stages

Find alternatives to binge eating â

List distracting activities Try them

Reduce life problems

The approach is twofold---first, to identify behaviours that maintain
the disorder and, second, to change hypochondriacal ideas directly. The
relevant behaviours include: â

repeatedly seeking reassurance, which relieves anxiety briefly but
reinforces the concerns in the longer term

â

checking bodily pulse rate)

â

checking bodily structure (e.g.Â palpating for lumps).

(e.g.

â

â

Cognitive behaviour therapy for hypochondriasis

functions

Eat only the planned amount Keep other food out of sight â Keep limited
stocks of food â Take just enough money when buying food â

measuring

the

Hypochondriacal ideas are treated in the same way as anxiety and
depressive disorders, using questioning and behavioural experiments. CBT
has been found to be moderately helpful and MBCT has also been tested
(Williams et al., 2011).

Cognitive behaviour therapy for schizophrenia Two approaches are used.
The first aims to help the patient to reduce and cope better with
stressors that may be exacerbating the disorder, and to cope better with
hallucinations. The techniques for dealing with stressors are similar to
those described above---namely, identifying and finding ways

â

Problem-solving counselling

For further information, see Fairburn (2013).

of dealing with stressful situations. Patients are helped to cope with
hallucinations by distancing themselves and repeating statements that
neutralize their effects. The aim of the second approach is to challenge
delusions. This approach is directed to secondary delusions, especially
those that seem to have developed to explain hallucinations. The
therapist encourages the patient to regard the delusions as beliefs
rather than facts, and to discuss alternatives. To do this effectively
requires a detailed formulation of each patient's delusions and other
beliefs. When questioning the basis of the delusions, the therapist
should avoid challenging them directly. Instead, he should try to
persuade the patient to consider the consequences of holding the
delusion and what would be the consequences of thinking in another way.
The therapist then tries to reformulate the delusion as a way of making
sense of certain experiences, which can be understood in terms of the
knowledge the patient had at the time, but should now be reconsidered.

679

Individual dynamic psychotherapies Turkington et al.Â (2005) have taught
the approach to nurses with considerable success, and it is a module in
several postgraduate mental health nursing courses
(www.thorn-initiative.org.uk). CBT is included as an integral component
of treatment in current schizophrenia treatment guidelines. For details,
see Chapter 11.

Cognitive therapy for personality disorder Beck suggested that the
techniques he had developed for the treatment of depressive disorders
could be adapted for personality disorders. He described beliefs and
ways of thinking that characterize each type of personality disorder in
terms of self-view, the views of others, general beliefs, perceived
threats, main strategies for coping, and primary affective responses.
Beck also suggested a 'schema' characteristic of each type of
personality disorder and consisting of statements that can be challenged
in treatment. For example, the schema for histrionic personality
disorder includes the following statements: â

'Unless I captivate people, I am nothing'

â

'To be happy, I need other people to admire me'

â

'I must show people that they have hurt me.'

Schemas are challenged using the general techniques of cognitive therapy
(see Box 24.7). There is some weak evidence for the value of
schema-based CBT in borderline personality disorder (Blum et al., 2008)
and they are widely used in forensic settings.

Dialectic behaviour therapy for borderline personality disorder Marsha
Linehan (Linehan et al., 1994) developed this treatment for patients
with borderline personality disorder who repeatedly harmed themselves.
Despite the name, it uses cognitive as well as behavioural techniques.
The treatment is highly structured and described in a manual. Therapy is
intensive, with individual sessions, skills training in a group, and
access by telephone

to the therapist between sessions. It is delivered by a small team of
therapists and lasts for up to a year. Individual sessions have four
elements: 1. Cognitive behavioural techniques, including selfmonitoring,
and a collaborative style of working with the patient. 2. Dialectical
ways of thinking about problems, such as seeing causality in terms of
'both/and' rather than 'either/or', and the possibility of reconciling
opposites. This approach is particularly valuable to avoid unhelpful
confrontations. 3. 'Mindfulness'---the practice of detachment from
experience. 4. Aphorisms---that is, phrases that encapsulate the
approach (e.g.Â 'Although I may not have caused all my problems, I still
have to solve them'). During the sessions, treatment goals are
prioritized, dealing first with life-threatening situations, then with
matters that could reduce collaboration with treatment, and after that
with behaviours that impair quality of life. Skills training sessions
are usually provided in weekly groups lasting for 2 hours or more.
Patients learn how to control anger and other strong emotions, how to
tolerate distress, how to develop interpersonal skills, and mindfulness.
The procedures for teaching these skills are described in a manual.
Telephone contact is designed to help patients get through crises by
using the skills that have been learned in the sessions. The hours at
which contact will be available are agreed in advance between patient
and therapist. Dialectic behaviour therapy has been claimed to give good
results with borderline personality disorder, and has become widely
available, although providing the full programme can be difficult. The
beneficial effects are primarily on behaviour (i.e.Â reducing
self-harming and suicide attempts) rather than on mood and self-esteem,
and the degree of prescription in its provision may be a barrier to
better understanding of what is effective within it.

Individual dynamic psychotherapies Brief insight-oriented psychotherapy
This kind of psychotherapy seeks to uncover the origins of a psychiatric
disorder in early life experience, identifying unconscious factors that
account for

abnormal thinking, emotions, and behaviour. In its usual form, it aims
to produce change, with weekly sessions over 6--9 months. The treatment
is focused upon specific problems---hence an alternative term focal
psychotherapy. The procedures can be summarized as follows.

697

698

698

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments

Starting treatment The initial assessment is considered very important
and is not hurried. It assesses suitability for brief treatment and
selects the problems that will be the focus of treatment. This focus and
the length of treatment are agreed with the patient, and that not all
problems will be resolved is acknowledged. The therapist explains the
general aim of linking past and present behaviour patterns, and that the
therapist's role is to help the patient to find their own solutions. An
atmosphere is created in which the patient feels involved and listened
to, and one that is safe to explore ideas and fantasies that were
previously hidden.

responded to key figures in childhood. In brief therapy,
countertransference is usually taken to include all the therapist's
emotional responses to the patient. Insight into countertransference can
be difficult so therapists have their own regular supervision. Ending
treatment. The difficulty, and inevitability, of termination is
discussed from an early stage. As it approaches, the patient should have
a better understanding of their problems and be more confident about
dealing with them. Endings often involve a 'flare up' of symptoms,
allowing their understanding to be refreshed. It is common to arrange a
couple of follow-up appointments spaced over 2 or 3 months.

Subsequent sessions

Indications

In subsequent sessions the patient is encouraged to:

The indications for short-term dynamic psychotherapy are based
predominantly on clinical experience. It is chosen when the problem:

â

give specific examples of the selected problems, and consider how they
thought, felt, and acted at the time

â

talk freely about these emotionally painful subjects

â

can be conceptualized in psychodynamic terms

â

express ideas and feelings even if they seem illogical or shameful

â

is emotional or interpersonal (rather than a specific psychiatric
disorder)

â

review their own part in difficulties they usually ascribe to other
people

â

involves low self-esteem, and recurrent problems in forming intimate
relationships.

â

look for common themes in their problems and their responses

In addition, treatment is more effective when the patient:

â

consider how their present patterns of behaviour began, their original
function, and why they persist

â

has adequate social support while treatment continues

â

consider alternative ways of thinking and behaving in distressing
situations

is willing to attempt change through their own efforts

â

can look honestly at their own motives

â

is capable of ceasing self-exploration when the sessions end.

â

â

try out new responses to their emotions.

The therapist's role is to respond to the emotional as well as the
intellectual content of the patient's descriptions (e.g.Â 'It sounds as
though you felt angry when this happened'). He helps the patient to
examine feelings previously denied, and to consider past situations in
which similar feelings were experienced. Non-verbal behaviour can point
to problems that are not being expressed directly. He maintains the
agreed focus---avoiding problem areas too complex to address.
Interpretations are key features of dynamic therapy. These are
essentially hypotheses linking present to past events and behaviours.
They can include observations of defence mechanisms, such as blocks in
recall during the sessions. Transference and countertransference. The
therapist has to be alert to intense emotions arising in sessions---
transference and countertransference. Transference feelings about the
therapist are a key to how the patient

Contraindications include obsessional or hypochondriacal disorders,
severe mood disorder, psychoses, and some personality disorders,
especially those characterized by acting out. For a review of the
theories and methods of brief individual dynamic psychotherapy, see
Hobbs (2005).

Cognitive analytic therapy Cognitive analytic therapy is a brief therapy
developed by a GP, Tony Ryle. Treatment is based on a 'procedural
sequence model'. This proposes that behaviour follows a set sequence.
Procedural sequences can be faulty in three ways. â

Traps are repetitive cycles of behaviour in which the consequences of
behaviour perpetuate it. For example, depressed people think in ways
that lead to failure, making further depression more likely.

69

Individual dynamic psychotherapies â

â

Dilemmas are false choices or unduly narrowed options. For example,
people who fear angry feelings may think that the only alternative to
aggression is excessive submission. This allows others to take advantage
of them, making them even more angry. Snags are the anticipation of
highly negative consequences of actions such that the action is never
carried out and therefore never subjected to a reality check.

The theory of reciprocal roles was developed when cognitive analytic
therapy was used with borderline personality disorder patients. Ryle
proposed that people develop internalized 'templates' of social roles
which consist of a role for the self, a role for the other person, and a
paradigm of the relationship. Such roles include teacher/ pupil,
bully/victim, and abuser/abused. When one person adopts one of the
roles, the other person feels under pressure to adopt the reciprocal
role. These 'templates' can become narrow and inflexible.

Outline of the treatment Following assessment and an explanation of the
treatment, the patient is helped to construct a list of problems, moods,
and behaviours, and records them in a diary. Recurrent maladaptive
behaviours, role problems, and faulty procedural sequences are
identified and formulated, often using diagrams to explain the
procedural sequences. Specific examples of general procedures are sought
in the diaries, and homework is arranged to try out alternative
procedures---for example, asserting oneself appropriately. The origins
of maladaptive procedures are also considered from a psychodynamic
perspective--- present maladaptive behaviour may have arisen from
behaviour that was adaptive when the person was younger. The formulation
is summarized in the form of a letter to the patient. The therapist
helps the patient become aware of and change their behaviours,
procedural sequences, and role problems. Transference and
countertransference problems are anticipated, identified, and discussed.
Treatment usually lasts either 16 or 24 sessions. When it ends, the
therapist writes another letter to the patient summarizing their
progress, prognosis, and future action, and the patient is asked to
write to the therapist summarizing their experience. Patients often need
help to become aware of their problems ('develop an observing I'). This
is achieved by modelling the evaluation and analysis of problems using
diagrams. There is some early evidence of its value in young patients
and those with borderline personality disorder (Chanen et al., 2008).
For further information about cognitive analytic therapy, see Ryle and
Kerr (2016).

Long-term individual dynamic psychotherapy Long-term dynamic
psychotherapy is a general term for most individual psychotherapy that
lasts for longer than 9 months. The best known is psychoanalysis, and
most methods are derived from it. Long-term dynamic psychotherapy is
costly, and because it has not been shown to be superior to shorter
forms, it is rarely available in public health services. It is reserved
for patients judged too difficult for short-term psychotherapy and is
still used in training for psychotherapists. Long-term dynamic
psychotherapy aims to increase insight---that is 'the conscious
recognition of the role of unconscious factors on current experience and
behaviour' (Fonagy and KÃ¤chele, 2009). It also involves integrating
these insights into current functioning, called 'working through'.
Insight is achieved by bringing feelings and ideas previously outside
consciousness into conscious awareness, and then interpreting their
significance and linking past experiences to present ones. The basic
tools are free association, and examining the content of fantasies and
dreams. Analysis of transference provides further information about
unconscious processes, as does analysis of the countertransference.
Recognizing countertransference is a key goal of personal psychotherapy
during training. Resistance to accessing unconscious material takes
three forms: 1. Repression: active blocking access to unconscious
material. 2. Transference resistance: restricting the intensity of the
therapeutic relationship. 3. Negative therapeutic reactions: such as new
symptoms that retard progress. Analysis of resistance, as with analysis
of transference, can often markedly increase insight. Interpretations
are considered the hallmark of this treatment. Interpretations link
together seemingly unrelated mental phenomena and involve defences,
unconscious processes, transference, or the links between past
experience and present patterns. Transference interpretations are
particularly emphasized in long-term therapy. Long-term psychodynamic
psychotherapy also differs from brief dynamic psychotherapy in that: â

It is less structured---the patient is encouraged to talk and associate
ideas freely without a specific focus.

â

The therapist is less active and guides the patient less.

â

Patients may be seen twice a week (up to five times a week in
vanishingly rare classical analysis).

699

70

700

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments

Treatment in groups Small-group psychotherapy This is psychotherapy
carried out with a group of usually about eight patients. Small-group
psychotherapy is used most often to modify interpersonal problems, as a
form of supportive treatment, or to encourage adjustment to the effects
of physical or mental illness.

The origins of group psychotherapy Group therapy's early origins were in
American physician Joseph Pratt's supportive and educational groups for
patients with pulmonary tuberculosis (Pratt, 1908). Modern group therapy
originated in the treatment of war neuroses in the UK. Group analysis
(Foulkes and Lewis, 1944) was based on psychoanalysis with a rather
passive group leader using analytical interpretations. Bion, a Kleinian
analyst, focused specifically on the unconscious defences of the group
as a whole rather than on the problems of individual members (Bion,
1961). In the USA, so-called 'action groups' in the 1960s and early
1970s provided a more intense experience. Group techniques are legion,
but what they have in common seems more important than the differences.

Classification of small-group therapies One classification of groups is
by their goals (specific versus non-specific) and the activity of the
leader (high versus low) (Schlapobersky and Pines, 2009): 1. Specific
goals---high leader activity: such as structured alcohol and drug
programmes and CBT in groups. 2. Specific goals---low leader activity:
includes problemsolving groups. 3. Non-specific goals---high leader
activity: includes the many short-term group therapies, including
psychodrama. 4. Non-specific goals---low leader activity: includes
various psychodynamic groups.

Terminology Groups can be described in terms of their structure,
process, and content. â

Structure describes the enduring reciprocal relationships between each
member of the group and the therapist, and between the members.

â

Process describes the short-term changes in emotions, behaviours,
relationships, and other experiences of the group.

â

Content refers to the observable events in the group meetings---the
themes, responses, discussions, and silences.

Therapeutic factors in group therapy Group treatments share the
therapeutic factors common to all kinds of psychological treatment,
including restoring hope, releasing emotion, giving information,
providing a rationale, and suggestion (see Box 24.1). Group treatment
also shares additional factors, such as shared experience, support for
and from group members, socialization, imitation, and interpersonal
learning (Yalom and Leszcz, 2005), summarized in Box 24.10.

General indications for group therapy Group or individual therapy? There
is no strong evidence that the results of group therapy differ from
those of equivalent individual psychotherapy. Nor is there evidence of
differing results for forms of group therapy. Clinical experience
suggests that they are somewhat less effective than individual therapies
unless they build on shared clinical features.

What problems are suitable? Group therapy appears most appropriate for
patients whose problems are mainly in relationships. Contraindications
are similar to those for individual psychotherapy.

Types of small-group psychotherapy Supportive groups Many of the
therapeutic factors in a group (Box 24.10) work in supportive treatment.
In supportive groups, the therapist encourages self-help and ensures
that the experiences are used positively. He should also ensure that
relationships do not become too intense, protect vulnerable patients
when necessary, and ensure that each member is supported by and gives
support to other members.

Self-help ('mutual-help') groups Self-help groups are organized and led
by patients or former patients who have learned ways of overcoming

701

Treatment in groups

Box 24.10 Therapeutic factors in group therapy Universality (shared
experience). This helps the patient to realize that they are not alone
and that others have similar experiences and problems. Hearing about
others' experiences is often more convincing and helpful than
reassurance from a therapist. Altruism. Supporting others increases
self-esteem of the giver, as well as helping the receiver. Mutual
support leads to a sense of belonging to the group. Group cohesion.
Belonging to a group is especially valuable for those who have
previously felt isolated. Group cohesion sustains the group through
difficult patches. Socialization. Social skills are acquired in the
group from the comments and reactions of members in response

or adjusting to their difficulties. Group members benefit from the
opportunity to talk about their own problems and express their feelings,
and from mutual support. Group processes develop very strongly in these
groups. Some such groups, such as Alcoholics Anonymous, have strict
rules of procedure. There are countless self-help groups for people who
suffer from a wide range of different problems. These include Alcoholics
Anonymous (page 584), Weight Watchers, groups for patients with chronic
physical conditions, and groups for the bereaved (CRUSE Clubs). Few
self-help groups (now often referred to as 'mutual-help groups') have
been evaluated.

Therapeutic groups Interpersonal group therapy Interpersonal group
therapy developed in particular from the work of Yalom and Leszcz
(2005), and characterizes most group therapy. Treatment is focused on
problems in current relationships, and examines the ways in which these
problems are reflected in the group. The past is discussed only in so
far as it helps to make sense of present problems. Patients are prepared
for their experience in a group by emphasizing: â

Confidentiality: the proceedings of the group are confidential.

to one another's behaviour. Members can try out new behaviours within
the safety of the group. Imitation. This involves learning from
observing and adopting the behaviours of other group members. Patients
imitate adaptive behaviours, although there is a risk that maladaptive
behaviours can also be learnt. Interpersonal learning. This involves
learning from the interactions within the group and from practising new
ways of interacting. Interpersonal learning is an important component of
group therapy. Recapitulation of the family group. Interactions can
become over time increasingly based on past relationships between
patients and their parents and siblings. This group transference is
encouraged and used in analytical groups.

â

Reliability: members must attend regularly and on time, and not leave
early.

â

Disclosure: members are required to disclose their problems.

â

Concern: members must show concern for the problems of others.

â

Disappointment: at first members may be disappointed by the lack of
rapid change, or frustrated by the need to share the time available for
speaking.

â

Keeping apart: The group members should not meet outside the group, and
if they do so this should be reported at the next meeting.

â

Duration: the length of the group is explained (e.g.Â '10 weeks' or '2
years'), together with the need to remain until the end.

Setting up the group General considerations. About eight members are
chosen. They should have some problems in common, and no member should
have exclusive problems that set them apart from the rest. Meetings need
a room of adequate size, with the chairs in a circle so that all members
can see one another. Meetings usually last for 60--90 minutes to allow
adequate time for every member to take part; they are usually held once
a week, and generally continue for 12--18 months. Most groups are 'slow
open', with new members joining only to replace those who leave. Totally
closed groups are very difficult to maintain, and

701

702

702

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments rare outside residential settings.
Groups that accept new members frequently, known as open groups, are
usually supportive or psychoeducational. One or two therapists? Most
groups are run by one therapist, but many have cotherapists. The
advantage of having two therapists is both practical and theoretical. It
ensures continuity if one of the therapists has to be away, and it also
provides an excellent training opportunity. Theoretically it can also
help with countertransference problems. A risk is that cotherapists may
compete with or behave defensively towards one another. However, in
general if differences are discussed as they arise, they can provide
further insight into the group process and offer healthy modelling of
problem exploration and resolution.

Some problems in group therapy However skilful the therapist, certain
problems commonly arise. â

Formation of subgroups. Some members may form a coalition based on age,
social class, shared values, or other characteristics. The therapist
should discourage such groupings, encouraging the group to discuss the
reasons for their formation.

â

Members who talk too much. The therapist needs to address this at an
early stage, before the group rejects the talkative member. He may ask
the group why they allow one person to absolve the rest from the need to
speak about themselves.

â

Members who talk too little. The therapist should assist silent members
to speak and should therefore understand the reasons for silence.

â

Conflict between members. The therapist should not take sides in
conflicts but should encourage the whole group to discuss the issue in
ways that lead to understanding of its arising, perhaps a hostile
transference.

â

Avoidance of the present. Members may talk excessively about the past to
avoid present conflicts. The therapist can ask questions or use
interpretations to bring the discussion back to the present, or actively
relate it to current group process.

â

Potentially embarrassing revelations. Common sense and judgement have to
be used to protect vulnerable patients from blurting out potentially
devastating information (e.g.Â about sexual or even criminal activity)
early in the group.

Group analysis This technique has been widely used within the UK health
service. It differs from the interpersonal method described above in the
greater use of interpretations

about transference and unconscious mechanisms and in encouraging
'free-floating discussion' rather than a specific focus. Particular
attention is given to transferences to the therapist and between members
generating hypotheses about previous relationships to understand current
problems.

Encounter groups and psychodrama (action techniques) In encounter groups
the interaction between members is actively intensified to provoke
change. The encounter can be verbal, using challenging language, but it
can also include touching or hugging between the participants. Sessions
can last several hours. These groups are attractive to volatile
individuals and undoubtedly carry some risks of things getting worse.
Psychodrama groups enact events from the life of one member, in scenes
reflecting either current relationships or those of their family of
origin. Such enactments often provoke strong feelings reflecting the
problems of other group members. Members often swap roles to understand
the other person's perspective. The drama is followed by a group
discussion. Psychodrama is found useful with less educated and verbal
patients, and is favoured in some prison settings.

Ward groups Group meetings, often called 'community meetings', are part
of the daily programme of many psychiatric wards. The approach
originated in therapeutic communities. These are large groups, usually
including all of the patients in a treatment unit together with some or
all of the staff. At the simplest level, large groups allow patients to
examine and deal with the problems of living together. They can confront
individual patients about disordered or disruptive behaviour, and
provide opportunities for social learning. Care needs to be exercised to
avoid bullying, and a predominantly supportive atmosphere is needed for
these groups to work. The group is sometimes used as a kind of governing
body that formulates rules and seeks to enforce them.

Therapeutic communities In a therapeutic community, every shared
activity is viewed as a potential source of learning and change. Members
live, work, and play together, and learn about themselves through the
reactions of other members in the course of these activities. Within the
safe environment of the community, they are encouraged to experiment
with new behaviours and appreciate points of view other than their own.
Members take part in frequent group meetings. Maxwell Jones, its
founder, called it a living-learning

703

Psychotherapy with couples and families

Box 24.11 Principal features of a therapeutic community Informality.
There are few rules, and staff dress and behave informally. Mutual help.
Members support each other and help others to change. Permissiveness.
Members tolerate behaviour that they might not accept elsewhere.
Directness and honesty. Members respond directly to distortions of
reality and other kinds of self-deception. Shared decisions. Members and
staff join in the dayto-day decisions about the running of the unit, the
behaviour of its members, and often about the admission of new members.
Shared activities. Members provide some of the 'hotel' services in the
community, so that each has a job involving responsibilities to other
people.

situation (Jones, 1968), others a culture of enquiry. The underlying
principles of the regimen have been summarized as democracy, reality
confrontation, permissiveness, and communality (Rapoport, 1960). These
translate into the features shown in Box 24.11. Residential therapeutic
communities are no longer available in the NHS but the approach is still
predominant in day units and in drug rehabilitation and some offender
institutions.

Therapeutic day hospitals Therapeutic day units are increasingly
widespread for the treatment of personality disorder (Bateman and
Fonagy, 2008). They have a similar structure to therapeutic communities,
with a culture of enquiry, but emphasize 'mentalization'. They are
informed by psychoanalytical theory, but emphasize group work and a
supportive environment. Using nurse therapists, the aim is to help
patients to become aware of their strong emotions and reflect and learn
to tolerate them, rather than act them out impulsively. There is no
emphasis on understanding past experiences as long as the patient can
begin to manage their intense emotions.

Psychotherapy with couples and families Couple therapy Couple therapy is
usually proposed either because conflict in a relationship appears to be
the cause of emotional disorder in one of the partners or to save a
threatened relationship. The problem is conceived in terms of how the
couple interact, and treatment is directed to this interaction. Couples
are required themselves to identify the difficulties that they would
like to put right. Several techniques of therapy have developed, based
on psychodynamic, behavioural, and systems theory approaches, and on a
combination of techniques drawn from these latter two.

Family therapy Several, sometimes all, members of a family take part in
this treatment. Usually both parents are involved, often together with
the child whose problems have led the family to seek help. They may be
joined by other members of the extended family. The aim of treatment is
to improve family communication and functioning,

and consequently to help the identified patient. Since success depends
on the collaboration of several people, dropout rates are high. Whatever
their method, family therapists have the following goals for the family:
â

improved communication

â

improved autonomy for each member

â

improved agreement about roles

â

reduced conflict

â

reduced distress in the member who is the patient.

The systems approach is very influential, and was developed in the USA
by Salvador Minuchin, who in his structural family therapy, advocated a
practical approach to resolving problems. In Italy, the Milan school
used hypotheses about the family system to suggest ways of promoting
change. These approaches are described briefly below, together with an
eclectic approach. The reader will find more detailed accounts in the
chapter by Bloch and Harari (2009). Family therapy is used in the
treatment of some young people with anorexia nervosa after weight has
been restored by other means. Special kinds of family treatment have

703

704

704

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments been developed to reduce relapses in
schizophrenia (page 290).

Systemic family therapy Systemic family therapy is concerned with the
present functioning of the family, rather than with members' past
experiences. The therapist's task is to identify the family's unspoken
rules, their disagreements about who makes these rules, and their
distorted ways of communicating. The therapist helps the family to
understand and modify the rules, and to improve communication. The Milan
approach (Palazzoli et al., 1978) usually consists of 5--10 sessions,
spaced at intervals of 1 month or more ('long brief therapy'). Circular
questioning is often used to assess the family. In this technique, one
person is asked to comment on the relationships of others---for example,
the mother may be asked how her husband relates to their son, and others
are asked to comment on her response. The purpose is to discover and
clarify confused or conflicting views. A hypothesis is then constructed
about the family functioning and presented to the family, who are asked
to consider the hypothesis during and between sessions. The family may
be asked to try to behave in new ways. Sometimes the therapist provokes
change with paradoxical injunctions designed to provoke the family into
making changes that they cannot make in other ways. Paradoxical
injunctions are impossible or counterintuitive suggestions that force
the family to confront their hidden or unacceptable motives. A review of
10 outcome studies of Milan therapy found symptomatic improvement in
about two-thirds of patients, and improved functioning in about 50% of
the families (Carr, 1991).

Eclectic family therapy In everyday clinical work, especially with
adolescents, it is almost impossible to do without simple short-term
interventions to bring about limited changes in the family. The present
situation of the family and how the members communicate with one another
is usually the focus.

Assessment Constructing a genogram using conventional symbols (Figure
24.1) is a particularly useful step in family therapy, leading to
questions on current and past family life, and the roles of the members.
The therapist tries to answer two questions: namely how the family
functions and whether family factors are involved in the patient's
problems. Bloch and Harari (2009) have proposed a helpful framework in
which to consider these questions. 1. How does the family function? â

structure recorded in the genogram (e.g.Â single parent, a step-parent,
size and age spread of the sibship)

â

changes and events (e.g.Â births, deaths, departures, and financial
problems)

â

relationships (e.g. conflictual, etc.)

â

patterns of interaction involving two or more people (e.g.Â a child who
sides with one parent against the other).

close,

distant,

loving,

2.  Are family factors involved in the patient's problems? The family
    may be: â

reacting to the patient's problems (note that there may be other,
unrelated, problems)

â

supporting the patient

â

contributing to the patient's problems (e.g.Â the problems of a daughter
who cannot leave her lonely mother).

Intervention Specific goals for change are agreed with the members of
the family, who are asked to consider how any changes will affect
themselves and others, and what has prevented the family from making the
changes. Paradoxical injunctions may be included, but should be made
only after the most careful consideration of the range of possible
responses. The therapist should remember that interchanges in the
sessions are likely to continue when the family return home, and should
try to ensure that this does not lead to further problems.

Psychotherapy for children The kinds of psychotherapy discussed so far
do not lend themselves to the treatment of young children, who lack the
necessary verbal skills. In practice many emotional problems of younger
children are secondary to those of

their parents, and it is often appropriate to direct psychotherapy
mainly to them. Melanie Klein believed it was possible to use the
child's play as equivalent to the words of the adult in

705

Psychotherapy for older people

45 Male

Household composition

Female

39

m.  1965
n.  1980

Patient m. 1987

2

s.  1988 d.Â 1990

t.  1948

Married

7

9

Separated/divorced m. 1965 d.Â 1980

m.  1987

Relationships

Divorced and remarried

Very close/fused

Met 1979 Living together, not married

Conï¬ictual

Died 1950 Dead Estranged

50

50 m. 1948 30

27

Adopted

Close

Stillbirth

22

Children

Figure 24.1 Symbols used in the construction of a genogram. Reproduced
from Bloch and Harari, Family Therapy in the Adult Psychiatric Setting.
In: MG Gelder, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJ Jr, Geddes JR (eds), The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, Copyright (2009), with permission from
Oxford University Press.

psychotherapy. Anna Freud developed child psychotherapy by a less
extreme adaptation of her father's techniques to the needs of the child.
She accepted that non-analytical techniques could be helpful, including
reassurance, suggestion, the giving of advice, and acting as a role
model (an 'auxiliary ego'). For many neurotic disorders, she advocated
analytical techniques to identify the unconscious content and to
interpret it to strengthen ego function. In the UK, most psychotherapy
for children is eclectic; the therapist tries to establish a good
relationship

with the child and to learn about their feelings and thoughts, partly
through talking and listening, and partly through play. Older children
can communicate verbally with adults, but younger children can
communicate better through play. The therapist can help children to find
words that express their thoughts and feelings, and can thus make it
easier for them to control and modify them. Child psychotherapy is
discussed further in Chapter 16. For a more detailed account, see Pearce
(2009).

Psychotherapy for older people Increasing emphasis is being placed on
the provision of psychological treatments as part of the care plan for
elderly patients. Provided that they do not have cognitive impairment,
elderly patients can take part in any of the treatments described for
younger adults. When using

cognitive therapy, it is important to be aware of minor cognitive
impairment that, while insufficient to affect general functioning, may
impair the patient's engagement in therapy. For a more detailed account
see Cook et al.Â (2005).

705

706

706

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments

Treatments of mainly historical and cultural interest In our
evidence-based era it may seem inappropriate to list treatments that
have fallen into disuse because of lack of effect. However, many of
these treatments have entered our culture and have a strong hold on the
public imagination. Psychiatrists are likely to be approached by
patients who are keen to receive such treatments, and we need to be
familiar with them in the same way as we are with outdated but
influential concepts such as the 'schizophrenogenic' mother. Hypnosis is
a state in which the person is relaxed and drowsy, and more suggestible
than usual. Hypnosis can be induced in many ways. The main requirements
are that the subject should be willing to be hypnotized and convinced
that hypnosis will occur. Most hypnotic procedures contain some
combination of a task to focus attention (e.g.Â watching a moving
object), rhythmic monotonous instructions, and the use of a graduated
series of suggestions (e.g.Â that the person's arm will rise). The
therapist uses the suggestible state either to implant direct
suggestions of improvement, or to encourage recall of previously
repressed memories. Hypnosis is used infrequently in psychiatry but is
used widely for stopping smoking, dieting, etc. A light trance is used
occasionally as a form of relaxation. For this purpose hypnosis has not
been shown to be generally superior to relaxation. A deeper trance is
used occasionally to enhance suggestion to relieve symptoms, especially
those of conversion disorder. Although sometimes effective in the short
term, this method has not been shown to be superior to suggestion
without hypnosis. The authors do not recommend the use of hypnosis in
clinical psychiatry. Autogenic training was described by Schultz in 1905
and was in use mainly in continental Europe as a treatment for physical
symptoms caused by emotional disorder. Patients practise exercises to
induce feelings of heaviness, warmth, or cooling in various parts of the
body, and to slow their respiration. Repeated use of these exercises is
supposed to induce changes in autonomic nervous activity, thereby
alleviating physical symptoms in stress-related and anxiety disorders,
including hypertension. Its results do not differ substantially from
those achieved with simple relaxation, nor is there any good evidence
that it has a specific therapeutic effect. Abreaction (the unrestrained
expression of emotion) has long been used to relieve mental distress and
some psychiatric symptoms. Abreaction is part of many forms of religious
healing (see below). It was used to great acclaim during the Second
World War, using

rapid-acting barbiturates to bring prompt relief from acute war neuroses
(predominantly acute stress disorders), notably by Sargant and Slater.
In civilian practice, abreaction is less effective, perhaps because
fewer disorders are the result of discrete overwhelming stresses. For
more information about the procedure, see Sargant and Slater (1963).
Meditation and yoga are increasingly used by people with minor
psychiatric problems as an alternative or adjunct to psychiatric
treatment. There are many approaches, each associated with different
systems of belief, but sharing common features. They involve relaxation
and the regulation of breathing, and directing attention away from the
external world and from the stream of thoughts that would otherwise
occupy the mind, often by repeating a word or phrase (a mantra). An
important feature is setting time aside when calm can be restored. In
addition, the espousal of a value system and association with
similar-minded individuals (the activities are commonly group-based) may
explain some of the reported successes of the methods. Aspects of
meditation have been incorporated into MBCT. Traditional healing still
plays an important part in many individuals' lives, and is often a
precursor to seeking professional help. It is not restricted, as is
often assumed, to ethnic minority groups. Alternative medicines and
treatments are ubiquitous in all strata of society. However, the use of
traditional healers is generally restricted to minority groups.
Traditional healers can be broadly divided into four groups (Jilek,
2000). â

Herbalists are concerned mainly with plant remedies, some of which are
known to contain active ingredients, while others appear to be placebos.

â

Medicine men and women use ritual methods of healing, sometimes combined
with plant remedies. They are believed to have special powers, often of
supernatural origin.

â

Shamans use methods like those of medicine men and women, but also enter
into altered states of consciousness in which they are believed to
communicate with spirits or ancestors, and to recover the abducted souls
of people made ill by this supposed loss.

â

Diviners discover and name the cause of illness by interpreting oracles
(in either clear or altered consciousness) from the content of dreams,
or through some form of communication with ancestors or spirits.

70

Ethical problems in psychological treatment Traditional healers use
methods that incorporate the nonspecific processes in western
psychological treatment (Box 24.1). In addition, they are aware of the
value of naming a condition and answering the questions 'Why am I (or my
son) afflicted?' This ends uncertainty and relieves blame and guilt.
Some traditional healers use therapeutic suggestion, and many involve
the family both in the diagnostic process and in the rituals of
treatment. Some employ

cleansing or purification rituals to eliminate supposed polluting
agents. A few healers use sacrificial rites to appease supernatural
beings, sometimes combining these with confession and a promise of
changed behaviour. They may involve the wider community to reinforce
their message. Traditional healing is not necessarily incompatible with
modern medicine, and may be running parallel with it more often than we
think.

Ethical problems in psychological treatment Autonomy The need for
informed consent is as great in psychological treatments as in any other
medical procedure. To give such consent the patient must understand the
nature of the treatment and its likely consequences. Such preparation is
not only ethically desirable but also likely to improve the therapeutic
alliance.

Confidentiality Group psychotherapy presents special problems of
confidentiality. Patients should understand fully the requirement to
talk of personal matters in the group, but they need to understand
equally clearly the requirement to treat as confidential all they hear
in the group. Family therapy presents similar problems, especially if
the therapist agrees to see one member outside the family session, and
is told of a family secret (e.g.Â an extramarital affair). Wherever
possible the therapist should avoid such individual meetings and arrange
for a colleague to see the family member if this is necessary (e.g.Â if
one member is seriously depressed). Similar problems arise in couple
therapy. The answer to the question of when a therapist should reveal
confidential material to a third party is the same as in other treatment
situations, namely that it is justified when there is a substantial risk
to a third party. Confidentiality is often confused with secrecy in
psychotherapy (both by patients and by some therapists). Modern mental
healthcare utilizes a model of shared responsibility, and often
information must be shared. Only in exceptional cases should patients be
promised that 'absolutely no one else will ever know of this'.

Exploitation Patients who are receiving psychological treatment are
particularly vulnerable to exploitation. This arises from the
experiences that cause them to seek psychotherapy,

but also because of the intense and often dependent relationship with
the therapist. As in other branches of medicine, exploitation may be
financial or sexual. Financial exploitation is a potential problem in
private practice, in which treatment may be prolonged for longer than is
necessary. Occasionally the exploitation is sexual. In the medical and
other caring professions, such exploitation is prohibited in
professional codes of conduct. Several rogue therapists have defended
inappropriate sexual contact as 'therapeutic' and, remarkably, in some
cases have succeeded in this defence. However, it is never acceptable to
form a sexual relationship with a current or previous patient. In some
jurisdictions (e.g. some US states) there are evolving guidelines about
the time that must elapse before such relationships can be considered
acceptable. Another form of exploitation is the imposition of the
therapist's values on the patient. This may be open and direct
(e.g.Â when a therapist imposes his view that termination of pregnancy is
morally wrong) or it may be concealed and indirect (e.g.Â when a
therapist expresses no opinion, but nevertheless gives more attention to
the arguments against termination than to those for it). Similar
problems may arise, for example, in couple therapy when the therapist's
values may affect his approach to the question of whether the couple
should separate. A controversial issue is that of 'implanting' erroneous
explanations. This has been very contested in relation to 'recovered
memory' syndrome, where the recall, after many years, of early familial
sexual abuse has been attributed to therapists exploiting
suggestibility. Although there has been no suggestion that this is
deliberate, there is considerable professional doubt about its status,
and the consequences are so potentially catastrophic that it requires
very careful monitoring. In group psychotherapy, one patient may be
exploited by another. This is one of the reasons for proscribing contact
outside the group. One patient may

707

708

708

Chapter 24 Psychological treatments bully or scapegoat another within
the sessions, or may seek a sexual relationship outside. The therapist
should try to protect vulnerable patients within the sessions. Clearly
it is not possible to be as strict in this matter as

in a professional relationship, but strongly emphasizing the purpose of
the therapy rules is key to minimizing the problem.

Further reading Bateman A, Brown D and Pedder J (2000). Introduction to
Psychotherapy: An outline of psycho-dynamic principles and practice, 3rd
edn. Tavistock/Routledge, London. (An account of dynamic theory, and
practice in individual, couple, family, and group formats.) Bloch S
(2013). An Introduction to the Psychotherapies, 4th edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. (An introduction to the commonly used
psychological treatments, with a chapter on ethics.) Frank JD and Frank
JB (1993). Persuasion and Healing, 3rd edn. Johns Hopkins Press,
Baltimore, MD. (A revised version of a landmark account of the
non-specific factors in psychotherapy.)

Gabbard G, Beck JS and Holmes J (2005). Oxford Textbook of
Psychotherapy. Oxford University Press, Oxford. (A comprehensive set of
reviews of the major forms of psychotherapy and their use in clinical
practice.) Gurman AS (ed.) (2003). Family Therapy: Theory, practice and
research. Brunner-Routledge, London. (A comprehensive work of
reference.) Hawton K et al.Â (2000). Cognitive Behavioural Approaches for
Adult Psychiatric Disorders: A practical guide, 2nd edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. (An introduction with many valuable practical
examples.)

709

CHAPTER 25

Drugs and other physical treatments Introduction 709

Antipsychotic drugs 724

History of physical treatments 709

Anticholinergic drugs 734

General considerations 712

Antidepressant drugs 735

The classification of drugs used in psychiatry 718

Mood-stabilizing drugs 752

Anxiolytic drugs 718

Psychostimulants 760

Hypnotics 723

Other physical treatments 761

Introduction This chapter is concerned with the use of drugs and other
physical treatments, such as electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and
neurosurgical procedures. Psychological treatments are the subject of
Chapter 24. This separation, although convenient when treatments are
described, does not imply that the two kinds of therapy are to be
thought of as exclusive alternatives when an individual patient is
considered; on the contrary, many patients require both. In this book,
the ways of combining treatments are considered in other chapters, where
the treatment of individual syndromes is discussed. It is important to
keep this point in mind when reading this chapter. Our concern is with
clinical therapeutics rather than basic psychopharmacology, which the
reader is assumed to have studied already. An adequate knowledge of the
mechanisms of drug action is essential if drugs are to be used in a
rational way, but a word of caution is appropriate. The clinician should
not assume that the therapeutic effects of psychotropic drugs are
necessarily

explained by the pharmacological actions that have been discovered so
far. In addition, there is relatively little knowledge about the
neuropsychological mechanisms through which pharmacological manipulation
can ameliorate psychological symptomatology. This caution does not imply
that a knowledge of pharmacological mechanisms has no bearing on
psychiatric therapeutics. On the contrary, there have been substantial
advances in pharmacological knowledge since the first specific
psychotropic drugs were introduced in the 1950s, and it is increasingly
important for the clinician to relate this knowledge to their use of
drugs. As noted in Chapter 6, evidence-based clinical guidelines are
increasingly used to assist practitioners in their use of medication,
and it is important to be aware of these. However, in specialist
psychiatric practice there is often rather less high-quality evidence to
guide prescribing, and a knowledge of pharmacology will help to ensure
that safe and reasonable prescribing practices are followed.

History of physical treatments Physical treatments have been applied to
patients with psychiatric disorders since antiquity, although, in
retrospect, the most that could be claimed for the best of

these interventions is that they were relatively harmless. Of course,
the same holds for the management of patients with general medical
disorders, for which

710

710

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments similar treatments, such
as bleeding and purging, were often used regardless of diagnosis. It is
wise not to be too censorious about the treatment of disorders of which
the aetiology is still largely unknown, but to bear in mind that 'it may
well be that in a hundred years current therapies, psychotherapies as
well as physical therapies, will be looked upon as similarly uncouth and
improbable' (Kiloh et al., 1988). Historically, physical treatments can
be divided into two main classes: â

Those that were aimed at producing a direct change in a
pathophysiological process, usually by some alteration in brain
function.

â

Those that were aimed at producing symptomatic improvement through a
dramatic psychological impact.

The latter interventions were often based on philosophical theories
about the moral basis of madness. For example, many physicians appear to
have followed the proposal of Heinroth (1773--1843) that insanity was
the product of evil and personal wrongdoing. Accordingly, restraint with
chains and corporal punishment were seen as appropriate remedies. Other
physical treatments, such as the spinning chair introduced by Erasmus
Darwin (1731--1802), seemed to be designed to produce a general 'shock
to the system', and perhaps thereby to interrupt the morbid
preoccupations of the patient. A less arduous regimen was the use of
continuous warm baths, often given in combination with cold packs. This
treatment was recommended by clinicians as distinguished as John Conolly
(1794--1866) and Emil Kraepelin (1856--1926), and was still in use at
the Bethlem Hospital in the 1950s. Drugs that produce changes in the
function of the central nervous system, such as opiates and
anticholinergic agents, have been used in the treatment of mental
disorders for hundreds of years. Although some of these drugs may have
had calming effects, they were of no specific value in the treatment of
psychiatric disorders. Often a physical treatment was used not because
of its proven efficacy, but because it was recommended by an eminent and
vigorous physician. Also, the assessment of efficacy depended almost
entirely on uncontrolled clinical observation. In 1933, about 10 years
after the isolation of insulin by Frederick Banting and Charles Best,
Manfred Sakel introduced insulin coma treatment for psychosis. A
suitable dose of insulin was used to produce a coma, which was
terminated by either tube feeding or intravenous glucose. A course of
treatment could include

up to 60 comas. Not surprisingly, serious side effects were common, and
a mortality of at least 1% could be expected, depending on the standard
of the clinic and the physical state of the patient. Insulin coma
treatment was rapidly taken up throughout Europe, and many specialized
treatment units were built. There was a great improvement in the morale
of patients and staff because of the belief that this dramatic treatment
could cure symptoms of some of the most serious psychiatric disorders.
There were always some practitioners who doubted the efficacy of insulin
coma treatment. Their doubts were reinforced by a controlled trial by
Ackner and Oldham (1962), who found that, in patients with
schizophrenia, insulin coma was no more effective than a similar period
of unconsciousness induced by barbiturates. This study was published
about the time when chlorpromazine was introduced, and both factors led
to a rapid decline in the use of insulin coma treatment. It should be
noted that the controlled studies did not exclude the efficacy of
insulin treatment in some circumstances, and a number of workers
continued to maintain that it was effective. Therefore it is interesting
that recent experimental studies have shown that insulin administration
causes striking changes in the release of monoamine neurotransmitters,
as well as other brain changes; for example, in inflammatory processes
and cytokine production (Kleinridders et al., 2014). Perhaps the main
lesson to be learned from insulin coma treatment is that the
introduction of a new medical treatment should be preceded by adequate
controlled trials to determine whether it is therapeutically more
effective or safer than current therapies (see Chapter 6). This lesson
is particularly important in psychiatry, because the aetiology of most
disorders is obscure and outcome may vary widely, even among patients
with the same clinical syndrome. ECT was introduced about the same time
as insulin coma treatment. Unlike the latter, ECT has retained a place
in current clinical practice. The rationale for convulsive therapy was a
postulated antagonism between schizophrenia and epilepsy such that the
one would exclude the other. This view is erroneous in so far as
schizophrenia-like illnesses are actually more common in patients with
temporal lobe epilepsy than would be expected by chance (see Chapter
11). Astute clinical observation, in combination with controlled trials,
has shown that ECT is effective in the acute treatment of severe mood
disorders. Thus, even though the rationale for the introduction of ECT
was incorrect and its mode of action remains unclear, controlled trials
have

71

History of physical treatments confirmed that, in carefully defined
clinical situations, ECT is a safe and effective treatment. The action
of lithium in reducing mania was a chance finding by Cade (1949), who
had been investigating the effects of urates in animals and had decided
to use the lithium salt because of its solubility. Lithium is a toxic
agent, so Cade's important observations did not have a significant
impact on clinical practice until the following decade, when controlled
trials showed that lithium was effective in both the acute treatment of
mania and the prophylaxis of recurrent mood disorders. Other agents that
revolutionized psychopharmacology were introduced about this time (see
Box 25.1). Their efficacy and their indications were first recognized
through clinical observation, and were subsequently confirmed by
controlled clinical trials. None of these agents was introduced on the
basis of an aetiological hypothesis. Indeed, such aetiological
hypotheses as there are in biological psychiatry have been largely
derived from knowledge of the mode of action of effective drugs. Thus
the dopamine-receptor-antagonist properties of antipsychotic drugs have
given rise to the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia, while the action
of tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) in
facilitating the effects of noradrenaline and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)
has led to the various monoamine hypotheses of mood disorders. The past
few decades have brought a period of consolidation in
psychopharmacology. Clinical trials have been widely used to refine the
indications of

particular drug treatments and to maximize their risk/ benefit ratios.
New compounds have become available, but because most of them have been
derived from previously described agents, their range of activity is not
strikingly different from that of their predecessors. In general,
however, the newer agents are better tolerated and sometimes
safer---developments that are important for clinical practice. There may
now be grounds for more optimism about the prospects for advances in
psychopharmacology. For example, there is rapidly increasing knowledge
about chemical signalling in the brain. Numerous neurotransmitters and
neuromodulators interact with specific families of receptors, many of
which exist in a number of different subtypes. Most of these receptors
have been cloned, and selective ligands for them are becoming available.
There is increasing knowledge as to how these chemical messengers may
modify behaviour through their interactions with specific brain regions
and distributed neuronal circuits. Future compounds that are developed
as a consequence of these scientific advances are likely to differ from
current drugs in their range of behavioural effects, and could lead to
important new developments in psychopharmacology. Given the complex
causes of psychiatric disorders, it seems likely that detailed knowledge
of aetiology and pathophysiology may lag behind advances in
therapeutics. Of course, this disparity is not uncommon in general
medicine. It serves to reinforce the importance of randomized clinical
trials in the assessment of new psychopharmacological treatments.

Box 25.1 Introduction of some physical treatments in psychiatry 1934
Insulin coma treatment (Sakel) 1936 Frontal leucotomy (Moniz) 1936
Metrazole convulsive therapy (Meduna) 1938 Electroconvulsive therapy
(Cerletti and Bini) 1941 Amphetamine for hyperactivity in children
(Bradley)

1966 Valpromide (valproate) in bipolar disorder (Lambert et al.) 1967
Clomipramine in obsessive--compulsive disorder (Fernandez and
Lopez-Ibor) 1971 Carbamazepine in bipolar disorder (Takezaki and
Hanaoka)

1949 Lithium (Cade)

1988 Clozapine in treatment-resistant schizophrenia (Kane et al.)

1952 Chlorpromazine (Delay and Deniker)

1999 Lamotrigine in bipolar depression (Calabrese et al.)

1954 Benzodiazepines (Sternbach) 1957 Iproniazid (Crane and Kline)

2001 Atypical antipsychotic augmentation in depression (Shelton et al.)

1957 Imipramine (Kuhn)

2005 Quetiapine in bipolar depression (Calabrese et al.)

711

712

712

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

General considerations The pharmacokinetics of psychotropic drugs Before
psychotropic drugs can produce their therapeutic effects, they must
reach the brain in adequate amounts. The extent to which they do so
depends on their absorption, distribution, passage across the
blood--brain barrier, metabolism, and excretion. A short review of these
processes is given here. The reader who has not studied them before is
referred to the chapters on pharmacokinetics in Rang and Dale's
Pharmacology (Rang et al., 2015). The following processes are important:
â

absorption

â

distribution

â

metabolism

â

excretion.

Absorption In general, psychotropic drugs are easily absorbed from the
gut because most of them are lipophilic and are not highly ionized at
physiological pH values. Like other drugs, they are absorbed faster from
an empty stomach, and in reduced amounts by patients suffering from
intestinal hurry or malabsorption syndrome.

Distribution Psychotropic drugs are distributed in the plasma, where
most of them are largely bound to proteins---for example, diazepam and
amitriptyline are about 95% bound. They pass easily from the plasma to
the brain, across the blood--brain barrier, because they are highly
lipophilic. For the same reason, they enter fat stores, from which they
are released slowly long after the patient has ceased to take the drug.
This means that psychotropic drugs tend to have large volumes of
distribution.

Metabolism Most psychotropic drugs are metabolized in the liver. This
process begins as the drugs pass through the liver in the portal
circulation on their way from the gut. This 'firstpass' metabolism
reduces the amount of available drug, and is one of the reasons why
larger doses are needed when a drug such as chlorpromazine is given by
mouth than when it is given intramuscularly. The extent of this liver
metabolism differs from one person to another. It is altered by certain
other drugs which, if taken at the same time, induce liver enzymes
(e.g.Â carbamazepine) or inhibit them (e.g.Â selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors \[SSRIs\]).

Some drugs, such as carbamazepine, induce their own metabolism,
especially after being taken for a long time. Not all drug metabolites
are inactive---for example, fluoxetine is metabolized to a hydroxy
derivative, norfluoxetine, which is also a potent 5-HT reuptake
inhibitor. Where drugs give rise to active metabolites, measurements of
plasma concentrations of the parent drug alone are a poor guide to
therapeutic activity.

Excretion Psychotropic drugs and their metabolites are excreted mainly
through the kidney. When kidney function is impaired, excretion is
reduced and a lower dose of drug should be given. Lithium is filtered
passively and then partly reabsorbed by the same mechanism that absorbs
sodium. The two ions compete for this mechanism; hence reabsorption of
lithium increases when that of sodium is reduced (e.g.Â by thiazide
diuretics). Certain fractions of lipophilic drugs such as chlorpromazine
are partly excreted in the bile, enter the intestine for the second
time, and are then partly reabsorbed (i.e.Â a proportion of the drug is
recycled between intestine and liver).

Plasma half-life Plasma concentrations of drugs vary throughout the day,
rising immediately after the dose and falling at a rate that differs
between individual drugs. The rate at which a drug level declines after
a single dose ranges from hours for lithium carbonate to weeks for
slow-release preparations of injectable antipsychotic agents. Knowledge
of these differences allows more rational decisions to be made about
appropriate intervals between doses. The concept of plasma half-life is
useful here. The halflife of a drug in plasma is the time taken for its
concentration to fall by a half, once dosing has ceased. For most
psychotropic drugs, the amount eliminated over time is proportional to
the plasma concentration, and in this case it will take approximately
five times the half-life for the drug to be eliminated from plasma.
Equally, when dosing with a drug begins, it will take five times the
half-life for the concentration in plasma to reach steady state. This
can be important when planning treatment. For example, MAOIs should not
be given with SSRIs. Therefore if a patient is taking sertraline, which
has an elimination half-life of about 26 hours, it will be important to
leave at least five times the half-life (a week is recommended) before
starting MAOI treatment. When sertraline treatment begins, the plasma
concentrations will continue to rise for about a week before reaching a
steady state.

713

General considerations

Measurement of circulating drug concentrations As a result of individual
variations in the mechanisms described above, plasma concentrations
after standard doses of psychotropic drugs can vary substantially from
one patient to another. For example, tenfold differences have been
observed with the antidepressant drug nortriptyline. Therefore it might
be expected that measurements of the plasma concentration of circulating
drugs would help the clinician. However, with a few exceptions
(e.g.Â lithium and clozapine), this practice is rarely helpful because
the plasma drug levels that predict therapeutic response or toxicity
within individuals vary so much. Clearly, for any drug to work it must
be present in plasma above a certain minimum concentration, and for some
medications 'target' levels have been suggested. However, it is still
not unusual for some individuals to show a therapeutic response when
plasma levels are lower than recommended.

Pharmacodynamic measures As an alternative to these assays, it may be
possible to measure the pharmacological property that is thought to be
responsible for the therapeutic effect of a particular drug. For
example, positron emission tomography (PET) can be used to measure
directly the degree of brain dopamine-receptor blockade produced by
antipsychotic drugs during treatment. Such information has proved
valuable in designing appropriate dosage regimens of antipsychotic drugs
(see Table 25.4). However, these pharmacodynamic measures have not yet
been able to identify why some patients do not respond to medication.
For example, the degree of dopamine-receptor blockade is the same in
patients who respond to antipsychotic drugs as in those who do not.
Pharmacogenetic approaches to prediction of treatment response (see Box
25.2) are a topic of current interest, although most of the findings
remain controversial and are yet to have an impact on routine clinical
practice. For a review, see Harrison (2015b).

Pharmacokinetic interactions Interactions that affect drug absorption
are seldom important for psychotropic drugs, although it is worth noting
that absorption of chlorpromazine is reduced by antacids. Interactions
due to protein binding are also uncommon, even though many psychotropic
drugs are highly proteinbound. Interactions that affect drug metabolism
are of considerable importance. Examples include the inhibition of the
metabolism of antipsychotic drugs by some SSRIs, and the stimulation of
the metabolism of many psychotropic drugs by carbamazepine, which
induces the relevant cytochrome P450 enzymes (see below). Interactions
that affect renal excretion are mainly important for lithium, the
elimination of which is decreased by thiazide diuretics. Cytochrome P450
enzymes. There have been significant developments in the understanding
of the microsomal cytochrome P450 enzyme system. These enzymes are
located mainly in the liver but also in other tissues, including the gut
wall and brain. Their role is to detoxify exogenous substances such as
drugs, and their activity can be increased or decreased by concomitant
drug administration. This can give rise to clinically important drug
interactions. Importantly, several antidepressants, particularly SSRIs,
potently inhibit P450 enzymes (see Table 25.9).

Pharmacodynamic interactions Pharmacodynamic interactions are
exemplified by the serotonin syndrome, in which drugs that potentiate
brain 5-HT function by different mechanisms (e.g.Â SSRIs and MAOIs) can
combine to produce dangerous 5-HT toxicity (see below). As a rule, a
single drug can be used to produce all of the effects required of a
combination---for example, many antidepressant drugs have useful
antianxiety effects. It is desirable to avoid combinations of
psychotropic drugs whenever possible, and, if a combination is to be
used, it is essential to know about possible interactions. The British
National Formulary provides a useful guide.

Drug withdrawal

Drug interactions When two psychotropic drugs are given together, one
may interfere with or enhance the actions of the other. Interference may
arise through alterations in absorption, binding, metabolism, or
excretion (pharmacokinetic interactions), or by interaction between the
pharmacological mechanisms of action (pharmacodynamic interactions).

Many psychotropic drugs do not achieve useful therapeutic effects for
several days or even weeks. After the drugs have been stopped, there is
often a comparable delay before their effects are lost. Psychotropic
and, indeed, many other classes of drugs produce neuroadaptive changes
during repeated administration. Tissues therefore have to readjust when
drug treatment is stopped; this readjustment may appear clinically as a
withdrawal or abstinence syndrome. Characteristic abstinence syndromes
have been described for antidepressants,

713

714

714

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Box 25.2 Pharmacogenetics in psychiatry Polymorphic (allelic) variation
in DNA may affect the expression (and therefore the function) of genes
involved in the actions, or metabolism, of psychotropic drugs. That is,
they may modify the likelihood of therapeutic response or the
development of adverse effects. Examples are listed below. â Genetic
variation in CYP-metabolizing enzymes can affect blood levels of drugs
and thereby brain exposure. Mutations in the gene for CYP2D6 may be

associated with antipsychotic drug-induced tardive dyskinesia. â Alleles
associated with decreased expression of 5-HT transporter may be
associated with poorer response to SSRIs. â Therapeutic response to
clozapine may be associated with specific alleles of the 5-HT2A
receptor. â Weight gain with antipsychotic drugs is associated with an
allele of the 5-HT2C receptor.

antipsychotics, and anxiolytics, while sudden discontinuation of lithium
can provoke a 'rebound' mania in patients with bipolar disorder. It is
important to be able to distinguish withdrawal syndromes from relapse of
the disorder that is being treated. In addition, the risk of abstinence
symptoms makes it prudent to withdraw psychotropic drugs slowly wherever
possible.

taken alone in full dosage (e.g.Â an SSRI with an atypical antipsychotic
agent). This practice, if it is to be used, is best carried out by
experienced psychiatrists (or under their guidance) because the adverse
effects of combinations are less easy to predict than those of single
drugs.

General advice about prescribing Use well-tried drugs It is good
practice to use well-tried drugs with therapeutic actions and side
effects that are thoroughly understood. Clinicians should become
familiar with a small number of drugs from each of the main classes. In
this way they can become used to adjusting the dosage and recognizing
side effects. Well-tried drugs are usually less expensive than new
preparations.

Give an adequate dose Having chosen a suitable drug, the doctor should
prescribe it in adequate doses. They should not change the drug or add
others without a good reason. In general, if there is no therapeutic
response to one established drug, there is no likelihood of a better
response to another that has very similar pharmacological properties
(provided that the first drug has been taken in adequate amounts).
However, since the main obstacle to adequate dosage is usually side
effects, it may be appropriate to change to a drug with a different
pattern of side effects--- for example, from a tricyclic antidepressant
to an SSRI, or vice versa.

Use drug combinations cautiously Occasionally, combinations of
psychotropic drugs are given deliberately in the hope of producing
interactions that will be more potent than the effects of either drug

Dosing and treatment duration When a drug is prescribed, it is necessary
to determine the dose, the interval between doses, and the likely
duration of treatment. The dose ranges for commonly used drugs are
indicated later in this chapter. Ranges for others can be found in the
manufacturers' literature, the British National Formulary, or a
comparable work of reference. Within the therapeutic range, the correct
dose for an individual patient should be decided after considering the
severity of symptoms, the patient's age and weight, and any factors that
may affect drug metabolism (e.g.Â other drugs that are being taken, or
liver disease). Next, the interval between doses must be decided.
Psychotropic drugs have often been given three times a day, even though
their duration of action is such that most can be taken once or twice a
day without any undesirable fall in plasma concentrations between doses.
Less frequent administration has the advantage that outpatients are more
likely to be reliable in taking drugs. In hospital, less frequent drug
rounds mean that nurses have more time for psychological aspects of
treatment. Some drugs, such as anxiolytics, are required for immediate
effect rather than continuous action; they should not be given at
regular intervals, but shortly before occasions on which symptoms are
expected to be at their worst or 'as needed' with an individually
defined daily limit. The duration of treatment depends on the disorder
under treatment; it is considered in the chapters that deal with the
relevant clinical syndromes.

715

General considerations

What patients want to know Psychotropic drugs have the aim of changing
what people think and feel; not surprisingly, many patients have
misgivings about taking them. It is therefore important to make it clear
what the drug is being used for, what therapeutic effects are expected,
and when they should start to appear. Other key questions that must be
dealt with include the following: â

What effects will I experience on first taking the drug?

â

What side effects can I expect?

â

What serious side effects should I report immediately?

â

For how long should I take the drug?

â

Is the drug addictive?

â

What will I notice when I stop the drug?

Compliance, concordance, and collaboration Many patients do not take the
drugs that are prescribed for them. Of course this problem is not
restricted to psychiatric practice, but the use of psychotropic drugs
raises additional issues in terms of societal stigma and the nature of
the adverse effects. Problems with compliance are mainly manifested when
treating outpatients, but also occur in hospital, where some patients
find ways of avoiding taking the drugs administered by nurses. If
patients are to take medication reliably, they must be convinced of the
need to take it, be free from unfounded fears about its dangers, and be
aware of how to take it. Each of these requirements presents particular
problems when the patient has a psychiatric disorder. Thus patients with
schizophrenia or seriously depressed patients may not be convinced that
they are ill, or they may not wish to recover. Deluded patients may
distrust clinical staff, and hypochondriacal patients may fear dangerous
side effects. Anxious patients often forget the prescribed dosage and
frequency of their drugs. Therefore it is not surprising that many
psychiatric patients do not take their drugs in the prescribed way. It
is important for the clinician to pay attention to this problem. Time
spent discussing the patient's concerns is time well spent, for it often
increases compliance with treatment. Written instructions and
information can be a valuable adjunct, and are now included with drug
packaging. The successful and safe use of medication requires a
collaborative relationship between patient and doctor. Some have
proposed that the terms concordance or adherence should therefore be
preferred to compliance, which carries the implicit assumption that the
patient's job is to obey instructions. Whatever the term used, it is

clearly important to recognize that the use of drug treatment,
particularly in psychiatry, requires a thorough understanding of the
patient's attitude to both their illness and its treatment (Britten et
al., 2010).

Ethical aspects of drug prescription The ethical issues in this complex
area have been reviewed by Kader and Pantelis (2009). 1. The basis of
ethical prescribing is the practitioner's comprehensive knowledge of the
risks and benefits of drug therapies. This will be derived from
evidencebased approaches where possible. 2. The doctor--patient
relationship is the appropriate framework through which this knowledge
is communicated to the patient. 3. The therapeutic partnership between
patient and doctor must lead to true informed consent, which includes
the right of competent patients to refuse treatment. Difficulties arise
when the evidence base for treatment is lacking and when there is
uncertainty about what approach to pursue. Here the clinician has the
responsibility to advise treatments that would be supported by peer
opinion and to use clinical guidelines. The clinician should also
support the right of patients to genuinely effective treatment where
this is being hindered by cost constraint and other economic factors.
Another difficult problem concerns refusal of treatment when capacity is
impaired and the health and safety of the patient or others are at risk.
In fact, empirical research suggests that refusal of treatment in these
circumstances is often transient and due to current clinical factors.
Indeed, most patients whose refusal of treatment is clinically
overridden apparently conclude eventually that the decision to treat
them was justified (Kader and Pantelis, 2009). It is, of course,
important to elucidate and document the reasons for treatment refusal,
and to respect the right of competent patients to refuse treatment.

Prescribing for special groups Children and the elderly Psychotropic
drugs usually lack specific licences for use in young people, and
relevant controlled trials are sparse. However, in the case of
antidepressants, for example, only fluoxetine has a licence for the
treatment of depression in young people, with accompanying advice from
NICE that it should be used in combination with a specific psychological
treatment in this age group (see Chapter 16). Practitioners need to make
themselves

715

716

716

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments aware of local guidelines
concerning the use of psychotropic medication in young people, and
should seek specialist advice when in doubt. Clinical trials of most
psychotropic medications often exclude older patients, even though
conditions such as depression are more common in the elderly. Elderly
patients are often sensitive to side effects of medication, and may have
impaired renal or hepatic function; for these reasons it is important to
start treatment with low doses.

Pregnant women There are special problems with regard to prescribing
psychotropic drugs in pregnancy, because of the risk of teratogenesis.
Information about the teratogenic risk of individual drugs can be
obtained from the relevant manufacturer and from the British National
Formulary, although the available evidence is often sparse or difficult
to interpret. In addition, illnesses such as depression are known to
have adverse effects on pregnancy outcomes (Grote et al., 2010). The
practitioner and patient therefore have the difficult task of weighing
available information against the risk of managing the illness without
medication. In addition, a substantial number of pregnancies are
unplanned. For this reason, it is prudent, where possible, to advise
women of childbearing age who require psychotropic drugs specifically to
avoid pregnancy until the need for the drug treatment is over. For
reviews of the use of psychotropic drugs in pregnancy, see National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2014) and Chisolm and Payne
(2016).

Anxiolytics and antidepressants Anxiolytic drugs are seldom essential in
early pregnancy, and psychological treatments can usually be used. If
short-term medication is needed, benzodiazepines have in general not
been shown to be teratogenic, although one meta-analysis has shown an
increased risk of oral clefts after first-trimester exposure. If an
antidepressant drug is required, it is probably better to use long-
established preparations such as imipramine or amitriptyline, for which
there is no consistent evidence of a teratogenic effect after many years
of use. There is also reasonable experience with fluoxetine and
sertraline, which do not appear to be associated with an increased risk
of major malformations. However, paroxetine treatment in the first
trimester may result in increased cardiac defects, and SSRIs taken after
20 weeks' gestation may result in an increased risk of pulmonary
hypertension in the newborn.

Antipsychotic drugs and mood stabilizers It is seldom necessary to start
antipsychotic drugs in early pregnancy. There is little evidence that
high-potency agents such as haloperidol carry an increased teratogenic
risk. However, there may be a higher rate of congenital malformations in
babies who are exposed to lowerpotency agents such as chlorpromazine.
There is less information on the teratogenic risk of newer ('atypical')
antipsychotic agents, but a recent epidemiological study in over 1000
women found, after careful controlling, no evidence of an increase in
adverse outcomes for either mother or baby (Vigod et al., 2015). Lithium
treatment early in pregnancy has been associated with cardiac
abnormalities in the fetus, particularly Ebstein's anomaly. Therefore
women who are considering pregnancy have been recommended to discontinue
lithium before conceiving. Similarly, women who become pregnant while
taking lithium have usually been advised to stop the treatment. However,
recent epidemiological studies have suggested that, although the
relative risk of Ebstein's anomaly is increased at least tenfold in
infants who are exposed to lithium in the first trimester, the absolute
risk is still fairly low, at 0.05--0.1%. Withdrawal of lithium carries a
high risk of relapse in patients with bipolar illness, and the balance
of risk to mother and baby may therefore suggest continuation of lithium
treatment during pregnancy in some cases. Anticonvulsant drugs such as
carbamazepine and valproate are increasingly used as mood stabilizers.
However, both of these agents are clearly associated with an increased
risk of neural-tube defects as well as other fetal abnormalities. The
neural-tube defects associated with anticonvulsant use may be associated
with changes in folate metabolism. However, a role for folate treatment
in their prevention has not been established. Because many pregnancies
are unplanned, current guidelines suggest that valproate should not be
prescribed to women of childbearing age unless no alternative treatment
is found effective or sufficiently well tolerated (National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence, 2014).

Neonatal toxicity Exposure to psychotropic drugs in the later stages of
pregnancy can give rise to neonatal toxicity, either through the
presence of the drug or through a withdrawal syndrome. For example, it
has been reported that among babies born to mothers who have been
receiving tricyclic antidepressants there may be withdrawal reactions
that

71

The classification of drugs used in psychiatry include tremulousness,
vomiting, poor feeding, and seizures. Direct anticholinergic effects,
such as gastrointestinal stasis and bladder distension, have also been
reported. These reactions, although clearly problematic, appear to
settle quickly without causing lasting sequelae. There are also reports
that late exposure to SSRIs may be associated with an increased risk of
neonatal complications, including jitteriness, hypoglycaemia, poor
muscle tone, and respiratory difficulties. The perinatal toxicity
associated with lithium use includes 'floppy baby syndrome', with
cyanosis and hypotonicity, whereas benzodiazepine treatment can result
in impaired temperature regulation together with breathing and feeding
difficulties. Animal studies suggest that fetal exposure to psychotropic
medication can cause longer-term abnormalities in brain development and
behaviour, and it is possible that similar effects might occur in humans
(see, for example, Pederson et al., 2010). However, disentangling such
effects from those associated with illness in the mother is difficult
(Grote et al., 2010).

Breastfeeding Psychotropic drugs should be prescribed cautiously to
women who are breastfeeding. Diazepam and other benzodiazepines pass
readily into breast milk, and may cause sedation and hypotonicity in the
infant. Antipsychotic drugs and antidepressants also enter breast milk,
although rather less readily than diazepam. However, sulpiride is
excreted in significant amounts and should be avoided. Fluoxetine and
citalopram could also accumulate, but imipramine, nortriptyline, and
sertraline are present in small amounts and breastfeeding can be
permitted while the baby is observed for sedation or feeding
difficulties. It is usually advised that mothers should express and
discard breast milk that has been exposed to peak plasma levels of the
drug concerned. Lithium salts enter the milk freely, and serum
concentrations in the infant can approach those of the

mother, so breastfeeding is best avoided. However, the amounts of
carbamazepine and valproate in breast milk are considered too low to be
harmful. A general problem is that, even when the concentration of a
particular drug in breast milk is low and no detectable clinical effect
on the infant can be discerned, it is nevertheless possible that subtle
longer-term effects on brain development and behaviour could occur. For
this reason, some authorities recommend that women who are receiving
psychotropic medication should not breastfeed at all. A more pragmatic
view is provided by the British National Formulary (see also National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2014 and Taylor et al., 2015).

What to do if there is no therapeutic response 1. Is the drug being
taken as recommended? The first step is to find out whether the patient
has been taking the drug in the correct dose. They may not have
understood the original instructions, or may be worried that a full dose
will produce unpleasant side effects. Some patients fear that they will
become dependent if they take the drug regularly. Other patients may
have little wish to take drugs for the reasons discussed above. 2. Is
the patient taking any other drug that could affect the metabolism or
pharmacological action of the psychotropic agent? Misuse of legal or
illegal substances might interfere with the therapeutic actions of
psychotropic drugs. 3. Is the diagnosis correct? Review the diagnosis to
make sure that the treatment is appropriate before deciding whether to
increase the dose. Failure to respond adequately to psychotropic
medication is a common reason for psychiatric referral. Specific
pharmacological approaches for individual disorders are discussed in the
relevant chapters.

The classification of drugs used in psychiatry Drugs that have effects
mainly on mental symptoms are referred to as psychotropic. Psychiatrists
also use the term antiparkinsonian agents, which refers to drugs that
are employed to control the side effects of some

psychotropic drugs. Anticonvulsant drugs have a growing role in the
treatment of mood disorders. Psychotropic drugs are conventionally
divided into different classes, as shown in Table 25.1, but the

717

718

718

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments therapeutic actions of
particular compounds are not confined to one diagnostic category. For
example, SSRIs are classified as antidepressants and are effective in
the treatment of major depression, but they also produce useful
therapeutic effects in anxiety states, obsessive-- compulsive disorders,
and some eating disorders. Of course, this breadth of effect does not
mean that the latter syndromes are forms of depression. It merely
highlights the fact that the neuropsychological consequences of
facilitating brain 5-HT function may provide beneficial effects in a
variety of psychiatric disorders. Although there is considerable
understanding of the pharmacological actions of psychotropic drugs,
little is known about the neuropsychological consequences of these
pharmacological actions and about the ways in which neuropsychological
changes are translated into clinical benefit in different diagnostic
syndromes.

At present, therefore, the best plan is to classify drugs according to
their major therapeutic use, but to bear in mind that the therapeutic
effects of different classes of drugs may overlap considerably. Each of
the main groups of drugs will now be reviewed in turn. For each group,
an account will be given of therapeutic effects, pharmacology, the
principal compounds available, pharmacokinetics, unwanted effects, and
contraindications. General advice will also be given about the use of
each group in everyday clinical practice, but specific applications to
the treatment of individual disorders will be found in the chapters that
deal with those conditions. Drugs that have a limited use in the
treatment of a single disorder---for example, disulfiram for alcohol
problems, or cholinesterase inhibitors for dementia---are discussed in
the chapters that deal with the relevant clinical syndromes.

Anxiolytic drugs Anxiolytic drugs, such as benzodiazepines, have been
prescribed widely and often inappropriately. Before prescribing
anxiolytic drugs it is always important to seek the causes of anxiety
and to try to modify them. It is also essential to recognize that a
degree of anxiety can motivate patients to take steps to reduce the
problems that are causing it. Therefore removing all anxiety in the
short term is not always beneficial to the patient in the long run.
Anxiolytics such as benzodiazepines are most useful when given for a
short time, either to tide the patient over a crisis or to help them to
tackle a specific problem. Tolerance is a particular problem with
benzodiazepinelike anxiolytic drugs, and drug dependence can develop.
Because the benzodiazepines are still widely used anxiolytics, they will
be considered first. Antidepressants are increasingly used to treat
specific anxiety syndromes, but their therapeutic actions differ in
important ways from benzodiazepine-like drugs. Their indications in the
treatment of anxiety disorders will be considered here, but their
detailed pharmacology is discussed in the section on antidepressant
drugs. When reading this section, it is important to bear in mind that
psychological treatments are effective in the management of anxiety
disorders and have certain advantages over drug treatment, including
more sustained efficacy after treatment cessation, as well as fewer
adverse effects.

Benzodiazepines Pharmacology Benzodiazepines have several actions: â

anxiolytic

â

sedative and hypnotic

â

muscle relaxant

â

anticonvulsant.

Their pharmacological actions are mediated through specific receptor
sites located in a supramolecular complex with gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABAA) receptors. Benzodiazepines enhance GABA neurotransmission,
thereby indirectly altering the activity of other neurotransmitter
systems, such as those involving noradrenaline and 5-HT.

Compounds available Many different benzodiazepines are available. They
differ both in the potency with which they interact with benzodiazepine
receptors and in their plasma half-life (see Box 25.3). In general,
high-potency benzodiazepines and those with short half-lives are more
likely to be associated with dependence and withdrawal. Benzodiazepines
with short half-lives (less than 12 hours) include lorazepam, temazepam,
and lormetazepam. Because of problems with dependence, long-acting
benzodiazepines are preferable for the management of

719

Anxiolytic drugs

Table 25.1 Classification of clinical psychotropic drugs Class of drug

Examples of classes

Class indications (examples)

Antipsychotic

Phenothiazines

Acute treatment of schizophrenia and mania; prevention of relapse in
schizophrenia

Butyrophenones Substituted benzamides Antidepressant

Tricyclic antidepressants

Major depression (acute treatment and prophylaxis), anxiety disorders

MAOIs SSRIs Mood stabilizer

Lithium

Prophylaxis of bipolar disorder and recurrent mood disorder

Anticonvulsants Anxiolytic

Benzodiazepines

Anxiety disorders (short-term use)

Azapirones (buspirone) Hypnotic

Benzodiazepines

Insomnia

Cyclopyrrolones ('Z drugs') Psychostimulant

Methylphenidate

Hyperkinetic syndrome of childhood

Modafinil

Narcolepsy

anxiety, even if such treatment is to be given intermittently on an
'as-required' basis. Long-acting benzodiazepines include drugs such as
diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, alprazolam, and clonazepam. Diazepam is
rapidly absorbed and can be used both for the continuous treatment of
anxiety and for treatment 'as required'. Alprazolam, a high-potency
benzodiazepine, is effective in the treatment of panic disorder. This
therapeutic efficacy is not confined to alprazolam, because equivalent
doses of other high-potency agents such as clonazepam are also
effective. Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine-receptor antagonist that
produces little pharmacological effect by itself, but blocks the actions
of other benzodiazepines. Therefore it may be useful in reversing acute
toxicity produced by benzodiazepines, but carries a risk of provoking
acute benzodiazepine withdrawal. Flumazenil is available only for
intravenous use.

Pharmacokinetics Benzodiazepines are rapidly absorbed. They are strongly
bound to plasma proteins but, because they are lipophilic, pass readily
into the brain. They are metabolized to a large number of compounds,
many of which have

therapeutic effects of their own; temazepam and oxazepam are among the
metabolic products of diazepam. Excretion is mainly as conjugates in the
urine. Benzodiazepines with short half-lives, such as temazepam and
lorazepam, have a 3-hydroxyl grouping, which allows a one-step
metabolism to inactive glucuronides. Other benzodiazepines, such as
diazepam and clorazepate, are metabolized to long-acting derivatives,
such as desmethyldiazepam, which are themselves therapeutically active.
It is now common practice to give benzodiazepines (often in combination
with low-dose antipsychotic drugs) to produce a rapid calming effect in
psychosis. In this situation, benzodiazepines may be given parenterally,
and it is worth noting that the absorption of diazepam following
intramuscular injection is poor, and lorazepam should be preferred if
this route of administration is used.

Unwanted effects Benzodiazepines are well tolerated. When they are given
as anxiolytics, their main side effects are due to the sedative
properties of large doses, which can lead to ataxia and drowsiness and
falls (especially in the elderly), and occasionally to confused thinking
and amnesia. Minor

719

720

720

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Box 25.3 Half-lives of some drugs that act at the
GABA--benzodiazepinereceptor complex

do. Even so, fatal overdoses of benzodiazepines have occasionally been
reported.

Drug interactions Benzodiazepines, like other sedative anxiolytics,
potentiate the effects of alcohol and of drugs that depress the central
nervous system. Significant respiratory depression has been reported in
some patients receiving combined treatment with benzodiazepines and
clozapine.

Diazepam

20--100 h\*

Chlordiazepoxide

5--30 h\*

Lorazepam

8--24 h

Dependence and withdrawal

Temazepam

5--11 h

Zopiclone

4--6 h

Zolpidem

1.5--2 h

Chlormethiazole

4--6 h

It is now generally agreed that dependence develops after prolonged use
of benzodiazepines. The frequency depends on the drug and the dosage,
and has been estimated to be up to 50% of patients who are long-term
users. Benzodiazepines are associated with a withdrawal syndrome and
tolerance. Although drug-seeking behaviour is less common, it certainly
can occur, and benzodiazepines are not uncommonly involved in polydrug
misuse and dependence. The withdrawal syndrome associated with
benzodiazepines is characterized by several different kinds of symptoms:

(4--12 h in the elderly) Chloral

6--8 h

- Active metabolite increases half-life further.

degrees of drowsiness and of impaired coordination and judgement can
affect driving skills and the operation of potentially dangerous
machinery; moreover, people who are affected in this way are not always
aware of it. For this reason, when benzodiazepines are prescribed,
especially those with a longer action, patients should be advised about
these dangers and about the potentiating effects of alcohol. The
prescriber should remember that these effects are more common among
elderly patients and those with impaired renal or liver function. Use of
benzodiazepines for more than 3 months has been linked to an increased
risk of dementia but residual confounding cannot be excluded (National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2015) Although in some
circumstances benzodiazepines reduce tension and aggression, they can
also rarely lead to a release of aggression by reducing inhibitions in
people with a tendency to aggressive behaviour. In this they resemble
alcohol. This possible effect should be remembered when prescribing for
those judged to be at risk of child abuse, or for any person with a
previous history of impulsive aggressive behaviour.

Toxic effects Benzodiazepines have few toxic effects. Patients usually
recover from large overdoses because these drugs do not depress
respiration and blood pressure as barbiturates

â

apprehension, anxiety, and insomnia

â

tremor

â

nausea

â

heightened sensitivity to perceptual stimuli and perceptual disturbances

â

depression and suicidal thinking

â

epileptic seizures (rarely).

Since many of these symptoms resemble those of anxiety disorder, it can
sometimes be difficult to decide whether the patient is experiencing a
benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome or a recrudescence of the anxiety
disorder for which the drug was originally prescribed. Perceptual
disturbances are more likely to indicate benzodiazepine withdrawal.
Withdrawal symptoms generally begin within 2-- 3 days of stopping a
short-acting benzodiazepine, and within 7 days of stopping a long-acting
one. The symptoms generally last for 3--10 days. Withdrawal symptoms
seem to be more frequent after taking drugs with a short half-life than
after taking those with a long one. If benzodiazepines have been taken
for a long time, it is best to withdraw them gradually over a period of
several weeks. If this is done, withdrawal symptoms can be minimized or
avoided (see Chapter 20). Benzodiazepines do have the advantage of
becoming quickly effective. Therefore current advice is that they should
be administered on a

721

Anxiolytic drugs short-term basis only (not more than 4 weeks) to help a
patient to cope with functionally disabling anxiety while other
treatment measures are instituted.

Azapirones (buspirone) Indications and pharmacology The only drug in the
azapirone class that is currently marketed for the treatment of anxiety
is buspirone. It is effective in the treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder but is not helpful in the treatment of panic disorder. Unlike
the benzodiazepines, the anxiolytic effects of buspirone take several
days to develop and require dosetitration. It is also important to note
that buspirone cannot be used to treat benzodiazepine withdrawal.
Perhaps for these reasons it has relatively little use.
Pharmacologically, buspirone has no affinity for benzodiazepine
receptors, but stimulates a subtype of 5HT receptor called the 5-HT1A
receptor. This receptor is found in high concentration in the raphe
nuclei in the brainstem, where it regulates the firing of 5-HT cell
bodies. Administration of buspirone lowers the firing rate of 5-HT
neurons and thereby decreases 5-HT neurotransmission in certain brain
regions. This action may be the basis of its anxiolytic effect.

Pharmacokinetics and adverse effect Buspirone has poor systemic
availability because it has an extensive first-pass metabolism. The side
effect profile differs from that of benzodiazepines. For example,
buspirone treatment does not cause sedation, but instead is often
associated with lightheadedness, nervousness, and headache early in
treatment. There is little evidence that tolerance and dependence occur
during buspirone use, although such a judgement must always be made with
circumspection.

Drug interactions Buspirone is relatively free from significant drug
interactions, but combination with MAOIs has been reported to cause
raised blood pressure.

Antidepressant drugs used for anxiety Antidepressant drugs usually
ameliorate the anxiety that accompanies depressive disorders. Tricyclic
antidepressants have also been shown to be effective in the management
of generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and post-traumatic
stress disorder, whether or not significant depressive symptoms are
present. Similarly, SSRIs are effective in a broad range of anxiety
disorders, including obsessive--compulsive disorder (Baldwin et al.,
2014). Both venlafaxine and duloxetine, which are classified

as selective serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs),
are licensed for the treatment of generalised anxiety disorder as well
as depression. The therapeutic profile of antidepressant drugs in the
treatment of anxiety differs significantly from that of benzodiazepines.
The time of onset of effect is much slower with antidepressants and,
particularly in panic disorder, there may be an exacerbation of symptoms
early in treatment. However, the ultimate therapeutic effect of
antidepressants is as least as great as that of benzodiazepines, and
they are less likely to produce cognitive impairment (Baldwin et al.,
2014). In addition, the use of antidepressants is not associated with
tolerance and dependence although, as noted above, sudden cessation of
treatment can cause abstinence symptoms.

Antipsychotic drugs used for anxiety Conventional antipsychotic drugs
have sometimes been prescribed in low doses for their anxiolytic
effects, particularly in patients with persistent anxiety who have
become dependent on other drugs, and those with aggressive personalities
who respond badly to the disinhibiting effects of benzodiazepines.
However, even lowdose antipsychotic treatment, if maintained, is not
free from the risk of tardive dyskinesia. Newer antipsychotic drugs,
such as quetiapine, may also possess anxiolytic effects when given
either as a sole treatment or as augmentation treatment in patients who
are non-responsive to more standard drug therapies (Baldwin, 2014).
However, the adverse-effect profile of antipsychotic drugs, together
with the lack of well-controlled studies, suggests that such an
indication should be restricted to specialist use in patients with
anxiety disorders that have not responded to other pharmacological and
psychological approaches (Baldwin et al., 2014).

Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists that are used for anxiety These drugs
relieve some of the autonomic symptoms of anxiety, such as tachycardia,
almost certainly by a peripheral effect. They are best reserved for
anxious patients whose main symptom is palpitation or tremor,
particularly in social situations. An appropriate drug is propranolol in
a dose of 20--40 mg three times a day. Contraindications are heart
block, systolic blood pressure below 90 mmHg, or a pulse rate of less
than 60 beats/minute, and a history of bronchospasm. Betaadrenoceptor
antagonists precipitate heart failure in a few patients, and should not
be given to those with atrioventricular node block, as they decrease
conduction

721

72

722

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments in the atrioventricular
node and bundle of His. They can exacerbate Raynaud's phenomenon and
hypoglycaemia in diabetics.

Pregabalin Indications and pharmacology Pregabalin is a derivative of
the anticonvulsant drug, gabapentin. Like gabapentin, pregabalin has
anticonvulsant and analgesic properties. It is licensed for the
treatment of generalized anxiety disorder but not other anxiety
disorders. Both gabapentin and pregabalin are analogues of GABA;
however, neither compound is active at GABA or benzodiazepine receptors.
It is believed that their therapeutic effects are mediated through
interaction with the Î±2-Î´ subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels with
a consequent modification of neurotransmitter release. Controlled trials
have shown that, in doses of 150-- 600 mg, pregabalin is effective in
the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder, and is at least as
efficacious as other agents used to treat generalized anxiety disorders,
including the SSRIs (Baldwin et al., 2014).

Pharmacokinetics and adverse effect Pregabalin is rapidly absorbed, with
peak plasma concentrations occurring within about 1 hour. Its half-life
is about 6 hours, and it is eliminated unchanged primarily through renal
excretion. Dose adjustment is therefore required in patients with
impaired renal function. Because of its pattern of elimination,
pregabalin treatment is not expected to cause pharmacokinetic
interactions with other drugs, but the effects of central sedatives
(e.g.Â benzodiazepines and alcohol) may be potentiated. In clinical
trials of patients with generalized anxiety disorder, discontinuation
owing to adverse events with pregabalin was about 12%, compared with 5%
with placebo. The most common adverse effects are somnolence and
dizziness. Other common unwanted effects of pregabalin include increased
appetite, mood changes, confusion, ataxia, tremor, and memory
impairment. The most potentially serious reactions are visual
disturbances, including vision loss, blurred vision, and other changes
of visual acuity. These symptoms mostly improve when pregabalin is
discontinued. It also seems likely that withdrawal of pregabalin is
associated with discontinuation

symptoms, such as insomnia, headache, nausea, diarrhoea, anxiety,
sweating, and dizziness.

Advice on management Before an anxiolytic drug is prescribed, the cause
of the anxiety should always be sought. In addition, it is helpful to
classify the nature of the anxiety disorder, as this can have
implications for drug treatment. It is worth remembering that, although
medication is undoubtedly helpful in the treatment of anxiety syndromes,
psychological treatments are as effective and are often preferred by
patients. In practice, medication tends to be used when psychological
treatments are not readily available or have not been successful. For
most patients with anxiety symptoms, attention to life problems, an
opportunity to talk about their feelings, and reassurance from the
doctor are enough to reduce anxiety to tolerable levels. If an
anxiolytic is needed, a benzodiazepine should be given for a short
time---not more than 3 weeks---and withdrawn gradually. It is important
to remember that dependency is particularly likely to develop among
people with alcohol-related problems. If the drug has been taken for
several weeks, the patient should be warned that they may feel tense for
a few days when it is stopped. A compound such as diazepam is suitable
for both the intermittent treatment of anxiety and continuous treatment
throughout the day. The use of diazepam on an 'as-needed' basis usually
means that lower total doses are consumed and the risk of tolerance and
dependence is diminished. For longer-term treatment of severe
generalized anxiety disorder, antidepressant medication is more
appropriate (see Chapter 8). Antidepressants are often helpful in the
treatment of panic disorder, although the risk of early symptomatic
worsening must be remembered and explained to the patient. The use of
small doses early in treatment (e.g.Â 10 mg imipramine, 5 mg citalopram)
can be helpful. High-potency benzodiazepines such as alprazolam and
clonazepam are effective in panic disorder, but can cause cognitive
impairment and withdrawal problems. However, they may be helpful in
patients who do not respond to other treatments. MAOI treatment can also
be used in treatment-resistant patients (Baldwin et al., 2014).

Hypnotics Hypnotics are drugs that are used to improve sleep. Many
anxiolytic drugs also act as hypnotics, and these

have been reviewed in the previous section. Hypnotic drugs are
prescribed widely and are often continued for

723

Hypnotics too long. This reflects the frequency of insomnia as a
symptom. Effective psychological treatments are available for the
management of insomnia, and they appear to have a more sustained
duration of action than hypnotics (Espie and Kyle, 2009).

Pharmacology The ideal hypnotic would increase the length and quality of
sleep without residual effects the next morning. It would do so without
altering the pattern of sleep and without any withdrawal effects when
the patient ceased to take it. Unfortunately, no drug meets these
exacting criteria. It is not easy to produce drugs that affect the whole
night's sleep and yet are sufficiently eliminated by morning for there
to be no residual sedative effects (Wilson et al., 2010). Most
prescribed hypnotics enhance the action of GABA through interaction with
either the benzodiazepine receptor or other adjacent sites located on
the GABA macromolecular complex. Antihistamines and low doses of
sedating antidepressants such as amitriptyline and trazodone are also
used to facilitate sleep. The pineal hormone, melatonin, is involved in
organizing circadian rhythms and is sometimes used for the treatment of
primary insomnia.

Compounds available The most commonly used hypnotics are benzodiazepines
or non-benzodiazepine ligands, which act at or close to the
benzodiazepine-receptor site. The latter include zopiclone and zolpidem
('the Z drugs'). The actions of these drugs can be reversed by the
benzodiazepine-receptor antagonist, flumazenil. Other available hypnotic
agents include chloral hydrate (or its derivatives), chlormethiazole,
and sedating antihistamines (the latter are often present in
'over-the-counter' preparations). A sustainedrelease form of melatonin
is also licensed for the shortterm treatment of insomnia in the
middle-aged and elderly (Lemoine and Zisapel, 2012). Of the
benzodiazepines, the shorter-acting compounds such as temazepam and
lormetazepam are appropriate as hypnotics because of their relative lack
of hangover effects (see Box 25.3). Other benzodiazepines that were
previously marketed as hypnotics, such as flurazepam and nitrazepam,
have a long duration of action and produce significant impairments in
tests of cognitive function on the day following treatment. Zopiclone is
a cyclopyrrolone. It produces fewer changes in sleep architecture than
benzodiazepine hypnotics. The most common side effect is a bitter
aftertaste following ingestion, but behavioural disturbances,

including confusion, amnesia, and depressed mood, have been reported.
Zolpidem is a similar agent, with a shorter half-life. Like
benzodiazepines, an epidemiological study has linked prolonged use of Z
drugs with an increased risk of dementia (National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence, 2015). Clomethiazole edisylate is a hypnotic drug
with anticonvulsant properties. It has often been used to prevent
withdrawal symptoms in patients who are dependent on alcohol. For this
reason, it is sometimes mistakenly believed to be a suitable hypnotic
for alcoholic patients. This belief is erroneous because the drug is as
likely as any other hypnotic drug to cause dependency, and can cause
respiratory depression when combined with alcohol. It retains a place in
the treatment of insomnia in the elderly because of its short duration
of action. Unwanted effects include sneezing, conjunctival irritation,
and nausea.

Unwanted effects As well as the specific side effects of individual
compounds noted above, there are a number of general problems associated
with the use of all hypnotics. One of the most important is the presence
of residual effects, which are experienced by the patient on the next
day as feelings of being slow and drowsy. These are accompanied by
deficits in daytime performance and an increased risk of falls and other
accidents. Such effects are less apparent with the shorter-acting
compounds noted above but can still be detected even with drugs such as
zolpidem. Other problems include the development of tolerance, whereby
the original dose of the drug has progressively less efficacy, and
'rebound' insomnia on withdrawal, which makes preparations difficult to
stop. Tolerance is less of a problem with sedating antidepressants, but
such drugs have long half-lives accompanied by residual psychomotor
effects the next day.

Interactions The most important interaction of hypnotic drugs is with
alcohol, where a potentiated effect can be seen. The interaction between
clomethiazole and alcohol is particularly dangerous, and can result in
death from respiratory failure. It should not be prescribed for
alcoholics who continue to drink. Hypnotics will also potentiate the
effect of other drugs with sedating actions, such as some antidepressant
and antipsychotic agents.

Advice on management Before prescribing hypnotic drugs, it is important
to find out whether the patient is really sleeping badly and, if so,
why. Many people have unrealistic ideas about

723

724

724

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments the number of hours for
which they should sleep. For example, they may not know that duration of
sleep often becomes shorter in middle and late life. Others take 'cat
naps' in the daytime, perhaps through boredom, and still expect to sleep
as long at night. Some people ask for sleeping tablets in anticipation
of poor sleep for one or two nights (e.g.Â when travelling). Such
temporary loss of sleep is soon compensated for by increased sleep on
subsequent nights, and any supposed advantage in terms of alertness
after a full night's sleep is likely to be offset by the residual
effects of the drugs. The common causes of disturbed sleep include
excessive caffeine or alcohol, pain, cough, pruritus, dyspnoea, and
anxiety and depression. When any primary cause is present, this should
be treated, not the insomnia. Often simple 'sleep hygiene' measures may
be helpful (see Chapter 13). If, after careful enquiry, a hypnotic
appears to be essential, it should be prescribed for a few days only.
The clinician should explain this to the patient, and should warn them
that a few nights of restless sleep may occur when the drugs are
stopped,

but that this restlessness will not be a reason for prolonging the
prescription. The prescription of standard hypnotics for children is not
justified, except for the occasional treatment of night terrors and
somnambulism. However, melatonin has been regarded as helpful in
improving sleep in children with neurodevelopmental disorders or sleep
disorders such as sleep-onset insomnia and delayed-phase sleep syndrome
(see Chpater 13; Wilson et al., 2010). Hypnotics should also be
prescribed with particular care for the elderly, who may become confused
and get out of bed in the night, and perhaps injure themselves. Many
patients are started on long periods of dependency on hypnotics by the
prescribing of 'routine night sedation' in hospital. Prescription of
these drugs should not be routine, but should only be a response to a
real need, and should be stopped before the patient goes home. Guidance
from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2015)
reinforces advice to use hypnotic medicines only for short periods in
disabling insomnia.

Antipsychotic drugs This term is applied to drugs that reduce
psychomotor excitement and control symptoms of psychosis. Alternative
terms for these agents are neuroleptics and major tranquillizers. None
of these names is wholly satisfactory. 'Neuroleptic' refers to the side
effects rather than to the therapeutic effects of the drugs, and 'major
tranquillizer' does not refer to the most important clinical action. The
term 'antipsychotic' is used here because it appears in the British
National Formulary. The main therapeutic uses of antipsychotic drugs are
to reduce hallucinations, delusions, agitation, and psychomotor
excitement in schizophrenia, mania, or psychosis secondary to a medical
condition. The drugs are also used prophylactically to prevent relapses
of schizophrenia and other psychoses. The introduction of chlorpromazine
in 1952 led to substantial improvements in the treatment of
schizophrenia, and paved the way to the discovery of the many
psychotropic drugs that are now available.

Pharmacology Antipsychotic drugs (see Box 25.4) share the property of
blocking dopamine receptors. This may account for their therapeutic
action, a suggestion that is supported by the close relationship between
their potency in blocking dopaminergic receptors in vitro, and their

therapeutic strength. Imaging studies show that acute psychosis is
associated with increased dopamine release in striatal regions, and that
the extent of this increase correlates with the subsequent therapeutic
effect of antipsychotic drugs (see Chapter 11). A persuasive formulation
of antipsychotic drug action suggests that these agents block the
ability of increased dopamine release to attribute abnormal salience to
irrelevant stimuli (Kapur, 2003). Dopamine receptors are of several
subtypes. It is the D2 receptor that is critical for antipsychotic
action, and all licensed drugs in the category are antagonists at this
receptor, with varying affinities for the D2 subtype. PET studies
suggest that an antipsychotic effect is obtained when D2-receptor
occupancy lies in the range 60--70%. Higher levels are associated with
extrapyramidal movement disorders and hyperprolactinaemia, but not with
greater efficacy (Kapur et al., 1999). Other side effects are
attributable to binding to a variety of other receptors (see below).

Distinction between typical and atypical antipsychotic drugs The term
atypical antipsychotic agent was introduced to distinguish the newer
antipsychotic drugs from

725

Antipsychotic drugs

Box 25.4 A list of antipsychotic drugs Phenothiazines Chlorpromazine
Trifluoperazine

Thioxanthenes Flupenthixol Clopenthixol

Butyrophenones Haloperidol

Dibenzodiazepines Clozapine Olanzapine

Dibenzothiazepine Quetiapine

Substituted benzamides Sulpiride Amisulpride

Benzisoxazole Risperidone

Quinolinone Aripiprazole

conventional typical agents, such as chlorpromazine and haloperidol. An
alternative term is second generation. Although the definition of the
term 'atypical' varies in the literature, a fundamental property of an
atypical antipsychotic is its ability to produce an antipsychotic effect
without causing extrapyramidal side effects. This definition is
problematic, not least because antipsychotics do not fall clearly into
two classes in this respect, but lie along a spectrum. For example,
low-potency conventional antipsychotic drugs such as chlorpromazine have
a relatively low risk of producing extrapyramidal symptoms when
prescribed at modest dosages; conversely, extrapyramidal side effects
can also occur with the atypical antipsychotic risperidone. However, it
is true to say that atypical antipsychotic agents have a lower
likelihood of causing extrapyramidal side effects within their usual
therapeutic range.

In addition, the risk of tardive dyskinesia appears to be lower with the
newer antipsychotic drugs (Correll et al., 2014). Another property that
is sometimes attributed to atypical antipsychotic drugs is improved
efficacy relative to typical agents. Although this is true in terms of
positive psychotic symptoms for the prototypic atypical antipsychotic,
clozapine, it is not clear how far more recently developed compounds
meet this exacting criterion. A multiple treatments meta-analysis of
placebo-controlled trials showed that evidence in this respect is
strongest for amisulpride, olanzapine, and risperidone (Leucht et al.,
2013). However, pragmatic trials have so far failed to demonstrate
important therapeutic differences between conventional and newer
antipsychotic drugs, and even clozapine does not have proven efficacy
against negative or cognitive symptoms. For these and other reasons,
most authorities now believe that the terms 'atypical' and 'typical'
antipsychotic are not useful, and that attention is better directed
towards the pharmacological properties of individual drugs and their
associated therapeutic profile (Leucht et al., 2013) (see Table 25.2).
See Chapter 11 for further discussion.

Pharmacology of typical (conventional) antipsychotics All of these drugs
are effective dopamine-receptor antagonists, but many possess additional
pharmacological properties that influence their adverse-effect profile.

Phenothiazines Chlorpromazine is the prototypic phenothiazine. It
antagonizes Î±1-adrenoceptors, histamine H1-receptors, and muscarinic
cholinergic receptors. Blockade of Î±1adrenoceptors and histamine
H1-receptors gives chlorpromazine a sedating profile, while
Î±1-adrenoceptor blockade also causes hypotension. The anticholinergic
activity may cause dry mouth, urinary difficulties, and constipation,
while on the other hand offsetting the liability to cause extrapyramidal
side effects. In contrast to chlorpromazine, piperazine compounds such
as trifluoperazine and fluphenazine are more selective dopaminereceptor
antagonists, and are therefore less sedating but more likely to cause
extrapyramidal effects.

Thioxanthenes and butyrophenones Thioxanthenes such as flupenthixol and
clopenthixol are similar in structure to the phenothiazines. The
therapeutic effects are similar to those of the piperazine group.
Butyrophenones such as haloperidol have a different structure but are
clinically similar to the thioxanthenes.

725

726

726

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Table 25.2 Atypical antipsychotics Drug

EPS\*

Prolactin elevation

Weight gain

Adverse effects

Amisulpride

- 

+++

- 

Insomnia, agitation, nausea, constipation, QT prolongation

Sulpiride

- 

+++

- 

Insomnia, agitation, abnormal liver function tests

Clozapine

0

0

+++

Agranulocytosis---white cell monitoring mandatory, myocarditis and
myopathy (rare), fatigue, drowsiness, dry mouth, sweating, tachycardia,
postural hypotension, nausea, constipation, ileus, urinary retention,
seizures, diabetes

Olanzapine

+/0

- 

+++

Somnolence, dizziness, oedema, hypotension, dry mouth, constipation,
diabetes, QT prolongation

Quetiapine

0

0

++

Somnolence, dizziness, postural hypotension, dry mouth, abnormal liver
function tests, QT prolongation, diabetes

Risperidone

++

+++

++

Insomnia, agitation, anxiety, headache, impaired concentration, nausea,
abdominal pain, diabetes, QT prolongation

Aripiprazole

- 

0

0

Agitation, insomnia, nausea, vomiting

Lurasidone

- 
- 

0

Somnolence, insomnia, anxiety, agitation, nausea, dyspepsia, abdominal
pain

- EPS, extrapyramidal symptoms; 0, not present; +, sometimes; ++, often;
  +++, can be excessive.

They are potent dopamine-receptor antagonists, with few effects at other
neurotransmitter receptors. They are not sedating, but have a high
propensity to cause extrapyramidal side effects.

Pharmacology of atypical antipsychotic drugs Selective D2-receptor
antagonists. Atypical antipsychotic drugs have a diverse pharmacology,
but currently two main groupings can be discerned. On the one hand are
substituted benzamides such as sulpiride and amisulpride. These drugs
are highly selective D2-receptor antagonists which, for reasons that are
not well understood, seem less likely to produce extrapyramidal movement
disorders. They also lack sedative and anticholinergic properties.
However, they do cause a substantial increase in plasma prolactin.

5-HT2-D2-receptor antagonists The other major group of atypical
antipsychotic drugs possess 5-HT2-receptor-antagonist properties. In
other aspects---for example, potency of dopamine D2-receptor blockade,
these drugs differ significantly from one another (Meltzer, 2004;
Citrome, 2013). Risperidone is a potent antagonist at both 5-HT2
receptors and dopamine D2 receptors. It also possesses
Î±1-adrenoceptor-blocking properties, which can cause mild sedation and
hypotension. Paliperidone is an active metabolite of risperidone

and has very similar pharmacological properties when given orally.
Olanzapine is a slightly weaker D2-receptor antagonist than risperidone,
but has anticholinergic and powerful histamine H1-receptor-blocking
activity. This gives it strong sedating effects. Quetiapine is also a
histamine H1-receptor antagonist; it has modest 5-HT2-receptorantagonist
effects, and rather weaker D2-receptorantagonist properties. It has a
low propensity to cause movement disorders and, like olanzapine, is
highly sedating. Lurasidone is a potent 5-HT2 and D2 receptor
antagonist. It binds only weakly to histamine H1 receptors, which makes
it less likely to cause weight gain and sedation than olanzapine or
quetiapine. Asenapine binds potently to 5-HT2 receptors. It also binds
significantly to D2 receptors, as well as to a range of other 5-HT
receptors and the alpha-2-adrenoreceptor, but the contribution of these
latter properties to its therapeutic effect is unclear. In the UK and
Europe, asenapine is licensed for the treatment of mania but not
schizophrenia. It requires sublingual administration. Sertindole is a
potent 5-HT2-receptor antagonist with weak D2-receptor-antagonist
effects. It causes clinically significant effects on the QT interval in
the electrocardiogram, and its use is currently suspended. Ziprasidone
is another 5-HT2 and D2-receptor antagonist, which differs from the
other 5-HT2/D2-receptor antagonists described

72

Antipsychotic drugs here, because it also binds to 5-HT1A receptors and
is a noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor. Somnolence and dizziness are
common side effects of ziprasidone, and it causes relatively little
weight gain. It has a tendency to increase the QT interval, and has not
been licensed in the UK. Aripiprazole is a partial dopamine agonist that
also has 5-HT2-receptor-blocking and 5-HT1A-agonist properties. It has
an activating profile and pro-dopaminergic side effects such as
insomnia, nausea, and vomiting. It is less likely to cause weight gain
than quetiapine or olanzapine. To some extent these latter drugs were
designed to reproduce the pharmacological profile of clozapine, which
was the first antipsychotic agent to show definite benefit in the
treatment of patients whose psychotic symptoms had failed to respond to
conventional agents. In addition, clozapine has a low liability to cause
movement disorders, and is therefore usually regarded as the prototypic
atypical antipsychotic drug (Kane et al., 1988). Clozapine is a weak
dopamine D2-receptor antagonist but has a high affinity for 5-HT2
receptors. It also binds to a variety of other neurotransmitter
receptors, including histamine H1, Î±1-adrenergic and muscarinic
cholinergic receptors (Meltzer, 2004). Various studies have attempted to
define a therapeutic plasma range for clozapine, with inconsistent
results. A reasonable compromise between efficacy and safety is 350--500
Î¼g/l. Above 600 Î¼g/l the risk of seizures increases significantly. The
pharmacological basis for the increased efficacy of clozapine is not
well understood. However, it is clear that the use of clozapine is
associated with a significant risk of leucopenia, which restricts its
use to patients who do not respond to or who are intolerant of other
antipsychotic drugs. The adverse effects and haematological monitoring
of clozapine treatment is discussed below.

Depot antipsychotic drugs Slow-release preparations are used for
patients who need to take antipsychotic medication to prevent relapse
but cannot be relied upon to take it regularly. These 'depot'
preparations include the esters of conventional antipsychotic drugs such
as fluphenazine decanoate, flupenthixol decanoate, zuclopenthixol
decanoate, haloperidol decanoate, and pipotiazine palmitate. All are
given intramuscularly in an oily medium. Zuclopenthixol acetate reaches
peak plasma levels within 1--2 days and has a shorter duration of action
than other depots. It is used for the immediate control of acute
psychosis, but its superiority to ordinary intramuscular injections is
not established. Slow-release injections of atypical

antipsychotic drugs such as risperidone, paliperidone (an active
metabolite of risperidone), aripiprazole, and olanzapine are also
available.

Pharmacokinetics Antipsychotic drugs are well absorbed, mainly from the
jejunum. When they are taken by mouth, part of their hepatic metabolism
is completed as they pass through the portal system on their way to the
systemic circulation (first-pass metabolism). Antipsychotic drugs are
highly protein-bound. With the exception of sulpiride and amisulpride,
which are excreted unchanged by the kidney, antipsychotic drugs are
extensively metabolized by the liver to produce a range of active and
inactive metabolites. For example, following administration of
chlorpromazine, about 75 metabolites have been detected in the blood or
urine. This complex metabolism has made it difficult to interpret the
clinical significance of plasma concentrations of most antipsychotics;
for this reason the plasma measures are seldom used in everyday clinical
work. The half-life of most antipsychotic drugs (around 20 hours) is
sufficient to allow once-daily dosing. However, quetiapine has a
half-life of about 3 hours, and twice-daily dosing in the treatment of
schizophrenia is recommended, although modified-release preparations are
available. The pharmacokinetic profile of depot preparations differs
substantially from that of standard preparations. For all compounds
except zuclopenthixol acetate, it takes several weeks for steady-state
drug levels to be reached in the plasma (see Table 25.3). This means
that relapse after treatment discontinuation is likely to be similarly
delayed.

Drug interactions Antipsychotic drugs potentiate the effects of other
central sedatives. They may delay the hepatic metabolism of tricyclic
antidepressants and antiepileptic drugs, leading to increased plasma
levels of the latter agents. The hypotensive properties of
chlorpromazine may enhance the effects of antihypertensive drugs,
including ACE inhibitors. Some antipsychotic drugs, and particularly
pimozide, can increase the QT interval (QTc is often cited, which is the
QT interval corrected for heart rate) and should not be given with other
drugs that are likely to potentiate this effect, such as
antiarrhythmics, astemizole and terfenadine, cisapride, and tricyclic
antidepressants. There are also reports of an increased risk of cardiac
arrhythmias when pimozide has been combined with clarithromycin and
erythromycin.

727

728

728

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Table 25.3 Some pharmacokinetic properties of depot antipsychotic drugs
Depot

Time to peak plasma level (days)

Time to steady state (weeks)

Licensed dosing interval (weeks)

Typical clinical dose (mg)

Flupenthixol decanoate

3--7

8

2--4

60

Fluphenazine decanoate

1--2

8

2--5

50

Haloperidol decanoate

7

8--12

4

100

Pipotiazine palmitate

7--14

8

4

50

Zuclopenthixol decanoate

7

8

2--4

300

Risperidone microspheres

28

8

2

37.5

Olanzapine pamoate

2--4

12

2-4

300

Paliperidone palmitate

13

20

Monthly

100

Aripiprazole

7

20

Monthly

300

Adapted from Taylor D, Paton C and Kapur S, The Maudsley Prescribing
Guidelines, 12th edition, Copyright (2015), with permission from John
Wiley & Sons.

Clozapine should not be given with any agent that is likely to
potentiate its depressant effect on white cell count, such as
carbamazepine, co-trimoxazole, and penicillamine. Some SSRIs (notably
fluoxetine and paroxetine) slow the hepatic metabolism and increase
blood levels of several antipsychotic drugs, including haloperidol,
risperidone, aripiprazole, and clozapine.

Unwanted effects The many different antipsychotic drugs share a broad
pattern of unwanted effects that are mainly related to their
antidopaminergic, antiadrenergic, and anticholinergic properties (see
Box 25.5). Details of the effects of individual drugs can be found in
the British National Formulary or a similar work of reference. Here we
give an account of the general pattern, with examples of the side
effects associated with a few commonly used drugs.

Extrapyramidal effects These are related to the antidopaminergic action
of the drugs on the basal ganglia. As already noted, the therapeutic
effects may also derive from the antidopaminergic action, although at
mesolimbic and mesocortical sites. The effects on the extrapyramidal
system fall into four groups, which are summarized below.

Acute dystonia This occurs soon after treatment begins, especially in
young men. It is most often observed with

butyrophenones and with the piperazine group of phenothiazines. The main
features are torticollis, tongue protrusion, grimacing, and
opisthotonos, an odd clinical picture that can easily be mistaken for
histrionic behaviour. It can be controlled by an anticholinergic agent
given carefully by intramuscular injection.

Akathisia This is an unpleasant feeling of physical restlessness and a
need to move, leading to an inability to keep still. Agitation with
suicidal ideation can also occur. Akathisia may wrongly be mistaken for
a worsening of psychosis, and more antipsychotic medication may then be
inappropriately prescribed. It usually occurs during the first 2 weeks
of treatment with antipsychotic drugs, but may begin only after several
months. Akathisia is not reliably controlled by antiparkinsonian drugs.
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists and shortterm treatment with
benzodiazepines may be helpful. The best strategy is to reduce the dose
of antipsychotic drug, if possible.

Parkinsonian syndrome Antipsychotic-induced parkinsonism is
characterized by akinesia, an expressionless face, and lack of
associated movements when walking, together with rigidity, coarse
tremor, stooped posture, and, in severe cases, a festinant gait. This
syndrome often does not appear until a few months after the drug has
been taken, and then sometimes diminishes even though the dose has not
been reduced. The symptoms can be controlled with

729

Antipsychotic drugs

Box 25.5 Some unwanted effects of antipsychotic drugs Antidopaminergic
movement effects Acute dystonia Akathisia Parkinsonism Tardive
dyskinesia

Antiadrenergic effects Sedation Postural hypotension Inhibition of
ejaculation

Anticholinergic effects Dry mouth Reduced sweating Urinary hesitancy and
retention Constipation Blurred vision Precipitation of glaucoma

Antihistaminic effects Sedation Weight gain

Other effects Cardiac arrhythmias Metabolic syndrome and diabetes
Amenorrhoea Galactorrhoea Hypothermia Pulmonary embolus

antiparkinsonian drugs. However, it is not good practice to prescribe
antiparkinsonian drugs prophylactically as a routine, because not all
patients will need them. Moreover, these drugs themselves have
undesirable effects in some patients; for example, they occasionally
cause an acute organic syndrome, and may worsen or unmask concomitant
tardive dyskinesia.

Tardive dyskinesia This is particularly serious because, unlike the
other extrapyramidal effects, it does not always recover when the drugs
are stopped. It is characterized by chewing and sucking movements,
grimacing, choreoathetoid movements, and possibly akathisia. The
movements

usually affect the face, but the limbs and the muscles of respiration
may also be involved. Although the syndrome is seen occasionally among
patients who have not taken antipsychotic drugs, it is more common among
those who have taken antipsychotic drugs for a number of years. It is
also sometimes seen in patients who are taking dopamine-receptor
blockers for other indications (e.g.Â metoclopramide for chronic
gastrointestinal problems). Epidemiology. Tardive dyskinesia is more
common among women, the elderly, and patients who have diffuse brain
pathology. A diagnosis of mood disorder is also a risk factor. In about
50% of cases, tardive dyskinesia disappears when the antipsychotic drug
is stopped. Estimates of the frequency of the syndrome vary in different
series, but it seems to develop in about 20% of patients with
schizophrenia who have been treated with long-term conventional
antipsychotic medication. Current evidence suggests that the incidence
of tardive dyskinesia is lower with atypical antipsychotic agents such
as clozapine, olanzapine, and risperidone than with haloperidol (Correll
et al., 2014). However, cases still occur, albeit at a lower level.
Pathophysiology. The cause of tardive dyskinesia is uncertain, but it
could be due to supersensitivity to dopamine as a result of prolonged
dopaminergic blockade. This explanation is consistent with the
observations that tardive dyskinesia may be aggravated by stopping
antipsychotic drugs or by the administration of anticholinergic
antiparkinsonian drugs (presumably by upsetting further the balance
between cholinergic and dopaminergic systems in the basal ganglia).
Treatment. Many treatments for tardive dyskinesia have been tried, but
none of them is universally effective. Therefore it is important to
reduce its incidence as far as possible by limiting long-term
antipsychotic drug treatment to patients who really need it. At the same
time, a careful watch should be kept for abnormal movements in all
patients who have taken antipsychotic drugs for a long time. If
dyskinesia is observed, the antipsychotic drug should be stopped if the
state of the mental illness allows this. Although tardive dyskinesia may
first worsen after stopping the drug, in many cases it will improve over
several months. If the dyskinesia persists after this time or if the
continuation of antipsychotic medication is essential, a trial can be
made of an atypical agent such as quetiapine. This can sometimes lead to
remission of the disorder. Olanzapine and aripiprazole are also
possibilities. Clozapine may be the most effective atypical agent in
treating tardive dyskinesia but because of its side effect profile is
best reserved for patients who do not respond

729

730

730

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments to other atypicals
(unless the patient also has a concomitant treatment-resistant psychotic
illness). Other agents that have been tried include vitamin E, although
the evidence for its efficacy is conflicting. A dopaminedepleting agent
called tetrabenazine is licensed for the treatment of tardive dyskinesia
but tends not to be well tolerated (see Taylor et al., 2015).

Tardive dystonia Although the two conditions can coexist, tardive
dyskinesia needs to be distinguished from tardive dystonia, which is the
long-term persistence of a dystonic movement disorder. Clinically the
condition is indistinguishable from the various idiopathic dystonias
which present, for example, with blepharospasm or torticollis. The
diagnosis of drug-induced tardive dystonia is made on the basis of
exposure to dopamine-receptorblocking agents and a negative family
history of dystonia. Treatment is unsatisfactory. Anticholinergic drugs
are ineffective, and the condition often persists after withdrawal of
the antipsychotic agent. However, clozapine has been reported to be
useful, as has local injection of botulinum toxin into the affected
muscle group.

Antiadrenergic effects These include sedation, postural hypotension with
reflex tachycardia, nasal congestion, and inhibition of ejaculation. The
effects on blood pressure are particularly likely to appear after
intramuscular administration, and may appear in the elderly whatever the
route of administration.

Anticholinergic effects These include dry mouth, urinary hesitancy and
retention, constipation, reduced sweating, blurred vision, and, rarely,
the precipitation of glaucoma.

Antihistaminic effects H1-histamine receptor antagonism causes sedation
and also increased appetite. The latter can result in excessive weight
gain, which contributes towards the development of the metabolic
syndrome and type 2 diabetes.

Other effects Cardiac conduction defects Cardiac arrhythmias are
sometimes reported. ECG changes are more common in the form of
prolongation of the QT interval and T-wave changes. It was noted above
that the use of pimozide has been associated with serious cardiac
arrhythmias. Cautious dose adjustment with ECG monitoring is
recommended. A similar effect

led to the withdrawal of the phenothiazine, thioridazine. Other
antipsychotic drugs with moderate effects to lengthen the QT interval
are amisulpride, quetiapine, chlorpromazine, and haloperidol.
Antipsychotic drugs are also associated with an increased risk of venous
thrombosis and pulmonary embolus, which appears to be greater with the
newer agents and in those who have started treatment more recently
(Parker et al., 2010). For a review of the cardiac effects of
antipsychotic drugs and the role of ECG monitoring, see Abdelmawla and
Mitchell (2006a, b).

Depression Depression of mood has been said to occur, but this is
difficult to evaluate because untreated patients with schizophrenia may
have periods of depression. It is certainly possible that excessive
dopamine-receptorblockade in the mesolimbic forebrain could be
associated with anhedonia and loss of drive, which could then resemble
depression or negative symptoms of schizophrenia.

Diabetes and metabolic syndrome We have already seen that, probably due
to histamine H1 receptor antagonism, patients may gain weight when
taking antipsychotic drugs, especially chlorpromazine and atypical
agents such as olanzapine, quetiapine, and clozapine (see Table 25.2).
Weight gain can result in obesity, which increases the risk of type 2
diabetes. Schizophrenia itself has been associated with an increased
risk of diabetes, and this risk is probably increased by antipsychotic
drugs, partly but not completely through the associated weight gain.
Weight gain is probably least likely to be a problem with haloperidol,
amisulpride, aripiprazole, and lurasidone. Other pharmacological
properties of antipsychotic drugs may increase the risk of diabetes,
independently of weight gain---for example, via blockade of peripheral
M3 muscarinic receptors. Similarly, newer antipsychotic drugs such as
olanzapine, clozapine, and quetiapine are associated with increased
lipid levels. These adverse effects are of great clinical importance
because they increase the risk of cardiovascular disease and may
therefore contribute to the increase in overall mortality seen in
patients with schizophrenia. A meta-analysis reported that just over a
third of patients taking antipsychotic drugs have the 'metabolic
syndrome' (a combination of central obesity with two out of four of:
hypertension, raised fasting glucose, low HDL cholesterol, and raised
triglycerides). The presence of this syndrome significantly increases
the risk of cardiovascular disease such as myocardial infarction and
stroke.

731

Antipsychotic drugs Patients who are receiving treatment with
antipsychotic drugs require careful monitoring of metabolic aspects of
their general health (Box 25.6). For a review, see Cooper et al. (2016).
For a review of the pharmacological mechanisms involved in the adverse
metabolic effects of antipsychotic drugs, see Reynolds and Kirk (2010).

Endocrine changes Galactorrhoea and amenorrhoea are induced in some
women by high prolactin levels, and it is possible that low libido and
sexual dysfunction may also result. There may also be an increased risk
of osteoporosis. Some atypical agents do not increase prolactin levels
significantly (see Table 25.2). For a review of the adverse effects of
hyperprolactinaemia, see Wieck and Haddad (2004).

Other unwanted effects In the elderly, hypothermia is an important
unwanted effect. Some antipsychotic drugs, particularly lowerpotency
agents, such as chlorpromazine and clozapine, lower the seizure
threshold and can increase the frequency of seizures in epileptic
patients. Prolonged chlorpromazine treatment can lead to
photosensitivity and to accumulation of pigment in the skin, cornea, and
lens. Sensitivity reactions. Phenothiazines, particularly
chlorpromazine, have been associated with cholestatic jaundice, but the
incidence is low (about 0.1%). Blood cell dyscrasias also occur rarely
with antipsychotic drugs, but are most common with clozapine. Skin
rashes can also occur.

Adverse effects of clozapine The use of clozapine is associated with a
significant risk of leucopenia (about 2--3%), which can progress to
agranulocytosis. Weekly blood counts for the first 18 weeks of treatment
and at 2-weekly intervals thereafter are mandatory. After 1 year, the
frequency of blood sampling may be reduced to monthly intervals. With
this intensive monitoring, the early detection of leucopenia can be
followed by immediate withdrawal of clozapine and by reversal of the low
white cell count. This procedure greatly reduces, but does not
eliminate, the risk of progression to agranulocytosis. It is usually
recommended that clozapine be used as the sole antipsychotic agent in a
treatment regimen. Clearly, it is wise to avoid concomitant use of drugs
such as carbamazepine, which may also lower the white cell count.
Because of its relatively weak blockade of dopamine D2 receptors,
clozapine is unlikely to cause extrapyramidal movement disorders,
including tardive dyskinesia. It does not increase plasma prolactin, so
galactorrhoea does not occur. However, its use is associated with

Box 25.6 Metabolic monitoring and interventions for patients taking
antipsychotic drugs Monitoring (if possible, should start before
treatment or as soon as possible afterwards) 1. Body mass index (once
every 4 weeks for 12 weeks, then at least biannually) 2. Blood glucose
(fasting or random: 12 weeks, 6 months, and then annually---switch to
HbA1c) 3. Lipid profile (fasting or random: 12 weeks, 6 months, and then
annually) 4. Blood pressure (12 weeks, 6 months, and annually) 5.
Enquire about tobacco smoking and alcohol use at each visit

Possible interventions 1. 'Lifestyle' interventions: diet and exercise,
advice about smoking and alcohol intake 2. Switch to antipsychotic drug
less likely to cause weight gain (Table 25.2) 3. Adjunctive metformin
for weight gain (requires monitoring of renal function and B12 levels)
4. Medical management of diabetes, dyslipidaemia, and hypertension
according to NICE guidelines Reproduced from Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 30(8), Cooper SJ et al, BAP guidelines on the
management of weight gain, metabolic disturbances and cardiovascular
risk associated with psychosis and antipsychotic drug treatment,
pp.Â 717-48, Copyright (2016), with permission from SAGE Publications.

hypersalivation, drowsiness, postural hypotension, weight gain, and
hyperthermia. Seizures may occur at higher doses. Clozapine is a
sedating compound, and cases of respiratory and circulatory
embarrassment have been reported during combined treatment with
clozapine and benzodiazepines. Constipation is common and should be
treated or a dangerous ileus may result. Rarely, fatal myocarditis and
myopathy have been reported. The weight gain is at least partly
responsible for an increased risk of diabetes mellitus.

The neuroleptic malignant syndrome This rare but serious disorder occurs
in a small minority of patients who are taking antipsychotic drugs,
especially high-potency compounds. Most reported cases have followed the
use of antipsychotic agents for schizophrenia, but in some cases the
drugs were used for mania, depressive disorder, or psychosis secondary
to

731

732

732

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments a medical condition.
Combined lithium and antipsychotic drug treatment may be a predisposing
factor. The overall incidence is probably about 0.2% of patients who are
treated with antipsychotic drugs. The onset is often, but not
invariably, during the first 10 days of treatment. The clinical picture
includes the rapid onset (usually over 24--72 hours) of severe motor,
mental, and autonomic disorders, together with hyperpyrexia. â

The prominent motor symptom is generalized muscular hypertonicity.
Stiffness of the muscles in the throat and chest may cause dysphagia and
dyspnoea.

â

The mental symptoms include akinetic mutism, stupor, or impaired
consciousness.

â

Hyperpyrexia develops, with evidence of autonomic disturbances in the
form of unstable blood pressure, tachycardia, excessive sweating,
salivation, and urinary incontinence.

â

In the blood, creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) levels may be greatly
elevated, and the white cell count may be increased.

â

Secondary complications may include pneumonia, thromboembolism,
cardiovascular collapse, and renal failure.

The mortality rate of neuroleptic syndrome appears to have been
declining over recent years, but can still be of the order of 10%. The
syndrome lasts for 1--2 weeks after stopping an oral neuroleptic, but
may last two to three times longer after stopping long-acting
preparations. Patients who survive are usually, but not invariably,
without residual disability. The differential diagnosis includes
encephalitis, and in some countries heat stroke. Before the introduction
of antipsychotic drugs, a similar disorder was reported as a form of
catatonia sometimes called acute lethal catatonia. The condition can
probably occur with any antipsychotic agent, but in many reported cases
the drugs used have been haloperidol or fluphenazine. Cases have also
been reported with atypical antipsychotic drugs, including clozapine.
The cause could be related to excessive dopaminergic blockade, although
why this should affect only a minority of patients cannot be explained.
Treatment is symptomatic. The main priorities are to stop the drug, cool
the patient, maintain fluid balance, and treat intercurrent infection.
No drug treatment is certainly effective. Diazepam can be used for
muscle stiffness. Dantrolene, a drug used to treat malignant
hyperthermia, has also been tried. Bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist, is
also recommended. Very ill patients

require support in an intensive care unit, with intubation and paralysis
to maintain respiration and deal with renal failure. Some patients who
developed the syndrome on one occasion have been given the same drug
again safely after the acute episode has resolved. Nevertheless, if an
antipsychotic has to be used again, it is prudent to restart treatment
cautiously with an atypical agent with weaker dopamine-receptor-blocking
properties, used at first in low doses. At least 2 weeks should elapse
before antipsychotic drug treatment is reinstated.

Contraindications to antipsychotic drugs There are few absolute
contraindications to antipsychotic medication, and they vary with
individual drugs. Before any of these drugs are used, it is important to
consult the British National Formulary or a comparable work of
reference. Contraindications include myasthenia gravis, Addison's
disease, glaucoma (where compounds have significant anticholinergic
activity), and, in the case of clozapine, any evidence of bone marrow
depression. For patients with liver disease, chlorpromazine should be
avoided and other drugs used with caution. Caution is also required when
there is renal disease, cardiovascular disorder, epilepsy, or serious
infection. Patients with Parkinson's disease sometimes require
antipsychotic medication to deal with psychotic states induced by
dopaminergic agents; quetiapine or clozapine is advised in these
circumstances. Antipsychotic drugs can produce severe movement disorders
and changes in consciousness in some patients with dementia,
particularly Lewy body dementia. In the elderly, especially those with
pre-existing cerebrovascular disease, they are also associated with an
increased risk of stroke. Current recommendations are to use
antipsychotic drugs with great caution, and to avoid their use if
possible, in these clinical situations. For discussion, see Chapter 14.

Dosage Doses of antipsychotic drugs need to be adjusted for the
individual patient, and changes should be made gradually. Doses should
be lower for the elderly, for patients with brain damage or epilepsy,
and for the physically ill.Â The dosage of individual drugs can be found
in the British National Formulary or a comparable work of reference, or
in the manufacturer's literature.

PET imaging studies There has been an important trend towards the
recommendation of lower doses of typical antipsychotic

73

Antipsychotic drugs twofold) in patients who are taking antipsychotic
drugs is similar for the older and newer agents, and is related to
increasing dose (Ray et al., 2009). Although this association may not be
causal, it is clearly prudent to use as low a dose of an antipsychotic
drug as the clinical circumstances permit. Particular caution is needed
in patients with pre-existing cardiac disease and those taking other
medications that might increase the QT interval (Abdelmawla and
Mitchell, 2006a, b). An indication of the relative dosage of some
commonly used antipsychotic drugs taken by mouth is given in Table 25.4.
Some practical guidance on the most frequently used drugs is given in
the next section.

drugs such as haloperidol. This is based in part on studies with PET,
which have demonstrated that adequate dopamine D2-receptor blockade (in
the basal ganglia at least) can be obtained with what were previously
considered low doses of conventional antipsychotic drugs (e.g.Â about 5
mg of haloperidol) (see Table 25.4) (Nord and Farde, 2011). For newer
antipsychotic drugs, sufficient PET data are usually available to allow
clear dosage recommendations. Low recommended doses produce an adequate
antipsychotic effect in the majority of patients. Higher doses may cause
further calming, but are likely to be associated with significant
adverse effects, some of which may be serious (e.g.Â cardiac
arrhythmias). A prevailing view is that the combination of modest doses
of antipsychotic drugs with a benzodiazepine is a safer and more
effective means of producing rapid sedation than high doses of
antipsychotic drugs.

Pharmacological treatment of acute behavioural disturbance The role of
antipsychotic drugs in the treatment and management of schizophrenia and
related disorders is covered in Chapter 11. Here we cover the
appropriate use of antipsychotic agents in control of acute behavioural
disturbance---sometimes called rapid tranquillization. Antipsychotic
drugs and benzodiazepines are used to control psychomotor excitement,
hostility, and other abnormal behaviour resulting from schizophrenia,
mania, or organic psychosis. If the patient is very excited and is
displaying abnormally aggressive behaviour, the aim should be to bring
the behaviour under control as quickly and safely as possible. Drug
treatment in this situation should only be used if psychological or

Antipsychotic drugs and the risk of sudden death The association of
sudden unexplained death with antipsychotic drug treatment is a matter
of continuing debate. Patients with schizophrenia treated with
antipsychotic drugs appear to have higher rates of cardiac arrest and
ventricular arrhythmias than controls. They are also more likely to die
through choking (Ruschena et al., 2003). This could be due to the
illness or to treatment. However, antipsychotic drugs are known to alter
cardiac conduction, and drugs such as chlorpromazine also have
hypotensive effects. Epidemiological studies show that the increased
risk of sudden death (about

Table 25.4 Dosage and D2 receptor blockade of some antipsychotic drugs
Drug

Relative dose (oral)

Maximum BNF dose (mg)

D2-receptor occupancy in vivo (%) \[daily dose (mg)\]\*

Chlorpromazine

100

1000

80 \[200\]

Trifluoperazine

5

NA

80 \[10\]

Haloperidol

2

20

80 \[4\]

Flupenthixol

1

18

74 \[10\]

Sulpiride

200

2400

74 \[800\]

Clozapine

60

900

47 \[600\]

Risperidone

2

16

75 \[4\]

Olanzapine

8

20

75 \[15\]

Aripiprazole

5

30

80 \[15\]

NA, not available. \*Source: Nord and Farde, 2011; Yokoi et al., 2002.

733

734

734

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments behavioural approaches
cannot be employed or have failed to calm the situation. If the patient
is already taking an antipsychotic drug, the addition of lorazepam (1--2
mg) or promethazine (25-- 50 mg) can be helpful. If the patient is not
taking regular antipsychotic medication, the use of olanzapine (10 mg),
quetiapine (100--200 mg), risperidone (1--2 mg), or haloperidol (5 mg)
(the latter combined with promethazine 25 mg) can be considered,
although the product licence for haloperidol recommends pre-treatment
ECG monitoring, which might be difficult to arrange in an emergency
situation. If parenteral treatment is needed, lorazepam (2 mg),
promethazine (50 mg), and olanzapine (10 mg) are available as
intramuscular preparations, as is haloperidol (5 mg), which, as with
oral treatment, is best combined with promethazine. An intramuscular
preparation of aripiprazole (9.75 mg) is licensed for emergency use; it
may be somewhat less effective than olanzapine, but is less likely to
cause hypotension. When using olanzapine intramuscularly it is important
to be aware of the contraindications to its use, particularly with
regard to patients with cardiovascular disease. Intramuscular olanzapine
should not be given with parenteral benzodiazepines. Whatever treatment
is used, it is important to check for

possible respiratory depression, particularly in the elderly and in
patients with concomitant physical illness. The benzodiazepine
antagonist flumazenil should be available. For a summary of the
emergency pharmacological management of disturbed behaviour, see Taylor
et al.Â (2015). There are several other practical points concerning the
management of the acutely disturbed patient that can be dealt with
conveniently here. Although it may not be easy in the early stages to
differentiate between mania and schizophrenia as causes of the disturbed
behaviour, it is necessary to try to distinguish them from psychosis
secondary to medical conditions and from outbursts of aggression in
abnormal personalities. Among medical conditions it is important to
consider postepileptic states, the effects of head injury, transient
global amnesia, and hypoglycaemia. If the patient has been drinking
alcohol, the danger of potentiating the sedative effects of
antipsychotic drugs and benzodiazepines should be remembered. Similarly,
antipsychotic drugs that may be more likely to provoke seizures should
be used with caution in postepileptic states. For further information
about the management of violence in health care settings, and clinical
guidelines, see Chapter 18.

Anticholinergic drugs Although these drugs have no direct therapeutic
use in psychiatry, they are sometimes required to control the
extrapyramidal side effects of typical antipsychotic drugs.

effects. Other preparations that are employed include procyclidine and
benzhexol. Orphenadrine and benztropine have combined antihistaminic and
anticholinergic properties.

Pharmacology

Pharmacokinetics

Of the drugs that are used to treat idiopathic parkinsonism, currently
only the anticholinergic compounds are used for drug-induced
extrapyramidal syndromes. These drugs are antagonists of muscarinic
cholinergic receptors both centrally and in the periphery. Some also
possess antihistaminic properties.

Limited data are available. Anticholinergic drugs appear to be well
absorbed and are extensively metabolized in the liver. They are highly
protein-bound. Their half-lives are generally in the range of 15--20
hours.

Preparations available Many anticholinergic drugs are available, and
there is little to choose between the various compounds. However, some
authorities suggest that the use of agents that are more selective for
the M1 subtype of the muscarinic receptor---for example, biperiden---may
be associated with fewer peripheral anticholinergic

Unwanted effects In large doses these drugs may cause delirium (acute
organic syndrome), especially in the elderly. Their anticholinergic
activity can summate with those of antipsychotic drugs so that glaucoma
or retention of urine in men with enlarged prostates may be
precipitated. Drowsiness, dry mouth, and constipation also occur. These
effects tend to diminish as the drug is continued.

735

Antidepressant drugs Orphenadrine may be more toxic than other
anticholinergic drugs in overdose, whereas benztropine has been
associated with heat stroke. All anticholinergic drugs can exacerbate
tardive dyskinesia, but are probably not a predisposing factor in its
development. Anticholinergic drugs can worsen cognitive function and
should be avoided in patients with dementia. It is also possible that
long-term use of drugs with anticholinergic properties (this will
include drugs such as tricyclic antidepressants and some antipsychotics)
can increase the risk of dementia (Gray et al., 2015).

Drug interactions Antiparkinsonian drugs can induce drug-metabolizing
enzymes in the liver, so that plasma concentrations of antipsychotic
drugs are sometimes reduced. As noted above, anticholinergic agents can
potentiate the effects of other drugs with anticholinergic activity,
such as chlorpromazine and amitriptyline.

Advice on management As noted previously, anticholinergic drugs should
not be given routinely because they may increase the manifestation of
tardive dyskinesia. Also, the presence of persistent extrapyramidal side
effects is a sign that the dose of medication is excessive for that
patient, in terms of D2receptor occupancy. Patients who are receiving
injectable long-acting antipsychotic preparations may require
anticholinergic drugs for only a few days after injection, if at all.
There have been reports of misuse of and dependence on anticholinergic
drugs, possibly resulting from a mood-elevating effect. If
anticholinergic drugs are required, biperiden (2-- 12 mg daily) or
procyclidine (5--30 mg daily) are appropriate for routine use. These
drugs are usually given three times daily, although their half-lives
would suggest that less frequent dosing should be possible. It is best
not to give anticholinergic drugs in the evening because of the
possibility of excitement and sleep disruption.

Antidepressant drugs Currently used antidepressant drugs can be divided
into three main classes, depending on their acute pharmacological
properties. 1. Monoamine reuptake inhibitors. These are compounds that
inhibit the reuptake of noradrenaline and/or 5-HT. They include
tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), selective noradrenaline and serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SNRIs), and selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (NARIs). 2.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). These are compounds that
deactivate monoamine oxidase irreversibly (phenelzine and
tranylcypromine) or reversibly (moclobemide). 3. 5-HT2 receptor
antagonists. These drugs (mirtazapine and trazodone) have complex
effects on monoamine mechanisms but share the ability to block 5-HT2
receptors. In the broad range of major depression, these drugs are of
equivalent efficacy. The main differences between them are in their
adverse effects and safety (see Table 25.5). Each of these three classes
of drugs will be considered in turn after some comments on the possible
mechanism of action of antidepressants.

Mechanism of action The acute effect of reuptake inhibitors and of MAOIs
is to enhance the functional activity of noradrenaline and/

or 5-HT. These actions can be detected within hours of the start of
treatment, yet the full antidepressant effects of drug treatment can be
delayed for several weeks. For example, it has been suggested that at
least 6 weeks should elapse before an assessment of the effects of an
antidepressant drug can be made in an individual patient. To some
extent, this delay in the onset of therapeutic activity may be due to
pharmacokinetic factors. For example, the half-life of most
antidepressant drugs is around 24 hours, which means that steady-state
plasma drug levels will be reached only after 5--7 days. However, it
seems unlikely that this can completely account for the lag in
antidepressant activity. The delay in onset of obvious therapeutic
effect with antidepressant medication led to suggestions that the
antidepressant effect of current treatments is a consequence of slowly
evolving neuroadaptive changes in the brain, which are triggered by
acute potentiation of monoamine function. Studies in experimental
animals have implicated various mechanisms that might underlie this
effect, including desensitization of inhibitory autoreceptors on 5-HT
and noradrenaline cell bodies, increased production of neurotrophins,
such as brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and increased
synaptogenesis and neurogenesis. Recently, however, attention has
focused on the effects of antidepressant drugs on the neuropsychological

735

736

736

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Table 25.5 Groups of antidepressant drugs Drug

Advantages

Disadvantages

Tricyclic antidepressants

Well studied Efficacy never surpassed

Cardiotoxic\*, dangerous in overdose Anticholinergic side effects\*\*

Useful sedative effect in selected patients

Cognitive impairment Weight gain during longer-term treatment

Lack cardiotoxicity\*\*\*: relatively safe in overdoseâ 

Long-term toxicity not fully evaluated

Not anticholinergic

Gastrointestinal disturbance, sexual dysfunction

No cognitive impairment

May worsen sleep and anxiety symptoms initially

Relatively easy to give effective dose

Greater risk of drug interaction

Trazodone

Lacks cardiotoxicityâ â , relatively safe in overdose

Daytime drowsiness

Mirtazapine

Useful sedative effect in selected patients

Weight gain common Less well-established efficacy in severe depression

SSRIs/SNRIs

*Lofepramine is relatively safe in overdose. **Long-term use of
anticholinergic drug may increase risk of dementia*** Citalopram and
escitalopram increase QT interval Venlafaxine is more dangerous than
SSRIs in overdose

â 

Cardiac arrhythmias have rarely been reported with trazodone.

â â 

mechanisms involved in the processing of emotional information.
Emotional processing is known to be negatively biased in depressed
patients, and it is therefore of great interest that single doses of
antidepressant drugs produce positive biases in emotional processing in
healthy volunteers and reverse the negative biases present in depressed
patients, in the absence of any changes in subjective mood. These
findings suggest that relevant neuropsychological effects of
antidepressants can be detected from the beginning of treatment, and the
delay in the appearance of obvious therapeutic effects of antidepressant
medication may stem from the time taken for changes in emotional
processing to be experienced as subjective changes in mood as an
individual with this new emotional 'set' interacts with their
environment. The latter process could well involve the 'relearning' of
emotional associations, which makes the changes in synaptic plasticity
and neurogenesis that have been reported in animal studies of
antidepressants of great interest. For a review, see Sharp and Cowen
(2011).

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors In general, SSRIs are now
preferred to tricyclic antidepressants in the first-line treatment of
depression

because they are moderately better tolerated and markedly less toxic in
overdose (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2009a).

Pharmacological properties Six SSRIs---citalopram, escitalopram,
fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline---are available at
present for clinical use in the UK. SSRIs are a structurally diverse
group, but they all inhibit the reuptake of 5-HT with high potency and
selectivity. None of them has an appreciable affinity for the
noradrenaline uptake site, and the present data suggest that they have a
low affinity for other monoamine neurotransmitter receptors.

Pharmacokinetics In general, SSRIs are absorbed slowly and reach peak
plasma levels after about 4--8 hours, although citalopram and
escitalopram are absorbed more quickly. The half-lives of citalopram,
escitalopram, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline are between 20 and
30 hours, whereas the half-life of fluoxetine is 48--72 hours. The SSRIs
are primarily eliminated by hepatic metabolism. Fluoxetine is
metabolized to norfluoxetine, which is also a potent 5-HT uptake blocker
and has a half-life of

73

Antidepressant drugs 7--9 days. Sertraline is converted to
desmethylsertraline, which has a half-life of 2--3 days and is 5--10
times less potent than the parent compound in inhibiting the reuptake of
5-HT. The contribution of desmethylsertraline to the antidepressant
effect of sertraline during treatment is unclear.

Efficacy of SSRIs in depression SSRIs have been extensively compared
with placebo and with reference tricyclic antidepressants. The SSRIs are
all superior to placebo and are generally as effective as tricyclics in
the treatment of major depression. Most comparative studies have been of
moderately depressed outpatients, and there has been concern that SSRIs
may be less effective than conventional tricyclic antidepressants for
more severely depressed patients, particularly inpatients (Anderson,
2003).

Unwanted effects of SSRIs Side effects can be grouped as follows (see
Table 25.6): â

Gastrointestinal effects. Nausea occurs in about 20% of patients,
although it often resolves with continued administration. Other side
effects include dyspepsia, bloating, flatulence, and diarrhoea. Over
longer-term treatment weight gain can occur---most significantly with
paroxetine.

â

Neuropsychiatric effects. These include insomnia, daytime somnolence,
agitation, tremor, restlessness, irritability, and headache. SSRIs have
also been associated with seizures and mania, although they are less
likely than tricyclics to cause the latter effects. Extrapyramidal side
effects such as parkinsonism and akathisia have been reported, but are
uncommon.

â

Other effects. Sexual dysfunction, including ejaculatory delay and
anorgasmia, is common during SSRI treatment. Sweating and dry mouth are
also reported. Cardiovascular side effects are rare with SSRIs, but some
reduction in pulse rate may occur, and postural hypotension has been
reported. SSRIs have been associated with skin rashes and, rarely, a
more generalized

allergic reaction with arthritis. SSRIs can cause low sodium states
secondary to inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion, especially in
the elderly. Elevation of liver enzymes can occur but is generally
reversible on treatment withdrawal. SSRIs may increase the risk of upper
gastrointestinal bleeding, particularly when combined with non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs or aspirin. Long-term use of SSRIs has been
associated with an increased risk of osteoporotic fracture. Part of this
risk probably stems from depression itself, but 5HT mechanisms play a
role in bone physiology, and SSRIs are associated with a greater risk of
fracture than antidepressants with a low affinity for the 5-HT
transporter (Verdel et al., 2010).

SSRIs and suicidal behaviour There have been anecdotal reports that SSRI
treatment may be associated with hostile and suicidal behaviour.
Meta-analyses of placebo and comparator controlled trials of SSRIs in
adults have found no significant increase in completed suicide in
SSRI-treated patients, and no difference in rates of non-fatal suicidal
behaviour between patients taking SSRIs and those taking tricyclics.
Relative to placebo there may be a small risk that SSRIs can increase
rates of self-harm, but in the largest meta-analysis, involving over 700
studies, the number needed to harm with SSRIs (759) was much greater
than the number needed to treat (estimated to be between 4 and 7)
(Gunnell et al., 2005). Ecological studies, although difficult to
control, show fairly consistently that SSRI prescription at a population
level is associated with a decline in completed suicide (Isacsson et
al., 2010). In adolescents and children the risk of self-harm with SSRIs
might be greater. In a meta-analysis of 27 placebocontrolled trials in
children and adolescents with a variety of diagnoses, including
depression, Bridge et al. (2007) found no completed suicides but a
small, significant increase in suicidal ideation and self-harm attempts
with SSRIs compared with placebo (number needed to harm = 143). Again
there are hints that, in adolescents, rates of SSRI prescribing at a
population level may be

Table 25.6 Side effects of SSRIs Gastrointestinal

Common: nausea, appetite loss, dry mouth, diarrhoea, constipation,
dyspepsia Uncommon: vomiting, weight loss

Central nervous system

Common: headache, insomnia, dizziness, anxiety, fatigue, tremor,
somnolence Uncommon: extrapyramidal reaction, seizures, mania

Other

Common: sweating, delayed orgasm, anorgasmia Uncommon: rash, bleeding,
pharyngitis, dyspnoea, serum sickness, hyponatraemia, alopecia

737

738

738

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments inversely related to
completed suicide, but this has been disputed (Gibbons et al., 2007). As
noted above, SSRIs can cause agitation and restlessness early in
treatment, and it is possible that in predisposed individuals this might
trigger dangerous behaviour. An epidemiological study of depressed
patients in primary care who received a first prescription for an
antidepressant found no significant difference in rates of suicidal
behaviour or completed suicide in patients taking SSRIs compared with
those taking tricyclic antidepressants (Jick et al., 2004). Noteworthy,
however, was the fourfold increase in risk of attempted suicide seen
with all antidepressants in the first 9 days of treatment, relative to
the risk with longer-term treatment (greater than 90 days). In the small
number of completed suicides, the relative risk in the first 9 days of
treatment was increased almost 40-fold (Jick et al., 2004). There are a
number of possible reasons for this important phenomenon. For example,
depressed people may visit their doctor and start treatment when they
are at a particularly low ebb. Thus it is possible that suicidal
feelings and behaviour are important factors in bringing people into
treatment in the first place. Alternatively, the observation may be a
reflection of the traditional view that the greatest risk of suicidal
behaviour occurs during the early stages of antidepressant treatment,
because improvement in motor retardation precedes resolution of
depressed mood. Whatever the explanation, it reinforces advice that
patients should be closely monitored when starting antidepressant
medication. Interestingly, a similar phenomenon of increased rates of
self-harm has been reported in patients with depression in the early
stages of psychological treatment (Simon and Savarino, 2007).

Interactions with other drugs Pharmacodynamic interactions The most
serious interaction reported is where simultaneous administration of
SSRIs and MAOIs has provoked a 5-HT toxicity syndrome (the 'serotonin
syndrome'), with agitation, hyperpyrexia, rigidity, myoclonus, coma, and
death (for further details, see the section below on MAOIs). Other drugs
that increase brain 5-HT function and that must therefore be used with
caution in combination with SSRIs include lithium and tryptophan, which
have been reported to be associated with mental state changes,
myoclonus, and seizures. Other medical drugs that have been implicated
in the serotonin syndrome when combined with SSRIs include tramadol and
linezolid. Serotonin toxicity can also occur if SSRIs are combined with
5-HT receptor agonists such as sumatriptan.

SSRIs may potentiate the induction of extrapyramidal movement disorders
by antipsychotic drugs, although this effect could be partly due to a
pharmacokinetic interaction whereby SSRIs increase plasma levels of
certain antipsychotic drugs (see below). The risk of gastrointestinal
bleeding is increased when SSRIs are combined with aspirin or
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The risk of clinically
significant bleeding is also elevated with combined administration of
SSRIs and anticoagulants such as warfarin.

Pharmacokinetic interactions Some SSRIs, particularly fluvoxamine,
fluoxetine, and paroxetine, can produce substantial inhibition of
hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes, and can decrease the metabolism of
several other drugs, thereby elevating their plasma levels (see Table
25.7). Examples where clinically important reactions have been reported
include tricyclic antidepressants, antipsychotic agents (including
clozapine and risperidone), anticonvulsants, and warfarin. Citalopram,
escitalopram, and sertraline cause fewer reactions of this nature.

The clinical use of SSRIs in depression Whether meta-analyses reveal
clinically important differences in efficacy between SSRIs has been
disputed (Gartlehner et al., 2008; Cipriani et al., 2009). However,
there are significant differences in pharmacokinetic profile, which have
a bearing on the likelihood of a withdrawal syndrome and the potential
for drug interactions (see Table 25.8). Fluvoxamine appears to have
higher dropout rates from trials, and may be somewhat less well
tolerated. Fluoxetine has the most activating effect, and also has a
distinctive pharmacokinetic profile in relation to its long-acting
metabolite, which has a half-life of about 1 week. On the one hand, this
results in potential for troublesome drug interactions several weeks
after fluoxetine has been stopped. For example, at least 5 weeks should
elapse between stopping fluoxetine and starting an MAOI. On the other
hand, this slow tapering of plasma concentration results in fluoxetine
being the least likely of the SSRIs to cause a withdrawal syndrome.
Escitalopram is the active isomer of citalopram, and is marketed as
being more effective than the parent compound, although whether any
difference between the two drugs is of clinical significance is
disputed. Both citalopram and escitalopram have been associated with
prolongation of the QT interval and their maximum allowable doses
lowered accordingly. Paroxetine appears to have the most troublesome
withdrawal syndrome of the SSRIs (Table 25.8).

739

Antidepressant drugs

Table 25.7 Inhibition of P450 enzyme by SSRIs

Inhibitors

Some substrates (plasma level increased)

CYP 1A2

CYP 2D6

CYP 2C9

CYP 2C19

CYP 3A/4

Fluvoxamine

Fluoxetine

Fluoxetine

Fluvoxamine

Fluvoxamine

(+++)

(+++)

(+++)

(+++)

(++)

Duloxetine (+)

Paroxetine

Fluvoxamine

Fluoxetine

Fluoxetine

(+++) Duloxetine (++)

(+++)

(++)

(+)

Olanzapine Clozapine

Sertraline (+)

Venlafaxine

Citalopram (+) Escitalopram (+)

(+)

Tricyclic antidepressants

Haloperidol

Venlafaxine

Tricyclic antidepressants Theophylline

Risperidone

Warfarin Tolbutamide Phenytoin

Tricyclic antidepressants

Benzodiazepines Carbamazepine

Diazepam

Quetiapine

Haloperidol

Propranolol

Clozapine

Thioridazine

Omeprazole

Clozapine Olanzapine Inhibition: +, mild; ++, modest; +++, strong.

When treating depressive disorder, dosing with SSRIs is straightforward
because the recommended starting dose is often sufficient to produce
significant therapeutic benefit. Higher doses may be a little more
effective but this is offset by a greater rate

of treatment discontinuation due to side effects (Jakubovski et al.,
2015). Patients who are starting SSRIs should be warned about the likely
side effects, including nausea and some restlessness during sleep---a
forewarned patient is more

Table 25.8 Differences between SSRIs Drug

Risk of pharmacokinetic interaction\*

Discontinuation Other syndrome

Citalopram

- 
- 

Increases QT interval

Escitalopram

- 
- 

Increases QT interval

Fluoxetine

+++

0

Increased risk of agitation, slower onset of action

Fluvoxamine

+++

+++

Less well tolerated

Paroxetine

+++

+++

Weight gain

Sertraline

++

++

May have dopaminergic effects

- Based on inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes. See Table 25.7. +,
  present; ++, common; +++, marked.

739

740

740

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments likely to continue with
medication. A number of patients become more anxious and agitated early
during SSRI treatment; therefore it is important to explain that such
effects are sometimes experienced during treatment but do not mean that
the underlying depression is worsening. If the patient persists with
treatment, such anxiety and agitation usually diminish, but short-term
treatment with a benzodiazepine may be helpful, particularly if sleep
disturbance is a problem. Small doses of trazodone (50--150 mg) may also
help sleep, although there are occasional reports of serotonin toxicity
with this combination. Patients should be reviewed frequently during the
first few weeks of treatment, when support and advice are helpful both
to maintain morale and to ensure compliance with medication. Often the
clinician can detect improvements in rapport and initiative early in
treatment. It can then be useful to discuss these changes with the
patient. When patients respond to SSRIs there is good evidence that
continuing treatment for at least 6 months lowers the rate of relapse.
In addition, placebo-controlled studies have shown that SSRIs are
effective in the prophylaxis of recurrent depressive episodes. SSRIs
should not be stopped suddenly, as there have been reports of withdrawal
reactions (insomnia, nausea, agitation, and dizziness) after the
cessation of treatment, particularly with paroxetine (for a review of
antidepressant discontinuation syndromes, see Haddad and Anderson,
2007). Liquid preparations of SSRIs can facilitate a slow withdrawal, as
can a switch to fluoxetine.

Tricyclic antidepressants Tricyclic antidepressants continue to be
useful agents because of their efficacy in severely ill depressed
patients and those with treatment-refractory illness (Cowen and
Anderson, 2015). At low doses tricyclics are still used widely for the
treatment of neuropathic pain syndromes.

Pharmacology Tricyclic antidepressants have a three-ringed structure
with an attached side chain. A useful distinction is between compounds
that have a terminal methyl group on the side chain (tertiary amines)
and those that do not (secondary amines). In general, compared with the
secondary amines, tertiary amines (e.g.Â amitriptyline, clomipramine, and
imipramine) have a higher affinity for the 5-HT uptake site and are more
potent antagonists of Î±1-adrenoceptors and muscarinic cholinergic
receptors. Therefore, in clinical use, tertiary amines are more sedating
and cause more anticholinergic effects than secondary amines
(e.g.Â desipramine and nortriptyline). Tricyclic antidepressants inhibit
the reuptake of both 5-HT and noradrenaline. They also have antagonist

activities at a variety of neurotransmitter receptors. In general, these
receptor-blocking actions have been thought to cause adverse effects
(see Table 25.9), although some investigators have argued that the
ability of some tricyclic antidepressants to antagonize brain 5-HT2
receptors may also mediate some of their therapeutic effects. Tricyclics
have quinidine-like membrane-stabilizing effects, and this may explain
why they impair cardiac conduction and cause high toxicity in overdose.

Pharmacokinetics Tricyclic antidepressants are well absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract, and peak plasma levels occur 2--4 hours after
ingestion. Tricyclics are subject to significant first-pass metabolism
in the liver and are highly protein-bound. The free fraction is widely
distributed in body tissues. In general, the elimination half-life of
tricyclics is such that it is unnecessary to give them more than once
daily. Tricyclics are metabolized in the liver by hydroxylation and
demethylation. It is noteworthy that demethylation of tricyclics with a
tertiary amine structure gives rise to significant plasma concentrations
of the corresponding secondary amine. There can be substantial (10- to
40fold) differences in plasma tricyclic antidepressant levels between
individual subjects when fixed-dose regimens are employed. Despite this,
plasma level monitoring does not have a clearly established role in the
use of tricyclics. Plasma measures have been suggested to be helpful for
safety reasons when high doses of tricyclics are employed, but ECG
monitoring is probably more useful (Taylor et al., 2015).

Compounds available These include amitriptyline, clomipramine,
desipramine dosulepin, doxepin, imipramine, lofepramine, nortriptyline,
and trimipramine. Clomipramine and lofepramine are sufficiently distinct
from amitriptyline and imipramine to warrant separate mention.
Clomipramine is the most potent of the tricyclic antidepressants in
inhibiting the reuptake of 5-HT. However, its secondary amine
metabolite, desmethylclomipramine, is an effective noradrenaline
reuptake inhibitor. In studies of depressed inpatients, the
antidepressant effect of clomipramine was found to be superior to that
of the SSRIs citalopram and paroxetine (Clear et al., 2015). Unlike
other tricyclic antidepressants, clomipramine is also useful in
ameliorating the symptoms of obsessive--compulsive disorder (whether or
not there is a coexisting major depressive disorder). Lofepramine is a
tertiary amine which is metabolized to desipramine. However, during
lofepramine treatment, desipramine levels are probably too low to
contribute

741

Antidepressant drugs

Table 25.9 Some adverse effects of tricyclic antidepressants
Pharmacological action

Adverse effect

Muscarinic-receptor blockade (anticholinergic)

Dry mouth, tachycardia, blurred vision, glaucoma, constipation, urinary
retention, sexual dysfunction, cognitive impairment

Î±1-Adrenoceptor blockade

Drowsiness, postural hypotension, sexual dysfunction, cognitive
impairment

Histamine H1 receptor blockade

Drowsiness, weight gain

Membrane-stabilizing properties

Cardiac conduction defects, cardiac arrhythmias, epileptic seizures

significantly to the therapeutic effect. Lofepramine is a fairly
selective inhibitor of noradrenaline reuptake, and has fewer
anticholinergic and antihistaminic properties than amitriptyline.
Lofepramine has been widely compared with other tricyclic
antidepressants, and in general its antidepressant efficacy appears to
be equivalent (Anderson, 2003). The most important feature of
lofepramine is that, unlike conventional tricyclic antidepressants, it
is not cardiotoxic in overdose. This means that it is likely to be safer
than other tricyclics for patients with cardiovascular disease, although
caution is still recommended. There have been reports of hepatitis in
association with lofepramine, but it is not clear whether the incidence
is higher than with other tricyclic antidepressants.

Unwanted effects of tricyclic antidepressants These are numerous and
important (see Tables 25.5 and 25.9). â

â

Anticholinergic effects. These include dry mouth, disturbance of
accommodation, difficulty in micturition, leading to retention,
constipation, leading rarely to ileus, postural hypotension,
tachycardia, and increased sweating. Retention of urine, especially in
elderly men with enlarged prostates, and worsening of glaucoma are the
most serious of these effects; dry mouth and accommodation difficulties
are the most common. Psychiatric effects. These include tiredness and
drowsiness with amitriptyline and other sedative compounds, insomnia
with desipramine and lofepramine, and acute organic syndromes. Mania may
be provoked

in patients with bipolar disorders and generally tricyclics are not
recommended for patients with bipolar illness (see Chapter 10). â

Cardiovascular effects. Tachycardia and postural hypotension occur
commonly. The electrocardiogram frequently shows prolongation of PR and
QT intervals, depressed ST segments, and flattened T-waves. Ventricular
arrhythmias and heart block develop occasionally, more often in patients
with pre-existing heart disease.

â

Neurological effects. These include fine tremor (commonly),
incoordination, headache, muscle twitching, epileptic seizures in
predisposed patients, and, rarely, peripheral neuropathy.

â

Other effects. Allergic skin rashes, cholestatic jaundice, and, rarely,
agranulocytosis; weight gain and sexual dysfunction are also common.

â

Withdrawal effects. Tricyclic antidepressants should be withdrawn slowly
if at all possible. Sudden cessation may be followed by nausea, anxiety,
sweating, gastrointestinal symptoms, and insomnia with vivid dreaming.

Toxic effects In overdosage, tricyclic antidepressants produce a large
number of effects, some of which are extremely serious. Therefore urgent
expert treatment in a general hospital is required, but the psychiatrist
should know the main signs of overdosage. These can be listed as
follows. The cardiovascular effects include ventricular fibrillation,
conduction disturbances, and low blood pressure. Heart rate may be
increased or decreased depending partly on the degree of conduction
disturbance. Sedation and coma lead to respiratory depression. The
resulting hypoxia increases the likelihood of cardiac complications.
Aspiration pneumonia may develop. In practice most patients need only
supportive care, but cardiac monitoring is important, and arrhythmias
require urgent treatment by a physician in an intensive care unit.

Interactions with other drugs â

Tricyclic antidepressants antagonize the hypotensive effects of
Î±2-adrenoceptor agonists such as clonidine, but can be safely combined
with thiazides and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.

â

The ability of tricyclics to block noradrenaline reuptake can lead to
hypertension with systemically administered noradrenaline and
adrenaline.

â

Tricyclics should not be used in conjunction with antiarrhythmic drugs,
particularly amiodarone. Tricyclics increase the QT interval and should
not be given with other psychotropic or general medical

741

742

742

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments drugs that can produce a
similar effect, for example, pimozide, astemizole, erythromycin,
clarithromycin, diphenhydramine, and tamoxifen. â

Plasma levels of tricyclics can be increased by numerous other drugs,
including cimetidine, sodium valproate, calcium-channel blockers, and
SSRIs. Tricyclics may increase the action of warfarin. Interactions of
tricyclic drugs with MAOIs are considered later.

Contraindications Contraindications include agranulocytosis, severe
liver damage, glaucoma, prostatic hypertrophy, uncontrolled epilepsy,
and significant cardiovascular disease. Tricyclics must be used
cautiously in epileptic patients and in the elderly.

Clinical use of tricyclic antidepressants It is probably sufficient to
be familiar with one sedating compound (e.g.Â amitriptyline) and one less
sedating drug (e.g.Â nortriptyline). Other tricyclics can then be
reserved for special purposes. For example, lofepramine can be used for
patients who present a risk of overdose, while clomipramine can be
reserved for patients in whom a depressive disorder is related to
obsessive-- compulsive disorder. The prescribing of amitriptyline can be
taken as an example. At the outset it is important to explain to the
patient that, although side effects may be noticed early in treatment,
any significant improvement in mood may be delayed for a week or more,
and therefore it is important to persist. Early signs of improvement may
include better sleep and a lessening of tension. The usual practice of
starting with a low dose of amitriptyline and building up is probably
wise, because side effects are generally milder and the patient is more
likely to develop tolerance to them. The starting dose will depend to
some extent on the patient's age, weight, physical condition, and
history of previous exposure to tricyclics; daily doses of 25--50 mg for
an outpatient and 50--75 mg for an inpatient would be reasonable. The
whole dose can be given at night about 1--2 hours before bedtime,
because the sedative effects of the drug will aid sleep. The dose of
amitriptyline to be aimed for is about 125 mg daily or above. With
careful monitoring and encouragement, this dose can usually be reached
over a period of 2--4 weeks. Whether lower doses of tricyclics are
effective in less severe depressive states in primary care is still
debated. In some patients, side effects limit the rate of dosage
increase, but if there is clinical improvement it is reasonable to
settle for lower doses. In general, side effects should not be greater
than the patient can comfortably

tolerate. For patients who show little or no improvement, it is usually
advisable to continue amitriptyline for 4 weeks at the maximum tolerated
dose before deciding that the drug is ineffective. Some patients respond
only to higher doses (up to 300 mg daily), and cautious increases
towards this level are warranted in patients with resistant depression
provided that the side effects are tolerable. In doses above 225 mg
daily, it is wise to monitor the ECG before each further dosage
increase. In the ECG it is important to note any evidence of impaired
cardiac conduction---for example, lengthening of the QT interval and the
appearance of bundle branch block or arrhythmias. Because of the
half-life of amitriptyline, each dose increase will take about a week to
reach steady state. If the patient has not improved, and if they cannot
tolerate an increase in dose or fail to respond to higher doses, other
treatments should be considered. Some possible strategies are outlined
in Chapter 9 (see page 228).

Maintenance and prophylaxis If patients respond to amitriptyline, they
should be maintained on treatment for at least 6 months, as continuation
therapy greatly reduces the risk of early relapse. The same dose of
amitriptyline should be maintained if possible, but if side effects
become a problem the dose can be lowered until tolerance is again
satisfactory. It is often not clear when antidepressant drug treatment
should be withdrawn, because in some patients depression is a recurrent
disorder. Long-term prophylactic treatment may then be justified.
Obviously the risk of recurrence increases with the number of episodes
that the patient suffers, but other clinical and biochemical predictors
of relapse are not well established (see Chapter 9).

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors MAOIs were introduced just before the
tricyclic antidepressants, but their use has been less widespread
because of both troublesome interactions with foods and drugs and
uncertainty about their therapeutic efficacy. However, in adequate doses
MAOIs are useful antidepressants, often producing clinical benefit in
depressed patients who have not responded to other medication or ECT. In
addition, MAOIs can be useful in refractory anxiety states (Baldwin et
al., 2014; Cowen and Anderson, 2015). These beneficial effects have to
be weighed against the need to adhere to strict dietary and drug
restrictions to avoid reactions with tyramine and other sympathomimetic
agents. In practice this means that conventional MAOIs are used only in
patients who failed to respond to multiple other treatments.

743

Antidepressant drugs

Pharmacological properties MAOIs inactivate enzymes that oxidize
noradrenaline, 5-HT, dopamine, and tyramine, and other amines that are
widely distributed in the body as transmitters, or are taken in food and
drink or as drugs. Monoamine oxidase (MAO) exists in a number of forms
that differ in their substrate and inhibitor specificities. From the
point of view of psychotropic drug treatment, it is important to
recognize that there are two forms of MAO---type A and type B---which
are encoded by separate genes. In general, MAO-A metabolizes
intraneuronal noradrenaline and 5-HT, whereas both MAO-A and MAO-B
metabolize dopamine and tyramine.

Compounds available Phenelzine is the most widely used and widely
studied compound. Isocarboxazid is reported to have fewer side effects
than phenelzine, and can be useful for patients who respond to the
latter drug but suffer from its side effects of hypotension or sleep
disorder. Tranylcypromine differs from the other compounds in combining
the ability to inhibit MAO with an amphetamine-like stimulating effect,
which may be helpful in patients with anergia and retardation. However,
some patients have become dependent on the stimulant effect of
tranylcypromine. Moreover, compared with phenelzine, tranylcypromine is
more likely to give rise to hypertensive crises, although it is less
likely to damage the liver. For these reasons, tranylcypromine should be
prescribed with particular caution. Moclobemide differs from the other
compounds in selectively binding to MAO-A, which it inhibits in a
reversible way. This results in a lack of significant interactions with
foodstuffs, and a quick offset of action (see below).

Pharmacokinetics Phenelzine, isocarboxazid, and tranylcypromine are
rapidly absorbed and widely distributed. They have short half-lives
(about 2--4 hours), as they are quickly metabolized in the liver by
acetylation, oxidation, and deamination. People differ in their capacity
to acetylate drugs. For example, in the UK, approximately 60% of the
population are 'fast acetylators', who would be expected to metabolize
hydrazine MAOIs more quickly than 'slow acetylators'. Some studies have
shown a better clinical response to phenelzine in 'slow acetylators',
but this finding has not been consistently replicated. However, it may
underlie the observation that the best response rate with MAOIs occurs
in studies that have used higher dose ranges, presumably because even
patients who metabolize MAOIs quickly will receive an adequate dose.

Phenelzine, isocarboxazid, and tranylcypromine bind irreversibly to
MAO-A and MAO-B by means of a covalent linkage. This means that the
enzyme is permanently deactivated and MAO activity can be restored only
when new enzyme is synthesized. Thus, despite their short half-lives,
irreversible MAOIs cause a longlasting inhibition of MAO. In contrast to
these compounds, moclobemide binds reversibly to MAO-A. This compound
has a short halflife (about 2 hours), and therefore its inhibition of
MAOA is brief, declining to some extent even during the latter periods
of a three times daily dosing regimen. Full MAO activity is restored
within 24 hours of stopping moclobemide, whereas with the irreversible
MAOIs, a period of 2 weeks or more may be needed for synthesis of new
MAO.

Efficacy of MAOIs in depression For many years MAOIs were in relative
disuse because several studies, in particular a large controlled trial
by the Medical Research Council (Clinical Psychiatry Committee, 1965),
found phenelzine to be no more effective than placebo in the treatment
of depressive disorders. It seems likely that the doses of MAOIs were
too low in these early investigations; in the Medical Research Council
study the maximum dose of phenelzine was 45 mg daily, in contrast to the
current practice of using doses of up to 90 mg daily if side effects
permit. Subsequent studies have shown that in this wider dose range
MAOIs are superior to placebo and are generally equivalent to tricyclic
antidepressants in their therapeutic activity (Cleare et al., 2015).

Unwanted effects These include dry mouth, difficulty in micturition,
postural hypotension, confusion, mania, headache, dizziness, tremor,
paraesthesia of the hands and feet, constipation, and oedema of the
ankles. Hydrazine compounds can give rise to hepatocellular jaundice
(see Box 25.7).

Interactions with foodstuffs Some foods contain tyramine, a substance
that is normally inactivated by MAO in the liver and the gut wall. When
MAO is inhibited, tyramine is not broken down and is free to exert its
hypertensive effects. These effects are due to release of noradrenaline
from sympathetic nerve terminals with a consequent elevation in blood
pressure. This may reach dangerous levels and may occasionally result in
subarachnoid haemorrhage. Important early symptoms of such a crisis
include a severe and usually throbbing headache.

743

74

744

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Box 25.7 Adverse effects of MAOIs Central nervous system Insomnia,
drowsiness, agitation, headache, fatigue, weakness, tremor, mania,
confusion

Autonomic nervous system Blurred vision, difficulty in micturition,
sweating, dry mouth, postural hypotension, constipation

Other Sexual dysfunction, weight gain, peripheral neuropathy (pyridoxine
deficiency), oedema, rashes, hepatocellular toxicity (rare), leucopenia
(rare)

The incidence of hypertensive reactions is about 10% in patients who are
taking MAOIs, even in those who have received dietary counselling.
Therefore regular reminders about dietary restrictions may be helpful,
particularly in patients on longer-term treatment (see Box 25.8). There
have been reports of a wide range of foods being implicated in
hypertensive reactions with MAOIs, but many of these have cited single
cases and therefore are of uncertain validity. Another complication is
that the tyramine content of a particular food item may vary, as may the
susceptibility of an individual patient to a hypertensive reaction. If a
forbidden food has been consumed on one occasion without adverse
effects, this does not preclude a future reaction.

Box 25.8 Foods to be avoided during MAOI use All cheeses except cream,
cottage, and ricotta cheeses â Red wine, sherry, beer, and liquors â
Pickled or smoked fish â Brewer's yeast products (e.g.Â Marmite, Bovril,
and some packet soups) â Broad bean pods (e.g.Â Italian green beans) â
Beef or chicken liver â Fermented sausage (e.g.Â bologna, pepperoni,
salami) â Unfresh, overripe, or aged food (e.g.Â pheasant, venison,
unfresh dairy products) â

It is notable that about 80% of all reported reactions between
foodstuffs and MAOIs, and nearly all of the deaths, have followed the
consumption of cheese. Hypertensive reactions should be treated with
parenteral administration of an Î±1-adrenoceptor antagonist, such as
phentolamine. If this drug is not available, chlorpromazine can be used.
The use of oral nifedipine has also been advocated. Whatever treatment
is given, blood pressure must be monitored carefully.

Moclobemide and tyramine reactions Tyramine is metabolized by both MAO-A
and MAO-B. Experimental studies have shown that the hypertensive effect
of oral tyramine is potentiated much less by moclobemide than by
non-selective MAOIs. In patients who are taking moclobemide in doses of
up to 900 mg daily, the dose of tyramine required to produce a
significant pressor response is above 100 mg. Even a fivecourse meal
with red wine would be unlikely to result in a tyramine intake of more
than 40 mg. Tyramine has relatively little effect in patients who are
receiving moclobemide because MAO-B (present in the gut wall and the
liver) is still available to metabolize much of the tyramine ingested.
Another factor may be that the interaction between moclobemide and MAO-A
is reversible, thus allowing displacement of moclobemide from MAO when
tyramine is present in excess.

Interactions with drugs Patients who are taking MAOIs must not be given
drugs whose metabolism depends on enzymes that are affected by the MAOI.
These drugs include sympathomimetic amines such as adrenaline,
noradrenaline, and amphetamine, as well as phenylpropanolamine and
ephedrine (which may be present in proprietary cold cures). L-Dopa and
dopamine may also cause hypertensive reactions. Local anaesthetics often
contain a sympathomimetic amine, which should also be avoided. Some
opiates (particularly pethidine, tramadol, and fentanyl), as well as
cocaine, and insulin can be involved in dangerous interactions.
Sensitivity to oral antidiabetic drugs is increased, with a consequent
risk of hypoglycaemia. The ability of MAOIs to cause postural
hypotension can increase the hypotensive effects of other agents.
Finally, the metabolism of carbamazepine, phenytoin, and other drugs
that are broken down in the liver may be slowed. The serotonin syndrome.
A number of drugs that potentiate brain 5-HT function can produce a
severe neurotoxicity syndrome when combined with MAOIs. The main
features of this syndrome are listed in Box 25.9. It is worth noting
that some of these

745

Antidepressant drugs

Box 25.9 Clinical features of the serotonin syndrome Neurological
Myoclonus, nystagmus, headache, tremor, rigidity, seizures

Mental state Irritability, confusion, agitation, hypomania, coma

Other Hyperpyrexia, sweating, diarrhoea, cardiac arrhythmias, death

symptoms resemble the neuroleptic malignant syndrome with which 5-HT
neurotoxicity is occasionally confused. In view of the interactions
between dopamine and 5-HT pathways, it is possible that similar
mechanisms may be involved. Current clinical data indicate that
combination of MAOIs with SSRIs, venlafaxine, and clomipramine is
contraindicated. The combination of MAOIs with Ltryptophan has also been
reported to cause 5-HT toxicity. Adverse reactions have been reported
between the 5HT1A receptor agonist, buspirone, and MAOIs. In addition,
the use of 5-HT1 receptor agonists, such as sumatriptan, should be
avoided. If used with caution, the combination of lithium with MAOIs
appears to be safe, and it can be effective in patients with resistant
depression. If a 5-HT syndrome develops, all medication should be
stopped and supportive measures instituted. In theory, drugs with
5-HT-receptor-antagonist properties such as cyproheptadine or
propranolol may be helpful, but controlled studies have not been carried
out. For a review of the serotonin syndrome, see Gillman and Whyte
(2004). Combination of MAOIs with tricyclic antidepressants. The
combined use of MAOIs and tricyclic antidepressants fell into disuse
because of the severe reactions associated with the 5-HT syndrome.
Current views are that combination therapy is safe provided that the
following rules are observed: â

Clomipramine and imipramine are not used. The most favoured tricyclics
in combination with MAOIs are amitriptyline and trimipramine.

â

The MAOI and tricyclic are started together at low dosage, or the MAOI
is added to the tricyclic (adding

tricyclics to MAOIs is more likely to provoke dizziness and postural
hypotension). The advantages and disadvantages of combined tricyclic and
MAOI therapy have not been fully established. On the one hand, patients
who are taking tricyclics with MAOIs are less likely to suffer from
MAOI-induced insomnia, but on the other hand, they are more likely to
experience postural hypotension and troublesome weight gain. The
combination is said to be useful in patients with resistant depression.
Although formal studies have not been carried out in this patient group,
there are case reports of patients for whom combined MAOI and tricyclic
treatment was successful when either treatment alone had not been
helpful. Low doses of trazodone (50--150 mg) are also used to ameliorate
MAOI-induced insomnia; present experience suggests that this combination
is generally well tolerated, although there are occasional reports of
adverse effects that could represent serotonin toxicity.

Contraindications These include liver disease, phaeochromocytoma,
congestive cardiac failure, and conditions that require the patient to
take any of the drugs that react with MAOIs.

Clinical use of MAOIs in depression The clinical use of phenelzine can
be taken as an example. Treatment should start with 15 mg daily,
increasing to 30 mg daily in divided doses (with the final dose taken
not later than 3.00 pm) in the first week. Patients should be given
clear written instructions about foods to be avoided (see below), and
should be warned to take no other medication unless it has been
specifically checked with a pharmacist or doctor who knows that the
patient is taking MAOIs. As always, patients should be warned about the
delay in therapeutic response (up to 6 weeks) and about common side
effects (sleep disturbance and dizziness). In the second week, the dose
of phenelzine can be increased to 45 mg daily. At this stage a greater
increase to 60 mg may produce a quicker response, but is also associated
with more adverse effects. Accordingly, if feasible, it is better to
find out whether an individual patient will respond to lower doses
(about 45 mg) before increments are made (up to 90 mg daily). If the
patient does not respond to 45 mg, the dose can be increased by 15 mg
weekly if side effects permit. The response to MAOIs can often be
sudden; over the course of a day or two the patient suddenly feels
better. If there are signs of overactivity or excessive buoyancy in
mood, the dose can be reduced and the patient monitored for signs of
developing hypomania. Side effects that are likely to be particularly
troublesome are

745

746

746

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments insomnia and postural
hypotension. Insomnia is best managed by lowering the dose of MAOI, if
feasible. Otherwise, the addition of a benzodiazepine or trazodone
(50--150 mg at night) can be helpful, although the latter drug can
sometimes increase problems of dizziness and postural hypotension.
Postural hypotension can be a disabling problem with MAOIs. Again, dose
reduction is worth considering. Various measures have been
suggested---for example, the use of support stockings, an increase in
salt intake, or even the use of a mineralocorticoid. Of course, the
latter two measures have their own adverse effects.

Withdrawal from MAOIs Patients who respond to MAOIs have often suffered
from disabling depression for many months or even years. For such
patients the usual practice is to continue therapy for at least 6 months
to a year. With MAOIs, it is wise to lower the dose if the patient can
tolerate the reduction without relapsing. Sudden cessation of MAOIs can
lead to anxiety and dysphoria. Even gradual withdrawal can be associated
with increasing anxiety and depression. Clinical experience indicates
that it is more difficult to stop MAOI than tricyclic antidepressant
treatment. An explanation for this difference may be that MAOIs produce
a more severe discontinuation syndrome than other antidepressants;
another possible explanation is that MAOIs are given to patients with
chronic disabling disorders who frequently relapse. It is emphasized
that, because of the time taken to synthesize new MAO, 2 weeks should
elapse between the cessation of irreversible MAOI treatment and the
easing of dietary and drug restrictions.

nausea, insomnia, and agitation occur in about 20--30% of patients.

Drug interactions of moclobemide Moclobemide should not be combined with
SSRIs, venlafaxine, or clomipramine because a serotonin syndrome may
result. Caution is needed with sumatriptan. Like the irreversible MAOIs,
moclobemide may react adversely with some opiates. Similarly,
moclobemide may potentiate the pressor effects of sympathomimetic
amines; therefore combined use should be avoided. Moclobemide should not
be combined with L-dopa because of the risk of hypertensive crisis.
Cimetidine delays the metabolism of moclobemide.

Other antidepressant drugs Other antidepressant drugs are available for
use in the UK and other countries. Their mechanism of action is such
that they cannot easily be grouped with SSRIs, tricyclic
antidepressants, or MAOIs. These drugs also have differing adverse-event
profiles. Therefore they are discussed individually below.

Agomelatine Agomelatine is a more recently licensed antidepressant which
is a melatonin receptor agonist and a somewhat weaker antagonist at
5-HT2C receptors. The mechanism of antidepressant action of agomelatine
is not established, but could be mediated through a melatonin-like
action on circadian rhythms. It is also possible that 5HT2C-receptor
blockade might lead to increased dopamine release in the prefrontal
cortex, though whether agomelatine blocks 5-HT2C receptors at clinically
used doses is unclear (Whiting and Cowen, 2013).

Moclobemide

Pharmacokinetics

In their freedom from tyramine reactions and their quick offset of
activity, reversible type A MAOIs, such as moclobemide, have clear
advantages over conventional MAOIs. However, the therapeutic efficacy of
moclobemide, particularly in more severely depressed patients, is not as
well established. Also, it is not clear that moclobemide is effective
for patients with the various forms of atypical depression and
drug-resistant depression for which conventional MAOIs can be useful
(Cleare et al., 2015). The starting dose of moclobemide is 150--300 mg
daily, which can be increased to 600 mg over a number of weeks.
Treatment-resistant patients may require higher doses, but above levels
of 900 mg daily it is prudent to institute the usual MAOI dietary
restrictions. Moclobemide is better tolerated than tricyclic
antidepressants or irreversible MAOIs, but side effects such as

Agomelatine is rapidly absorbed, reaching maximum levels within 1--2
hours of ingestion. However, it has a high first-pass metabolism, with a
bioavailability of only 5--10%. It has a short half-life of about 2
hours and no metabolites likely to contribute to its therapeutic action.

Efficacy Controlled trials indicate that agomelatine appears comparable
in efficacy to venlafaxine and paroxetine, although the doses of the
latter agents were relatively modest. However, efficacy relative to
placebo is somewhat equivocal and long-term efficacy in terms of relapse
prevention is not well established (Koesters et al., 2013). In clinical
trials, agomelatine was dosed oncedaily at 9.00 pm, which is
sufficiently in advance of the endogenous night-time melatonin peak to
produce effects on circadian rhythm. Therefore it seems sensible

74

Antidepressant drugs when prescribing agomelatine to use the same
treatment schedule.

has only minor inhibitory effects on cytochrome P450 isoenzymes.

Unwanted effects

Efficacy

The most common adverse effects of agomelatine are nausea and dizziness.
Agomelatine is not sedating, but some patients experience somnolence,
and insomnia has also been reported. Other possible side effects include
anxiety and fatigue, diarrhoea, and constipation. Sexual dysfunction is
less frequent than with SSRIs. The most serious potential adverse effect
of agomelatine is an increase in liver enzymes (ALT and AST), with a
rate of 1.4% and 2.5% in agomelatine-treated patients (25 mg and 50 mg,
respectively) compared with 0.6% in patients taking placebo. For this
reason, treatment with agomelatine should be preceded by measurement of
liver function tests, which should be repeated after approximately at 3,
6, 12, and 24 weeks. Any clinical suspicion of impaired hepatic function
should be followed by urgent liver function tests, and treatment with
agomelatine should be stopped if the results are abnormal.

Mirtazapine has demonstrated clinical efficacy in both
placebo-controlled and comparator trials with SSRIs and tricyclic
antidepressants in moderate to severely depressed patients. The
effective dose is usually between 10 mg and 45 mg daily.

Drug interactions The main interaction of agomelatine is with drugs that
inhibit the hepatic microsomal enzymes, CYP1A2 and CYP2C9/19. This is
because these enzymes metabolize agomelatine, and higher blood levels of
agomelatine are likely to increase the risk of hepatic dysfunction.
Therefore agomelatine should not be given with potent CYP1A2 inhibitors
such as fluvoxamine and ciprofloxacin. Coadministration of agomelatine
with more moderate inhibitors (oestrogens, propranolol, and
grepafloxacin) should be employed with caution.

Mirtazapine Mirtazapine is a quadricyclic compound with complex
pharmacological actions. It is a fairly potent antagonist at several
5-HT-receptor subtypes, particularly 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors.
Mirtazapine is also a competitive antagonist at histamine H1 receptors
and Î±1- and Î±2adrenoceptors. The latter action leads to an increase in
noradrenaline cell firing and release. Mirtazapine is not a muscarinic
cholinergic antagonist and is not cardiotoxic. Because of these various
actions, mirtazapine has a sedating profile, but it is not
anticholinergic and is relatively safe in overdose.

Pharmacokinetics Mirtazapine is well absorbed, with peak plasma levels
being reached between 1 and 2 hours. The half-life is about 16 hours,
and the daily dose can be given at night. Mirtazapine is extensively
metabolized by the liver, and

Unwanted effects The common adverse effects of mirtazapine are
attributable to its potent antihistaminic actions, and include
drowsiness and dry mouth. Increased appetite and body weight are also
common. Thus far leucopenia does not appear to be more common with
mirtazapine than with other antidepressants. However, the data sheet
recommends that physicians be vigilant for possible signs that might
reflect low white cell count.

Drug interactions Mirtazapine may potentiate other centrally acting
sedatives. There is a theoretical risk that mirtazapine could reverse
the therapeutic effect of Î±2-adrenoceptor agonists such as clonidine.

Trazodone Trazodone is a triazolopyridine derivative with complex
actions on 5-HT pathways. Studies in vitro suggest that trazodone has
some weak 5-HT-reuptake-inhibiting properties, which are probably not
manifested during clinical use; for example, repeated administration of
trazodone does not lower platelet 5-HT content. Trazodone has antagonist
actions at 5-HT2 receptors, but its active metabolite,
m-chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP), is a 5-HT receptor agonist. Therefore
the precise balance of effects on 5-HT receptors during trazodone
treatment is difficult to determine, and may depend on relative blood
levels of the parent compound and metabolite. Trazodone also blocks
postsynaptic Î±1adrenoceptors. Overall it has a distinct sedating
profile.

Pharmacokinetics Trazodone has a short half-life (about 4--14 hours). It
is metabolized by hydroxylation and oxidation, with the formation of a
number of metabolites, including m-CPP. During treatment, plasma levels
of m-CPP may exceed those of trazodone itself.

Efficacy Several controlled studies have shown that trazodone in doses
of 150--600 mg is superior to placebo in the

747

748

748

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments treatment of depressed
patients. Trazodone also appears to have equivalent antidepressant
activity to reference compounds such as imipramine. Many of these
studies were carried out in moderately depressed outpatients, and the
efficacy of trazodone relative to other antidepressants in more severely
ill patients is not well established (Anderson, 2003). Some have
maintained that the efficacy of trazodone is improved if treatment is
started at low doses (50 mg) and increased slowly to 300 mg over 2--3
weeks. Despite the short half-life of trazodone, once-daily
adminstration of the drug is often sufficient. The drug is usually given
in the evening to take advantage of its sedative properties. Doses above
300 mg daily are usually better given in divided amounts. Lower doses
(50--150 mg) are sometimes used in combination with SSRIs and MAOIs to
ameliorate the sleep-disrupting effects of the latter agents.

Unwanted effects The major unwanted effect of trazodone is excessive
sedation, which can result in significant cognitive impairment. Nausea
and dizziness are also reported, particularly if the drug is taken on an
empty stomach. The Î±1-adrenoceptor-antagonist properties of trazodone
may lower blood pressure to some extent, and postural hypotension has
been reported. Trazodone is less cardiotoxic than conventional
tricyclics, but there are reports that cardiac arrhythmias may be
worsened in patients with cardiac disease. Nevertheless, trazodone is
less toxic in overdose than tricyclic antidepressants. The most serious
side effect of trazodone is priapism. This reaction is seen rarely
(about 1 in 6000 male patients). It can cause considerable problems,
requiring the local injection of noradrenaline agonists such as
adrenaline, or even surgical decompression. Long-term sexual dysfunction
has sometimes resulted. It is recommended that male patients be warned
of this potential side effect and advised to seek medical help urgently
if persistent erection occurs.

Drug interactions As with all sedative antidepressants, trazodone may
potentiate the sedating effects of alcohol and other central
tranquillizing drugs. Studies in animals have raised the possibility
that trazodone could attenuate the hypotensive effect of clonidine, but
it is not known whether such an interaction occurs in humans.

Venlafaxine Venlafaxine is a phenylethylamine derivative which produces
a potent blockade of 5-HT reuptake, with lesser

effects on noradrenaline reuptake, which probably only become apparent
at higher doses. In this respect the pharmacological properties of
venlafaxine resemble those of clomipramine to some extent. However,
unlike clomipramine and other tricyclic antidepressants, venlafaxine has
a negligible affinity for other neurotransmitter receptor sites, and so
lacks sedative and anticholinergic effects. Because of these
pharmacological properties, venlafaxine has been classified as a
selective serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI).

Pharmacokinetics Venlafaxine is well absorbed, achieving peak plasma
levels about 1.5--2 hours after oral administration. The half-life of
venlafaxine is 3--7 hours, but it is metabolized to
desmethylvenlafaxine, which has essentially the same pharmacodynamic
properties as the parent compound and a half-life of 8--13 hours. The
extended-release formulation of venlafaxine (venlafaxine XL) reaches a
peak plasma level after about 6 hours. This gives a longer apparent
half-life (about 15 hours), but the drug is still quickly eliminated.
Once-daily dosing is possible with this preparation.

Efficacy Venlafaxine has been studied in both inpatients and outpatients
with major depression and compared with placebo and active comparators.
Current studies suggest that it is more effective than placebo and of at
least equal efficacy to other available antidepressant drugs, including
tricyclic antidepressants. Some metaanalyses suggest that venlafaxine is
more effective than SSRIs, particularly for more severely depressed
patients, but the data are inconsistent (Cleare et al., 2015).
Venlafaxine has a wider dosage range than SSRIs, from 75 to 375 mg daily
in two divided doses, or up to 225 mg of the extended-release
preparation given as a single dose. The usual starting dose of
venlafaxine is 75 mg daily, which may be sufficient for many patients.
Upward titration can be considered in cases where there is insufficient
response.

Unwanted effects The adverse-effect profile of venlafaxine resembles
that of SSRIs, with the most common adverse effects being nausea,
headache, somnolence, dry mouth, dizziness, and insomnia. Anxiety and
sexual dysfunction may also occur. Venlafaxine occasionally causes
postural hypotension but, in addition, dose-related increases in blood
pressure can occur. Blood pressure monitoring is advisable in patients
who are receiving more than 150 mg venlafaxine daily.

749

Antidepressant drugs Overdoses of venlafaxine have been associated with
cardiac arrhythmias, so it is probably prudent to avoid using
venlafaxine in patients with significant cardiac disease. Like SSRIs,
venlafaxine can lower plasma sodium levels. Venlafaxine may be somewhat
less well tolerated than SSRIs (Cleare et al., 2015). Venlafaxine
appears to be more toxic than SSRIs in acute overdose (Cheeta et al.,
2004), with a toxicity intermediate between that of conventional
tricyclic antidepressants and SSRIs. Similarly to some SSRIs, sudden
discontinuation of venlafaxine has been associated with troublesome
symptoms of fatigue, nausea, abdominal pain, and dizziness. It is
recommended that patients who have received venlafaxine for 6 weeks or
more should have the dose reduced gradually over at least a 1-week
period, and longer if possible.

equivalent in therapeutic activity to SSRIs. Currently there is no
consistent evidence that the efficacy of duloxetine is greater than that
of SSRIs, or that it has a role in SSRI-resistant depression (Cipriani
et al., 2009).

Unwanted effects The adverse-effect profile of duloxetine is similar to
that seen with other 5-HT-promoting antidepressants, and includes
nausea, dry mouth, dizziness, gastrointestinal disturbances, insomnia,
somnolence, and sexual dysfunction. Like venlafaxine, duloxetine can
increase blood pressure; there are few data on toxicity in overdose. As
would be expected from its pharmacology and half-life, abrupt cessation
of duloxetine is associated with troublesome dizziness, insomnia,
anxiety, and headache (Cowen et al., 2005).

Drug interactions

Drug interactions

Unlike the SSRIs, venlafaxine appears to produce relatively modest
effects on hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes, and therefore should be
less likely to inhibit the metabolism of coadministered drugs.
Venlafaxine is metabolized partly by CYP34A4, and caution is recommended
where venlafaxine is coprescribed with CYP3A4 inhibitors such as
ketoconazole and clarithromycin. Like other drugs that potently inhibit
the uptake of 5HT, venlafaxine should not be given concomitantly with
MAOIs because of the danger of a toxic serotonin syndrome. It is also
recommended that 14 days should elapse after the end of MAOI treatment
before venlafaxine is started, and that at least 7 days should elapse
after venlafaxine cessation before MAOIs are given. As with SSRIs,
venlafaxine should be used with caution in combination with other 5-HT
promoting drugs (for example, lithium, triptans, and tramadol).

Duloxetine produces a moderate inhibition of CYP2D6 and, to a lesser
extent, of CYP1A2. It is therefore likely to increase blood levels of
other drugs that are metabolized by these enzymes (see Table 25.7). On
the basis of its pharmacology, duloxetine should not be given
concomitantly with MAOIs because of the danger of a toxic serotonin
syndrome. For the same reason it seems advisable that 14 days should
elapse after the end of MAOI treatment before duloxetine is started, and
that at least 7 days should elapse after duloxetine cessation before
MAOIs are given. Combination with drugs such as lithium, triptans, and
tramadol should be approached with caution.

Duloxetine Like venlafaxine, duloxetine is also classified as an SNRI.
It is about five times more potent in inhibiting the reuptake of 5-HT
than in inhibiting that of noradrenaline. It has little effect on other
neurotransmitter receptors (Cowen et al., 2005).

Pharmacokinetics Duloxetine is well absorbed, with maximum blood levels
occurring about 6 hours post ingestion. It has a halflife of about 12
hours. It is extensively metabolized to therapeutically inactive
compounds.

Efficacy Duloxetine given in a single dose of 60 mg daily has greater
antidepressant efficacy than placebo, and is

Vortioxetine Vortioxetine is a recently licensed antidepressant which
blocks the reuptake of 5-HT and also antagonizes a variety of 5-HT
receptors, including the 5-HT1D, 5-HT3, and 5-HT7 receptors, while
acting as an agonist at 5-HT1A receptors. Hence vortioxetine produces
complex effects on 5-HT neurotransmission but probably overall leads to
an increase in brain 5-HT function, particularly at postsynaptic 5-HT1A
receptors. At higher doses (20 mg) vortioxetine produces a similar
occupancy of brain 5-HT transporter sites as standard therapeutic doses
of SSRIs.

Pharmacokinetics Vortioxetine is slowly absorbed, with peak plasma
concentrations being reached between 7 and 11 hours. Vortioxetine is
metabolized principally through CYP2D6 to an inactive metabolite. The
half-life is about 65 hours. Poor CYP2D6 metabolizers (about 5--7% of
the Caucasian population) have about a twofold increase in plasma
vortioxetine levels.

749

750

750

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Efficacy Short-term studies show superior efficacy of vortioxetine
relative to placebo at doses of 10--20 mg (Citrome, 2014), with a number
needed to treat for clinical response of 7 and remission of 11. In one
randomized study of patients who had failed to respond to first-line
SSRI treatment, a switch to vortioxetine was superior to agomelatine
(Montgomery et al., 2014). A relapse prevention study over 1 year showed
superiority of vortioxetine relative to placebo. It is claimed that
vortioxetine has a particularly beneficial effect on
depression-associated cognitive impairment, but systematic studies in
comparison to SSRIs have yet to be carried out.

Unwanted effects The main adverse effects of vortioxetine are nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, and constipation. Dizziness, abnormal dreaming, and
pruritis are also reportedly common. At lower doses (10--15 mg) the
incidence of sexual dysfunction appears less than that of other 5-HT
reuptake blockers, but at 20 mg the advantage for vortioxetine is lost.

Drug interactions Data are currently rather limited, but similar
precautions as those taken with SSRIs are recommended. Accordingly,
concomitant treatment with vortioxetine and MAOIs or within 2 weeks of
stopping a conventional MAOI is contraindicated. As with other 5-HT
reuptake blockers, caution is needed when vortioxetine is given to
patients at increased risk of bleeding, through, for example,
anticoagulant treatment or therapy with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents. Similarly, caution should be exercised when coadministering
vortioxetine with other 5-HT potentiating agents such as tryptophan,
lithium, triptans, and tramadol. Vortioxetine levels are likely to be
increased by strong inhibitors of CYP2D6, such as ritonavir, bupropion,
and quinidine.

Reboxetine Reboxetine is a morpholine and is structurally related to
fluoxetine. It is a selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (NARI),
with no clinically significant effects on other neurotransmitter
receptors.

Pharmacokinetics After oral administration, reboxetine reaches peak
plasma levels after about 2 hours. Its half-life is around 13 hours, and
twice-daily administration is recommended. Reboxetine is metabolized by
the liver, where it is a substrate for cytochrome P450 CYP3A.

Efficacy Reboxetine reportedly shows efficacy in both placebocontrolled
trials and against active comparators such

as SSRIs. However, different meta-analyses have come to differing
conclusions, and overall in moderately depressed outpatients reboxetine
may be less effective than some other classes of antidepressants,
including SSRIs (Cipriani et al., 2009). It is claimed that reboxetine
produces better improvement in social function in depressed patients
than SSRIs, but this possibility has not been confirmed. The usual dose
of reboxetine is 4 mg twice daily, with a maximum dose of 12 mg daily.

Unwanted effects Despite its low affinity for muscarinic receptors,
reboxetine produces adverse effects characteristic of
cholinergic-receptor blockade, presumably through interactions of
noradrenergic and cholinergic pathways. The most common side effects are
dry mouth, constipation, sweating, and insomnia. Urinary hesitancy,
impotence, tachycardia, and vertigo are also occasionally described.

Drug interactions Limited information is available. It is recommended
that reboxetine should not be given with other agents that might
potentiate noradrenaline function, such as MAOIs, or that might increase
blood pressure, such as ergot derivatives. Plasma reboxetine levels
might be increased by drugs that inhibit cytochrome P450 3A4, such as
some antifungal agents, fluvoxamine, and macrolide antibiotics.

L-Tryptophan L-Tryptophan is a naturally occurring amino acid which is
present in the normal diet; about 500 mg of tryptophan are consumed
daily in the typical western diet. Most ingested tryptophan is used for
protein synthesis and the formation of nicotinamide nucleotides, and
only a small proportion (about 1%) is used to synthesize 5-HT via
5-hydroxtryptophan (5-HTP). Tryptophan hydroxylase, the enzyme that
catalyses the formation of 5-HTP from L-tryptophan, is normally
unsaturated with tryptophan. Accordingly, increasing tryptophan
availability to the brain increases 5-HT synthesis.

Pharmacokinetics L-Tryptophan is rapidly absorbed, with plasma levels
peaking about 1--2 hours after ingestion. It is extensively bound to
plasma albumin. The amount of L-tryptophan available for brain 5-HT
synthesis depends on several factors, including the proportion of
L-tryptophan free in plasma, the activity of the tryptophan-metabolizing
enzyme, tryptophan pyrrolase, and the concentration of other plasma
amino acids that compete with L-tryptophan for entry into the brain.

751

Antidepressant drugs

Efficacy There is only weak evidence that L-tryptophan has
antidepressant activity when given alone, though it may be superior to
placebo in moderately depressed outpatients. There is rather better
evidence that L-tryptophan combined with MAOI treatment can enhance the
antidepressant effects of MAOIs. Similar synergistic effects have been
reported in some studies of L-tryptophan combined with tricyclic
antidepressants, although overall the therapeutic benefit of this
combination is inconsistent.

Unwanted effects L-Tryptophan is generally well tolerated, although
nausea and drowsiness soon after dosing are not unusual. However, the
prescription of L-tryptophan has been associated with the development of
a severe sclerodermalike illness, the eosinophilia--myalgia syndrome
(EMS), in which there is a very high circulating eosinophil count (about
20% of peripheral leucocytes), with severe muscle pain, oedema, skin
sclerosis, and peripheral neuropathy. Fatalities have been reported. It
is now reasonably well established that EMS is not caused by
L-tryptophan itself but rather by a contaminant formed in the
manufacturing process used by a particular manufacturer (Kilbourne et
al., 1996). LTryptophan may be used for the treatment of refractory
depression, when it can be used as an adjunct to other antidepressant
medication. Patients who are receiving L-tryptophan should be monitored
for possible symptoms of EMS. L-Tryptophan should be withdrawn if there
is any evidence that EMS may be developing, and an urgent blood
eosinophil count should be obtained.

Drug interactions The only significant drug interactions of L-tryptophan
are with drugs that also increase brain 5-HT function. Thus, although
administration of L-tryptophan with MAOIs may produce clinical benefit,
there are also reports that this combination may lead to 5-HT
neurotoxicity as described above. Similarly, the combination of
L-tryptophan with SSRIs has been reported to cause myoclonus, shivering,
and mental state changes (Gillman and Whyte, 2004).

St John's wort St John's wort is an extract from the plant, Hypericum
perforatum. It has been used in medicine for centuries for numerous
indications, including burns, arthritis, snakebite, and depression. The
active principles are probably derived from six major product groups,
including hypericins and hyperforins. The pharmacology of St John's wort
is complex, but animal

experimental and some human studies indicate that it potentiates aspects
of monoamine neurotransmission (Linde, 2009).

Efficacy There have been numerous trials of St John's wort, although
these are difficult to interpret because the preparations and dosages
have been difficult to standardize. In addition, the trials have been
conducted in mild to moderately depressed subjects. More recent
meta-analyses suggest that standardized extracts of hypericum (in doses
of 600--1800 mg) are more effective than placebo, and about equal in
efficacy to other antidepressants, in patients with clearly diagnosed
major depression (Linde et al., 2005; Cleare et al., 2015). However,
there is a lack of longer-term efficacy data, and the available
hypericum preparations are not standardized.

Adverse effects and drug interactions St John's wort is well tolerated,
with the most common side effects being gastrointestinal disturbance,
dizziness, and tiredness. Cases of mania during treatment have been
described. Photosensitivity is also rarely reported. Hypericum extracts
may induce hepatic enzymes, and there are reports that treatment with St
John's wort was associated with lowered levels of theophylline,
cyclosporin, digoxin, and ethinyloestradiol. Finally, St John's wort may
cause serotonin neurotoxicity when combined with SSRIs and other
5-HT-potentiating drugs (Linde, 2009).

Bupropion Bupropion has significant use as an antidepressant in the USA.
In the UK it is licensed as an adjunct to smoking withdrawal but not as
an antidepressant. It is structurally and pharmacologically distinct
from other antidepressants, being a unicyclic aminoketone derivative.
Bupropion modestly enhances both dopamine and noradrenaline function in
the brain, probably via reuptake blockade.

Efficacy and adverse effects Numerous controlled trials have shown that
the antidepressant effect of bupropion is superior to that of placebo
and equivalent to that of SSRIs. In some respects the adverse-effect
profile of bupropion is similar to that of the SSRIs, with insomnia,
agitation, tremor, and nausea being most frequently reported. However,
mania and psychosis can also occur, as can raised blood pressure.
Bupropion is less likely than SSRIs to cause sexual dysfunction and
weight gain, which gives it an important advantage in some patients. The
main concern with the use of bupropion has been the increased risk of
seizures. In its original formulation

751

752

752

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments the risk of seizures at
higher doses (0.4%) was about four times greater than that associated
with SSRIs (about 0.1%). The risk appears to be less with the
slow-release formulation (bupropion SR), which has been marketed for
smoking cessation. At doses of 300 mg or less, the risk of seizures with
bupropion SR appears to be about the same as that seen with SSRIs. This
is the maximum dose recommended for smoking cessation, and is the
standard dose used when treating depression. Bupropion should not be
used in patients with a history of seizures or eating disorder.

Drug interactions Bupropion should not be given with other drugs that
might lower the seizure threshold, such as tricyclic antidepressants,
antipsychotic drugs, and antimalarial drugs. Administration with MAOIs
is also contraindicated. Bupropion has been combined safely with
lithium, and in the USA is used by specialists to augment ineffective
SSRI treatment. Bupropion inhibits CYP2D6, and drugs metabolized by this
pathway (including some other antidepressants and antipsychotics) should
be coprescribed only with caution.

Mood-stabilizing drugs Several agents are grouped under this heading,
such as lithium and a number of anticonvulsant drugs, including
carbamazepine and sodium valproate. These three drugs are effective in
the prevention of recurrent affective illness and also in the acute
treatment of mania. In addition, lithium has useful antidepressant
effects in some circumstances, but the antidepressant activity of
carbamazepine and sodium valproate is less well established. Another
anticonvulsant, lamotrigine, shows promise in the acute treatment and
prevention of bipolar depression, but does not appear to be effective
against manic states.

Lithium Placebo-controlled trials have shown that lithium is effective
in a number of conditions, including the following: â

the acute treatment of mania

â

the prophylaxis of unipolar and bipolar mood disorder

â

augmentation therapy in resistant depression

â

the prevention of aggressive behaviour in patients with learning
disabilities.

many of which use the above messenger systems. More recent interest has
focused on the ability of lithium to promote cell survival and increase
synaptic plasticity, perhaps through inhibition of the activity of the
enzyme glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3).

Pharmacokinetics Lithium is rapidly absorbed from the gut and diffuses
quickly throughout the body fluids and cells. Lithium moves out of cells
more slowly than sodium. It is removed from the plasma by renal
excretion and by entering cells and other body compartments. Therefore
there is rapid excretion of lithium from the plasma, and a slower phase
reflecting its removal from the whole-body pool. Like sodium, lithium is
filtered and partly reabsorbed in the kidney. When the proximal tubule
absorbs more water, lithium absorption increases. Therefore dehydration
causes the plasma lithium concentration to rise. Because lithium is
transported in competition with sodium, more is reabsorbed by the kidney
when sodium concentrations fall. This is the mechanism whereby thiazide
diuretics can lead to toxic concentrations of lithium in the blood.

Mechanism of action

Dosage and plasma concentrations

Animal studies have shown that lithium has important effects on the
intracellular signalling molecules or 'second messengers' that are
activated when a neurotransmitter or agonist binds to a specific
receptor. At clinically relevant doses, lithium inhibits the formation
of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and also attenuates the
formation of various inositol lipid-derived mediators. Through these
actions lithium could exert profound effects on a wide range of
neurotransmitter pathways,

Because the therapeutic and toxic doses are close together, it is
essential to measure plasma concentrations of lithium during treatment.
Measurements should first be made after about 7 days, then about every 2
weeks, and then, provided that a satisfactory steady state has been
achieved, once every 6 weeks. Subsequently, lithium levels are often
very stable, and serum measures can be carried out at intervals of
approximately 3 months unless there are clinical indications for more
frequent monitoring.

753

Mood-stabilizing drugs After an oral dose, serum lithium levels rise by
a factor of two or three within about 4 hours. For this reason,
concentrations are normally measured approximately 12 hours after the
last dose, usually that given at night. It is important to follow this
routine, as published information about lithium levels refers to the
concentration 12 hours after the last dose, and not to the 'peak'
reached in the 4 hours after that dose. If an unexpectedly high
concentration is found, it is important to establish whether the patient
has inadvertently taken a morning dose before the blood sample was
taken. Previously, the accepted range for prophylaxis was 0.7--1.2
mmol/l measured 12 hours after the last dose. However, current trends
are to maintain lithium at lower serum levels because this decreases the
burden of side effects. Severus et al.Â (2008) concluded that, in the
prophylaxis of bipolar disorder, the minimum efficacious serum level of
lithium was 0.4 mmol/l, but in most patients the best therapeutic
response was obtained with levels in the range 0.6--0.75 mmol/l. Higher
levels benefited some patients with more persistent manic
symptomatology. In the treatment of acute mania, serum concentrations
below 0.8 mmol/l appear to be ineffective, and a range of 0.8--1.0
mmol/l is probably required. Serious toxic effects appear with
concentrations above 2.0 mmol/l, although early symptoms may appear at
concentrations above 1.2 mmol/l (Macritchie and Young, 2004). A number
of delayed-release preparations of lithium are now available, but their
pharmacokinetics in vivo do not differ significantly from those of
standard lithium carbonate preparations. Liquid formulations of lithium
citrate are available for patients who have difficulty in taking
tablets. Lithium may be administered once- or twice-daily. Frequency of
administration does not appear to affect urine volume. In general, it is
more convenient to take lithium as a single dose at night, but patients
who experience gastric irritation on this regimen may be helped by
divided daily doses.

Unwanted effects A mild diuresis due to sodium excretion occurs soon
after the drug is started. Other common effects include tremor of the
hands, dry mouth, a metallic taste, feelings of muscular weakness, and
fatigue (Table 25.10). Some degree of mild thirst and polyuria is common
in patients taking lithium, probably because lithium blocks the effect
of antidiuretic hormone on the renal tubule. This may not be of clinical
significance, but up to one-third of patients can show progression to a
diabetes insipidus-like syndrome with pronounced polyuria and
polydipsia. This may necessitate withdrawal of lithium

treatment, although the use of lower serum lithium levels may cause the
syndrome to remit. Some patients, especially women, gain weight when
taking the drug. Persistent fine tremor, mainly affecting the hands, is
common, but coarse tremor suggests that the serum concentration of
lithium has reached toxic levels. Most patients adapt to the fine
tremor; for those who do not, propranolol up to 40 mg three times daily
may reduce the symptom. Both hair loss and coarsening of hair texture
can occur. Thyroid gland enlargement occurs in about 5% of patients who
are taking lithium. The thyroid shrinks again if thyroxine is given
while lithium is continued, and it generally returns to normal a month
or two after lithium has been stopped. Lithium interferes with thyroid
production, and hypothyroidism occurs in up to 20% of women patients,
with a compensatory rise in thyroidstimulating hormone. Tests of thyroid
function should be performed every 6 months to help to detect these
changes, but these intermittent tests are no substitute for a continuous
watch for suggestive clinical signs, particularly lethargy and
substantial weight gain. If hypothyroidism develops and the reasons for
lithium treatment are still strong, thyroxine treatment should be added.
Lithium has also been associated with elevated serum calcium levels in
the context of hyperparathyroidism. This is occasionally associated with
severe depression, making distinction from the underlying mood disorder
difficult. Reversible ECG changes also occur. These may be due to
displacement of potassium in the myocardium by lithium, as they resemble
those of hypokalaemia, with T-wave flattening and inversion or widening
of the QRS. They are rarely of clinical significance. Other changes
include a reversible leucocytosis and occasional papular or
maculopapular rashes. Effects on memory are sometimes reported by
patients, who complain in particular of everyday lapses of memory, such
as forgetting well-known names. It is possible that this impairment of
memory is caused by the mood disorder rather than by the drug itself,
but there is also evidence that lithium can be associated with impaired
performance on certain cognitive tests. Long-term effects on the kidney.
As noted above, lithium treatment decreases tubular concentrating
ability and can occasionally cause a nephrogenic diabetes inspidus. In
addition, there have been reports that over many years of treatment,
lithium can sometimes cause an increasing and in some cases irreversible
decline in tubular function. This may be more likely in patients with
higher serum concentrations of lithium, and

753

754

754

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Table 25.10 Some adverse effects of lithium, carbamazepine, and
valproate Lithium

Carbamazepine

Neurological

Tremor, weakness, dysarthria, ataxia, impaired memory, seizures (rare)

Dizziness, weakness, drowsiness, Tremor, sedation ataxia, headache,
visual disturbance

Renal/fluid balance

Increased urine output with decreased urine-concentrating ability.
Thirst, diabetes insipidus, oedema

Acts to increase urineIncreased plasma ammonia concentrating ability,
low sodium states, oedema

Gastrointestinal

Altered taste, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, weight gain

Anorexia, nausea, constipation, hepatitis

Endocrine

Decreased thyroxine with increased TSH. Goitre, hyperparathyroidism
(rare)

Decreased thyroxine with normal Menstrual disturbances TSH

Haematological

Leucocytosis

Leucopenia, agranulocytosis (rare) Low platelet count, abnormal platelet
aggregation

Dermatological

Acne, exacerbation of psoriasis

Erythematous rash

Cardiovascular

ECG changes (usually clinically benign)

Cardiac conduction disturbances

where concomitant psychotropic medication has been employed (Macritchie
and Young, 2004). Several follow-up studies have examined the effect of
longer-term lithium maintenance treatment on glomerular function. In
general, it has been thought that any decline in glomerular function is
usually mild and related to lithium intoxication. However, more recent
epidemiological studies suggest that lithium treatment is associated
with an increased risk of chronic kidney disease, particularly in
patients with a greater number of prescriptions for lithium (Kessing et
al., 2015). Whether lithium is associated with an increased risk of
end-stage renal failure is unclear (Close et al., 2014; Kessing et al.,
2015). Clarifying this possibility is difficult because patients with
bipolar disorder (the group most likely to receive lithium) may have an
increased risk of renal disease anyway through associated medical
morbidities; for example, hypertension and diabetes (see Chapter 10).
With the current trends towards long-term prophylaxis of mood disorders,
it is clearly wise to monitor plasma creatinine levels regularly and to
supplement this with estimated glomerular filtration rate (e-GFR; see
Box 25.10). It seems likely that the risk of nephrotoxicity will be
minimized by maintaining plasma lithium levels at the lower end of the
therapeutic range, provided that they are therapeutically effective for
the individual

Valproate

Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, weight gain, hepatitis (rare),
pancreatitis (rare)

Hair loss

patient. Also, careful attention to medical comorbidity in bipolar
patients is important.

Toxic effects These are related to dose. They include ataxia, poor
coordination of limb movements, muscle twitching, slurred speech, and
confusion. They constitute a serious medical emergency, as they can
progress through coma and fits to death. If these symptoms appear,
lithium must be stopped at once and a high intake of fluid provided,
with extra sodium chloride to stimulate an osmotic diuresis. In severe
cases, renal dialysis may be needed. Lithium is rapidly cleared if renal
function is normal, so that most cases either recover completely or die.
However, cases of permanent neurological and renal damage despite
haemodialysis have been reported. As noted earlier, lithium can increase
fetal abnormalities, particularly of the heart, although the magnitude
of the individual risk is low. The decision as to whether or not to
continue with lithium treatment during pregnancy must therefore be
carefully considered. Important factors include the likelihood of
affective relapse if lithium is withheld, and the difficulty that could
be experienced in managing an episode of affective illness in the
particular individual.

75

Mood-stabilizing drugs

Box 25.10 Lithium, renal function, and estimated glomerular filtration
rate The estimated glomerular filtration rate (e-GFR) in a healthy young
adult is about 100 ml/min, and it falls by about 1 ml/min per year as
people get older, so many healthy 75-year-olds will have an e-GFR of
50-- 60 ml/min.

Stage 3 CKD is asymptomatic, but is associated with a greater subsequent
risk of cardiovascular disease. People with stage 3 CKD require regular
cardiovascular monitoring and tests of renal function, including
urinalysis every 3 months.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD)

Indications for referral to a specialist renal physician in a patient
taking lithium

CKD stage 1: e-GFR \>90 ml/min, normal kidney function, but urine
findings or structural abnormalities or genetic trait indicate kidney
disease CKD stage 2: e-GFR 60--90 ml/min, mildly reduced kidney
function, and other findings (as for stage 1) indicate kidney disease
CKD stage 3: e-GFR 30--59 ml/min, a moderate reduction in kidney
function CKD stage 4: e-GFR 15--29 ml/min, a severe reduction in kidney
function CKD stage 5: e-GFR \<15 ml/min, established kidney failure,
when dialysis or a kidney transplant may be needed.

If pregnant patients continue with lithium, serum levels should be
monitored closely. Ultrasound examination and fetal echocardiography are
valuable screening tests as the pregnancy progresses. Patients with a
history of bipolar disorder have a substantially increased risk of
relapse in the postpartum period. In such patients it may be worth
considering the introduction of lithium shortly after delivery to
provide a prophylactic effect. However, significant concentrations of
lithium can be measured in the serum of breastfed infants, which may
make bottle-feeding advisable.

Drug interactions Because of the narrow therapeutic index of lithium,
pharmacokinetic drug interactions are of major clinical importance (Box
25.11). Pharmacodynamic interactions may involve potentiation of
5-HT-promoting agents, leading to a serotonin syndrome. In addition,
therapeutic serum levels of lithium can be associated with neurotoxicity
in the presence of certain other centrally acting agents; for example,
calcium channel blockers and carbamazepine. ECT and surgery. It is
possible that the continuation of lithium during ECT may lead to
neurotoxicity. If feasible,

Referral is required if any of the following are present: â e-GFR is
decreasing by \>4 ml/min annually â progressive rise in blood creatinine
concentration in three or more serial tests â proteinuria â haematuria â
symptoms suggestive of chronic renal failure (e.g. tiredness, anaemia) â
e-GFR \<30 ml/min. Source: data from British Journal of Psychiatry,
193(2), Morriss R and Benjamin B, Lithium and eGFR: a new routinely
available tool for the prevention of chronic kidney disease, pp.Â 93--95,
Copyright (2008), The Royal College of Psychiatrists.

lithium treatment should be suspended or serum levels reduced during
ECT, because the customary overnight fast beforehand may leave patients
relatively dehydrated the following morning. If possible, lithium
treatment should be discontinued before major surgery, because the
effects of muscle relaxants may be potentiated. However, the risk of
acute withdrawal and 'rebound' mania must be considered.

Lithium withdrawal In some studies, abrupt lithium withdrawal has been
associated with the rapid onset of mania. Undoubtedly there is an
increased risk of recurrent mood disorder after lithium discontinuation,
probably because lithium is an effective prophylactic agent and because
it is used for disorders that have a high risk of recurrence. However,
there is probably also a lithium withdrawal syndrome with 'rebound'
mania, although this may be restricted to patients with bipolar
disorder. The risk of rapid relapse is reduced if lithium is
discontinued slowly over a period of several weeks. Even patients who
have remained entirely well for many years may experience a further
episode of affective disorder after lithium discontinuation. Most of
these individuals

755

756

756

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Box 25.11 Some drug interactions of lithium Pharmacokinetic Increased
lithium levels Diuretics (furosemide is safest) Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin/ sulindac is safest) â ACE inhibitors â
Angiotensin-II-receptor antagonists â Antibiotics (metronidazole) â â

Decreased lithium levels â â

Theophylline Sodium bicarbonate

Pharmacodynamic 5-HT neurotoxicity SSRIs (can be used safely with care)
â Extrapyramidal side effects enhanced Antipsychotic agents,
metoclopramide, domperidone â Enhanced neurotoxicity Carbamazepine,
phenytoin, calcium-channel blockers, methyldopa â

will respond to the reintroduction of lithium (Tondo et al., 1997).

Contraindications These include renal failure or recent renal disease,
current cardiac failure or recent myocardial infarction, and chronic
diarrhoea sufficient to alter electrolytes. Lithium should not be
prescribed if the patient is judged to be unlikely to observe the
precautions required for its safe use. This includes a propensity to
discontinue it suddenly against advice.

The management of patients on lithium Preparation. A careful routine of
management is essential because of the effects of therapeutic doses of
lithium on the thyroid and kidney, and the toxic effects of excessive
dosage. The following routine is one of several that have been proposed,
and can be adopted safely. Successful treatment requires attention to
detail, so the steps are described below at some length. Before starting
lithium, a physical examination should be performed, including the
measurement of blood pressure. It is also useful to weigh the patient
and calculate the BMI.

Blood should be taken for estimation of electrolytes, calcium,
creatinine, e-GFR, and a full blood count. Thyroid function tests are
also necessary. If indicated, an ECG and pregnancy tests should be
performed as well. If these tests show no contraindication to lithium
treatment, the doctor should check that the patient is not taking any
drugs that might interact with lithium. A careful explanation should
then be given to the patient. They should understand the possible early
toxic effects of an unduly high blood concentration, and also the
circumstances in which this can arise---for example, during intercurrent
gastroenteritis, renal infection, or the dehydration secondary to fever.
They should be advised that if any of these arise, they should stop the
drug and seek medical advice. It is usually appropriate to include
another member of the family in these discussions. Providing printed
guidelines on these points is often helpful (either written by the
doctor, or in one of the forms provided by pharmaceutical firms). In
these discussions a sensible balance must be struck between alarming the
patient by overemphasizing the risks, and failing to give them the
information that they need to take a collaborative part in the
treatment. Starting treatment. Lithium should normally be prescribed as
the carbonate, and treatment should begin and continue with a single
daily dose unless there is gastric intolerance, in which case divided
doses can be given. If the drug is being used for prophylaxis, it is
appropriate to begin with 200--400 mg daily in a single dose. The lower
end of the range is appropriate when patients are taking concomitant
medication such as SSRIs that might interact with lithium. Blood should
be taken for lithium estimations every week or two, adjusting the dose
until an appropriate concentration is achieved. A lithium level of
0.4--0.7 mmol/ l (in a sample taken 12 hours after the last dose) may be
adequate for prophylaxis, as explained above. If this is not effective,
the previously accepted higher range of 0.8--0.9 mmol/l can be tried if
side effects permit and the predominant symptomatology is manic. When
judging the response, it should be remembered that several months may
elapse before lithium achieves its full effect. Continuation treatment.
As treatment continues, lithium estimations should be carried out about
every 12 weeks. It is important to have some means of reminding patients
and doctors about the times at which repeat investigations are required.
Computerized databases may be helpful in this respect. Every 6 months,
blood samples should be taken for electrolytes, urea, creatinine, e-GFR,
calcium, and thyroid function tests. If two consecutive thyroid function
tests 1 month apart show

75

Mood-stabilizing drugs evidence of hypothyroidism, lithium should be
stopped or L-thyroxine prescribed. Troublesome polyuria is a reason for
attempting a reduction in dose, whereas severe persistent polyuria is an
indication for specialist renal investigation, including tests of
concentrating ability. A persistent leucocytosis is not uncommon and is
apparently harmless. It reverses soon after the drug is stopped. When
lithium is given, the doctor must keep in mind the interactions that
have been reported with psychotropic and other drugs (see above). It is
also prudent to be extra vigilant for toxic effects if ECT is being
given. If the patient requires an anaesthetic for any reason, the
anaesthetist should be told that they are taking lithium; this is
because, as noted above, there is some evidence that the effects of
muscle relaxants may be potentiated. Lithium is usually continued for at
least a year, and often for much longer. The need for the drug should be
reviewed once a year, taking into account any persistence of mild mood
fluctuations, which suggest the possibility of relapse if treatment is
stopped. Continuing medication is more likely to be needed if the
patient has previously had several episodes of mood disorder within a
short time, or if previous episodes were so severe that even a small
risk of recurrence should be avoided. Some patients have taken lithium
continuously for 15 years or more, but there should always be compelling
reasons for continuing treatment for more than 5 years. As noted above,
lithium should be withdrawn slowly, over a number of months if possible.
The patient should be advised not to discontinue lithium suddenly on
their own initiative.

Carbamazepine Carbamazepine was originally introduced as an
anticonvulsant, and was found to have useful effects on mood in certain
patients. Subsequently it was found to be beneficial in some bipolar
patients, including those who had proved refractory to lithium. There is
reasonable evidence that carbamazepine is effective in the management of
acute mania and also in the prophylaxis of bipolar disorder, although
overall its efficacy is probably less than that of lithium (Goodwin et
al, 2016). Mode of action. Like certain other anticonvulsants,
carbamazepine blocks neuronal sodium channels. It is unclear whether
this action plays a role in the moodstabilizing effects. In both humans
and animals, carbamazepine facilitates 5-HT neurotransmission, an action
that it shares with lithium.

Pharmacokinetics Carbamazepine is slowly but completely absorbed and
widely distributed. It is extensively metabolized, and at

least one metabolite, carbamazepine epoxide, is therapeutically active.
The half-life during long-term treatment is about 20 hours.
Carbamazepine is a strong inducer of hepatic microsomal enzymes, and can
lower the plasma concentrations of numerous other drugs.

Dosage and plasma concentrations The dosage of carbamazepine in the
treatment of mood disorders is similar to that used in the treatment of
epilepsy, within the range 400--1600 mg daily. Treatment is usually
given in divided doses twice-daily, because this practice may improve
tolerance. No clear relationship has been established between plasma
carbamazepine concentrations and therapeutic response, but it seems
prudent to monitor levels (about 12 hours after the last dose) and to
maintain them in the usual anticonvulsant range as a precaution against
toxicity.

Unwanted effects Side effects are common at the beginning of treatment.
They include drowsiness, dizziness, ataxia, diplopia, and nausea.
Tolerance to these effects usually develops quickly. A potentially
serious side effect of carbamazepine is agranulocytosis, although this
complication is very rare (variously estimated to be from 1 in 10,000 to
1 in 125,000 patients). A relative leucopenia is more common, with the
white cell count often falling during the first few weeks of treatment,
although it usually remains within normal levels. Rashes occur in about
5% of patients, and, rarely, severe exfoliative dermatitis develops.
Elevations in liver enzymes may also occur, and, rarely, hepatitis has
been reported. Carbamazepine can cause disturbances of cardiac
conduction, and is therefore contraindicated in patients with
pre-existing abnormalities of cardiac conduction. Carbamazepine is an
established human teratogen. Carbamazepine lowers plasma thyroxine
levels, but thyroid-stimulating hormone levels are not elevated and
clinical hypothyroidism is unusual. Carbamazepine has also been
associated with low sodium states. The unwanted effects of carbamazepine
are compared with those of lithium and valproate in Table 25.10.

Drug interactions Carbamazepine increases the metabolism of many other
drugs, including tricyclic antidepressants, benzodiazepines,
antipsychotic drugs, oral contraceptive agents, thyroxine, warfarin,
other anticonvulsants, and some antibiotics. A similar mechanism may
underlie the decline in plasma carbamazepine levels that occurs after
the first few weeks of treatment.

757

758

758

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments Carbamazepine levels may
be increased by SSRIs and erythromycin. The pharmacodynamic effects and
plasma levels of carbamazepine may be increased by some calcium-channel
blockers, such as diltiazem and verapamil. Conversely, carbamazepine may
decrease the effect of certain other calcium-channel antagonists, such
as felodipine and nicardipine. Neurotoxicity has been reported when
carbamazepine and lithium have been combined even in the presence of
normal lithium levels. The manufacturers of carbamazepine recommend that
combination of carbamazepine with MAOIs should be avoided. However,
there are case reports of these drugs being used safely together. It is
possible that some MAOIs may increase plasma carbamazepine levels.

Clinical use of carbamazepine Current clinical guidelines (see, for
example, Goodwin et al., 2016) place carbamazepine rather low down the
list of therapeutic options, after drugs such as lithium, valproate, and
lamotrigine. To some extent this reflects the liability of carbamazepine
to cause significant drug interactions, as well as its perceived poorer
tolerability. Also, there is less recent controlled evidence concerning
its use. With this is mind, the usual indications for carbamazepine are
as follows: â

The prophylactic management of bipolar illness in patients for whom
lithium and valproate treatment is ineffective or poorly tolerated.

â

The treatment of patients with frequent mood swings and mixed affective
states for which carbamazepine may be more effective than lithium.

â

Added to lithium treatment in patients who have shown a partial response
to the latter drug; in these circumstances it is important to remember
that this combination can cause neurotoxicity.

â

In the acute treatment of mania, again usually as an alternative or
addition to lithium and valproate.

If clinical circumstances permit, it is preferable to start treatment
with carbamazepine slowly at a dose of 100-- 200 mg daily, increasing in
steps of 100--200 mg twiceweekly. Patients show wide variability in the
blood levels at which they experience adverse effects; accordingly, it
is best to titrate the dose against the side effects and the clinical
response. Because of the risk of a lowered white cell count, it is
prudent to monitor the blood count before treatment and after 3 and 6
months of treatment. Some guidelines also recommend monitoring liver
function tests and plasma electrolytes; however, clinical vigilance is
probably the best safeguard. Patients should be instructed

to seek help urgently if they develop a fever or other sign of
infection. When patients have responded to the addition of carbamazepine
to lithium, it is possible subsequently to attempt a cautious withdrawal
of lithium. However, the current clinical impression is that, for many
patients, the maintenance of mood stability requires continuing
treatment with both drugs.

Sodium valproate Like carbamazepine, sodium valproate was first
introduced as an anticonvulsant. In recent years there has been
increasing interest in using the drug in the management of mood
disorders. There have been several controlled studies indicating that
valproate is effective in the acute management of mania. As yet there is
less clear evidence that it is effective in longer-term prophylaxis of
bipolar disorder. In a randomized trial, Bowden et al.Â (2000) showed a
marginal benefit for valproate over lithium and placebo in bipolar
patients over a 1-year follow-up. However, in the large pragmatic
BALANCE trial, valproate was less effective than lithium (BALANCE Study
Group, 2010). There have been numerous case studies and open series that
have reported useful prophylactic effects of valproate in patients who
were unresponsive to lithium and carbamazepine, including those with
rapid-cycling mood disorders. Mode of action. Valproate is a simple
branch-chain fatty acid with a mode of action that is unclear. However,
there is some evidence that it can slow down the breakdown of the
inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. This action could account for the
anticonvulsant properties of valproate, but whether it also underlies
the psychotropic effects is unclear.

Pharmacokinetics Valproate is rapidly absorbed, with the peak plasma
concentrations occurring about 2 hours after ingestion. It is widely and
rapidly distributed and has a half-life of 8--18 hours. Valproate is
metabolized in the liver to produce a wide variety of metabolites, some
of which have anticonvulsant activity. Unlike carbamazepine, valproate
does not induce hepatic microsomal enzymes and, if anything, it tends to
delay the metabolism of other drugs.

Dosing and plasma concentrations Valproate can be started at a dose of
200--400 mg daily, which may be increased once- or twice-weekly to a
range of 1--2 g daily. Plasma levels of valproate do not correlate well
with either the anticonvulsant or the mood-stabilizing effects, but it
has been suggested

759

Mood-stabilizing drugs that efficacy in the treatment of acute mania is
usually apparent when plasma levels are greater than 50 Î¼g/ml.

Unwanted effects Common side effects of valproate include
gastrointestinal disturbances, tremor, sedation, and tiredness. Other
troublesome side effects include weight gain and transient hair loss,
with changes in hair texture on regrowth. Patients who are taking
valproate may show some elevation in hepatic transaminase enzymes.
Provided that this increase is not associated with hepatic dysfunction,
the drug can be continued while enzyme levels and liver function are
carefully monitored. However, there have been several reports of fatal
hepatic toxicity associated with the use of valproate; most of these
cases have occurred in children taking multiple anticonvulsant drugs.
Valproate must be withdrawn immediately if vomiting, anorexia, jaundice,
or sudden drowsiness occur. Valproate may also cause thrombocytopenia,
and may inhibit platelet aggregation. Acute pancreatitis is another rare
but serious side effect, and increases in plasma ammonia levels have
also been reported. Other possible side effects include oedema,
amenorrhoea, and rashes. Valproate has been associated with polycystic
ovary disease, and is an important human teratogen. The National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2014) has recommended that
valproate should not be used for the treatment of bipolar disorder in
women of childbearing age unless no alternative treatment is effective
or can be tolerated.

Drug interactions Valproate potentiates the effects of central
sedatives. It has been reported to increase the side effects of other
anticonvulsants (without necessarily improving anticonvulsant control).
It may increase plasma levels of lamotrigine, phenytoin, and tricyclic
antidepressants. The interaction with lamotrigine necessitates careful
adjustment of lamotrigine dosage (see below). Valproate can increase the
adverse effects of olanzapine.

Clinical use The efficacy of valproate in the acute and continuation
treatment of mania has been established by several controlled trials
(Goodwin et al., 2016), and it is licensed for this indication in the UK
in the form of the semisodium preparation. In the treatment of acute
mania it has a quicker onset of action than lithium and carbamazepine
because it can be dosed at high levels initially. For example, a
therapeutic effect can be apparent within

1 or 2 days of employing a loading dose of valproate of 20 mg/kg.
Valproate may also be more effective than lithium in the management of
patients with mixed affective states. In terms of prophylaxis, valproate
appears to be effective in the prevention of both manic and depressive
episodes (Miura et al., 2014). It has often been used in combination
with lithium in bipolar patients who have shown a partial response to
lithium, and this combination appears to be safe. Valproate has also
been used in combination with carbamazepine. For patients who continue
to show episodes of mood disturbance, valproate can also be combined
with atypical antipsychotic drugs (Goodwin et al., 2016). Guidelines
recommend that body weight, blood count, and liver function tests are
assessed prior to treatment and thereafter at 6-monthly intervals.

Lamotrigine Lamotrigine is a triazine derivative that blocks
voltagedependent sodium channels and reduces excitatory neurotransmitter
release, particularly that of glutamate. It is licensed in the UK as a
monotherapy and adjunctive treatment for epilepsy. Lamotrigine is not
licensed for the treatment of mood disorders in the UK, but there are
open studies showing therapeutic benefit when it has been added to the
medication of patients with bipolar illness that is refractory to
standard treatments. In addition, placebo-controlled trials have shown
that lamotrigine has efficacy as monotherapy in the acute treatment of
bipolar depression (Geddes et al., 2009), and also in the longer-term
prevention of bipolar depression (Benyon et al., 2009). Lamotrigine was
also effective in patients with bipolar depression when added to
quetiapine (Geddes et al., 2016). Used alone, lamotrigine does not seem
to have significant acute or prophylactic antimanic actions.

Pharmacokinetics Following oral administration, lamotrigine is rapidly
absorbed, with peak plasma levels occurring after about 1.5 hours. The
drug is extensively metabolized by the liver but does not induce
cytochrome P450 enzymes. Its half-life is about 30 hours. A plasma
therapeutic range has not been identified.

Adverse effects Skin eruptions, usually maculopapular in nature, occur
in about 3% of patients and may be associated with fever. They are most
common in the first few weeks of treatment, and their incidence can be
reduced by careful initial dosing (see below). Other side effects
include nausea, headache, diplopia, blurred vision, dizziness, ataxia,

759

760

760

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments and tremor. Rarely, very
serious adverse effects, such as angioedema, Stevens--Johnson syndrome,
and toxic epidermal necrolysis, have been reported.

Drug interactions Plasma levels of lamotrigine can be lowered by drugs
that induce hepatic-metabolizing enzymes, such as carbamazepine.
Combination of carbamazepine and lamotrigine can also cause
neurotoxicity. Lamotrigine levels are increased by concomitant
administration of valproate.

Clinical use Lamotrigine has a useful role to play in the acute and
prophylactic management of the depressive pole of bipolar disorder.
Because lamotrigine appears to be ineffective in the treatment or
prevention of mania, it is often used in combination with other drugs
such as lithium. However, in bipolar patients where the burden of
illness is almost exclusively depressive, it can be used as a
monotherapy (Goodwin et al., 2016). When initiating lamotrigine
treatment, to minimize the risk of rash it is important to follow the
dosage recommendations in the British National Formulary (25 mg daily
for the first 2 weeks, followed by 50 mg daily for the next 2 weeks).
The usual therapeutic dose in bipolar disorder is in the range 50--300
mg daily. If the patient is also taking valproate, dosage initiation
must be even more cautious (for guidance, see the British National
Formulary).

Gabapentin Gabapentin was developed as a structural analogue of GABA.
Despite its structural relationship to GABA, its anticonvulsant
mechanism of action is thought to be mediated through inhibition of the
Î±2-Î´ subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels. Gabapentin is licensed
as an adjunctive treatment for seizure disorders, and is not licensed
for the treatment

of mood disorders. There are published case series that show benefit
when gabapentin has been used as an adjunctive therapy in patients with
bipolar disorder resistant to standard medication regimens. However,
controlled trials in mania and refractory bipolar depression have
yielded disappointing results (Goodwin et al., 2016). Gabapentin has a
sedating profile and may also have anxiolytic properties. Its analogue,
pregabalin, has not been studied in bipolar disorder, but is licensed
for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder and neuropathic pain.

Pharmacokinetics After oral absorption, peak plasma levels of gabapentin
are reached after 2--3 hours. Gabapentin is not metabolized by the liver
and is excreted entirely by the kidney. Its half-life is about 5--7
hours, and three times daily dosing is recommended.

Unwanted effects The most common side effects of gabapentin are
somnolence, dizziness, fatigue, and nystagmus. No serious adverse
effects have been reported.

Drug interactions Probably because of its lack of hepatic metabolism, to
date no significant pharmacokinetic interactions of gabapentin with
other medications have been described. It may potentiate the effects of
other central sedatives.

Clinical use Gabapentin has a wide dosage range, but the usual dose in
bipolar illness is between 600 mg and 2400 mg daily. Sedative and
anxiolytic effects are often apparent at lower doses. Although effects
of this nature might be useful in patients with refractory bipolar
illness, there is currently no evidence from controlled trials that
gabapentin has a place in the treatment of bipolar disorder.

Psychostimulants This class of drugs includes mild stimulants, of which
the best known is caffeine, and more powerful stimulants, such as
amfetamine and methylphenidate. Cocaine is a powerful psychostimulant,
with a particularly high potential for inducing dependence (see Chapter
20). It is useful as a local anaesthetic, but has no other clinical

indications. All potent psychostimulants increase the release and block
the reuptake of dopamine and noradrenaline. A newer compound, modafinil,
produces increases in alertness and decreases sleepiness, and, although
its mechanism of action is uncertain, it may also involve dopaminergic
mechanisms (Young and Geyer, 2010).

761

Other physical treatments

Indications The main current indication for psychostimulant treatment
with methylphenidate and amfetamine is attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) in children, and in adults where ADHD symptomatology has
persisted from childhood. Various preparations are available and
slow-release forms of methylphenidate are often preferred to diminish
the need to take additional doses in the school day and to lessen
rapid-onset stimulant effects which are believed to increase the risk of
dependence. A recently licensed form of amfetamine, lisdexamfetamine,
consists of an inactive complex of dexamfetamine and the amino acid,
lysine; this prodrug is then taken up by red cells from which the active
dexamfetamine is slowly released. Another indication for stimulants is
the treatment of narcolepsy. In the past, amfetamines were widely
prescribed for the treatment of depression, but have now been superseded
by the antidepressant drugs. Some specialists, mainly in the USA,
believe that psychostimulants may have a role in combination with other
antidepressant drugs for patients with refractory depressive

disorder, but this indication is not clearly supported by evidence from
controlled trials. Modafinil is licensed for the treatment of sleepiness
associated with narcolepsy, obstructive sleep apnoea, and sleep
disorders associated with shift work. Modafinil has also been used with
apparent benefit to treat sleepiness and fatigue in depressed patients
receiving SSRIs (Cowen and Anderson, 2015).

Unwanted effects These include restlessness, insomnia, poor appetite,
dizziness, tremor, palpitations, and cardiac arrhythmias. Toxic effects
from large doses include disorientation and aggressive behaviour,
hallucinations, convulsions, and coma. Persistent abuse can lead to a
paranoid state similar to paranoid schizophrenia. Amfetamines can cause
severe hypertension in combination with MAOIs and, to a lesser extent,
with tricyclic antidepressants. They are contraindicated in
cardiovascular disease and thyrotoxicosis. Modafinil has been associated
with dry mouth, nausea, abdominal pain, headache, tachycardia,
palpitations, anxiety, and insomnia. It should not be used in patients
with significant cardiovascular disease.

Other physical treatments Electroconvulsive therapy History Convulsive
therapy was introduced in the 1930s on the basis of the mistaken idea
that epilepsy and schizophrenia do not occur together. It seemed to
follow that induced fits should lead to improvement in schizophrenia.
However, when the treatment was tried it became apparent that the most
striking changes occurred not in schizophrenia but in severe depressive
disorders, in which it brought about a substantial reduction in
chronicity and mortality. The first psychiatrist to employ seizures as
therapy was Ladislas von Meduna who, in 1934, used medications such as
camphor and pentylenetetrazole to produce grand mal fits. However, in
1938 Cerletti and Bini found that electrical stimulation, applied
through bitemporal electrodes, produced fits more efficiently and
quickly than drugs, and, as time went by, electrical stimulation became
the rule. The subsequent addition of brief anaesthesia and muscle
relaxants made the treatment safer and more acceptable.

Indications This section summarizes the indications for ECT. Further
information about the efficiency of the procedure will be found in the
chapters that deal with the individual psychiatric syndromes. ECT is a
rapid and effective treatment for severe depressive disorders. In the
Medical Research Council trial (Clinical Psychiatry Committee, 1965) it
acted faster than imipramine or phenelzine, and was more effective than
imipramine in women and more effective than phenelzine in both sexes.
The indications for ECT have been reviewed by the National Institute for
Clinical Excellence (2003) (see Box 25.12). Indications suggested by the
Royal College of Psychiatrists (2005) are shown in Box 25.13. Both sets
of guidelines are in agreement with the impression of many clinicians,
and with the recommendations of this book, that ECT should be used
mainly when it is essential to bring about improvement quickly.
Therefore the strongest indications are an immediate high risk of
suicide, depressive stupor, or danger to physical health because the
patient is not drinking enough to maintain adequate renal function.

761

762

762

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Box 25.12 Indications for ECT (National Institute for Clinical
Excellence, 2003) It is recommended that electroconvulsive therapy is
used only to achieve rapid and short-term improvement of severe symptoms
after an adequate trial of other treatment options has proven
ineffective and/ or when the condition is considered to be potentially
life-threatening in individuals with: 1. Severe depressive illness. 2.
Catatonia. 3. A prolonged or severe manic episode.

The NICE guidelines for the use of ECT in depression were modified
slightly in 2009 to the following: â

Consider ECT for acute treatment of severe depression that is
life-threatening and when a rapid response is required, or when other
treatments have failed.

â

Do not use ECT routinely for people with moderate depression but
consider it if their depression has not responded to multiple drug
treatments and psychological treatment.

ECT can lead to a rapid resolution of mania, but is generally reserved
for patients who do not respond to drug treatment, or for those whose
manic illness is particularly severe, requiring high doses of
antipsychotic drugs (Goodwin et al., 2016).

On the basis of clinical case studies, it has long been held that ECT is
useful for the treatment of acute catatonic states. Controlled studies
have also shown that ECT is effective in patients with acute
schizophrenia with predominantly positive symptoms. In these studies ECT
is effective not only for affective symptoms but also for positive
symptoms such as delusions and thought disorder (Brandon et al., 1985).
In general, however, ECT adds little to the effects of adequate doses of
antipsychotic drugs, although it probably produces a greater rate of
symptomatic improvement in the short term. It is unclear whether ECT has
a role in the treatment of patients with schizophrenia whose positive
symptoms do not respond to antipsychotic medication. There is more
evidence for the use of clozapine in this situation, and ECT is not
generally recommended (National Institute for Clinical Excellence,
2003), although the Royal College of Psychiatrists suggests that it can
be considered as a fourth-line option. A randomized controlled trial
indicated that ECT may be beneficial in patients with schizophrenia who
do not respond to clozapine (Petrides et al., 2015).

Mode of action Role of the seizure Presumably the specific therapeutic
effects of ECT must be brought about through physiological and
biochemical changes in the brain. The first step in identifying the mode
of action must be to find out whether the therapeutic effect depends on
the seizure, or whether other features of the treatment are sufficient,
such as the passage of the current through the brain, and the use of
anaesthesia and muscle relaxants.

Box 25.13 Indications for ECT (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2005) In
severe depressive illness, ECT may be the treatment of choice when the
illness is associated with: â life-threatening illness because of
refusal of foods and fluids â a high suicide risk. ECT may be considered
for the treatment of severe depressive illness associated with: â stupor
â marked psychomotor retardation â depressive delusions and
hallucinations. ECT may be considered as second- or third-line treatment
of depressive illness that is not responsive to antidepressant drugs.
ECT may be considered for the treatment of mania:

that is associated with life-threatening physical exhaustion â that has
not responded to appropriate drug treatment. ECT may be considered for
the treatment of acute schizophrenia as a fourth-line option for
treatmentresistant schizophrenia after treatment with two antipsychotic
drugs and then clozapine has proved ineffective. ECT may be indicated in
patients with catatonia where treatment with a benzodiazepine (usually
lorazepam) has proved ineffective. â

Reproduced from Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 11(2), Scott A,
College Guidelines on electroconvulsive therapy: an update for
prescribers, pp.Â 150--6, Copyright (2005), with permission from The
Royal College of Psychiatrists.

763

Other physical treatments Trial

Number of participants

Standardized effect size (95% CI)

Wilson 1963

12

--1.078 (--2.289 to 0.133)

West 1981

25

--1.255 (--2.170 to --0.341)

Lambourn 1978

40

--0.170 (--0.940 to 0.600)

Freeman 1978

40

--0.629 (--1.2647 to 0.006)

Gregory 1985

69

--1.418 (--2.012 to --0.824)

Johnstone 1980

70

--0.739 (--1.253 to --0.224)

Pooled ï¬xed effects

--0.911 (--1.180 to --0.645)

Pooled random effects

--0.908 (--1.270 to --0.537) --3

--2

--1 Favours ECT

0

1 Favours simulated

Figure 25.1 Meta-analysis of randomized, placebo-controlled studies of
ECT in depression. Reproduced from The Lancet, 361(9360), The UK ECT
Review Group, Efficacy and safety of electroconvulsive therapy in
depressive disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis,
pp.Â 799--808, Copyright (2003), with permission from Elsevier.

Clinicians have generally been convinced that the patient does not
improve unless a convulsion is produced during the ECT procedure. This
impression has been confirmed by several double-blind trials which,
taken together, show that ECT is strikingly more effective than a full
placebo procedure that includes anaesthetic and muscle relaxant (UK ECT
Review Group, 2003) (see Figure 25.1). This evidence does not
necessarily support the view that a full seizure is the sufficient and
necessary therapeutic component of ECT, and recent studies have shown
that this notion is incorrect. Modern ECT machines deliver brief pulses
of electrical current that enable a seizure to be induced by
administration of relatively low doses of electrical energy. With this
mode of administration, both electrode placement and electrical dosage
can have profound effects on the therapeutic efficacy of ECT. In
particular, it appears that the amount by which the applied electrical
dose exceeds the seizure threshold of the individual patient is an
important determinant of both efficacy and cognitive side effects of
ECT. Furthermore, the seizure threshold varies greatly (about 15-fold)
between individuals. This situation has important implications for the
practical management of ECT when the clinician's aim is to find the best
balance between therapeutic efficacy and cognitive side effects (see
below). From a theoretical viewpoint, however, it can be concluded that
an important determinant of ECT efficacy is how far the applied

electrical energy exceeds the seizure threshold of the individual
patient.

Neurobiological effects of ECT Electrical seizures in animals produce
many biochemical and electrophysiological changes, and therefore it is
difficult to identify the processes that are important in the
antidepressant effect of ECT. It is of interest that some of the changes
in brain monoamine pathways found in rodents after ECT
(e.g.Â downregulation of noradrenaline Î²adrenoceptors) resemble those
found after antidepressant drug treatment. In addition, both ECT and
antidepressants increase the expression of dopamine D2 receptors in the
nucleus accumbens, which could be associated with improvements in
motivational behaviour. In the case of ECT, this may involve interaction
with glutamatergic pathways. Like antidepressant medication, electrical
seizures in animals result in changes in neurotropins such as BDNF, and
increases in neurogenesis in the hippocampus. The hippocampus is likely
to play an important role in the pathophysiology of depression, and
changes in hippocampal activity could therefore underpin some of the
therapeutic effects of ECT. Of course, altered hippocampal function
could also play a role in the amnestic side effects of ECT. Finally, in
terms of network theories of depression (see Chapter 9), ECT appears to
decrease the hyperconnectivity of the default mode network that is
characteristic of depressive states (Perrin et al., 2012). For a review,
see Anderson and Fergusson (2013).

763

764

764

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Physiological changes during ECT If ECT is given without anticholinergic
premedication, the pulse first slows and then rises quickly to 130-- 190
beats/minute, falling to the original resting rate or beyond towards the
end of the seizure, before a final less marked tachycardia that lasts
for several minutes. Marked increases in blood pressure are also common,
and the systolic pressure can rise to 200 mmHg. Cerebral blood flow also
increases by up to 200%.

Unilateral or bilateral ECT Overall, bilateral ECT has a superior
efficacy to unilateral ECT. However, bilateral treatment is associated
with more cognitive impairment (UK ECT Review Group, 2003). When right
unilateral ECT is dosed to about six times the seizure threshold, its
efficacy approaches that of bilateral ECT, but the associated cognitive
impairment is also similar (Kellner et al., 2010). These data suggest
that the appropriate electrode placement for ECT should balance efficacy
against cognitive disturbance according to the needs of the individual
patient. If the need for improvement is particularly urgent, bilateral
ECT should be considered, dosed to about two and a half times the
seizure threshold. For a meta-analytical review of treatment factors
that affect the efficacy of ECT, see UK ECT Review Group (2003) (see
also Box 25.14).

Unwanted effects after ECT Subconvulsive shock may be followed by
anxiety and headache. ECT can cause a brief retrograde amnesia as well
as loss of memory for up to 30 minutes after the fit. Brief
disorientation can occur, particularly with bilateral electrode
placement. Headache can also occur. Some patients complain of confusion,
nausea, and vertigo for a few hours after the treatment, but with modern
methods these unwanted effects are mild and brief. A few patients
complain of muscle pain, especially in the jaws, which is probably
attributable to the relaxant. There have been a few reports of sporadic
major seizures in the months after ECT, but these may have had other
causes. Occasional damage to the teeth, tongue, or lips can occur if
there have been problems in positioning the gag or airway. Poor
application of the electrodes can lead to small electrical burns.
Fractures, including crush fractures of the vertebrae, have occurred
occasionally when ECT was given without muscle relaxants. All of these
physical consequences are rare if a good technique of anaesthesia is
used and the fit is modified

Box 25.14 Efficacy of ECT in depression in relation to antidepressant
treatment and different stimulus parameters Treatment comparison

HAM-D difference (with 95% CI)

Effect size\*

ECT superior to antidepressant medication

5.2 (1.4--8.9)

0.46

Bilateral ECT superior to unilateral ECT

3.6 (2.2--5.2)

0.32

Higher ECT dose superior

4.1 (2.4--5.9)

0.57

Source: UK ECT Review Group (2003). HAM-D, Hamilton Rating Scale for
Depression. \* For explanation of effect sizes, see Chapter 6

adequately. Other complications of ECT are rare and mainly occur in
people suffering from physical illness. They include cardiac arrhythmia,
pulmonary embolism, aspiration pneumonia, and cerebrovascular accident.
Prolonged apnoea is a rare complication of the use of muscle relaxants.
Rarely, status epilepticus may occur in predisposed individuals or in
those taking medication that prolongs seizure duration. Since the
introduction of ECT, there has always been concern as to whether it may
cause brain damage. When ECT is given to animals in the usual clinical
regimen, there is no evidence that brain damage occurs. Also, structural
imaging studies in patients have been reassuring on this point (UK ECT
Review Group, 2003).

Memory disorder after ECT Short-term effects. As already mentioned, the
immediate effects of ECT include loss of memory for events shortly
before the treatment (retrograde amnesia), and impaired retention of
information acquired soon after the treatment (anterograde amnesia).
These effects depend on both electrode placement (unilateral versus
bilateral) and electrical dose, but electrode placement appears to be
the more important factor.

765

Other physical treatments Controlled studies indicate that the
anterograde amnesia produced by ECT is temporary. Depressive disorders
substantially impair cognitive function, and many patients report their
memory as subjectively improved after ECT. ECT-induced cognitive
impairment can be detected for the first days after the end of the
course of treatment. However, this usually remits within about 2 weeks.
A meta-analysis showed improvements in various objective measures of
cognitive function, including, for example, processing speed, working
memory, and executive function 2 weeks after the end of ECT treatment
(Semkovska and McLoughlin, 2010). Long-term effects. The major concern
regarding longterm effects of ECT on memory is the loss of memories for
personal remote events (retrograde amnesia for remote events) or
autobiographical memory loss. In a systematic review, Fraser and
colleagues (2008) concluded that ECT can produce a definite loss of
autobiographical memory. While objective measures suggested that this
loss largely resolved within 6 months, subjective reports by patients
indicated that the loss could extend for longer and, in some cases,
could be permanent. Autobiographical memory loss was less when treatment
employed right unilateral electrode placement and when dose of
electricity was titrated to the level of the individual patient's
seizure threshold. It seems reasonable to conclude that, when used in
the usual way, ECT is not normally followed by persisting anterograde
memory disorder, or problems with working memory and executive function,
and that where these do occur they are mild and may be accounted for by
concurrent depressive symptomatology. However, ECT, particularly when
applied bilaterally, may cause a persisting retrograde amnesia for
personal memories. Although this is not a significant problem for most
patients, some, for reasons that are unclear, have much greater
autobiographical memory loss, to the extent that their lives and sense
of self are adversely affected. For a review of the cognitive effects of
ECT, see Freeman (2013).

The mortality of ECT The death rate attributable to ECT has been
estimated to be less than 1 per 70,000 treatments. This is similar to
that seen with general anaesthesia for minor surgical conditions. The
risks are related to the anaesthetic procedure, and are greatest in
patients with cardiovascular disease. When death occurs it is usually
due to ventricular fibrillation or myocardial infarction (see Benbow and
Waite, 2013).

Contraindications The contraindications to ECT are any medical illnesses
that increase the risk of anaesthetic procedure by an unacceptable
amount---for example, respiratory infections, serious heart disease, and
serious pyrexial illness. Other contraindications are diseases that are
likely to be made worse by the changes in blood pressure and cardiac
rhythm that occur even in a well-modified fit. These include serious
heart diseases, recent myocardial infarction, cardiac failure, cerebral
or aortic aneurysm, deep vein thrombosis, and raised intracranial
pressure. In Mediterranean and Afro-Caribbean patients who might have
sickle-cell trait, additional care is needed to ensure that oxygen
tension does not fall. Extra care is also required with diabetic
patients who take insulin. Although risks rise somewhat in old age, so
do the risks of untreated depression and drug treatment.

Technique of administration In this section we outline the technical
procedures used at the time of treatment. Although the information in
this account should be known, it is important to remember that ECT is a
practical procedure that must be learned by apprenticeship as well as by
reading. For a review of the medical evaluation of patients for ECT, see
Tess and Smetana (2009). ECT clinic. ECT should be given in pleasant
safe surroundings. Patients should not have to wait where they can see
or hear treatment being given to others. There should be waiting and
recovery areas separate from the room in which treatment is given, and
adequate emergency equipment should be available, including a sucker,
endotracheal tubes, adequate supplies of oxygen, and facilities to carry
out full resuscitation. The nursing and medical staff who give ECT
should receive special training and accreditation. Arrival of the
patient. The first step in giving ECT is to put the patient at ease and
to check their identity. The case notes should then be seen to make sure
that there is a valid consent form and that the patient continues to
consent to treatment. The drug sheet should be checked to ensure that
the patient is not receiving any drugs that might complicate the
anaesthetic procedures. It is also important to check for evidence of
drug allergy or adverse effects of previous general anaesthetics. The
drug sheet should be available for the anaesthetist to see. A full
physical evaluation should have been carried out by the patient's
treating doctor. Specialist advice should be sought if there may be
medical contraindications to ECT.

765

76

766

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments Electrode placement. A
decision about electrode placement should have been made by the treating
doctor prior to treatment. When using unilateral treatment, it is
important to apply the electrodes to the non-dominant hemisphere. In
right-handed people, the left hemisphere is nearly always dominant; in
lefthanded people, either hemisphere may be dominant. Therefore, if
there is evidence that the patient is not right-handed, it is usually
better to use bilateral electrode placements. Anaesthetic procedures.
Prior to administering the anaesthetic it is necessary to make sure that
the patient has taken nothing by mouth for at least 5 hours, and then,
with the anaesthetist, to remove any dentures and check for loose or
broken teeth. Finally, the record of any previous ECTs should be
examined for evidence of delayed recovery from the relaxant (due to
deficiency in pseudocholinesterase) or other complications. The
anaesthetic should be given by a trained anaesthetist (although this
cannot always be achieved in developing countries). Suction apparatus, a
positivepressure oxygen supply, and emergency drugs should always be
available. A tilting trolley is also valuable. As well as the
psychiatrist and the anaesthetist, at least one nurse should be present.
Anaesthesia for ECT was previously induced with methohexitone, a
short-acting barbiturate. However, this agent became increasingly
difficult to obtain, and propofol is the most widely used alternative.
The injection of propofol can be painful, and it can also decrease
seizure length and delay or abolish convulsions. Etomidate may be
preferred in patients in whom it is difficult to induce a seizure. The
induction agent is followed immediately by a muscle relaxant (often
suxamethonium chloride) from a separate syringe, although the same
needle can be used. The anticholinergic agent glycopyrrolate can be used
to prevent ECT-induced increases in parasympathetic tone and
bradycardia. The anaesthetist is responsible for the choice of drugs,
and should also ensure that the lungs are well oxygenated before a mouth
gag is inserted. Application of ECT. While the anaesthetic is being
given, the psychiatrist checks both the dose of electricity and the
electrode placement that has been prescribed for the patient. The skin
is cleaned in the appropriate areas and moistened electrodes are
applied. (If good electrical contact is to be obtained, it is also
important that grease and hair lacquer are removed by ward staff before
the patient is sent for ECT.) Although dry electrodes can cause skin
burns, it is also important to remember that excessive moisture causes
shorting and may prevent a seizure response.

Although enough muscle relaxant should have been given to ensure that
convulsive movements are minimal, a nurse or other assistant should be
ready to restrain the patient gently if necessary. The electrodes are
then secured firmly. For unilateral ECT, the first electrode is placed
on the non-dominant side, 3 cm above the midpoint between the external
angle of the orbit and the external auditory meatus. The second
electrode is placed at least 10 cm away from the first one, vertically
above the meatus of the same side (see Figure 25.2). A wide separation
of the electrodes is thought to maximize the efficacy of unilateral ECT.
The stimulus is then given. For fixed-dose right unilateral ECT the
initial dose should be set at 400 millicoulombs and subsequently
adjusted according to clinical efficacy and cognitive side effects.
However, dose titration offers advantages in terms of individualizing
the dose for each patient. In dose titration the seizure threshold for
the individual patient is determined during the first ECT session by
starting with a very low dose and increasing it until a fit occurs
(Scott, 2005). For bilateral ECT, electrodes are placed on opposite
sides of the head, each 3 cm above the midpoint of the line joining the
external angle of the orbit to the external auditory meatus---usually
just above the hairline (see Figure 25.2). When using bilateral
electrode placement, the present practice is to administer a dose of
electricity that is only modestly (about 1.5 to 2.5 times) above the
seizure threshold for the individual. The seizure threshold for ECT is
best determined by dose titration as described above. Otherwise an
appropriate dose can be estimated from the fact that two-thirds of the
population have seizure thresholds in the range 100--200 millicoulombs.
In addition, seizure thresholds are higher in men than in women, and
increase with age. For example, a reasonable starting dose for a male

3cm 2. 2. 3cm 1.2 1.2

1.  

Bitemporal (BT)

1.  3cm 1.2 1.2

Right unilateral (RU)

Figure 25.2 Electrode placements for ECT.

76

Other physical treatments patient under 40 years of age who is to
receive bilateral ECT would be 150 millicoulombs. Subsequently this dose
could be adjusted, depending on the length of the seizure, the cognitive
side effects, and the clinical response. The dose might be increased if
the seizure was short or absent, or if there was no improvement after
several treatments. Conversely, troublesome post-ECT cognitive
disturbance would indicate that the dose of electricity should be
reduced or that unilateral placement of the electrodes should be used.
It is important to note that seizure duration may decrease during a
course of ECT, because repeated treatment tends to increase the seizure
threshold. Thus if a dose of electricity initially produced a seizure of
satisfactory duration, it may subsequently need to be increased. The
seizure. It is essential to observe carefully for evidence of seizure.
If satisfactory muscle relaxation has been achieved, the seizure takes
the following form. First, the muscles of the face begin to twitch and
the mouth drops open. Then the upper eyelids, thumbs, and big toes jerk
rhythmically for about half a minute. It is important not to confuse
these convulsive movements with muscle twitches due to the
depolarization produced by suxamethonium. EEG monitoring is now often
used to check whether a seizure has been induced, but the records can be
difficult to interpret because of the muscle artefact produced by direct
stimulation of the frontalis muscle. A seizure can be detected by the
appearance in the EEG of high frequency spike waves followed by slower
spike and wave complexes with a frequency of around 3 Hz (Scott and
Waite, 2013). An alternative is to isolate one forearm from the effects
of the muscle relaxant. This can be done by blowing up a blood pressure
cuff to above systolic pressure before the relaxant is injected; this
pressure is maintained during the period in which the seizure should
occur and then released. Seizure activity can then be observed in the
muscles of the isolated part of the arm. When determining the
appropriate cuff pressure, it is important to remember that systolic
pressure rises during the seizure, so if the cuff is not at sufficient
pressure the relaxant will pass into the forearm at this stage. There is
no direct correlation between treatment outcome and duration of seizure
activity, but it is recommended that the dose of electricity is adjusted
so as to achieve a seizure duration of between 20 and 50 seconds. This
duration is recommended because short seizures are likely to be
therapeutically ineffective, whereas long seizures are more likely to be
associated with cognitive disturbance. Psychotropic drugs may alter the
seizure threshold and seizure duration. For example, most antidepressant

and antipsychotic drugs lower the seizure threshold, whereas
benzodiazepines, valproate, and lamotrigine have the opposite effect.
Adverse effects, including increased cognitive impairment, have been
reported when ECT has been given with lithium, and it may be prudent to
suspend lithium treatment or omit the lithium dose the evening before
treament. SSRIs have been associated with prolonged seizures during ECT.
Some anaesthetists prefer not to anaesthetize patients who are taking
MAOIs, but ECT can in fact be given safely to patients who are receiving
MAOI treatment. The usual practice in the UK has been to continue
antidepressant medication during a course of ECT. Sackheim et al. (2009)
found that the introduction of nortriptyline to unmedicated patients
during a course of ECT improved efficacy and lessened cognitive adverse
effects. On the other hand, venlafaxine had a weaker effect in improving
efficacy, and tended to worsen cognitive adverse effects. Recovery
phase. After the seizure, the lungs are oxygenated thoroughly with an
airway in place. The patient remains in the care of the anaesthetist and
under close nursing observation until breathing resumes and
consciousness is restored. During recovery, the patient should be turned
on to their side and cared for in the usual way for any patient
recovering from an anaesthetic after a minor surgical procedure. A
qualified nurse should be in attendance to supervise the patient and
reassure them. Meanwhile, the psychiatrist makes a note of the date,
type of electrode placement, drugs used, and amount of current, together
with a brief description of the fit and any problems that have arisen.
When the patient is awake and orientated, they should rest for an hour
or so on their bed or in a chair. If ECT is given to a day-patient, it
is especially important to make certain that no food or drink has been
taken before they arrive at the hospital. They should rest for several
hours and should not leave until it is certain that their recovery is
complete; they should leave in the company of a responsible adult, and
certainly not riding a bicycle or driving a car. Failed stimulations.
The most important problem, apart from those relating to the anaesthetic
procedure, is failure to produce a clonic convulsion (a tonic jerk
produced by the current must not be mistaken for a seizure). If it is
certain that no seizure has appeared, checks should be made of the
machine, the electrodes, and contact with the skin. The possibility of
shorting due to excess moisture on the scalp should also be considered.
If all of these are excluded, the patient may have either an unusually
high resistance to the passage of current through the extracranial
tissues and skull, or a high

767

768

768

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments convulsive threshold. The
charge can then be increased by 50% and a further stimulus given.

Frequency and number of treatments ECT is usually given twice a week. In
general, ECT given three times weekly has little therapeutic advantage
over a twice-weekly regimen, and may produce more cognitive impairment
(UK ECT Review Group, 2003). Decisions about the length of a course of
ECT must depend on clinical experience, as relevant information is not
available from clinical trials. A course of ECT usually consists of
between six and a maximum of twelve treatments. Progress should be
reviewed after each treatment. There is usually little response until
two or three treatments have been given, after which increasing
improvement occurs. If the response is more rapid than this, fewer
treatments may be given. If there has been no response after six to
eight treatments, the course should usually be abandoned, as it is
unlikely that more ECT will produce a useful change. Clinical change and
memory should also be assessed after each treatment. It is better to use
reliable, validated scales for this purpose. For clinical change, the
Clinical Global Impression of Improvement is suitable and the patient's
subjective report should also be noted. Measurement of the various
aspects of memory in a routine clinical setting is more difficult. NICE
(2003) has recommended the Mini Mental State Examination, which will
capture confusion and short-term memory impairment but not, for example,
autobiographical memory loss. Significant cognitive impairment should
lead to a reappraisal of the electrical dose and electrode placement.

Prevention of relapse It is important that, whereas ECT may produce
striking benefit in depressed patients, there is a high relapse rate
unless continuation therapy with antidepressant medication is
undertaken. Sometimes the choice of antidepressant drug can be difficult
because, if a patient does not respond to an adequate dose of an
antidepressant drug prior to ECT, continuing the same drug after the
course of ECT is completed may not provide a useful prophylactic effect.
Thus, if a patient has required ECT because of nonresponse to
antidepressant medication, it is good practice to consider a different
class of antidepressant drug or lithium carbonate in the continuation
and prophylactic phases of drug treatment. A randomized study of 200
patients found post-ECT prophylaxis with a combination of lithium and
nortriptyline as effective as maintenance ECT in sustaining remission in
the 6 months following a successful course of treatment. Despite this,
just over 50% of the patients in each group relapsed (Kellner et al.,
2006).

A few patients respond well to ECT but continually relapse even when
maintained on multiple drug therapy. In these circumstances, some
practitioners have given maintenance ECT at a reduced frequency
(e.g.Â fortnightly or monthly). However, this practice was not
recommended by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2003).

Consent to ECT Before a patient is asked to agree to ECT, it is
essential to provide a full explanation of the procedure and indicate
its expected benefits and possible risks, especially the effects on
memory. Appropriately written information sheets should be a standard
part of the consent procedure (National Institute for Clinical
Excellence, 2003). Many patients expect severe and permanent memory
impairment after treatment, and some even expect to experience
unmodified fits. Once the doctor is sure that the patient understands
what they have been told, the patient is asked to sign a standard form
of consent. It should be made clear to them that consent is being sought
for the whole course of ECT, and not just for one treatment, although it
is also essential to make sure that they understand that consent can be
withdrawn at any time. It is also good practice to ensure that patients
continue to give consent prior to each treatment throughout the course.
Part of the consent process should involve the assessment of capacity
(see Chapter 4). Patients cannot give informed consent if they lack
capacity, and advance directives declining ECT should be respected
unless treatment is considered life-saving and can be administered under
the Mental Health Act. In the UK, if a patient refuses consent, or is
unable to give it because they are in a stupor or for some other reason,
and if the procedure is essential, further steps must be considered. The
first is to decide whether there are grounds for involving the
appropriate section of the Mental Health Act (see Chapter 4). The
section does not allow anyone to give consent on behalf of the patient,
but it does establish formally that they are mentally ill and in need of
treatment. In England and Wales, the opinion of a second independent
consultant is required by the Mental Health Act 1983. Readers working
outside the UK should familiarize themselves with the relevant legal
requirements.

Patient attitude to treatment Surveys carried out by clinicians have
generally reported positive experiences of ECT, with the majority of

769

Other physical treatments patients reporting that the procedure was
tolerable and helpful. The presence of friendly and helpful clinic staff
was regarded as important in reducing anxiety about treatment. The major
complaint about ECT concerned autobiographical memory loss, which in
some patients was persistent and severe. Service user-led research on
ECT generally elicits less positive responses about treatment, with
about half the patients reporting that they would not have ECT again.
Again, the presence of persistent memory loss is usually the main
complaint, but some patients also reported a lack of information about
ECT and its adverse effects and also experiences of coercion. Not
surprisingly, patients who believe that ECT has helped them are more
positive about treatment (Waite, 2013). These experiences underline the
need for careful selection of patients for ECT, as well as adequate time
being taken to explain the procedure and its possible adverse effects as
fully and carefully as possible.

Ethical aspects of ECT As with drug treatment, the key issue for a
competent patient is the concept of full informed consent. In general,
ECT is widely regarded as a safe and effective treatment--- a view that
is supported by randomized controlled trials. However, it is important
that patients are warned about the possibility of loss of remote
memories outlined above. In addition, in the case of
medication-resistant patients, the issue of relapse should be discussed.
ECT in the case of non-competent patients raises particularly difficult
issues. Usually, in these circumstances, ECT is needed to treat a
patient whose life is placed at risk as a result of their illness. The
legal safeguards for patients are outlined above, but the clinician has
a duty to explain to the patient and their family the reasons for the
action taken, and to follow carefully the ethical principles outlined in
Chapter 4.

Bright light treatment The use of phototherapy, or artificial bright
light, as a psychiatric treatment was first studied systematically by
Rosenthal et al.Â (1984). These workers used bright light to treat
patients with the newly identified syndrome of seasonal affective
disorder. Since then, phototherapy has become the mainstay of treatment
of winter depression, particularly in patients with atypical depressive
features such as hyperphagia and hypersomnia.

Mechanism of action The light--dark cycle is believed to be one of the
most important 'zeitgebers' regulating circadian and seasonal

rhythmicity in mammals. Initially, phototherapy was believed to
ameliorate the symptoms of winter depression by extending the
photoperiod. This was based on the view that patients with winter
depression were particularly sensitive to the effects of short winter
days, and that bright light treatment produced a day length equivalent
to that of summer. More recent formulations have suggested that the
antidepressant effect of bright light may be attributable to a phase
advance in circadian rhythm. This is supported by the fact that
controlled trials show that, in most patients, morning phototherapy is
more effective than evening phototherapy. However, other studies have
shown that bright light given at midday is also therapeutically
effective. It is difficult to devise a truly plausible placebo condition
for bright light treatment, and some have argued that the antidepressant
effects of bright light may be mediated in large measure by placebo
effects, particularly patient expectation. MÃ¥rtensson and colleagues
(2015) found in a meta-analysis of eight randomized studies that bright
light was significantly superior to a dim light control in reducing
depressive symptomatology in patients with seasonal affective disorder,
with an effect size of 0.54 (95% CI: --0.95, --0.13) at study endpoint.
In winter depression the therapeutic effects of bright light treatment,
fluoxetine, and cognitive behaviour therapy appear generally equivalent,
although cognitive therapy had a better long-term outcome (Cleare et
al., 2015).

Equipment A conventional light box contains fluorescent tubes mounted
behind a translucent plastic diffusing screen. The tubes provide an
output that can vary between 2500 and 10,000 lux. Light sources that
produce 10,000 lux are more expensive, but may allow a reduced duration
of exposure (30 minutes, compared with 120 minutes) to secure a
therapeutic effect. Phototherapy has also been administered using
head-mounted units or light visors. These instruments are attached to
the head and project light into the eyes, allowing the subject to remain
mobile while receiving treatment. Although light visors are more
convenient to use than light boxes, results from placebo-controlled
trials of light visors have proved disappointing and their use is not
currently recommended.

Therapeutic efficacy and indications The major indication for light
therapy is seasonal affective disorder in which patients experience
winter depressions. Bright light treatment is more effective than

769

70

770

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments placebo in patients with
winter depression, particularly if patients experience: â

increased sleep

â

carbohydrate cravings

â

an afternoon slump in energy.

Patients with more typical melancholic symptoms---for example, weight
loss and insomnia---do less well with phototherapy as a sole treatment,
even where the disorder is seasonal in nature. Although there are
studies to suggest that morning light treatment may augment the
therapeutic effect of antidepressant medication in non-seasonal
depression, the effect may not be well sustained. However, bright light
given as a sole treatment in non-seasonal depression may be helpful
(MÃ¥rtensson et al., 2015). Phototherapy may also be of benefit in other
disorders characterized by depressed mood and appetite changes---for
example, premenstrual syndrome and bulimia nervosa. The literature
contains a number of controlled trials in such disorders where light
treatment has improved ratings of depression. However, the difficulty of
distinguishing specific and placebo effects of bright light makes the
current data difficult to interpret.

Adverse effects In general, phototherapy is well tolerated, although
mild side effects occur in up to 45% of patients early in treatment.
These include headache, eye-strain, blurred vision, eye irritation, and
increased tension. Insomnia can also occur, particularly with late
evening treatment. Rare adverse events that have been reported include
manic mood swings and suicide attempts, the latter putatively through
light-induced alerting and energizing effects prior to mood improvement.
Whether these rare events are actually adverse reactions to light is
uncertain. There is no evidence that phototherapy employed in
recommended treatment schedules causes ocular or retinal damage.

Clinical use of phototherapy Since the best-established indication for
phototherapy is winter depression, the following account will describe
the use of bright light treatment in winter depression. One of the major
practical difficulties in phototherapy is the time needed to administer
the treatment. For this reason, a 10,000 lux light box may be preferred
because the daily duration of therapy can be reduced to 30 minutes. It
seems likely that cool-white light and full-spectrum light have
equivalent clinical efficacy, but because cool-white light is free of
ultraviolet light it is theoretically safer.

The evidence suggests that bright light treatment of winter depression
is most effective when administered in the early morning. However,
treatments given at other times of day may prove beneficial and can be
more convenient for individual patients. In an initial trial, therefore,
it is best to recommend early morning treatment but to advise the
patient that the exact timing of therapy can eventually represent a
balance of therapeutic efficacy and practical convenience. Treatment
should not be given late in the evening because of the possibility of
sleep disruption. Early morning phototherapy should start within a few
minutes of awakening. Patients should allow an initial duration of
treatment of 30 minutes with a 10,000 lux light box or 2 hours with 2500
lux equipment. They should seat themselves about 30--40 cm away from the
light box screen. They should not gaze at the screen directly, but face
it at an angle of about 45Â° and glance across it once or twice each
minute. The antidepressant effect of light treatment can appear within a
few days, but in controlled trials longer periods (up to 3 weeks) can be
necessary before the therapeutic effects of bright light exceed those of
placebo treatment. As noted above, mild side effects are common in the
early stages of treatment, but usually settle without specific
intervention. If they are persistent and troublesome, the patient can
sit a little further away from the light source or reduce the duration
of exposure. Exposure should also be reduced if elevated mood occurs.
Once a therapeutic response has occurred, it is necessary to continue
phototherapy up to the point of natural remission, otherwise relapse
will occur. However, it may be possible to lower the daily duration of
treatment. Phototherapy may also be started in advance of the
anticipated episode of depression, as this appears to have a
prophylactic effect, although doubts about the robustness of this effect
have been expressed.

Neurosurgery for psychiatric disorders (psychosurgery) History of
procedure Psychosurgery refers to the use of neurosurgical procedures to
modify the symptoms of psychiatric illness by operating on either the
nuclei of the brain or the white matter. Psychosurgery began in 1936
with the work of Egas Moniz, whose operation consisted of an extensive
cut in the white matter of the frontal lobes (frontal leucotomy). This
extensive operation was modified by Freeman and

71

Other physical treatments Watts (1942), who made smaller coronal
incisions in the frontal lobes through lateral burr holes. Although
their so-called 'standard leucotomy' was far from standardized
anatomically, and although it produced unacceptable side effects (see
below), the procedure was widely used in the UK and other countries.
There was enthusiasm for the initial improvements observed in patients,
but this was followed by growing evidence of adverse effects, including
intellectual impairment, emotional lability, disinhibition, apathy,
incontinence, obesity, and epilepsy. These problems led to a search for
more restricted lesions capable of producing the same therapeutic
benefits without these adverse consequences. Some progress was made,
particularly with the incorporation of stereotactic techniques (see
Christmas et al., 2004), but at the same time advances in pharmacology
made it possible to use drugs to treat the disorders for which surgery
was intended.

Box 25.15 Stereotactic procedures used in psychosurgery Subcaudate
tractotomy Lesion made beneath the head of each caudate nucleus, in the
rostral part of the orbital cortex

Anterior cingulotomy Bilateral lesions within the cingulate bundles

Limbic leucotomy Subcaudate tractotomy combined with cingulotomy

Anterior capsulotomy Bilateral lesions in the anterior limb of the
internal capsule

Current approaches The term psychosurgery is now often replaced by the
phrase neurosurgery for mental disorders. This change in terminology is
intended to emphasize that: â

The techniques involved now involve placement of localized lesions in
specific cerebral sites.

â

The treatment is for specific psychiatric conditions
(treatment-resistant major depression and obsessive-- compulsive
disorder), not for primary behavioural disturbance.

Royal College of Psychiatrists (2000) found a 'marked improvement' rate
in 63% of patients with major depression and in 58% of patients with
obsessive--compulsive disorder (see Box 25.16). A recent literature
review reported a slightly but significantly greater improvement in
symptomatology in intractable obsessive--compulsive disorder following
anterior capsulotomy in comparison to deep brain stimulation of ventral
striatum and nucleus accumbens (51% reduction versus 40%) (Pepper et
al., 2015).

Indications In the UK the indications for neurosurgery for mental
disorders are restricted to major depression and obsessive--compulsive
disorder that is chronic, treatmentrefractory, and disabling.
Neurosurgery is not indicated where these conditions arise as a
consequence of organic brain disease or a pervasive developmental
disorder.

Box 25.16 Outcome of psychosurgery in the UK, 1961--1997 Depression (n =
727)

Obsessive-- compulsive disorder (n = 478)

Marked improvement

63%

58%

Lesser improvement

22%

27%

No response

14%

14%

Worse

1%

1%

Types of operation Nowadays the older 'blind' operations have been
replaced by stereotactic procedures that allow the lesions to be placed
more accurately (see Box 25.15). In the UK, current procedures are
limited to anterior capsulotomy and anterior cingulotomy. The lesions
are produced either by radiofrequency thermocoagulation or by gamma
radiation (the 'gamma knife'). Lesions are made bilaterally.

Effectiveness In the absence of controlled trials, assessment has been
in the form of long-term follow-up studies. A report by the

Source: data from Royal College of Psychiatrists, Copyright (2000).

771

72

772

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments

Adverse effects With modern procedures, severe adverse effects are rare.
After the operation, headache and nausea are common, and confusion
occurs in about 10% of patients. These adverse effects typically last
for a few days, but can persist for up to a month. Long-term cognitive
impairment does not seem to occur (see Box 25.17).

Clinical use Neurosurgical procedures for mental disorders should not be
performed until the effects of several years of vigorous multimodal
treatment have been observed. If this rule is followed, the operation
will hardly ever be used. In fact, less than 20 psychosurgical
operations a year are currently performed in the UK, about 25% of the
annual rate in the early 1980s. If the surgery is to be considered at
all, it should only be for chronic intractable obsessional disorder and
severe chronic depressive disorders in older patients. There is no clear
justification for neurosurgery for anxiety disorders or schizophrenia.
For a review, see Christmas et al.Â (2004).

â

the lack of randomized studies to demonstrate that it is effective

â

the irreversibility of the procedure

â

the potentially serious nature of some of the adverse effects.

For these reasons it seems ethically appropriate that psychosurgery
should be offered only to competent patients who are able to give their
full informed consent. Determining competence may, of course, be
difficult in a patient with chronic severe mood disorder. In the UK,
this has led to the development of safeguards under Section 57 of the
1983 Mental Health Act, which require that: 1. The patient gives their
full informed consent. 2. A multidisciplinary panel appointed by the
Mental Health Act Commission confirms that the patient's consent is
valid. 3. The doctor on the multidisciplinary panel certifies that the
treatment should be given. Before doing so, the doctor must consult two
people, one a nurse and the other neither a nurse nor a doctor, who have
been concerned with the patient's treatment.

Ethical issues The brain is the organ of judgement and decisionmaking,
but it is regarded as ethically permissible to operate, for example, on
a brain tumour, if a patient gives their consent. The situation with
regard to psychosurgery is different because the tissue that is lesioned
is not overtly diseased. However, surgeons do sometimes operate on
tissue that is not diseased. The practical problems with regard to
psychosurgery (which distinguish it from ECT) are as follows:

Box 25.17 Adverse effects of stereotactic psychosurgery Acute effects
Operative mortality (less than 0.1%) Haemorrhage, hemiplegia (less than
0.3%) Transient confusion, lethargy (common)

Long-term effects Epilepsy (1--2%) Weight gain (10%) Frontal lobe
syndrome (very rare) Personality changes (usually mild)

Brain stimulation techniques Transcranial magnetic stimulation The use
of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is based on the principle
that, if a conducting medium such as the brain is adjacent to a magnetic
field, a current will be induced in the conducting medium. In TMS, an
electromagnetic coil is placed on the scalp. The passage of
high-intensity pulses of current in the coil produces a powerful
magnetic field---typically about 2 Tesla---which results in current flow
in neural tissue and neuronal depolarization. Neuropsychological effects
of TMS are particularly likely when pulses of current are delivered
rapidly, so-called repetitive TMS (rTMS). If the stimulation occurs more
quickly than once per second (1 Hz), it is called fast rTMS. The use of
appropriately shaped coils allows reasonably localized stimulation of
the main specific cortical areas.

Uses of TMS TMS has been used for many years in clinical neurophysiology
to explore, for example, the integrity of the motor cortex after stroke.
In research settings, TMS is used to localize the cortical substrates of
specific neuropsychological functions. For example, short-term verbal
recall can be disrupted by rTMS administered over the left temporal
cortex.

73

Other physical treatments Clinically, rTMS has been used to relieve
depressive states. Initially, studies used fast rTMS applied to the left
prefrontal cortex. However, other investigations have employed different
kinds of electromagnetic coil, stimulation parameters, and sites of coil
application, making comparison between studies difficult. Typically in
the treatment of depression, 40 pulses of stimulation are delivered over
4 seconds followed by a gap of 26 seconds before the next 40 pulses.
Around 2400--3000 pulses are delivered over a single session, which may
last for about 30 minutes. To achieve a clinical antidepressant effect,
TMS is usually repeated daily for 2--3 weeks (Tracy and David, 2015).
Meta-analyses suggest that, overall, TMS is more effective in the
treatment of depression than sham treatment, but it is significantly
less effective than ECT (Cowen and Anderson, 2015). TMS has also been
employed in treatment studies of other disorders, such as
obsessive--compulsive disorder, schizophrenia, eating disorders, and
depersonalization syndrome (Tracy and David, 2015). Findings in these
conditions are still preliminary and the difficulty of providing a
convincing sham control makes assessment difficult.

Adverse effects of TMS The use of single-pulse TMS in neurophysiological
studies has not raised significant safety concerns. The major hazard
with rTMS is the risk of inducing seizures. This is greater with fast
rTMS than with slow rTMS. Current safety protocols, which adjust the
amount of magnetic stimulation in relation to the motor threshold of the
individual, appear to have greatly reduced the likelihood of fits,
although patients with risk factors (e.g.Â a family history of epilepsy)
are generally excluded from TMS studies of healthy volunteers. Minor
side effects are more common, and include muscle tension headaches, and
sufficient noise is generated by the equipment to cause short-term
changes in hearing threshold. This can be prevented by the use of
earplugs (by both patients and investigators). rTMS appropriately
localized also has the potential to disrupt cognitive function, but so
far such changes have been temporary, and have not persisted after the
stimulation was terminated. There are insufficient data to establish
whether there might be any long-term sequelae to the brain or other
organs from the high-intensity magnetic field generated during TMS. No
specific hazard has been revealed by current follow-up studies.

subsequently been applied to the treatment of patients with resistant
depression. As well as providing an efferent parasympathetic outflow
from the brain, the vagus nerve conveys afferent sensory fibres that
synapse in the nucleus tractus solitarius and subsequently project to
the forebrain. Stimulating the vagus nerve therapeutically involves an
operative procedure during which a pulse generator is implanted
subcutaneously in the left anterior chest wall. Bipolar electrodes,
connected to the generator, are placed around the left vagus nerve in
the cervical region. These electrodes are intermittently stimulated by
the generator, with the stimulation parameters being regulated by a
telemetric 'wand', which is connected to a personal computer.
Modification of the stimulus parameters is used to balance adverse
effects (see below) with therapeutic effects. Typically stimulation
occurs for about 30 seconds followed by a 5-minute 'off' period (Tracy
and David, 2015).

VNS in depression Open studies have suggested that over 12 months of
treatment about 50% of patients show a good clinical response to VNS.
Currently the best antidepressant effects have occurred in patients who
have a moderate degree of treatment resistance but who have not proved
totally refractory to multiple trials of antidepressant and augmentation
therapies. Berry and colleagues (2013) carried out a patient-level
meta-analysis of six outpatient trials involving patients with resistant
depression, which allowed comparison of VNS and treatment as usual (TAU)
for up to 96 weeks postimplantation. Response rates in the VNS group at
48 and 96 weeks were 28% and 32%, whereas the corresponding figures for
the TAU participants were 12% and 14%, respectively. However, in only
one of these studies was there a randomized comparison of VNS and TAU,
and this did not show a significant difference between the two
conditions (Cowen and Anderson, 2015).

Adverse effects of VNS During periods of VNS, hoarseness is common and
throat pain, cough, and dyspnoea can occur. These adverse effects
decline with time, and withdrawal from treatment is uncommon. Hypomania
has rarely been reported, but its relationship to VNS treatment is
uncertain (Christmas et al., 2004; Tracy and David, 2015).

Vagal nerve stimulation

Deep brain stimulation

Vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) is an established treatment for patients
with refractory epilepsy, in whom it was noted to improve mood. It has
therefore

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is established in the treatment of
Parkinson's disease, where implantation of electrodes in the subthalamic
nucleus significantly alleviates

773

74

774

Chapter 25 Drugs and other physical treatments the motor symptoms of
advanced disease. DBS was also noted sometimes to improve mood and
obsessive symptomatology in patients with Parkinson's disease and this,
together with increasing knowledge of the neural circuitry underlying
psychiatric disorders, has led to studies of its effects in patients
with refractory depression and obsessive--compulsive disorder (Tracy and
David, 2015). DBS involves bilateral implantation of electrodes into
designated target locations using stereotactic guidance. The location of
the electrodes is confirmed with MRI scanning. The electrodes are
connected to a generator implanted into the abdomen, and the stimulation
settings are adjusted according to clinical response and adverse
effects. The fact that the settings can be modified and the generator
switched on or off makes DBS more susceptible to controlled trial than
neurosurgical treatment. It seems likely that stimulation frequency is a
key factor in determining the clinical efficacy of DBS. In Parkinson's
disease, for example, stimulation starts to reduce tremor at a frequency
of approximately 50 Hz and reaches a plateau at about 200 Hz.
Low-frequency stimulation is believed to activate neurons, whilst
high-frequency stimulation probably causes inhibition. Whereas
improvement in rigidity and tremor in Parkinson's disease can be seen
within minutes of DBS commencing, amelioration in depression and
obsessive-- compulsive symptomatology develops gradually over a period
of weeks. This might be a consequence of neuroplastic changes induced by
DBS, or might perhaps be due to changes in the oscillatory properties of
the relevant neural networks.

DBS in depression

DBS in obsessive--compulsive disorder

Ethical aspects of DBS

In studies of patients with intractable obsessive-- compulsive disorder,
electrodes have been implanted in the anterior limb of the internal
capsule, with the aim of influencing the brain regions targeted by
neurosurgery for obsessive--compulsive disorder (see above). Subsequent
studies have also examined the effect of DBS in the ventral striatum and
nucleus accumbens. Alonso and colleagues (2015) conducted a metaanalysis
of 31 studies (116 participants) of DBS in patients with refractory
obsessive--compulsive disorder. Clinical response was seen in 60% of the
sample, with older age of onset, religious obsessions, and compulsions
being positive predictors of outcome. The different DBS studies targeted
a variety of brain regions, and no particular location emerged as being
the most effective site. It will be important to confirm these results
with suitably powered randomized studies using sham stimulation.

DBS is considered to be less invasive than neurosurgery in that the
stimulation can be stopped and there is no lesioning of tissue. However,
the procedure does carry risks, and there is a lack of long-term
efficacy and safety data. The situation is further complicated by
involvement of commercial factors, because the stimulator equipment is
expensive and manufactured by industry. This highlights once again the
need for a scrupulous fiduciary relationship between the patient and the
treating clinical team, as well as full informed consent to the
procedure by a competent patient. It also suggests that some DBS trials
should be sponsored by non-commercial organizations, and that all
clinical data should be made publicly available so that there is no risk
of publication bias. In view of the troubled history of direct
neurosurgical interventions for psychiatric disorders, it has been

DBS in treatment-refractory depressed patients has also involved a
number of different brain regions, based on abnormalities revealed by
functional neuroimaging as well as theoretical considerations of the
neural underpinnings of symptoms such as anhedonia. Studies have
involved mainly the subgenual cingulate cortex and the ventral striatum.
A meta-analysis of four observational studies (66 participants) of
stimulation to the subgenual cortex in patients with resistant
depression showed a 12-month remission rate of 26% (Berlim et al.,
2014). However, benefit has yet to be shown in sham controlled studies
(Tracy and David, 2015).

Adverse effects of DBS Typical adverse effects associated with DBS
include throbbing or buzzing sensations, nausea, and jaw tingling.
Orofacial muscle contractions, dyskinesias, dysarthria, and dysphagia
are also reported. Mood changes may occur but are difficult to relate
specifically to DBS. However, some patients with no history of
bipolarity have experienced hypomania. More profound mood swings,
including severe depression and suicidal ideation, may occur if the
stimulator fails suddenly. Some patients have reported a feeling of
being cognitively 'clouded', which has responded to changes in stimulus
parameters. To date there is no evidence that DBS causes enduring
cognitive impairment. As with any neurosurgical procedure, implantation
of electrodes for DBS carries risks of haemorrhage and infection. Such
complications appear to be rare; in one series of 141 patients
undergoing DBS for Parkinson's disease, the overall mortality
attributable to the procedure was 0.7% (Vergani et al., 2010).

75

Further reading proposed that DBS should only be used to treat
psychiatric disorders in the context of an approved research protocol
with full independent ethical review.

Transcranial direct current stimulation A more recent stimulatory
technique for treating psychiatric disorders is provided by transcranial
direct current stimulation (TDCS). TDCS involves an application to the
scalp of a small current of 1 or 2 milliamperes via two electrodes which
function as anode and cathode. Current is typically applied for around
30 minutes. The weak electrical field thus generated is capable of
altering neuronal excitability and plasticity (Tracy and David, 2015).

TDCS has been applied mainly to the treatment of depression, although
even for this single indication a variety of electrode placements have
been used. In patients with resistant depression, the effects of TDCS
versus sham controls are inconsistent (Tracy and David, 2015). However,
in a randomized, sham-controlled study of first-line treatment of 120
depressed patients, TDCS applied to prefrontal cortex was effective as a
monotherapy and produced a large potentiation of the antidepressant
effect of a modest dose of sertraline (Brunoni et al., 2013). TDCS may
also have the ability to enhance aspects of cognitive function, which
potentially could give it a role in the augmentation of psychological
treatments for depression.

Further reading Anderson IM and McAllister-Williams RH (2015).
Fundamentals of Clinical Psychopharmacology. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
(Concise evidence-based guide to mode of action of psychopharmacological
agents and their clinical effects.) Stahl SM (2013). Stahl's Essential
Psychopharmacology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. (A
well-illustrated account of basic and clinical use of psychotropic
drugs.)

Taylor D, Paton C and Kapur S (2015). The Maudsley Prescribing
Guidelines, 12th edn. John Wiley, Chichester. (An excellent handbook of
good prescribing practice.) Waite J and Eaton A (eds.) (2013). The ECT
Handbook, 3rd edn. RCPsych Publications, London. (A clear, thorough, and
practical guide to high-quality administration of ECT).

775

76

7

CHAPTER 26

Psychiatric services Introduction 777 The history of psychiatric
services 777 The components of a mental health service 780 Services for
psychiatric disorder in primary care 789 Specialist services for acute
psychiatric disorder 792

Psychiatric services that provide long-term care 794 Services for people
with particular needs 797 Some difficulties with community care 798
International service principles 798

Introduction The last two chapters dealt with the treatment of
individual patients. This chapter is concerned with the provision of
psychiatric care for populations. It deals mainly with the needs of and
provisions for people aged 18-- 65 years ('adults of working age').
Services for children are described in Chapter 16, services for the
elderly in Chapter 19, and services for patients with intellectual
disability in Chapter 17. The organization of psychiatric services in
any country inevitably depends on the organization of general medical

services in that country. This chapter will refer specifically to
services in the UK, but the principles embodied apply widely. The
chapter begins with an account of the historical development of
psychiatric services. This is followed by descriptions of the commonly
available psychiatric services and of the problems encountered with
these provisions. The chapter ends with a consideration of some
innovations designed to overcome these problems.

The history of psychiatric services What we now recognize as psychiatry
dates from the end of the eighteenth century. Before that there were
hardly any special provisions for the mentally ill in Europe, other than
in Spain, where some hospitals were present from the Islamic Middle Ages
(Chamberlain, 1966). Although mental disturbances were often considered
as illnesses in antiquity, during the Middle Ages they became regarded
as spiritual problems. Other than forms of exorcism and containment,
little was provided.

In Britain until the middle of the eighteenth century, most mentally ill
people lived with their families or, if very disturbed, were in prison.
Private 'madhouses' (later to be called private asylums) were developed
mainly for those who could pay, but accepted some paupers supported by
their parishes (Parry-Jones, 1972). At about the same time, a few
hospitals or wards were established through private benefaction and
public subscription. The Bethel Hospital in Norwich was founded in 1713.
In London, the lunatic ward at Guy's Hospital

78

778

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services

At the end of the eighteenth century the Enlightenment led to a more
empirical, less theological, understanding of madness. This rational
approach led to increased public concern in many countries about the
poor standards of private and public institutions, including efforts to
improve the care of the mentally ill.Â In Paris in 1793, Philippe Pinel
iconically released patients from their chains and introduced other
changes to make the care of patients more humane. In England, similar
reforming ideas were proposed by William Tuke, a Quaker philanthropist
who founded the Retreat in York in 1792. The Retreat provided pleasant
surroundings and adequate facilities for occupation and recreation.
Treatment was based on 'moral' (i.e.Â social) management, consisting of
kindness, calm, and activity. Tuke and Pinel both acknowledged that,
although mad, patients still could respond to kindness and
consideration, in contrast to the previous authoritarian approach aimed
at simply controlling patients. Medical treatments such as bleeding and
purging were peripheral to the routine care of the insane. Tuke's
grandson, Samuel, described their system in A Description of the Retreat
(1813), and the Retreat was replicated internationally. It became clear
that many mentally ill patients could exert self-control and did not
require physical restraint and punishment.

Unfortunately, these early attitudes yielded to a more restrictive
approach as the asylums expanded and became overcrowded. Initial
optimism about the curability of psychiatric disorder faded with the
accumulation of chronic cases and an increased focus on organic and
hereditary causes. The original York Retreat housed 30 patients, and the
first 16 British asylums about 100 patients each. By 1840 they averaged
300 patients, 540 patients by 1870, and 960 patients by 1900. Some
patients with chronic illness were housed in detached annexes or houses
in the grounds of the asylum. Other hospitals returned chronic patients
to the community either by boarding them out with a family (a form of
care that had long been practised successfully at Gheel in Belgium), or
by returning them to workhouses. The Lunacy Commissioners, whose role
was to oversee the care of the mentally ill, were concerned that these
arrangements could lead to abuse, and were opposed to them.
Nevertheless, nineteenth-century asylums, even when overcrowded,
provided a standard of care for the mentally ill that was lacking
elsewhere. They were protected from exploitation, and provided with
shelter, food, and general health care, all without cost. A change to a
stricter custodial regime was endorsed by the Lunacy Act 1890, which
imposed restrictions on admission and discharge from hospital. The
bureaucratic and rigid 1890 Lunacy Act had resulted from years of
unwarranted committal, but it handicapped British psychiatric
development for nearly half a century. For accounts of psychiatric
hospitals in the UK and the USA in the nineteenth century, see Jones
(1992) and Rothman (1971).

The asylum movement

Arrangements for early treatment

Until the early nineteenth century most mentally ill people received no
care and lived as vagrants or as inmates of workhouses and gaols. Public
concern about the welfare of the insane in workhouses and gaols and some
private madhouses led to the County Asylum Act of 1808. This provided
for the building of mental hospitals in English counties. However, it
was the Lunatics Act 1845 that required the building of one in every
county. At first the new asylums were small and provided good treatment
in spacious surroundings. Moral management was championed. The
'non-restraint movement', which had started with the work of Gardiner
Hill at the Lincoln Asylum in 1837, was established by John Conolly at
the Middlesex County Asylum, Hanwell, in 1845. This removed the use of
all physical restraints, a practice that has characterized mental
healthcare in the UK ever since.

The opening of the Maudsley Hospital in 1923 provided an outpatient
service and voluntary inpatient treatment in surroundings in which
teaching and research were carried out. In the years between the wars
the impetus for change increased. The Mental Treatment Act 1930 repealed
many of the restrictions on discharge of patients that had been imposed
by the Lunacy Act 1890. It allowed county asylums to accept voluntary
patients, and changed the term 'asylum' to 'mental hospital' and the
term 'lunatic' to voluntary 'mental patient'. The 1930 Act also
encouraged local authorities to set up outpatient clinics and to
establish facilities for aftercare. Therapeutic optimism, revived by von
Jauregg's successful malaria treatment for cerebral syphilis, increased
further with the introduction of insulin coma treatment (later
abandoned) and electroconvulsive therapy. Efforts were made to improve
conditions in hospitals, to unlock

was established in 1728. In 1751, St Luke's Hospital was founded as an
alternative to the overcrowded Bethlem Hospital, which had existed as an
institution since 1247, but only latterly had become exclusively a
'madhouse.'

Moral management

79

The history of psychiatric services previously locked wards, and to
encourage occupational activities. Similar changes took place in other
countries. In most countries, these reforms were halted by the Second
World War. Psychiatric hospitals became understaffed as doctors and
nurses were recruited to the war effort, and became overcrowded as some
had to be evacuated for the care of the war injured (Crammer, 1990). In
Germany, many psychiatric patients died in a eugenics programme---a
particularly shameful episode in the history of a country that dominated
psychiatric progress in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
(Burleigh, 2000).

Social psychiatry and the beginning of community care Several forces led
to further changes in psychiatric hospitals directly after the Second
World War. Social attitudes had become more liberal and sympathetic
towards the disadvantaged. Wartime experience of 'battle neuroses' had
encouraged interest in the early treatments, and in the use of groups
and social rehabilitation. In the UK, the establishment of the National
Health Service led to a general reorganization of medical services,
including psychiatry. The introduction of chlorpromazine in 1952 made it
easier to manage the disturbed behaviour of patients with psychosis. It
became possible to open wards that had been locked (although some
hospitals had done so before such drugs became available), to engage
patients in social activities, and to discharge more of them into the
community. Despite these changes, services continued to be concentrated
at single sites, often remote from centres of population. In the USA,
Goffman (1961) vividly exposed the detrimental effects of such 'total
institutions'. He described how their impersonal, inflexible, and
authoritarian regimes eroded identity and, through this
'institutionalization', generated chronicity. In the UK, Wing and Brown
(1970) demonstrated how large mental hospital environments characterized
by 'social poverty' led to 'clinical poverty'. Vigorous social
rehabilitation was introduced to improve conditions in hospital and to
counteract the effects of years of institutional living. Occupational
and industrial therapies were used to prepare chronically disabled
patients for the move from hospital to sheltered accommodation or to
ordinary housing (Bennett, 1983). Many long-stay patients were very
responsive to these vigorous new methods, and optimism grew that newly
admitted patients could be similarly helped. Away from the hospitals,
day units were established to provide continuing treatment and
rehabilitation, and

hostels were opened to provide sheltered accommodation. The numbers of
patients in psychiatric hospitals fell substantially in the UK and in
other countries. The changes started later in the USA, with the
introduction of Medicaid in 1965, but then progressed very rapidly.
Despite these changes, services were still based in large mental
hospitals that were often far from patients' homes, and the provision of
community facilities remained inadequate.

Hospital closure Early successes in discharging institutionalized
patients led to expectations that asylums would soon be replaced by
small psychiatric units in general hospitals, supported by community
facilities. In most countries, the programme of hospital closure took
place, albeit very gradually. A notable exception was Italy. In 1978,
the Italian Parliament passed Law 180, which prohibited admissions to
mental hospitals forthwith. It aimed to abolish Italy's neglected mental
hospitals altogether over a period of 3 years and replace them with a
comprehensive system of community care. Psychiatric 'diagnostic' units
limited to admissions of 7 days were to be set up in general hospitals,
and community services developed for each catchment area. This Italian
revolution was led by Franco Basaglia in hospitals in north-east Italy,
through the movement he founded. This movement---Psichiatria
Democratica---combined a left-wing political view that patients in
psychiatric hospitals were the victims of oppression by the capitalist
system with the conviction that severe mental illness was induced more
by social conditions than by biological causes. Basaglia's charismatic
personality and qualities of leadership (and a wife who became an
Italian Senator) helped him to succeed with his reforms. Others found
them more difficult, and their impact varied. Where the reforms were
financed adequately and were implemented by enthusiastic staff
(particularly in the wealthy north), the new provisions were successful.
However, in Rome and the south facilities were often inadequate and
problems encountered (Fioritti et al., 1997). The state mental hospital
system, however, came to a complete end in 1989 (Burti, 2001). In the UK
and elsewhere the pace of change was slower, but similar problems arose.
Many patients needed ongoing intensive support, and many required
repeated readmissions to hospital---so-called 'revolving-door patients'.
Rehabilitation services had to adjust their expectations and provide
continuing care. The early expectations of deinstitutionalization had
clearly been overoptimistic. The policy of

779

780

780

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services 'community care' was introduced to
develop more adequate community provision.

The rise of community care The development of community care falls quite
neatly into two phases---before 1980 and from 1980 onwards (Burns,
2014). In the first phase, as hospitals closed, community psychiatric
services acquired three responsibilities. The first was to provide
treatment for those individuals with severe mental illness who would
previously have remained in hospital for many years. The second was to
treat severe acute psychiatric disorder as far as possible without
lengthy admission to hospital, and as near as possible to the patient's
home. The third was to assist primary care services in the detection,
prevention, and early treatment of the less severe psychiatric
disorders. Services were to be comprehensive, to deliver continuity of
care, and to be provided by multidisciplinary teams. The framework for
this 'sectorized' service was laid by the 1959 Mental Health Act in the
UK and a similar approach was initiated in France. The UK Act required
hospitals to provide outpatient follow-up for their own discharged
patients, and also required social services involvement in both
compulsory admissions and community support. A highly localized service
was therefore a practical necessity for effective joint working. These
general principles were applied rather differently in the UK and in the
USA. In the UK, emphasis was placed initially on provision for patients
discharged from long-term hospital care. In the USA, community mental
health centres (CMHCs) were established, with more emphasis on
prevention and early treatment to avoid admission. These CMHCs
emphasized crisis intervention and the treatment of acute, often
relatively minor, psychiatric disorders. Unlike the UK teams they had no
outreach facility, so patients with chronic and severe mental illness
(who seldom actively seek care) became neglected. A rather 'antimedical'
approach in CMHCs led to difficulties in recruiting and retaining
psychiatrists (Talbott et al., 1987). Dissatisfaction with the centres
grew as people discharged from long-term

hospital care found their way into private hospitals or prisons, or
joined the homeless population of large cities (Goldman and Morrissey,
1985). In the UK and parts of Europe, some commonly agreed principles
evolved in sectorized care: â

Minimizing inpatient care. Hospital admissions were to be brief, and as
far as possible patients were to be admitted to psychiatric units in
general hospitals rather than to psychiatric hospitals. Whenever
practicable, people were to be treated as outpatients or day patients.

â

Providing rehabilitation early on. The aim of this was to protect and
possibly improve residual functioning and prevent further deterioration.

â

Multidisciplinary teams. Care was to be provided by teams, usually
consisting of psychiatrists, community nurses, clinical psychologists,
and social workers, often working in collaboration with members of
voluntary groups.

â

Legal reform. New laws were introduced (e.g.Â the 1983 Mental Health Act
and its 2007 amendment in England and Wales) to limit the uses of
compulsory treatment, to encourage alternatives to inpatient care, and
to strengthen the rights of the individual.

As experience increased after the reforms had begun, the following
additional features were introduced: â

Care packages based on an assessment of each patient's needs.

â

Case management by a named, clinically trained, care worker who led and
coordinated the work of others involved in care.

â

Outreach to take services to vulnerable people who might otherwise find
it difficult to engage with the care that is offered, and to arrange
follow-up.

â

User involvement. Service users were increasingly involved in planning
both their own treatment and the services for the population.

â

Risk assessment carried out regularly, and more formally as part of the
care plan.

The components of a mental health service From the 1960s to the
mid-1980s, mental health services in the UK and, indeed, most parts of
the world evolved slowly, based on professional consensus. In

the 1980s, interest in evidence-based medicine spread to mental health
services research. This approach was international and increased the
pace of change

781

The components of a mental health service dramatically. The fundamental
components of most care, namely inpatient wards, day hospitals, and
community mental health teams (CMHTs), had not been subject to research,
but were well established and have proved durable. The publication of
Stein and Test's (1980) groundbreaking trial of an Assertive Community
Treatment team ushered in the second phase of development--- the era of
evidence-based mental health services. The more recent highly
specialized teams (assertive outreach teams, crisis resolution/home
treatment teams, and early-onset (psychosis) services) have been driven
more by policy and this research. Since the last edition of this book we
have witnessed a dramatic change in fortunes for some of these new teams
as the evidence has accumulated. What follows is a description of the UK
services, which addresses research and international evidence where this
is relevant or helpful. The NHS has entered a phase of profound change,
and the predictability and uniformity of services are likely to change
markedly during the lifetime of this book. As noted earlier, issues
specifically related to psychiatric services for children, those with
learning disabilities, and the elderly, are discussed in Chapters 16,
17, and 19, respectively.

Inpatient wards No comprehensive service can survive without access to
24-hour nursing supervision for acute episodes of severe illness
(Thornicroft and Tansella, 2013). Surprisingly, inpatient wards are
often overlooked in descriptions of comprehensive services. They serve
patients at risk from neglect or suicide and those lacking insight.
Wards usually accommodate 10--20 patients. It is rarely possible to
staff and run stand-alone units of less than three to four such wards
effectively (30--60 beds). The famed Italian Law 180 restricted wards to
15 patients, and this is a common international goal (Burns, 1998). Ward
size is a trade-off between privacy and domesticity on the one hand and
effective supervision on the other. Single rooms are preferable and are
now the norm in new-build units. They afford maximum privacy and,
although initially expensive, they improve flexibility and have been
shown to reduce conflict significantly.

Single-sex accommodation Concern for the safety and privacy of female
patients has led to government requirements for single-sex wards. This
reversal of the development that occurred in the 1960s and 1970s is
non-negotiable, even if it may have been overtaken by the increasing
availability of single ensuite accommodation in new units.

Smaller, more flexible, units such as 'crisis houses' offering 24-hour
care have been a useful complement to inpatient wards. However, they are
not a replacement for them, and where this has been attempted it has
usually resulted in an unacceptably high rate of transfer to the
psychiatric intensive care units (PICUs). Ward design and management are
increasingly crucial as improved community care concentrates involuntary
and disturbed inpatients in them.

Continuity of responsibility Responsibility by the same clinical team
for both community and inpatient care is unusual except in the UK and
Italy, where it has delivered strikingly shorter stays and improved bed
management. Continuity is difficult in dispersed populations, and
increasingly even in cities as each team has fewer inpatients. A
separate inpatient team ensures better inpatient standards, but with the
risk of diverging approaches (e.g.Â a 'medical model' inpatient team and
a 'psychotherapeutic' community team). It has recently become common
practice in the UK at the same time that many European services are
trying to overcome it, for reasons that are unclear but which may
include the problems of wards having to cope with several admitting
teams. Both the move to single-sex accommodation and specialized teams
result in each team often having only one or two patients on a ward.
Diffused responsibility and organizing multiple ward rounds have
promoted the change, but not without cost (Burns, 2010). It appears to
be in conflict with the expectation of continuity of clinical
responsibility in the 1983 Mental Health Act, and particularly in the
2007 amendment permitting compulsory treatment in the community through
the new provision of Supervised Community Treatment Orders (SCTOs, which
are invariably referred to as Community Treatment Orders, or CTOs; see
Chapter 4). It is unclear whether the inpatient consultant or the
community consultant should make the decision.

Longer inpatient care Acute inpatient wards admit patients for weeks or
a couple of months, with rapid discharge anticipated. Across Europe the
rate of compulsory admission has been rising for the past decade (Priebe
et al., 2005). The reasons are unclear but bed shortages are certainly
one factor (Keown et al., 2011), as is an increasing focus on risk
assessment. Some patients require longer, more secure, care service
because of illness severity or for legal reasons. Modern rehabilitation
wards are thus generally restricted to patients with persistently
unacceptable behaviour.

781

782

782

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services

Diagnosis-specific wards Diagnosis- or disorder-specific wards are
relatively rare in the UK. In Scandinavia and Central Europe, separate
wards for alcohol and substance abuse are long established. Wards for
specific, specialized problems such as anorexia nervosa or resistant
schizophrenia offer highly specific regimes. These are generally
regional, and are a complement to acute admission wards, not an
alternative. The current focus on organizing services along 'care
pathways' may result in more specialized inpatient services.

Daycare Daycare is provided in day hospitals and day centres, and there
is no clear distinction between them. Day hospitals are generally
provided by health services, include medical and nursing staff, and can
offer treatments (e.g.Â the prescription and monitoring of medication,
psychotherapies). Day centres are provided by social services or
voluntary organizations. They only rarely provide specific treatments or
employ clinically trained staff. However, services vary according to
local context. A drop-in day centre may provide psychiatric assessment
and treatment in areas of high social mobility and homelessness. Broadly
speaking, day centres provide long-term social support and day hospitals
provide focused interventions and treatments (Catty et al., 2005). Acute
day hospitals in Europe and partial hospitalization services in the USA
have been energetically proposed as acceptable and economical
alternatives to inpatient care (Marshall, 2003), but have had little
penetration. Day hospitals never achieved their anticipated prominence
in the UK, having perhaps been overtaken as CMHTs have become more
comprehensive. They serve specific groups well (e.g.Â mothers with small
children, those with eating disorders, or personality problems). Daycare
can be difficult to organize in rural settings.

Supported accommodation and residential care The extent of inpatient
care needed depends on access to other supervised accommodation.
Patients remain well outside hospital only with adequate support and
stable, affordable accommodation. Supervision may be needed to ensure
self-care, continued medication, and to anticipate and defuse crises.
This can be provided by voluntary agencies, social services, or health
services. Voluntary agencies tend to be more efficient at providing
long-term residential care (Knapp et al., 1999), but are reluctant to
accept risky patients. A mixed economy works best.

Outpatient clinics Psychiatrists assess patients, advise them and their
referrers, and provide treatments. In state-funded systems
'office-based' pure practice is rare, as most professionals work in
outpatient clinics or mental health teams. Psychiatrists and
psychologists may still operate independently within outpatient clinics,
but with easy access to enhanced resources and second opinions.
Outpatient clinics may operate either alongside CMHTs or as part of
them. They work better for severe illness when fully integrated with
CMHTs (Wright et al., 2004). Clinics provide an efficient format for
assessments and monitoring of treatment progress.

Multidisciplinary community mental health teams Most community mental
health services are made up of multidisciplinary professional groups
working together to care for an identified number of patients. These are
referred to generically as CMHTs. Nurses have long worked outside
hospitals (e.g.Â midwives, health visitors), and have made psychiatric
home visits since the 1950s. Social workers, psychologists, and
occupational therapists are increasingly based in CMHTs rather than in
their own separate departments. The staffing of these teams varies
internationally, but they all hold regular review meetings. These
reviews incorporate their varied professional perspectives and allocate
tasks according to staff skills and patient needs. They were developed
in France and the UK in the delivery of sectorized psychiatry, refined
in Italy, and further elaborated in North America and Australia.

The generic sector CMHT ('the CMHT') Who it is for The CMHT is the
fundamental building block of modern community mental health services.
It originated as mental hospital catchment areas (which often covered a
whole city or county) were divided into sectors of 50,000--100,000
inhabitants to facilitate ongoing care. It provides assessment and care
for patients who have been discharged from psychiatric units and for
outpatients who require more support than can be provided in primary
care. Current sector size in Western Europe ranges from 20,000 to 50,000
members of the population, determined both by resources (the size
shrinking as investment increases) and by the local configuration.

783

The components of a mental health service As more specialized teams are
established, the CMHT's remit may be narrowed and its sector size
increased. CMHTs prioritize individuals with severe mental illnesses
(SMIs), such as psychoses and severe affective disorders. Many
inner-city CMHTs only see such patients. However, diagnosis is not
all---complications due to social adversity, personality difficulties,
or substance abuse can make secondary mental health care necessary even
for apparently 'minor' disorders. Several tools have been developed for
clarifying a threshold for acceptance (Slade et al., 2000), but these
are of limited use and most teams rely on clinical assessments. In
countries with limited private care, such as the UK, CMHTs also treat
mild and transient disorders.

Staffing and management CMHTs range from 7 or 8 to over 20 full-time
staff. They emphasize skill sharing and a degree of generic working, and
have evolved an informal, democratic style (Burns, 2004). Senior
psychiatrists initially provided clinical leadership but, with increased
staff numbers and treatment complexity, 'team managers' now coordinate
the workload. There is little consensus on their role, which can range
from the purely administrative to determining clinical priorities and
supervising staff. Clinically active team managers usually have reduced
caseloads. If clinical leadership and team management are separated
(which is common if there is a strong medical presence), the roles need
to be well defined and relationships clarified.

Assessments The key to good care is accurate assessment, and CMHTs vary
in how they provide this. In general, psychiatrists are responsible for
an initial assessment (often in an outpatient clinic) and involve the
team members in treatment. Increasingly, other team members have taken a
role in assessments, either individually or jointly with the
psychiatrist. This issue generates strong opinions, but there has been
surprisingly little research into it. With highly developed primary
care, non-medical assessments may be effective, but otherwise medical
time should prioritize assessments. For the most severely ill patients,
home-based assessments pay considerable dividends (Stein and Test, 1980;
Burns et al., 2007b).

Case management Most CMHT staff act as clinical case managers (Holloway
et al., 1995), taking lead responsibility for the delivery,
coordination, and review of care for an agreed number of patients.
Currently, clinical case managers provide direct care to build a
trusting relationship and provide treatment and continuity for patients
with complex needs.

They also utilize the full range of team resources. The caseloads of
staff members are explicitly limited (usually 15--25), and reviews are
recorded and systematic. In the UK this has been formalized as the Care
Programme Approach (Department of Health, 1990), which requires a named
case manager (called a care coordinator) and a document called a care
plan, which records the patient's needs or problems, the proposed
interventions for them, and who is responsible for each of them, plus an
agreed date for review. Care plans are often supplemented with a risk
assessment and a contingency (crisis) plan. Optimally this should not
need more than two pages, but it is often weighed down with
administrative details that obscure its clinical purpose. Such simple
structured paperwork can be adapted to any service. It fulfils a vital
coordinating role in complex care, and serves as a natural focus for
clinical reviews. The value of this document (as with the risk
assessment and contingency plan) lies in its brevity. Too much
information is as risky as too little, and the level of detail needs to
be clinically (not managerially) determined.

Team meetings CMHTs always have one, and often two, regular meetings per
week for both clinical and administrative business. They last between 1
and 2 hours, and the level of structure varies. Allocation of referrals.
Deciding who will assess new patients need occupy only 10 minutes at the
beginning of the routine meeting, or can simply be delegated to a senior
member to decide. Referrals can be allocated according to who is first
available, or by matching the clinical problem against available skill
and training. It is remarkable how many CMHTs fail to have an agreed
timetable for new assessments (as is routine in outpatient clinics).
Much time is saved if each member has agreed regular assessment 'slots'.
There is then no need to 'coordinate diaries' for joint assessments, and
patients can be directly booked into available slots if the member is
absent at allocation. Time spent discussing allocations (and
particularly having a 'referral meeting') before assessment is
unprofitable, and most well-functioning teams delegate the task. Patient
reviews. Reviews are needed for new patients, routine monitoring,
crises, and discharge. They can range from simply reporting the problem
and proposed treatment in uncomplicated cases, through to detailed,
structured, multidisciplinary case conferences. These may include other
services (e.g.Â general practitioner, housing, child protection). New
patient reviews are particularly important for providing a broad,
experienced overview,

783

784

784

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services particularly if assessments are
distributed across the team. They also ensure rational and fair
allocation to caseloads. Routine monitoring is often overlooked, yet is
probably the most important review for team efficiency. It shapes and
redirects treatment and identifies patients who are ready for discharge.
The burden on individual staff members is regularly monitored. Routine
monitoring is a statutory requirement of the Care Programme Approach,
and is good practice in all case management. Crisis reviews are
unscheduled but allow case managers to seek advice when they are unsure.
Discharge reviews provide an excellent opportunity for audit and
learning within the team. Managing waiting lists and caseloads.
Effective CMHTs need to guarantee prompt access. Routine assessments
should take place within 2--4 weeks. Striving for a shorter waiting time
is rarely productive, and waiting times of much over 4 weeks have a
rapidly rising rate of failed appointments. Urgent assessments (which
include most psychotic episodes) need to be seen within a week, and
usually within a couple of days. Emergency assessments are for those
associated with immediate risk (e.g.Â hostile behaviour or suicidal
intent) and ideally need to be seen the same day. A practical approach
to managing waiting times is to count the number of referrals in the
preceding year and timetable routine assessment slots for about 120% of
that rate. So, if a team that had 300 referrals in the previous year
allocates seven slots a week, there will be one extra available each
week for urgent assessments and emergencies. Easy access to routine
assessments reduces pressure for urgent and emergency referrals, and is
much more efficient than emergency rotas.

Communication and liaison Team meetings ensure internal communication,
but CMHTs also need good links with the wider network of professional
colleagues. Most routine communication takes place by letter, phone, or
during clinical encounters. More structured liaison is advisable with
primary care and general hospitals. General hospital links may be
between specific CMHTs and wards, or CMHTs may provide input to patients
from their sectors. Dedicated liaison psychiatry and psychosomatic
services are routine in well-resourced services. General practice
liaison. GP liaison systems originated in Balint groups but are now more
likely to involve shared care or co-location of CMHTs in GP health
centres (Burns and Bale, 1997). An effective and sustainable system
involves regular (usually monthly) timetabled

meetings between the two teams, or a 'link' CMHT member attending the GP
health centre. It is important always to be clear about
responsibilities; blurring of boundaries is risky. Liaison with other
agencies. The same principles apply to liaison with other agencies
(social services, housing, and charitable and voluntary sector
providers). Whether regular meetings are cost-effective will depend on
the volume of shared work. Professional confidentiality and information
sharing are more sensitive.

Mental health services research The past 30 years have witnessed a
change in how mental health services are planned and evaluated. A new
academic activity, mental health services research (MHSR), has come into
existence, which has attempted to subject services and systems to the
same evidence-based medicine approach of rigorous testing
(e.g.Â controlled studies, randomized controlled trials, meta-analyses)
widely accepted with specific treatments. This has had two profound
effects. First, it has internationalized thinking about optimal
services. The language of science means that findings from other parts
of the world can be applied locally. Second, it has shifted the locus of
control in service development away from clinicians and towards
academics and policy-makers. There are undoubted benefits to MHSR. For
example, thinking and communication are markedly clearer, and some
ineffective practices (e.g.Â traditional 'brokerage' case management)
have been identified and abandoned. However, there are also drawbacks,
particularly the risk of overinterpretation of results and their
application without recognition of the modifying effects of the local
context. This is briefly outlined in the cases of Assertive Community
Treatment (ACT) teams. Three fundamental conceptual problems have dogged
MHSR: â

A tendency to equate a service with a treatment, rather than with the
platform for delivering treatments.

â

The assumption that the 'control' services in randomized controlled
trials are inert and consistent, when in fact they are active and very
variable 'comparator' services.

â

A tendency to ignore the 'pioneer' effect---shiny new demonstration
services with charismatic leaders have an inherent advantage.

MHSR methodology is improving, but these pitfalls in interpreting
studies always need to be considered.

785

The components of a mental health service

Mental Health National Service Framework 1999 Mental health services in
England and Wales were radically reformed following the publication of
the National Service Framework (NSF) in 1999 (Department of Health,
1999) and the NHS Plan in 2000 (Department of Health, 2000). These drew
heavily on MHSR and pioneering services in North Birmingham and
Australia. They initially recommended the complete replacement of the
UK's sectorized generic CMHTs with four separate 'functional'
teams---assertive outreach, crisis resolution and home treatment, early
intervention, and primary care liaison teams. The sheer impracticality
of such a massive reorganization (for which there simply were not
adequate trained staff) and challenges to the strength of the evidence
modified the proposal, and CMHTs were retained and primary care liaison
teams abandoned. An ambitious programme to establish the first three
types of functional teams was put in place, starting with the creation
of 300 assertive outreach teams (AOTs). These three teams are described
below. The research evidence will be briefly addressed but, as
demonstrated by that on AOTs, this can change radically over time.

Assertive outreach teams The most extensively replicated and researched
specialist CMHT is the AOT. This is based on the ACT model, whose
landmark study by Stein and Test (published in 1980 and mentioned
earlier) ushered in evidencebased mental health service planning. ACT
delivered improved clinical and social outcomes with substantially
reduced hospitalization at slightly lower overall costs. Two Cochrane
reviews with meta-analyses, one of case management showing an increase
in hospitalization and one of ACT showing a reduction (Marshall and
Lockwood, 1998; Marshall et al., 2001), were instrumental in the
adoption of ACT in the UK. AOTs (see Box 26.1) are costly, requiring one
full-time case manager for about 10 patients. Consequently they are
reserved for the most difficult ('hard to engage' or 'revolvingdoor')
psychotic patients, who have frequent, often dangerous, relapses. The
AOT approach is based on proactive outreach--- visiting patients at home
and persisting with visits even when patients are reluctant. It exploits
team-working, with daily meetings and several members working with most
patients, rather than exclusive individual

Box 26.1 Core components of assertive community treatment Assertive
follow-up Small caseloads (1:10--1:15) â Regular (daily) team meetings â
Frequent contact (weekly to daily) â In vivo practice (treatment in home
and neighbourhood) â Emphasis on engagement and medication â Support for
family and carers â Provision of services using all team members â
Crisis stabilization 24 hours a day, 7 days a week â â

relationships. This is needed for reasons of safety (it may not be safe
to visit some patients alone) and also because of the complexity of
patients' needs. The approach is very practical. Staff take patients
shopping, sort out their accommodation, even deliver their medicines
daily if necessary. These activities go well beyond traditional
professional boundaries. Advocates of AOT insisted that good outcomes
depended on a strict replication of Stein and Test's approach and even
developed scales to measure this ('model fidelity').

Who and what are assertive outreach teams for Assertive outreach
research has been conducted exclusively with psychotic patients,
generally those with poor medication compliance and often with comorbid
alcohol or drug abuse and offending behaviour. AOTs generally take only
patients who cannot be stabilized despite CMHT support. Enthusiasm for
AOTs led to a preoccupation with their structure and process rather than
with what they do. Despite the extensive early evidence of a reduction
in hospitalization (Marshall and Lockwood, 1998), this has never been
achieved against a CMHT control (Burns et al., 2002), and never in the
UK. Careful examination of AOT studies (Burns et al., 2007b)
demonstrated that this was because its practice was almost identical to
standard UK CMHTs apart from the very small caseload and 24-hour
availability, and these appeared to have no significant effect. In the
UK, AOT teams are being abandoned and their caseloads resorbed into
CMHTs. Internationally, however, ACT has become the accepted term for
any multidisciplinary CMHT that offers flexible outreach.

785

786

786

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services

Functional assertive community treatment teams Functional assertive
community treatment (FACT) teams are a response developed in the
Netherlands to the shifting evidence base for AOT (Firn et al., 2012).
FACT is a hybrid between an ACT team and a generic CMHT, and uses
'zoning' to specify high-risk patients who need intensive monitoring and
input. Zoning involves using a 'traffic light' classification of
patients. Those in the red zone need weekly to daily contact and are
considered at high risk. Those in amber are routine patients needing
weekly to monthly contact, often by a single case manager and not at
great immediate risk of relapse. Those in the green zone are not in need
of regular contact but only occasional assessment and are usually
allowed direct selfreferral. Zoning is a welcome structuring of
relatively longstanding CMHT practice. Only time and research will tell
whether FACT teams are significantly different from CMHTs.

Crisis teams Crisis intervention therapy in the early 1970s built on
Caplan's belief that crises (when psychological defences were breached)
presented fertile opportunities for psychotherapy breakthroughs (Caplan,
1964). More recently this psychodynamic focus has faded. Crisis teams
have been promoted most where local services are poorly developed (they
may be the only community services) or social mobility is high
(e.g.Â centres of major cities), with many transient and homeless
patients for whom continuity of care cannot be established. Crisis teams
are characterized by rapid response and accessibility. Defining the
duration of a crisis (and hence the window for intervention) has
generated endless unprofitable debate. Most teams will see patients
immediately, certainly on the same day. Their clinical aims (i.e.Â the
assessment and management of acute episodes of mental illness) and
staffing (mainly nurses and social workers) are similar to those of
CMHTs. Given the acuteness of the problems, medical input is probably
essential, despite attempts in some services to dispense with it. Crisis
teams may be based in mental health services alongside CMHTs, or in the
emergency rooms of general hospitals with 24-hour availability.
Important functions include distinguishing acute mental illness from
severe personal crises (especially those involving self-harm), and
accessing beds for both voluntary and involuntary admissions.
Hospital-based crisis teams are often run in conjunction with liaison
services (see Chapter 22).

Crisis resolution/home treatment teams Crisis resolution/home treatment
(CR/HT) teams, which were introduced by the NSF, were developed in
Australia (Hoult, 1986). Their primary purpose is to avoid unnecessary
admissions and to reduce the duration of inpatient care. They also are,
in part, a response to increased consumer demand for access out of
hours. They draw heavily on assertive outreach practice, with limited,
shared caseloads, flexible working, extended access, and an emphasis on
outreach. Reduction in hospitalization was proposed to offset much of
their cost (Smyth and Hoult, 2000). They aim to treat patients who would
otherwise be in hospital, and to focus on the severely mentally
ill.Â They offer intensive visiting (usually daily for a limited period)
and considerable practical support, and they work with patients' social
networks. Most aim to limit themselves to 6 weeks of involvement. Such
intensive teamworking requires highly effective communication, and the
teams meet daily (in some cases twice daily). Information transfer is
burdensome, and liaison with CMHTs is complex, requiring absolute
clarity about local arrangements for clinical responsibility.

Variations in practice and sustainability Crisis teams are particularly
difficult to research rigorously, as the informed consent required for
randomized controlled trials is almost impossible to obtain. However,
there is some evidence that CR/HT teams may reduce the need for hospital
care (Johnson et al., 2005), although this is not clear-cut (Glover et
al., 2006). As with AOTs, the potential for impact will depend on local
provision. Although the UK model is well specified (including who it
should and should not care for; see Box 26.2), in reality practice
varies considerably. Unless local services are particularly undeveloped,
a full 24hour service is very wasteful, and an on-call facility to the
emergency room and police station at night usually suffices. In
practice, contact frequencies are generally lower, patients stay with
the service longer than anticipated, and restricting the service to
patients who would otherwise be in hospital is rarely achieved. CR/HT
teams are inevitably referred individuals who are recurrently in crisis
(often with alcohol and relationship problems), who cannot be refused
care but would not 'otherwise be in hospital'. Medical input and the
team's independence from CMHTs both vary markedly. Some teams operate
completely parallel to CMHTs, some share extensively (often acting as an
adjunct to CMHT care---for example, making evening medication drops),
and some insist on CMHT involvement. Local circumstances (and staff
availability)

78

The components of a mental health service

Crisis houses and respite care Box 26.2 Remit of UK crisis
resolution/home treatment teams Commonly adults (16- to 65-years-old)
with severe mental illness (schizophrenia, manic depressive disorders,
severe depressive disorder) with an acute psychiatric crisis of such
severity that, without the involvement of the CR/HT team,
hospitalization would be necessary. The service is not usually
appropriate for individuals with: â mild anxiety disorders â primary
diagnosis of alcohol or other substance abuse â brain damage or other
organic disorders, including dementia â learning disabilities â
exclusive diagnosis of personality disorder â recent history of
self-harm but not suffering from a psychotic or serious depressive
illness â crisis related solely to relationship issues

will ultimately determine the configuration. Most CR/ HT teams are now
routinely involved at the threshold for admission and discharge. At its
most extreme some Trusts insist that no patient can be either admitted
or discharged except through the CR/HT team. Other Trusts take a more
pragmatic approach---particularly when patients are well known to CMHTs.
Clarity about responsibility and leadership is crucial. Patient
evaluation of CR/HT teams varies. Many appreciate the promptness of
response and the level of support. Others complain about intrusiveness
and having to explain themselves to a series of different staff who are
often insufficiently trained to make the necessary decisions.
Traditional crisis services may have a relatively limited lifespan. A
World Health Organization review found that many early crisis services
had ceased to exist within a decade (Cooper, 1979). Many had
successfully improved local access and consolidated as a more general
service (including, but not restricted to, crisis work). Others had
become overwhelmed with inappropriate referrals or patients who could
not be referred on, and eventually closed. A similar pattern has been
observed (but not documented) in crisis houses. Whether CR/HT teams will
persist in the era of clinical commissioning is an open question.

The excessive formality involved in hospital admission may prolong stays
and dissuade patients from seeking help. 'Crisis houses' allow admission
with a minimum of fuss, and often with reduced supervision. They are
usually small (four to eight beds), in a domestic setting, and take
patients for a period of days, or occasionally a week or two. They are
favoured for vulnerable women and early intervention services (EIS).
They do not replace inpatient care, but are generally very welcome for a
minority of patients. However, without careful targeting and integration
into local services they can become chaotic (and potentially dangerous)
or blocked, and few survive without an active local champion.

Early intervention services EIS are the third functional team introduced
by the NSF. As discussed in Chapter 11, a long duration of untreated
psychosis in schizophrenia is associated with poorer outcomes. EIS teams
were developed mainly from Australian and UK models (Birchwood et al.,
1998; Edwards et al., 2000). They aim to shorten DUP, protect current
social functioning and networks, and improve outcome by providing prompt
effective treatment. Despite a detailed prescription, UK teams vary
considerably and prioritize different features of the approach. Some
minimize the importance of diagnosis in favour of ease of access, while
others restrict themselves to schizophrenia to maximize skills. The
duration of involvement ranges from 18 to 36 months, with proposals of
up to 60 months. Some have a narrow age band (a 'youth service'), while
others take all first-episode patients irrespective of age (Burns,
2004). Three quite different activities are reported in the EIS
literature, which may have varying emphasis in different teams (see Box
26.3).

Box 26.3 Components of early intervention teams Case
management---ongoing care of identified patients â Early
identification---awareness-raising campaigns for psychoses â High-risk
and prodromal patient identification and treatment â

787

78

788

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services

Case management The core of EIS is a specialized CMHT that case-manages
first-episode psychosis patients. Teams prioritize the protection of
social networks and functioning (by keeping the patient at college or
work, and emphasizing family interventions, etc.). They assume that
there will be a return to premorbid functioning, and hospitalization is
avoided (crisis and respite houses are preferred) and obtaining welfare
benefits is minimized. An assertive outreach approach with practical and
shared case management is used during the acute phase, with less
intensive follow-up thereafter. 'Zoning' is commonly used, as in FACT
teams, with 'acute' patients seen at least weekly, recovering patients
seen weekly to monthly, and a third category for those who are still
open to the team but who are not in active treatment. Teams differ in
terms of whether they insist on keeping patients registered when they
have recovered and do not want contact. They also may or may not provide
inpatient care. EIS case managers aim to prevent patients and their
families from lowering their expectations prematurely. As mentioned
above, many avoid obtaining benefits for patients, encouraging as rapid
a return to work or college as possible. Self-management of illness is
strongly endorsed, with an emphasis on learning relapse signatures and
devising individually appropriate responses.

Early recognition and high-risk intervention Some EIS teams are actively
involved in psychosis public awareness campaigns and lecturing in
schools and colleges. A minority attempt to identify 'ultra-high-risk'
patients with prodromal symptoms of schizophrenia and offer them
treatment (both psychological and pharmacological) to prevent
'transition' to psychosis. This approach remains highly controversial
and is generally restricted to research teams. The evidence for the
efficacy of EIS interventions is outlined in Chapter 11. Experience with
EIS teams was much less than with AOTs when they were introduced in the
NSF, and they included confusing and contradictory prescriptions. Even
more than with AOTs, the difficulties of making them work in dispersed
rural and semirural settings have posed real challenges. A settled
single model has not yet evolved for EIS teams. However, they are now
well established nationally and look set to endure---probably outliving
both AOT and CR/HT teams.

Forensic and rehabilitation teams Community-focused services face
particular difficulties with treatment-resistant patients, especially
those

with socially unacceptable or offending behaviour. Such patients do not
fit well into open wards. Specialized forensic teams provide care where
offending behaviour and danger to others predominate. They provide
secure inpatient care (in addition to their traditional roles with
prisons and the courts), which is increasing internationally (Priebe et
al., 2005). Some forensic teams provide community services (intensive
case management of dangerous patients), but integrating them with
general services can be controversial. The focus on risk assessment and
extensive joint visiting are the main ways in which they differ from
AOTs. Rehabilitation services have reached out from longstay wards to
more community placements. A significant number of patients remain
profoundly disabled despite receiving optimum treatments. Rehabilitation
teams focus on the long-term management of disability rather than on
symptoms and episode-based care. The threshold from general services to
rehabilitation services varies enormously. Rehabilitation teams
generally serve patients who cannot survive without some form of
supervised accommodation even between relapses. These include a
shrinking handful of longstay patients, but, increasingly, a very
disturbed 'new long-stay' population with comorbid substance abuse and
behavioural disturbances. Inpatient provision is needed for this group,
and a range of hostel care can promote stability, but is difficult to
sustain. 'Hospital hostels', where patients can live in hostel-type
domestic accommodation, yet be subject to the Mental Health Act, have
been successfully established by some rehabilitation services.

Diagnosis-specific teams Highly specialized teams for specific disorders
(e.g.Â eating disorders, personality disorders, bipolar disorder) focus
on developing specific skills. They provide specialized treatments,
usually at regional level. They are strongly supported both by their
professionals and by the families of sufferers. However, the opportunity
costs of establishing such teams in a health service with finite
resources require careful consideration.

Other components of a mental health service The main components (teams
and facilities) of specialized mental health services have been outlined
above. It will be clear from that description that some of these
components (e.g.Â inpatient wards, generic-sector CMHTs) are fairly
ubiquitous and durable, while others

789

Services for psychiatric disorder in primary care 8. Early intervention
services for people during their first episode of psychosis and the
following 3 years.

(e.g.Â most of the specialized teams) are more variable in their
availability and practice. The way in which the functions and
obligations of mental health services are distributed between these
different teams will vary. The most important of these components will
now be outlined and described. They can be summarized as follows:

10. Vocational rehabilitation, which includes sheltered workshops and
    transitional employment.

11. Primary mental health care teams, which support primary care and
    conduct initial assessments.

12. Day hospitals and daycare services, including drop-in centres.

13. Outpatient care.

14. Self-help and service user groups and advocacy services.

15. Specialist psychological treatments, which are often integrated into
    the specialist or primary mental health care teams.

16. Inpatient wards.

17. Crisis/home-based treatment teams, which treat acute mental disorder
    in the patient's home.

18. Residential services, providing hostels and supported accommodation,
    including that for acutely ill people or crises.

19. Accident and emergency liaison services, which are often part of the
    crisis service, that assess and treat people who present to accident
    and emergency departments.

20. Employment services, including supported employment to help find
    paid employment, training, and education.

21. Forensic services, with wards for high, medium, and low levels of
    security, and court-diversion schemes.

22. Services for specific groups, such as people with eating disorders,
    and mother and baby units.

23. General hospital liaison services for medically ill people who have
    mental health problems.

24. Social and welfare services, for help with obtaining benefits,
    advocacy, community support workers, and home help/meals.

25. Assertive outreach teams for severely mentally ill people who are
    difficult to engage or high users of services.

26. Services for special groups, with outreach to marginalized groups,
    such as the homeless and refugees.

Services for psychiatric disorder in primary care Classification of
psychiatric disorders in primary care ICD-10 and DSM-5 were developed
for use in psychiatry. They are too detailed for routine use in primary
care, and their fine distinctions are seldom helpful when selecting
treatment in this setting. The World Health Organization has therefore
developed a simpler classification for use in primary care. Each
diagnosis is linked to a plan of management.

Identification of psychiatric disorders in primary care The most
important psychiatric service in primary care is to detect disorders.
This is not a simple matter, as many patients present with both physical
and psychological problems, and many of the latter go undetected (see
Figure 26.1). Many people with a psychiatric disorder complain only of
physical symptoms, whether of a coincidental minor physical illness or a
consequence of

the psychiatric disorder (e.g.Â palpitations in anxiety, or tiredness in
depression). Some describe physical symptoms because they fear the
doctor may not take emotional problems seriously. It is not just the
patient who

Person seeking help

Other care

Primary care

Alternative medicine, native healers, etc.

Specialist care

Figure 26.1 Pathways to care in the UK.

789

790

790

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services is responsible for this, as doctors
often do focus on the physical symptoms. Conspicuous morbidity is the
term for cases that are detected, and hidden morbidity for the rest.
Hidden morbidity is generally less severe than conspicuous morbidity.
How effectively general practitioners identify undeclared psychiatric
disorder depends on: â

â

Table 26.1 Pathways to care with rates of psychiatric disorder among
adults at each level of care Cases per 1000 per annum In the community

260--315

their ability to gain the patient's confidence, thus enabling them to
disclose the psychiatric problems of which they are aware

Attending primary care

230

Detected in primary careâ 

102

their skill in assessing whether physical symptoms are caused by
psychiatric illness; this requires a good knowledge of physical medicine
as well as psychiatry.

Attending psychiatric services

24

Inpatient

6

Disorders that are treated in primary care Most psychiatric disorders in
primary care attenders can be treated successfully there. Examples
include most adjustment disorders, the less severe anxiety and
depressive disorders, somatization, and some cases of alcohol misuse.
For a more detailed account, see Goldberg et al.Â (2009). Patients
presenting with physical symptoms. In primary care, many patients with
psychiatric disorder present with physical symptoms. Such patients were
called somatizers, but the terminology has moved to 'medically
unexplained symptoms'. Many of them will reveal associated psychiatric
symptoms and accept a psychiatric diagnosis when interviewed
appropriately. Others deny any psychiatric symptoms and reject a
psychiatric diagnosis, however skilfully they are examined, and can
prove very difficult to treat. Where the concern about physical illness
is unshakeable and no other psychiatric disorder is detected, the
diagnosis of hypochondriasis is made. Repeated investigations fail to
reassure but can be impossible to resist. Most frequent attenders are
female and middle-aged (Koch et al., 2007). Around 80% have a present or
past psychiatric disorder, usually depression, somatization, or
generalized anxiety, and around 60% have a concurrent physical illness
(Katon et al., 1990). Since most refuse to be referred to a psychiatric
team, the general practitioner has to manage them. One approach is to
help to make links between symptoms and stressful life events, leaving
out psychological processes, and explore how these stresses might be
reduced.

Disorders that are referred from primary care to the psychiatric
services Table 26.1 shows that on average about one in four of the
patients with psychiatric disorder who are identified by

Adapted from Goldberg D and Huxley P, Common Mental Disorders: a
biosocial model, Copyright (1992), with permission from Routledge. â 

Conspicuous psychiatric morbidity.

general practitioners are treated by the psychiatric services. This
referred group includes patients with severe depressive disorders,
bipolar disorders, schizophrenia, and dementia. General practitioners
are more likely to refer patients with other disorders when: â

the diagnosis is uncertain

â

the condition is severe

â

there is a significant suicide risk

â

the condition is chronic

â

the necessary treatment cannot be provided by a member of the primary
care team

â

previous treatment unsuccessful

â

psychiatric services are accessible and responsive

â

the patient is willing to attend.

in

primary

care

has

been

Treatments provided by the primary care team for acute disorders Acute
problems are often treated with counselling, used alone or combined with
medication. Some practices also provide simple behavioural treatments.
Many primary care teams include a counsellor. The availability of a
counsellor has not been shown to reduce the prescribing of psychotropic
drugs in the practice (Mynors-Wallis et al., 1995; Sibbald et al.,
1996).

Improving access to psychological therapies Psychotherapy has
traditionally been a less prominent aspect of health care in the UK
compared to the US or

791

Services for psychiatric disorder in primary care continental Europe.
Psychotherapists there are either accessed directly or via GPs and paid
by insurance or privately. Improving access to psychological therapies
(IAPT; Clark, 2011) is an initiative to reverse this by providing easy
access to basic psychotherapy (almost exclusively cognitive behavioural
therapy). IAPT is a highly prescribed process, but local flexibility has
been encouraged with regard to who provides it and where. IAPT has two
components---a stepped-care treatment of anxiety and depressive
disorders, and a supported employment service (see below). The supported
employment service aims to help patients to return to work when their
anxiety and depression symptoms have receded (reducing unemployment
owing to psychiatric disorders was the other political stimulus for
IAPT). The first step in IAPT is self-help using telephone and internet
programmes. A form of brief cognitive behaviour therapy is offered to
those with residual symptoms, and referral on to specialized services
only takes place after both self-help attempts and cognitive behaviour
therapy. A striking feature of IAPT is the level of
structure---therapists use detailed manuals, and symptomatic status is
recorded after every session using the Patient Health Questionnaire
(PHQ-9) (Kroenke et al., 2001) for depressive symptoms and the
Generalized Anxiety Disorder Assessment (GAD-7) (Spitzer et al., 2006)
for anxiety symptoms. The format of IAPT is highly variable and is as
yet unevaluated. The ease of access and clear commitment to
psychological treatments have won widespread approval. Those who provide
the service are positive about its outcome, but to date there has been
little evidence of diversion from psychiatric services nor independent
research evidence of its impact.

Treatments provided by the primary care team for chronic disorders The
respective roles of the general practitioner and the community team
should be clearly defined in relation to any patient with chronic mental
disorder, and reviewed regularly. For example, with some patients with
chronic schizophrenia, the general practitioner might be responsible for
their physical health, assess their general progress, administer and
encourage compliance with medication, and support the family. Kendrick
et al.Â (1995) found that, even with additional training, general
practitioners are not very reliable at making comprehensive assessments
of patients with long-term psychiatric illness. However, subsequent
research demonstrated that this was possible, and financial incentives
were introduced to primary care, which has improved

performance in this area. Physical monitoring of psychosis patients has
become high priority, with the recognition of their dramatically reduced
life expectancy (about 20 years) and the high rates of metabolic
syndrome associated with the atypical antipsychotics. It has become more
routine that the psychiatric team assesses these patients and agrees a
plan with the general practitioner.

Work in primary care by the psychiatric team There are several ways in
which a psychiatric team can work with the primary care team, and these
have changed over time (Burns and Bale, 1997).

Advising and training general practitioners and their staff (Balint
groups) Balint Groups are valued by a small group of highly motivated
GPs; while some do persist they are mainly of historical interest. The
psychiatrist does not see patients, but gives advice based on the
general practitioner's assessment and is psychoanalytically inspired
(Balint, 1964; www.balint.co.uk).

Assessing and referring The psychiatrist assesses patients when the GP
is uncertain about diagnosis or treatment. He may do this on his own or
jointly with the GP, after which referral can proceed in the usual way.
This approach is now very rarely used, as liaison with GPs has improved.

Assessing and treating ('shifted out patients') There are intermittent
initiatives to encourage psychiatrists to work mainly in primary care,
seeing most patients there or at home, rather than in the hospital
outpatient clinic. The approach rarely catches on although it often has
vocal local champions. Clinical psychologists and psychiatric nurses can
also work in primary care, providing assessment, counselling, or
behavioural treatment. Patients no longer need to visit a psychiatric
clinic, but there may be little learning between the psychiatric and
primary care teams. This approach was popular in the 1980s but was shown
to be generally ineffective (Wooff and Goldberg, 1988), as clinical
focus shifted and skills were lost. There is more positive evidence for
social workers located in primary care.

Shared care This approach aims for 'seamless care', with enthusiastic
advocates (Essex et al., 1990) and several well-publicized demonstration
services. However, these demonstration services rarely survived the
departure of their advocates,

791

792

792

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services and shared care has not caught on
generally. The term is ambiguous, covering everything from GPs
monitoring lithium levels to completely shared responsibility. In the
care of severely mentally ill patients, absolute clarity of
responsibility has repeatedly been shown to be crucial (hence the Care
Programme Approach), and the risk of confusion does not seem to be worth
taking.

Liaison meetings Probably the most useful and time-efficient method is
to arrange regular (usually monthly) face-to-face

meetings between members of the psychiatric team and the primary care
team (Burns and Bale, 1997). This can range from meetings of the entire
teams to relying on identified 'link' members. The important point is
that it is face to face and takes place routinely---not just over
crises. Joint patients are discussed, together with possible referrals.
Trust is established, along with a more realistic appraisal of what each
team can do. Such liaison meetings are increasingly required by
commissioners.

Specialist services for acute psychiatric disorder Patients who are
referred to specialist care

Generic versus specialized services

Patients who are treated by psychiatric services are a subgroup of
people with mental disorders. In some countries patients can go directly
to a specialist, so that those treated by the psychiatric services may
not be very different from those treated in primary care. Where the
general practitioner acts as the 'gatekeeper' to specialist services, as
in the UK, the number and types of patient reaching the psychiatric
services depend on: â

the willingness of general practitioners to treat psychiatric disorders

â

the treatment skills and resources of the primary care team

â

patients' willingness psychiatric advice

â

the general practitioner's criteria for referral to the psychiatric
services

â

the psychiatric services' criteria for accepting referrals.

to

attend

for

specialist

In the UK, most patients in contact with the psychiatric services have
severe and chronic anxiety disorders, severe mood disorder,
schizophrenia and other psychoses, or dementia. Patients who are
particularly likely to be cared for by specialists are those who are
suicidal, those who are potentially dangerous to others, and those with
dual diagnoses of mental disorder and substance misuse or personality
disorder.

Provisions for acute specialist care Specialist care of acute
psychiatric disorder requires community teams, supported by outpatient,
day patient, and inpatient provisions.

Community teams have traditionally been generic, dealing with all kinds
of adult psychiatric problems. More recent specialized separate teams
for crisis management and continuing care are described above. The
potential advantages of each of these arrangements are summarized in
Table 26.2.

Day hospitals Day care is used in four main ways: 1. Acute day hospital
care for patients with acute illness who would otherwise be admitted to
hospital. Such care is generally more appropriate for those who can be
with their families in the evening and at weekends. Early trials of
acute day hospital treatment (involving 1568 people) found it feasible
for 25% of those currently admitted to inpatient care, with comparable
rates of improvement and readmission, and some found it cheaper than
inpatient care (Marshall, 2003; Marshall et al., 2003). However, such
acute day hospitals were very different from routine day hospitals, and
failed to generalize, needing either a charismatic leader or a research
programme to sustain them. They are currently experiencing a resurgence
as the base for CR/HT teams but have not been researched individually.
2. Transitional daycare to allow earlier discharge from hospital. 3. Day
treatment programmes that provide more intensive treatment for people
who are not responding to outpatient care. There is evidence for the
value of this approach in personality disorder (Bateman and Fonagy,
2001), and it is increasingly being used for severe eating disorders.

793

Specialist services for acute psychiatric disorder

Table 26.2 Generic versus specialist services Advantages of generic
services

Drawbacks of specialist services

Simple model, easy to implement

Complex model, difficult to implement

Traditional, tried and tested

New, relatively untried in clinical practice

Comprehensive

Problem of transitions between teams or falling between different team
criteria

Less expensive

More expensive

Continuity of care is easier

Continuity is more difficult to achieve

Drawbacks of generic services

Advantages of specialist services

Evidence base is weak

Evidence base better developed

Less efficient---too many different tasks

More efficient with a smaller range of tasks

Less staff satisfaction

More staff satisfaction

Difficult to deliver complex treatments

Easier to deliver complex treatments

Heterogeneous patients, outcomes difficult to evaluate

Homogeneous patients, outcomes easier to assess

4.  Daycare centres for the support of long-term service users. Such
    care needs to be planned carefully with an active treatment
    programme that is specific to each patient's needs, otherwise
    attenders easily become dependent and 'stuck'. Day hospitals and day
    centres vary considerably and their clientele and activities overlap
    (Catty et al., 2005). CR/HT teams are often integrated with day
    hospitals.

Inpatient units The number of beds required for acute psychiatric
disorder is difficult to determine exactly. However, it is generally
accepted that bed numbers in the US, the UK, and parts of Europe are now
inadequate (Priebe et al., 2005). Severe bed shortage appears to be a
contributor to the recent increase in compulsion (Keown, 2008) as it
depends on: â

The level of morbidity, including substance misuse, in the population
served by the unit.

â

The willingness and ability of families to care for acutely ill
relatives, which in turn depends on the quality of accommodation and the
availability of other family members.

â

The extent and availability of crisis services.

â

Facilities for treatment of acute psychiatric disorder outside hospital,
such as well-staffed hostels.

â

Facilities for early discharge of patients from hospital after the acute
phase of the disorder; it is

generally easier to discharge early than to avoid admission. The design
of inpatient units for acutely ill patients should strike a balance
between the patients' needs for privacy and the staff's requirement to
observe them, although single, ensuite accommodation is increasingly the
norm. They need to be sufficiently large to ensure adequate staffing for
emergencies, yet avoid an anonymous or 'institutional' feel. Three 15-
to 20-bedded wards is considered to be the minimum necessary for safe
effective care, and units of over 100 patients are considered probably
too large. Ward design should minimize the possibility of suicide by
hanging or jumping. There is a need for secure areas for the most
disturbed patients, areas where patients can be alone, and areas where
they can interact with others. There should be provision for
occupational therapy, the practice of domestic skills, and recreation.
Outdoor space is desirable. Single-sex accommodation is now mandatory.
The siting of acute inpatient units. Inpatient care for acute
psychiatric disorders is generally provided as part of a general
hospital complex. This siting reduces stigma and provides easy access to
general medical services when required. The disadvantages of such siting
include a low threshold for disruptive behaviour and inadequate space
for occupational and recreational activities suitable for psychiatric
care. Many of these problems can be overcome if the psychiatric unit

793

794

794

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services occupies a separate building within the
general hospital complex. Collaboration with community teams. Patients
are at increased risk, particularly for suicide, when they move from
inpatient to community care. About 25%

of suicides among psychiatric patients in England and Wales occur within
3 months of discharge from inpatient psychiatric care, with a peak in
the first 1-- 2 weeks, and contact in the week following discharge is
essential.

Psychiatric services that provide long-term care Characteristics of
patients who require long-term care

â

Diagnosis With the exception of the elderly (who are considered in
Chapter 19), most psychiatric patients who require long-term care have
schizophrenia, chronic affective disorders, or personality disorders
associated with aggressive behaviour or substance misuse. Patients who
need care in hospital for longer than 1 year, other than forensic
patients, are referred to as 'new long-stay'. This distinguishes them
from the 'old long-stay', who had been residents in hospital closure
programmes.

Problems There are several ways of classifying the problems of patients
who need long-term psychiatric care. They can be divided into seven
groups, three of which are contained in the World Health Organization's
classification of disablement (page 23), on the basis of the following
problems: â

Symptoms such suicidal ideas.

as

persistent

hallucinations

or

â

Unacceptable behaviours, such as shouting obscenities, and threatening
or carrying out violent acts.

â

Impairments that interfere with the functioning of a psychological or
physical system---for example, poor memory or lack of drive.

â

Disabilities that interfere with the activities of the whole person,
such as inability to dress.

â

Handicaps, which are social disadvantages directly resulting from
disability---for example, inability to work, or to care for children.

â

Other social disadvantages that are not directly related to disability,
but which are a consequence of the stigmatizing attitudes of other
people---for example, unemployment, poverty, and homelessness.

Adverse personal reactions to illness and social disadvantage---for
example, low self-esteem, hopelessness, denial of illness, or the misuse
of drugs.

Wing and Furlong (1986) proposed a list of patient characteristics that
make it difficult to treat the individual in the community, which,
despite its age, is still useful (see Box 26.4). Patients with severe
and persistent problems of this kind may need care in a well-staffed
hostel, or in a hospital that can provide appropriate rehabilitation and
security.

Requirements of a community service providing long-term care To treat
patients in the community, they need all the elements of care previously
provided in hospital. The following provisions are required: 1. Suitable
and well-supported carers. 2. Appropriate accommodation. 3. Suitable
occupation. 4. Arrangements that enlist the patient's collaboration with
treatment. 5. Regular reassessment, including physical health. 6.
Effective collaboration among carers (formal and informal). 7.
Continuity of care and rapid response to crises. Complicated and
expensive arrangements are required to make these seven elements
available as readily in the community as they would be in hospital. Lack
of such arrangements may leave patients homeless, without constructive
occupation, inadequately treated, and without a carer. Failure of
community care may also leave carers unsupported and family life
disrupted. When community care began, it was concerned mainly with
patients who had become institutionalized and compliant after many years
in hospital. These patients

795

Psychiatric services that provide long-term care

Box 26.4 Patient characteristics that make community care difficult Risk
of harm to self and others Unpredictable behaviour and liability to
relapse Substance misuse Poor motivation and poor capacity for
self-management or for performance of social roles Lack of insight into
the need for treatment Low public acceptability

could often be managed in the community without much difficulty. Younger
patients who have spent less time in hospital are often less compliant
and more difficult to manage.

Carers When people with severe mental illness live at home, family and
friends are the main carers. They provide much of the help that would
have been given by nurses had the patient remained in hospital. For
example, they may have to encourage the patient to get up in the
morning, maintain personal hygiene, eat regular meals, and occupy
himself or herself constructively. Carers also encourage collaboration
with treatment. If patients have many problem behaviours, prolonged
involvement in their care is stressful. Carers may then need support and
advice, and sometimes periods of respite. Volunteers play an important
part in many systems of community care. Trained volunteers can help to
support patients and their families, and some charitable organizations
employ professional carers, such as hostel staff. Community psychiatric
nurses are the backbone of community care by supporting patients and
carers, evaluating patients, supervising drug therapy, and encouraging
social interaction. Monitoring is particularly important for patients
whose mental state is unstable.

Accommodation Patients who have been discharged from hospital need food
and shelter. Many live with their families, and some care for themselves
in rented accommodation. Others require more extensive help, which can
be provided in three ways. In lodgings. Some families take in patients
as lodgers and to provide them with extra care. This practice

works well in several countries, but has not been widely adopted in the
UK. In group homes. Many patients live in group homes of four or five
patients together. The houses may be owned by social or health services
or by a charity. This model works well for people with schizophrenia and
social handicaps but few positive symptoms. People in group homes
receive regular support and supervision, usually from a community nurse
or social worker. They ensure the arrangements are working well and
encourage residents to take on as much responsibility as possible. In
hostels. For some people, hostels are half-way houses from which they
move on to more independent living. Others need to remain in hostels for
a period of years. Although most hostel residents live fairly
independent lives, a few of the most disabled require additional care.
Hostels have permanent staffing. Levels of supervision vary and
overnight staff may sleep in, or do night shifts as in a hospital ward.

Occupation Most patients would like to work, although rates of
unemployment are higher in mental illness than any other disabled group.
There are several approaches to increasing work and employment: â

Vocational rehabilitation is the longest established approach. Extensive
training based on a detailed assessment of disabilities and following a
structured programme is provided to develop the skills and confidence
needed for competitive employment. Training may take place in sheltered
workshops, with transitional jobs in paid posts 'owned' by the
rehabilitation scheme. Progress to open employment is disappointing.

â

The Clubhouse model is a specialized form of vocational rehabilitation
that is based around a building which is jointly administered and
maintained by people with mental illness (Beard et al., 1987).
Originating in the USA, it has established itself internationally but is
not widespread and may be fading out.

â

Supported employment was originally developed for people with learning
disabilities. Individuals are placed in competitive work without any
extended preparation, but with support on the job (Bond et al., 1997).
It has been shown in several randomized controlled trials (Bond et al.,
2008) to be the most effective way of obtaining open employment. Most of
the studies have been conducted in the USA, but a European replication
(Burns et al., 2007a) confirmed equal efficacy (over 50% of psychotic
patients became employed). It is government policy

795

796

796

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services in the UK and several European countries
and is part of the IAPT programme, but provision remains patchy. â

Sheltered work allows people to work productively but more slowly than
would be acceptable elsewhere. Schemes include horticulture projects and
craft workshops.

â

Voluntary activities. Some patients who cannot meet the requirements for
sheltered work benefit from undertaking voluntary activities.

â

Occupational therapy. Those unable to contemplate work can benefit from
occupational therapy to reduce boredom, understimulation, and lack of
social contacts. Occupational activities are often provided in a day
hospital or a day centre.

Reassessment Patients living outside hospital require the same regular
reassessments. The patient's mental state and of collaboration with
treatment is assessed by the key worker, often a community nurse, with
less frequent reassessment by a psychiatrist. Patients can forget
appointments, and a recall system prompts re-establishing contact.
Physical health reviews are essential because such patients often
neglect physical illness, or may not accept offered help. Risk
assessment. It is more difficult to anticipate threatening or dangerous
behaviour in community care than in hospital. An important part of
assessment is a regular evaluation of the patient's risk to himself or
herself, and to other people. Such assessment involves static factors,
such as the patient's past behaviours, and dynamic risk factors, such as
the current level of substance misuse or of psychosocial stressors. A
risk management plan is an important component of the overall care plan.
The scientific value of structured risk assessment has been disputed
(Fazel et al., 2014). However, they demonstrate that due consideration
has been given of possible adverse consequences.

Continuity of care Community care staff need to gain the confidence of
their patients and to know them well. Neither can be achieved if there
are frequent changes in staff. Continuity of care is important, and
staff should be extra vigilant when care passes between workers.

Response to crisis Staff need to respond quickly to crises. Families and
the staff of voluntary organizations accept patients more readily if
they know that help will be available quickly in an emergency.
Furthermore, readmission to hospital may be avoided by prompt action. A
crisis plan agreed in

advance with the patient and carers is particularly helpful. Staffing
levels need to be adequate to allow a quick response, preferably by
staff who know the patient.

Working with the family and volunteers Community care is costly, and in
most countries public funds are limited, so arrangements often depend on
input from families and voluntary groups. It is important that families
and voluntary groups are involved in the planning of services, and that
there is agreement about their responsibilities. Without such an
agreement, family may feel responsible for over-demanding tasks, and
professionals concerned that volunteers are taking on tasks beyond their
capabilities. Similarly, it is best practice to involve families and
voluntary groups in the evaluation of services.

Other components of a community service Rehabilitation and recovery
Rehabilitation denotes procedures for helping patients to reach and
maintain their best level of functioning. It is based on a careful
assessment of disabilities and deficits and relies on a structured,
gradual training. It may be provided in an inpatient unit, a day
hospital, or a specialized rehabilitation centre. Rehabilitation
procedures include medical, psychological, occupational, social, and
residential. Most patients require medication to control symptoms of
schizophrenia or chronic affective disorders. Psychological methods
include supportive therapy, behavioural programmes, and social skills
training (see Chapter 24). Work helps to structure the day and provides
an opportunity for interaction with other people. It can improve
self-esteem, and payment is an added incentive. For many the aim is to
return to ordinary work, but those who cannot achieve this are trained
for activities such as gardening, crafts, and cooking. These provide a
sense of achievement and a shape to the day. Whenever practicable,
patients should be encouraged to join the same social groups attended by
healthy people.

The recovery movement 'Recovery' has taken on a quite specific meaning
in recent years beyond the absence of symptoms. The 'recovery movement'
(Slade et al., 2014) emphasizes the primacy of patient determination in
treatment planning and goals. What matters is the quality of life, not
the absence of symptoms. Clearly it is eminently sensible to

79

Services for people with particular needs recognize that the goal of
treatment is to enable patients to live the life they wish and to make
the best adaptation to their residual problems. The approach does,
however, raise some problems for practitioners. Firstly, much of the
rhetoric unnecessarily caricatures psychiatric practice as narrow and
mechanical. A tenet of the recovery movement is that psychiatrists are
overly pessimistic about outcomes, and it calls on us to be more hopeful
and 'upbeat'. Most professionals believe they owe their patients
honesty. Lastly, some recovery enthusiasts insist that mental health
professionals should support the patient's treatment choices even if
they believe them wrong. The recovery movement is a good reminder that
social and personal outcomes are what matter to patients and

families. Hopefully this will persist when the excesses have faded.

Inpatient care People with long-term mental illness require inpatient
care for acute treatment at times of relapse, for intensive
rehabilitation, and in some instances for long stay. The basic
requirements for such an inpatient unit are broadly similar to those for
patients with acute illness, except that accommodation can be more
domestic. Because the pace and intensity of treatment is usually slower
for this group, it is advisable to have a separate facility. Patients
with severely disturbed behaviour need secure areas, with outdoor space
and occupational and social activities in the same building.

Services for people with particular needs Clinical work and research
have identified several groups of patients whose needs may require
special attention.

Members of ethnic minorities and migrants Members of ethnic minorities
are less likely to use routine services. They are less likely to consult
general practitioners when they have a psychiatric disorder or to accept
referral to psychiatric services. Professionals are less likely to
identify psychiatric disorder, and may be less able to explain the
illness and treatment in terms that accommodate their cultural beliefs.
These problems are not primarily due to a limited command of English.
The problems of minorities in the UK have been studied, in particular
among those of Asian and AfroCaribbean origin. People of Asian origin
consult their general practitioners more frequently about most
conditions than do members of the general population, but consult them
less about psychiatric symptoms (Murray and Williams, 1986; Gillam et
al., 1989), and often present with physical symptoms. African-Caribbean
patients with psychoses lack family support and often bypass GP referral
and come to services via the police (Morgan et al., 2005). In some
ethnic minorities, referral to a psychiatrist is avoided because it can
affect marriage prospects.

African-Caribbean patients based on a lack of cultural sensitivity
(Littlewood and Lipsedge, 1997). The AESOP study has dispelled this
myth, confirming that the rates are indeed higher and the outcomes, if
anything, marginally worse rather than better as they would be as the
consequence of misdiagnosis (Fearon et al., 2006). The debate on whether
the needs of ethnic minority patients are best served by separate teams
has now faded out. Increased vigilance and flexible services are what is
needed rather than altered diagnostic procedures or separate services
(Singh and Burns, 2006).

Homeless mentally ill people When hospitals were closed, it was feared
that many discharged patients would become homeless, but when closures
were planned carefully, few of them became so (Leff, 1993; Harrison et
al., 1994). Nevertheless, surveys have found high rates of chronic
psychiatric disorder among the residents of hostels for the homeless
(Geddes et al., 2014). The most common disorders were alcohol and drug
dependence. Psychotic illness and major depression each ranged from 3%
to 42%. Alcohol dependence has increased over recent decades. Services
for the homeless mentally ill vary enormously, and there is neither
agreement on their need nor on their characteristics (Hwang and Burns,
2014).

Underrecognition and overadmission of psychiatric disorder

Doctors with psychiatric problems

In the 1980s and 1990s much was made of professionals' overdiagnosis of
psychosis in African and

Although doctors have tried to reduce the stigma associated with
psychiatric disorder, many of them do not

797

798

798

Chapter 26 Psychiatric services seek help if they develop such disorders
themselves. Most national medical associations provide accessible and
confidential services for doctors with mental health problems. It is
still important to provide arrangements to enable psychiatrically ill
doctors (and other mental health staff) to obtain treatment away from
their place of work. A greater acceptance of psychiatric disorder is
required within the medical profession, with appropriate arrangements
for aftercare and a gradual (and in some cases supervised) return to
work. The issue needs greater discussion during medical education and
training. When disorders are chronic or recurrent, fitness to practice
has to be considered.

Refugees Refugees have the general problems of members of ethnic
minority groups (described above), together with specific problems
secondary to the experiences that led them to seek refuge in another
country. These experiences include persecution, physical injury,
torture, rape, or the witnessing of these. The consequences include
general medical as well as psychiatric conditions. The latter are mainly
post-traumatic stress disorder and depressive disorder (described on
pages 000 and 000, respectively).

The specifics of care needed by refugees should be set in the context of
many of the principles of global mental health, dealt with further in
Chapter 23. At the very least they need integrated medical and
psychiatric care from a team that is sensitive to cultural factors.
Integrated care is important because general and psychiatric disorders
occur together, and because refugees often come from cultures in which
distress and psychiatric disorder are generally manifested by physical
symptoms. In addition, aid workers are sometimes reluctant to refer
refugees to a solely psychiatric service, which they think inappropriate
for what appears to be a normal response to overwhelmingly stressful
circumstances. As with the homeless mentally ill, acceptability is much
greater with integrated services. Staff who provide services for
refugees should be experienced in the treatment of post-traumatic
conditions, and should be aided by interpreters. Female members of staff
are needed to help female refugees, especially those who have
experienced rape. Other staff should have experience in treating
children and adolescents. For a review of the psychiatric problems of
refugees, see Mollica et al.Â (2009), and for a review of such problems
among child and adolescent refugees, see Fazel et al.Â (2012a). See also
Chapter 23.

Some difficulties with community care The burden on relatives If members
of the family are to take responsibility for patients, by housing them,
encouraging adaptive behaviour, supervising their medication, and
reporting signs of relapse, they need to be well informed, adequately
supported, and able to obtain help in an emergency. Such support is
time-consuming and is rarely available unless community care is well
resourced and the needs of the family are given high priority. In the UK
a carer assessment is obligatory with long-term disorders, yet many
carers report poor communication from psychiatric services. Staff
experience continuing conflict over their duty of confidentiality to the
patient and their wish to support and inform relatives. There is no easy
answer to this dilemma. Carers report the greatest difficulties in
coping with negative symptoms and socially embarrassing or aggressive
behaviour, and anticipatory anxiety about such behaviour and long-term
prognosis are regularly reported as more burdensome than practical help.

Care plans should always consider the possible effects of the patient's
illness on any children in the home.

Problems with the distribution of resources When resources are limited,
there is a conflict between the needs of patients with acute disorders
and those with chronic disorders. The conflict is most evident in
primary care, where the former group of patients is generally more
demanding of care and more responsive to it.

Problems with the coordination of services In most countries, long-stay
hospital care for patients with chronic psychiatric disorder is provided
by a single agency (a hospital authority). Community care requires
coordinated action by several agencies, each of which usually has other
responsibilities---for example, social

79

Further reading services departments have responsibilities for mentally
healthy children and frail elderly people as well as for psychiatric
patients. This broad responsibility

generates endless problems with regard to the allocation of resources.
Regular negotiation is the only possible response.

International service principles In countries that have few specialist
psychiatric resources, it is essential to decide on priorities. The
World Health Organization (1984) has identified four priorities: 1.
Rapid response to psychiatric emergencies. 2. Provisions for chronic
severe psychiatric disorder. 3. Care for psychiatric disorders
associated with general medical illness.

4.  Care for any high-risk groups that are found in the country
    (e.g.Â drug misusers). The World Health Organization advocates the
    training of auxiliary workers who can supplement the efforts of
    fully trained staff. Thus in countries with few trained
    psychiatrists, resources may be used most effectively by improving
    the skills of nurses who can perform the firstline management of
    psychiatric disorders, supported by general practitioners. See also
    Chapter 23.

Further reading Goldberg D and Huxley P (1992). Common Mental Disorders:
A biosocial model. Routledge, London. (This book is still valuable for
its account of the development and utility of the 'filter' model, which
relates epidemiology to the provision of services.)

Thornicroft G and Szmukler G (2001). Textbook of Community Psychiatry.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. (A comprehensive work of reference.)

799

80

801

References Abajobir AA et al.Â (2016). A systematic review and
metaanalysis of the association between unintended pregnancy and
perinatal depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 192, 56--63.
Abbass AA et al.Â (2013). Psychodynamic psychotherapy for children and
adolescents: A meta-analysis of short-term psychodynamic models. Journal
of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 52, 863--75.
Abdelmawla N and Mitchell AJ (2006a). Sudden cardiac death and
antipsychotics. Part 1: Risk factors and mechanisms. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 12, 35--44. Abdelmawla N and Mitchell AJ (2006b).
Sudden cardiac death and antipsychotics. Part 2: Monitoring and
prevention. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 12, 100--9. Abderhalden C
et al.Â (2008). Structured risk assessment and violence in acute
psychiatric wards: randomized controlled trial. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 193, 44--50. Abel KM, Drake R and Goldstein JM (2010). Sex
differences in schizophrenia. International Review of Psychiatry, 22,
417--28. Abraham HD (2009). Disorders relating to use of PCP and
hallucinogens. In: Gelder MG, Andreason NC, Lopez-Ibor JJJr and Geddes
JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. pp.Â 486--90. Abraham A and Luty J (2010). Testing for illicit
drug use in mental health services. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment,
16(5), 369--79 Abrams RC and Horowitz SV (1996). Personality disorders
after age 50: a meta-analysis. Journal of Personality Disorders, 10,
271--81. Academy of Medical Sciences (2004). Calling Time. The Nation's
drinking as a major health issue. Academy of Medical Sciences, London.
Ackner B and Oldham AJ (1962). Insulin treatment of schizophrenia. A
three-year follow-up of a controlled study. Lancet, i, 504--6. Adams K
and Grant I (2009). Neuropsychological Assessment of Neuropsychiatric
and Neuromedical Disorders. 3rd edn. Oxford University Press, New York.
Adams RD et al.Â (1965). Symptomatic occult hydrocephalus with 'normal'
cerebrospinal fluid pressure: a treatable syndrome. New England Journal
of Medicine, 273, 117--26. Addington J, Heinssen R (2012). Prediction
and prevention of psychosis in youth at clinical high risk. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 269--89. Adshead G and Ferris S
(2007). Treatment of victims of trauma. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 13, 358--68. Agid O et al.Â (2003). Delayed-onset hypothesis
of antipsychotic action: a hypothesis tested and rejected. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 60, 1228--35. Agnew-Blais JC et al.Â (2016).
Evaluation of the persistence, remission, and emergence of
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in young adulthood. JAMA
Psychiatry, 73, 713--20.

Agorastos A, Haasen C, Huber CG (2012). Anxiety disorders through a
transcultural perspective: implications for migrants. Psychopathology,
45(2), 67--77. Agrawal N and Govender S (2011). Epilepsy and
neuropsychiatric comorbidities. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 17,
44--53. Ahmari SE and Simpson B (2013). Neurobiology and treatment of
OCD. In: Charney DS, Sklar O, Buxbaum JD, Nestler EJ (eds.) Neurobiology
of Mental Illness, OUP, New York, Ch. 48. Ahmed AS (2007).
Post-traumatic stress disorder, resilience and vulnerability. Advances
in Psychiatric Treatment, 13, 369--75. Ahmed K, Mohan RA and Bhugra D
(2007). Self-harm in South Asian women: a literature review informed
approach to assessment and formulation. American Journal of
Psychotherapy, 61, 71--81. Ainsworth MDS et al.Â (1978). Patterns of
Attachment: A psychological study of the strange situation. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ. Aizenstein HJ et al.Â (2011). fMRI correlates of white
matter hyperintensities in late-life depression. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 168, 1075--82. Ajdacic-Gross V et al.Â (2008). Reduction in
the suicide rate during Advent---a time series analysis. Psychiatry
Research, 157, 139--46. Akagi H and House A (2002). The clinical
epidemiology of hysteria: vanishingly rare or just vanishing?
Psychological Medicine, 32, 191--4. Albanese A et al.Â (2013).
Phenomenology and classification of dystonia: a consensus update.
Movement Disorders, 28, 863--73. Albert FW and Kruglyak L (2015). The
role of regulatory variation in complex traits and disease. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 16, 197--212. Alcohol Concern (2016). Statistics on
alcohol.
https://www.alcoholconcern.org.uk/help-and-advice/statistics-on-alcohol/
Alexander DA (2005). Early mental health intervention after disasters.
Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 11, 12--18. Alexander GE and Crutcher
MD (1990). Functional architecture of basal ganglia circuits: neural
substrates of parallel processing. Trends in Neuroscience, 13, 266--71.
Alexander M et al.Â (2015). Age-stratified prevalence of mild cognitive
impairment and dementia in European populations: a systematic review.
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 48, 355--69. Alexopoulos GS et
al.Â (1997). 'Vascular depression' hypothesis. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 54, 915--22. Alisic E et al.Â (2014). Rates of post-traumatic
stress disorder in trauma-exposed children and adolescents:
meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 204, 335--40. Alloy LB et
al.Â (2005). The psychosocial context of bipolar disorder: Environmental,
cognitive and developmental risk factors. Clinical Psychology Review,
25, 1043--75. Alonso J et al.Â (2004). Prevalence of mental disorders in
Europe: results from the European Study of the Mental Disorders (ESEMeD)
project. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109, 21--7.

802

802

References Alonso P et al.Â (2015). Deep brain stimulation for
obsessivecompulsive disorder: a meta-analysis of treatment outcome and
predictors of response. PloS One, 10, e0133591. Althof S (2010). Sex
therapy: advances in paradigms, nomenclature, and treatment. Academic
Psychiatry, 34, 390--6. Altman EG et al.Â (1997). The Altman Self-Rating
Mania Scale. Biological Psychiatry, 42, 948--55. Altshuler D, Daly MJ
and Lander ES (2008). Genetic mapping in human disease. Science, 322,
881--8. Amato PR and Anthony CJ (2014). Estimating the effects of
parental divorce and death with fixed effects models. Journal of
Marriage and Family, 76(2), 370--86. American Psychiatric Association
(1998). Guidelines for assessing the decision-making capacities of
potential research subjects with cognitive impairment. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 155, 1649--50. American Psychiatric Association (2013).
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-5). American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC. American
Psychiatric Association (2013). The Principles of Medical Ethics 2013
Edition. American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC. American
Psychiatric Association Practice Guidelines (2001). Practice guideline
for the treatment of patients with borderline personality disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1--52. Amir N, Leiner A and Bomyea
J (2010). Implicit memory and posttraumatic stress symptoms. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 34, 49--58. Amminger GP et al.Â (2015). Longer-term
outcome in the prevention of psychotic disorders by the Vienna omega-3
study. Nature Communications, 6, 7934. Anand A and Charney DS (2000).
Norepinephrine dysfunction in depression. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 61, 16--24. Anand R et al.Â (2014). Therapeutics of
Alzheimer's disease: Past, present and future. Neuropharmacology, 76,
27--50. an der Heiden W and HÃ¤fner (2011). Course and outcome. In:
Weinberger D and Harrison PJ (eds.) Schizophrenia, 3rd edn.
Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 104--41. Andersen BL et al.Â (2014).
Screening, assessment, and care of anxiety and depressive symptoms in
adults with cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 32, 1605--19. Anderson
E (2008). Cognitive change in old age. In: R Jacoby, C Oppenheimer, T
Dening and A Thomas (eds.) The Oxford Textbook of Old Age Psychiatry,
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 33--50. Anderson IM (2003). Drug
treatment of depression: reflections on the evidence. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 9, 11--20. Anderson IM and Fergusson GM (2013).
Mechanism of action of ECT. In: J Waite, A Eaton (eds.) The ECT
Handbook. RCPsych Publications, London. pp.Â 1--7. Andrade C, Kumar C and
Surya S (2013). Cardiovascular mechanisms of SSRI drugs and their
benefits and risks in ischemic heart disease and heart failure.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 28, 145--55. Andreasen NC
(2009). Schizophrenia: a conceptual history. In: MG Gelder, NC
Andreasen, JJ Lopez-IborJr and JR Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 521--6.

Andreasson S et al.Â (1987). Cannabis and schizophrenia. A longitudinal
study of Swedish conscripts. Lancet, ii, 1483--6. Angel K (2010). The
history of 'female sexual dysfunction' as a mental disorder in the 20th
century. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 23, 536--41. Angermeyer MC et
al.Â (2011). Biogenetic explanations and public acceptance of mental
illness: systematic review of population studies. The British Journal of
Psychiatry, 199, 367--72. Angst J (2009). Course and prognosis of mood
disorders. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor and JR Geddes
(eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. pp.Â 665--9. Angst J et al.Â (2013). Mortality of 403 patients
with mood disorders 48 to 52 years after their psychiatric
hospitalization. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 263, 425--34. Angst J et al.Â (2015). A Swiss longitudinal
study of the prevalence of, and overlap between, sexual problems in men
and women aged 20 to 50 years old. Journal of Sex Research, 52, 949--59.
Anonymous (1994). Molecules and minds. Lancet, 343, 681--2. Anonymous
(2015). What's in a name? Systemic exertion intolerance disease. Lancet,
385, 663. Ansseau M et al.Â (2004). High prevalence of mental disorders
in primary care. Journal of Affective Disorders, 78, 49--55. Anthenelli
RM (2010). Focus on: comorbid mental health disorders. Alcohol Research
and Health, 33, 109--17. Anton RF et al.Â (2006). Combined
pharmacotherapies and behavioural interventions for alcohol dependence:
the COMBINE Study: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 295, 2003--17. Antypa N et al.Â (2013)
Serotonergic genes and suicide: A systematic review. European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 23, 1125--1142. Anwar S et al.Â (2009). Is arson
the crime most strongly associated with psychosis?---A national
case-control study of arson risk in schizophrenia and other psychoses.
Schizophrenia Bulletin. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbp098. Appleby L et
al.Â (2015). The National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide
by People with Mental Illness Annual Report 2015: England, Northern
Ireland, Scotland and Wales. University of Manchester. Arango C and
Carpenter WT (2011). The schizophrenia construct: symptomatic
presentation. In: D Weinberger and PJ Harrison (eds.) Schizophrenia, 3rd
edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 9--23. Arango C, Fraguas D (2016).
Should psychiatry deal only with mental disorders without an identified
medical aetiology? World Psychiatry, 15, 22--3. Araya R et al.Â (2006).
Cost-effectiveness of a primary care treatment program for depression in
low-income women in Santiago, Chile. American Journal of Psychiatry,
163, 1379--87. Arcelus J et al.Â (2011). Mortality rates in patients with
anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders. A meta-analysis of 36
studies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 724--31. Arena JE and
Rabinstein AA (2015). Transient global amnesia. Mayo Clinic Proceedings,
90, 264--72. Arnold SE et al.Â (2013). Comparative survey of the
topographical distribution of signature molecular lesions in major
neurodegenerative diseases. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 521,
4339--55.

803

References Arnone D et al.Â (2012). Magnetic resonance imaging studies in
unipolar depression: Systematic review and meta-regression analyses.
European Neuropsychopharmacology, 22, 1--16. Arnone D et al.Â (2015).
Indirect evidence of selective glial involvement in glutamate-based
mechanisms of mood regulation in depression: Meta-analysis of absolute
prefrontal neurometabolic concentrations. European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 25, 1109--17. Arnow BA et al.Â (2015).
Depression subtypes in predicting antidepressant response: A report from
the iSPOT-D Trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 743--50. Aronson
R et al.Â (1996). Triiodothyronine augmentation in the treatment of
refractory depression. A meta-analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry,
53, 842--8. Arscott K, Dagnan D and Kroese B (1998). Consent to
psychological research by people with an intellectual disability.
Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disability, 11, 77--83.
Arseneault L et al.Â (2006). Bullying victimization uniquely contributes
to adjustment problems in young children: a nationally representative
cohort study. Paediatrics, 118, 130--8. Arseneault L, Bowes L and
Shakoor S (2010). Bullying victimization in youths and mental health
problems: 'Much ado about nothing'? Psychological Medicine, 40, 717--29.
Asher R (1951). Munchausen's syndrome. Lancet, i, 339--41. Asperger H
(1944). Die 'Autistischen Psychopathien' Kindesalter. Archiv fÃ¼r
Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten, 117, 76--136. Assum T and SÃ¸rensen M
(2010). Safety performance indicator for alcohol in road
accidents---international comparison, validity and data quality.
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 42, 595--603. Auer RN (2004).
Hypoglycemic brain damage. Metabolic Brain Disease, 19, 169--75. Aust R,
Sharp C and Goulden C (2002). Prevalence of Drug Use: key findings from
the 2001/2002 British Crime Survey. Home Office, London. Ayala ES,
Meuret AE and Ritz T (2009). Treatments for bloodinjury-injection
phobia: a critical review of current evidence. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 43, 1235--42. Aybek S et al.Â (2014). Neural correlates of
recall of life events in conversion disorder. JAMA Psychiatry, 71,
52--60. Ayerbe L et al.Â (2012). Natural history, predictors and outcomes
of depression after stroke: systematic review and meta-analysis. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 14--21. Bagayogo IP et al.Â (2013).
Transcultural aspects of somatic disorders in the context of depressive
disorders. In: RD Alarcon (ed.). Cultural Psychiatry. Karger, Rochester,
pp.Â 64--74. Bagni C et al.Â (2012). Fragile X syndrome: causes,
diagnosis, mechanisms, and therapeutics. Journal of Clinical
Investigation, 122, 4314--22. Baigent C et al.Â (2010). Large-scale
randomized evidence: trials and meta-analyses of trials. In: Warrell DA,
Cox TM and Firth JD (eds.) Oxford Textbook of Medicine. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 31--47. Baio J (2012). Prevalence of
Autism Spectrum Disorders: Autism and Developmental Disabilities
Monitoring Network, 14 Sites, United States, 2008. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report. Surveillance Summaries. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 61, 1--19.

Baizabal-Carvallo J and Jankovic J (2016). Parkinsonism, movement
disorders and genetics in frontotemporal dementia. Nature Reviews
Neurology, 12, 175--85. Baker-Henningham H et al.Â (2005). The effect of
early stimulation on maternal depression: a cluster randomised
controlled trial. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 90, 1230--4. BALANCE
Study Group (2010). Lithium plus valproate combination therapy versus
monotherapy for relapse prevention in bipolar 1 disorder (BALANCE): a
randomised open label trial. Lancet, 375, 385--95. Baldwin DS and
Sinclair JM (2015). Recurrent brief depression: This too shall pass? In:
D Bhugra, GS Malhi (eds). Troublesome Disguises: Managing challenging
disorders in psychiatry, Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, pp.Â 100--13.
Baldwin DS, Huusom AKT and Maehlum E (2006). Escitalopram and paroxetine
in the treatment of generalised anxiety disorder: randomised,
placebo-controlled, double-blind study. British Journal of Psychiatry,
189, 264--72. Baldwin DS et al.Â (2014). Evidence-based pharmacological
treatment of anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder and
obsessive-compulsive disorder: a revision of the 2005 guidelines from
the British Association for Psychopharmacology. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 28, 403--39. Baldwin RC et al.Â (2003). Guideline for
the management of latelife depression in primary care. International
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 18, 829--38. Balestri M et al.Â (2014).
Genetic modulation of personality traits: a systematic review of the
literature. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 29, 1--15. Balint
M (1964). The Doctor, the Patient and his Illness, 2nd edn. Pitman,
London. Ballard C and Corbett A (2013). Agitation and aggression in
people with Alzheimer's disease. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 26,
252--9. Ballard C et al.Â (2005). Quetiapine and rivastigmine and
cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease: randomised double-blind
placebo-controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 330, 874--7. Ballard
C et al.Â (2015). Dextromethorphan and quinidine for treating agitation
in patients with Alzheimer disease dementia. JAMA, 314, 1233--5. Ballard
C et al.Â (2016). Dementia in Down's syndrome. Lancet Neurology, 15,
622--36. Ballenger JC (2009). Panic disorder and agoraphobia. In: MG
Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-IborJr and JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 750--64.
Balodis IM et al.Â (2015). Neurobiological features of binge eating
disorder. CNS Spectrums, 20, 557--65. Bandura A (1969). Principles of
Behaviour Modification. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York. Bang J et
al.Â (2015). Frontotemporal dementia. Lancet, 386, 1672--82. Banks R et
al.Â (2007). Challenging Behaviour: A unified approach (Clinical and
service guidelines for supporting people with learning disabilities who
are at risk of receiving abusive or restrictive practices). London: The
Royal College of Psychiatrists, The British Psychological Society and
The Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists. College Report CR,
144.

803

804

804

References Barahona-CorrÃªa J and Filipe CN (2015). A concise history of
Asperger syndrome: The short reign of a troublesome diagnosis. Frontiers
in Psychology, 6, 2024. Barbee JG et al.Â (2011). A double-blind
placebo-controlled trial of lamotrigine as an antidepressant
augmentation agent in treatment-refractory unipolar depression. Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 1405--12. Barbui C and Cipriani A (2011).
Efficacy of antidepressants and benzodiazepines in minor depression:
systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 198,
11--16. Barnes TR (1989). A rating scale for drug-induced akathisia.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 672--6. Barnes TRE et al.Â (2009).
Antipsychotic long-acting injections: Prescribing practice in the UK.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 195, s37--42. Barr B et al.Â (2012).
Suicides associated with the 2008--10 economic recession in England:
time trend analysis. British Medical Journal, 345, e5142. Barraclough B
and Harris EC (2002). Suicide preceded by murder: the epidemiology of
homicide--suicide in England and Wales 1988--92. Psychological Medicine,
32, 577--84. Barraclough BM and Shea M (1970). Suicide and Samaritan
clients. Lancet, ii, 868--70. Barraclough BM and Shepherd DM (1976).
Public interest: private grief. British Journal of Psychiatry, 126,
109--13. Barry G (2014). Integrating the roles of long and small
noncoding RNAs in brain function and disease. Molecular Psychiatry, 19,
410--16. Barry H et al.Â (2015). Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor
encephalitis: review of clinical presentation, diagnosis and treatment.
BJPsych Bulletin, 39, 19--23. Barth J et al.Â (2013). The current
prevalence of child sexual abuse worldwide: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. International Journal of Public Health, 58, 469--83.
Bartram DJ and Baldwin DS (2010). Veterinary surgeons and suicide: a
structured review of possible influences on increased risk. Veterinary
Record, 166, 388--97. Baruk H (1959). Delusions of passion. In: SR
Hirsch and M Shepherd (eds.) Themes and Variations in European
Psychiatry. Wright, Bristol. pp.Â 375--84. Bass C and Halligan P (2014).
Factitious disorders and malingering: challenges for clinical assessment
and management. Lancet, 383, 1422--32. Bass C and Jones D (2011).
Psychopathology of perpetrators of fabricated or induced illness in
children: case series. British Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 113--18.
Basson R and Schultz WW (2007). Sexual dysfunction 1: Sexual sequelae of
general medical disorders. Lancet, 369, 409--24. Bateman A and Fonagy P
(2008). Eight-year follow-up of patients treated for borderline
personality disorder: mentalizationbased treatment versus treatment as
usual. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 631--8. Bateman A and Fonagy
P (2009). Randomized controlled trial of outpatient mentalization-based
treatment versus structured clinical management for borderline
personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 1355--64.
Bateman A and Krawitz R (2013). Borderline Personality Disorder: An
evidence-based guide for generalist mental health professionals. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Bateman AW et al.Â (2015). Treatment of personality disorder. Lancet,
385, 735--43. Bateson G et al.Â (1956). Towards a theory of
schizophrenia. Behavioural Science, 1, 251--64. Bayley N (2006). Bayley
scales of infant and toddler development-- third edition. San Antonio,
TX: Harcourt assessment. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 25(2),
180--90. Beard JH, Propst RN and Malamud TJ (1987). The Fountain House
model of rehabilitation. Psychosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 5, 47--53.
Beards S et al.Â (2013). Life events and psychosis: a review and
meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39, 740--7. Beauchamp TL and
Childress JF (2013). Principles of Medical Ethics. 7th edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Beautler LE and Moos RH (2003). Coping and
coping styles in personality and treatment planning: introduction to the
special series. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 59, 1045--7. Beautrais
AL (2000). Risk factors for suicide and attempted suicide among young
people. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 34, 420--36.
Beautrais AL et al.Â (2010). Postcard intervention for repeat selfharm:
randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 197, 55--60.
Bebbington PE and Kuipers E (2011). Schizophrenia and psychosocial
stresses. In: D Weinberger and PJ Harrison (eds.) Schizophrenia, 3rd
edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford. pp. 601--24. Beck AT (1967). Depression:
Clinical, experimental, and theoretical aspects. Harper and Row, New
York. Beck AT (1976). Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders.
International Universities Press, New York. Beck AT et al.Â (1961). An
inventory for measuring depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 4,
561--85. Beck AT. (2010). Cognitive theory and therapy of anxiety and
depression: Convergence with neurobiological findings. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 14, 418--24. Beck K et al.Â (2014). The practical
management of refractory schizophrenia---the Maudsley Treatment Review
and Assessment Team service approach. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
130, 427--38. Beckley JT and Woodward JJ (2013). Volatile solvents as
drugs of abuse: focus on the cortico-mesolimbic circuitry.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 38, 2555--67. Beckwith H et al.Â (2014).
Personality disorder prevalence in psychiatric outpatients: A systematic
literature review. Personality and Mental Health, 8, 91--101. Beech AR
et al.Â (2016). Paraphilias in the DSM-5. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 12, 383--406. Beekman AT et al.Â (2002). The natural history
of late-life depression: a 6-year prospective study in the community.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 605--11. Beekman ATFC, Copeland JRM
and Prince M (1999). Review of community prevalence of depression in
later life. British Journal of Psychiatry, 174, 307--11. Bell V,
Halligan PW and Ellis HD (2006). Diagnosing delusions: a review of
inter-rater reliability. Schizophrenia Research, 86, 76--9. Belsky J et
al.Â (2007). Are there long-term effects of early child care? Child
Development, 78, 681--701.

805

References Benbow SM and Waite J (2013). Non-cognitive adverse effects
of ECT. In: J Waite, A Eaton (eds.) The ECT Handbook. RCPsych
Publications, London. pp.Â 71--5. Bendtsen L (2015). Treatment
guidelines: implications for community-based headache treatment.
International Journal of Clinical Practice, 69, 13--16. Bennett DH
(1983). The historical development of rehabilitation services. In: FN
Watts and DH Bennett (eds.) The Theory and Practice of Rehabilitation.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. Bennett S et al.Â (2015). Psychological
interventions for mental health disorders in children with chronic
physical illness: A systematic review. Archives of Disease in Childhood,
100, 308--16. Bennewith O et al.Â (2007). Effect of barriers on the
Clifton suspension bridge, England, on local patterns of suicide:
implications for prevention. British Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 266--7.
Bensing JM and Verhaak PFM (2006). Somatisation: a joint responsibility
of doctor and patient. Lancet, 367, 452--4. Benyon S et al.Â (2009).
Pharmacological interventions for the prevention of relapse in bipolar
disorder: a systematic review of controlled trials. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 23, 574--91. Berelowicz M and Tarnopolsky A (1993).
Borderline personality disorder. In: P Tyrer and G Stein (eds.)
Personality Disorder Reviewed. Gaskell, London. pp.Â 90--112. Bergen H et
al.Â (2010). Epidemiology and trends in non-fatal selfharm in three
centres in England: 2000--2007. British Journal of Psychiatry, 197,
493--8. Bergink V et al.Â (2015). Treatment of psychosis and mania in the
postpartum period. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 115--23. Berlim
MT et al.Â (2014). Effectiveness and acceptability of deep brain
stimulation (DBS) of the subgenual cingulate cortex for treatment
resistant depression: a systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized
trials. Journal of Affective Disorders, 159, 31--8. Berlin I (1958). Two
Concepts of Liberty. Clarendon Press, Oxford. Berman K and Brodaty H
(2006). Psychosocial effects of agerelated macular degeneration.
International Psychogeriatrics, 18, 415--28. Bernard S and Turk J
(2009). Developing Mental Health Services for Children and Adolescents
with Learning Disabilities: a toolkit for clinicians. Royal College of
Psychiatrists, London. Berrios GE (1992). Phenomenology, psychopathology
and Jaspers: a conceptual history. History of Psychiatry, 3, 303--27.
Berrios GE and Kennedy N (2002). Erotomania: a conceptual history.
History of Psychiatry, 13, 381--400. Berry SM et al.Â (2013). A
patient-level meta-analysis of studies evaluating vagus nerve
stimulation therapy for treatmentresistant depression. Medical Devices
(Auckland, NZ), 6, 17. Berson RJ (1983). Capgras' syndrome. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 140, 969--78. Bienvenu OJ, Davydow DS and Kendler
KS (2011). Psychiatric 'diseases' versus behavioral disorders and degree
of genetic influence. Psychological Medicine, 41, 33--40. Biesecker LG
and Green RC (2014). Diagnostic clinical genome and exome sequencing.
New England Journal of Medicine, 370, 2418--25. Billiard M (2009).
Excessive sleepiness. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor JJJr and
Geddes JR (eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. pp. 938--43.

Binet A (1877). Le fÃ©tichisme dans l'amour. Revue Philosophique, 24,
143. Bion WR (1961). Experiences in Groups. Tavistock Publications,
London. Birchwood M, Todd P and Jackson C (1998). Early intervention in
psychosis. The critical period hypothesis. British Journal of Psychiatry
Supplement, 172, 53--9. Bittles A (2009). The biology of ageing. In:
Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor JJJr and Geddes JR (eds.) New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry, Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1507--11.
Black D and Trickey D (2009). The effects of bereavement in childhood.
In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-IborJr and JR Geddes (eds.) New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
pp.Â 1758--60. Blackmore ER et al.Â (2013). Reproductive outcomes and risk
of subsequent illness in women diagnosed with postpartum psychosis.
Bipolar Disorders, 15, 394--404. Blackmore MA et al.Â (2009). Social
anxiety disorder and specific phobias. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ
Lopez-IborJr and JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 739--50. Blair RJR (2003).
Neurobiological basis of psychopathy. British Journal of Psychiatry,
182, 5--7. Blair RJR et al.Â (2014). Conduct disorder and
callous--unemotional traits in youth. New England Journal of Medicine,
371, 2207--16. Blanco C et al.Â (2009). Interpersonal psychotherapy for
depression and other disorders. In: Gelder MG, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr and
Andreasen NC (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1318--26. Blashfield RK et al.Â (2014). The cycle of
classification: DSM-I through DSM-5. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 10, 25--51. Blennow K et al.Â (2012). The neuropathology and
neurobiology of traumatic brain injury. Neuron, 76, 886--99. Blessed G,
Tomlinson BE and Roth M (1968). The association between quantitative
measures of dementia and of senile change in the cerebral grey matter of
elderly subjects. British Journal of Psychiatry, 114, 797--811. Bleuler
E (1906). AffektivitÃ¤t, SuggestibilitÃ¤t, und Paranoia. Halle, Marhold.
Bleuler E (1911). Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias.
International University, New York (English edition published in 1950).
Bleuler M (1974). The long-term course of the schizophrenic psychoses.
Psychological Medicine, 4, 244--54. Bloch MH et al.Â (2010).
Meta-analysis of the dose--response relationship of SSRI in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 15, 850--5. Bloch S
(2006). An Introduction to the Psychotherapies, 4th edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Bloch S and Harari E (2009). Family therapy in
the adult psychiatric setting. From Psychotherapy with couples. In: MG
Gelder, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr, and Geddes JR (eds.) The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
pp.Â 1380--91. Blomstrom A et al.Â (2016). Associations between maternal
infection during pregnancy, childhood infections, and the risk of
subsequent psychotic disorder. A Swedish cohort study of nearly 2
million individuals. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 42, 125--33.

805

806

806

References Bloomfield PS et al.Â (2016). Microglial activity in people at
ultra high risk of psychosis and in schizophrenia: an \[11C\] PBR28 PET
brain imaging study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 44--52. Blum N
et al.Â (2008). Systems Training for Emotional Predictability and Problem
Solving (STEPPS) for outpatients with borderline personality disorder: a
randomized controlled trial and 1-year follow-up. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 165, 468--78. Bockting CL et al.Â (2015). A lifetime approach
to major depressive disorder: The contributions of psychological
interventions in preventing relapse and recurrence. Clinical
Psychological Review, 41, 16--26. Boeve BF et al.Â (2013).
Clinicopathologic correlations in 172 cases of rapid eye movement sleep
behavior disorder with or without a coexisting neurologic disorder.
Sleep Medicine, 14, 754--62. Boland RJ, Goldstein MG and Haltzman SD
(2000). Psychiatric management of behavioural syndromes in intensive
care units. In: A Stoudemier, BS Fogel and DB Greenberg (eds.).
Psychiatric Care of the Medical Patient. Oxford University Press, New
York. pp.Â 299--314. Bolea-AlamaÃ±ac B et al.Â (2014). Evidence-based
guidelines for the pharmacological management of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder: Update on recommendations from the British
Association for Psychopharmacology. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 28,
179--203. Bond GR et al.Â (1997). An update on supported on the job
employment for people with severe mental illness. Psychiatric Services,
48, 335--46. Bond GR, Drake RE and Becker DR (2008). An update on
randomized controlled trials of evidence-based supported employment.
Psychiatry Rehabilitation Journal, 31, 280--90. Bondy B et al.Â (2006).
Genetics of suicide. Molecular Psychiatry, 11, 336--51. Bonsack C and
Borgeat F (2005). Perceived coercion and need for hospitalization
related to psychiatric admission. International Journal of Law and
Psychiatry, 28, 342--7. Boorsma M et al.Â (2012). The prevalence,
incidence and risk factors for delirium in Dutch nursing homes and
residential care homes. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
27, 709--15. Bora E, Pantelis C (2013). Theory of mind impairments in
firstepisode psychosis, individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis and
in first-degree relatives of schizophrenia: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 144, 31--6. Bornovalova MA et
al.Â (2014). Understanding the relative contributions of direct
environmental effects and passive genotypeenvironment correlations in
the association between familial risk factors and child disruptive
behavior disorders. Psychological Medicine, 44, 831--44. Borum R et
al.Â (2005). Structured assessment of violence risk in youth. In T
Grisso, G Vincent, D Seagrave (eds.), Mental Health Screening and
Assessment in Juvenile Justice, 311--23. Guilford Press, New York,
Bosanac P, Patton GC and Castle DJ (2009). Early intervention in
psychotic disorders: faith before facts? Psychological Medicine, 40,
353--8. Bostic J and Martin A (2009). Assessment in child and adolescent
psychiatry. In MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, JR

Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1600--6. Bouras N and Holt G (2009). The
planning and provision of psychiatric services for adults with learning
disability. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr and JR Geddes
(eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1887--92. Bourque F et al.Â (2011). A meta-analysis of
the risk for psychotic disorders among first- and second-generation
immigrants. Psychological Medicine, 41, 897--910. Bowden CL et
al.Â (1994). Efficacy of divalproex vs lithium and placebo in the
treatment of mania. Journal of the American Medical Association, 271,
918--24. Bowden CL, Calabrese JR and McElroy SL (2000). A randomized,
placebo-controlled 12-month trial of divalproex and lithium in treatment
of outpatients with bipolar I disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry,
57, 481--9. Bowden CL et al.Â (2003). A placebo controlled 18-month trial
of lamotrigine and lithium maintenance treatment in recently manic or
hypomanic patients with bipolar 1 disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 60, 392--400. Bower P, Rowland N and Hardy R (2003). The
clinical effectiveness of counselling in primary care: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 33, 203--15. Bowlby J
(1944). Forty-Four Juvenile Thieves: Their characters and home-life.
International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 25, 19--53. Bowlby J (1951).
Maternal Care and Maternal Health. World Health Organization, Geneva.
Bowlby J (1980). Attachment and Loss. Basic Books, New York. Braak H and
Braak E (1991). Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes.
Acta Neuropathologica, 82, 239--59. Braak H and Del Tredici K (2015).
The preclinical phase of the pathological process underlying sporadic
Alzheimer's disease. Brain, 138, 2814--33. Braam W et al.Â (2009).
Exogenous melatonin for sleep problems in individuals with intellectual
disability: a meta-analysis. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology,
51, 340--9. Bracken P et al.Â (2012). Psychiatry beyond the current
paradigm. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 201, 430--4. Bradford JM.
(2014). Sexual Deviation: Assessment and Treatment. An Issue of
Psychiatric Clinics of North America (Vol. 37). Elsevier Health
Sciences, Amsterdam. Braid J (1843). Neurohypnology: or the rationale of
nervous sleep, considered in relation with animal magnetism. Churchill,
London. Brakoulias V et al.Â (2015). A meta-analysis of the response of
pathological hoarding to pharmacotherapy. Psychiatry Research, 229,
272--6. Bramble D (2011). Psychopharmacology in children with
intellectual disability. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 17, 32--40.
Bramon E et al.Â (2004). Meta-analysis of the P.300 and P.50 waveforms in
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 70, 315--29. Bramon E et
al.Â (2005). Is the P300 wave an endophenotype for schizophrenia? A
meta-analysis and a family study. Neuroimage, 27, 960--8. Brandon S et
al.Â (1985). Leicester ECT trial: results in schizophrenia. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 177--83. Brandt R (2009). The mental health
of people living with HIV/ AIDS in Africa: a systematic review. African
Journal of AIDS Research, 8, 123--33.

870

References Branney P and White A (2008). Big boys don't cry: depression
and men. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 14, 256--62. Bras J,
Guerreiro R and Hardy J (2012). Use of next-generation sequencing and
other whole-genome strategies to dissect neurological disease. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 13, 453--64. Brazier J (2010). Is the EQ-5D fit
for purpose in mental health? British Journal of Psychiatry, 197,
348--9. Brent D and Maalouf F (2015). Depressive disorders in childhood
and adolescence. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp. 874--92. Brent
DA et al.Â (2002). Familial pathways to early-onset suicide attempt: risk
for suicidal behavior in offspring of mooddisordered suicide attempters.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 801--7. Breslin R and Evans H
(2004). Key Child Protection Statistics. Child homicides and deaths.
www.nspcc.org.uk/inform/Statistics/ KeyCPstats/4.asp Brewin CR (2009).
Recovered memories and false memories. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ
Lopez-Ibor and JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 713--16. Brickell C and Munir K
(2008). Grief and its complications in individuals with intellectual
disability. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 16, 1--12. Bridge JA et
al.Â (2006). Adolescent suicide and suicidal behavior. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 47, 372--94. Bridge JA et al.Â (2007).
Clinical response and risk for reported suicidal ideation and suicide
attempts in paediatric antidepressant treatment: a meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 297, 1683--96. British Medical Association (2013). Drugs of
Dependence: The role of medical professionals. BMA Board of Science.
Britten N, Riley R and Morgan M (2010). Resisting psychotropic
medicines: a synthesis of qualitative studies of medicinetaking.
Advances in PsychiatricTreatment, 16, 207--18. Broadhead J and Jacoby RJ
(1990). Mania in old age: a first prospective study. International
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 5, 215--22. Brockington I (2009).
Obstetric and gynaecological conditions associated with psychiatric
disorder. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr and JR Geddes
(eds.). The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. pp.Â 1114--27. Broen A et al.Â (2005). The course of mental health
after miscarriage and induced abortion: a longitudinal, five-year
follow-up study. BMC Medicine, 3, 18. Brown AS and Derkits EJ (2010).
Prenatal infection and schizophrenia. A review of epidemiologic and
translational studies. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 261--80.
Brown AS and Susser ES (2008). Prenatal nutritional deficiency and risk
of adult schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34, 1054--63. Brown C
and Lloyd K (2001). Qualitative methods in psychiatric research.
Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 7, 350--6. Brown GW (2009). Medical
sociology and issues of aetiology. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ
Lopez-Ibor, JR Geddes (eds). New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, OUP,
Oxford, pp. 268--75.

Brown GW and Birley JL (1968). Crises and life changes and the onset of
schizophrenia. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 9, 203--14. Brown
GW and Harris TO (1978). Social Origins of Depression. Tavistock,
London. Brown GW and Harris TO (1993). Aetiology of anxiety and
depressive disorders in an inner-city population. 1. Early adversity.
Psychological Medicine, 23, 143--54. Brown GW et al.Â (1962). Influence
of family life on the cause of schizophrenic illness. British Journal of
Preventive and Social Medicine, 16, 55--68. Brown J (2015). The use and
misuse of short cognitive tests in the diagnosis of dementia. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 86, 680--5. Brown M and
Barraclough B (1997). Epidemiology of suicide pacts in England and
Wales, 1988--92. British Medical Journal, 315, 286--7. Brown RJ (2002).
The cognitive psychology of dissociative states. Neuropsychiatry, 7,
221--35. Bruch H (1974). Eating Disorders: Anorexia nervosa and the
person within. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London. Brunelle S et al.Â (2013).
Late-onset schizophrenia. In: T Dening, A Thomas (eds). Oxford Textbook
of Old Age Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Brunoni
AR et al.Â (2013). The sertraline vs electrical current therapy for
treating depression clinical study: results from a factorial,
randomized, controlled trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 383--91. Bryant-Waugh
R, Markham L, Kreipe RE and Walsh BT (2010). Feeding and eating
disorders in childhood. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
43(2), 98--111. Bryant-Waugh R, Watkins B, Thapar A, Pine DS, Leckman
JF, Scott S, Snowling MJ and Taylor E (2015). Feeding and eating
disorders. Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 1016--34. Bryant RA
et al.Â (2010). The psychiatric sequelae of traumatic injury. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 312--20. Buchanan A (2008). Risk of violence
by psychiatric patients: beyond the 'actuarial versus clinical'
assessment debate. Psychiatric Services, 59, 184--90. Buckley PF et
al.Â (2009). Psychiatric comorbidities and schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 35, 383--402. Bulik-Sullivan C et al.Â (2015). An atlas of
genetic correlations across human diseases and traits. Nature Genetics,
47, 1236--41. Bundy H, Stahl D and MacCabe JH (2011). A systematic
review and meta-analysis of the fertility of patients with schizophrenia
and their unaffected relatives. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 123,
98--106. Bunevicius R and Prange AJ (2010). Thyroid disease and mental
disorders: cause and effect or comorbidity. Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 23, 363--8. Burleigh M (2000). Extinguishing the ideas of
yesterday: eugenics and euthanasia. In The Third Reich. A new history.
Macmillan, London, pp.Â 343--81. Burmeister M, McInnis MG and Zollner S
(2008) Psychiatric genetics: progress amid controversy. Nature Reviews
Genetics 9: 527--40. Burns A and Illiffe S (2009). Dementia. British
Medical Journal, 338, b75. Burns A, Gallagley A and Byrne J (2004).
Delirium. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 75, 362--7.

807

80

808

References Burns T (1998). Not just bricks and mortar: Report of the
Royal College of Psychiatrists Working Party on the size, staffing,
structure, sitting, and security of new acute adult psychiatric
in-patient units. Psychiatric Bulletin, 22, 465--6. Burns T (2006).
Psychiatry: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Burns T (2009). Part 7: Planning and providing mental health services
for a community. In: Gelder MG, Andreason NC, Lopez-Ibor JJJr and Geddes
JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Burns T (2010). The dog that failed to bark. The Psychiatrist,
34, 361--3. Burns T (2013). Our Necessary Shadow. Allen Lane, London.
Burns T (2014). Community psychiatry's achievements. Epidemiology and
Psychiatric Sciences, 23, 337--44. Burns T and Bale R (1997).
Establishing a mental health liaison attachment with primary care.
Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 3, 219--24. Burns T and
Burns-Lundgren E (2015). Very Short Introduction to Psychotherapy.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. Burns T and Firn M (due 2016).
Assertive Outreach in Community Mental Health, 2nd edn. retitled. Burns
T, RugkÃ¥sa J, Molodynski A, Dawson J, Yeeles K, VazquezMontes M, Voysey
M, Sinclair J and Priebe S (2013) Community treatment orders for
patients with psychosis (OCTET): a randomised controlled trial. The
Lancet, 381, 1627--33. Burns T et al.Â (2002). International differences
in home treatment for mental health problems. Results of a systematic
review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 181, 375--82. Burns T et
al.Â (2007a). The effectiveness of supported employment for people with
severe mental illness: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet, 370,
1146--52. Burns T et al.Â (2007b). Use of intensive case management to
reduce time in hospital in people with severe mental illness: systematic
review and meta-regression. British Medical Journal, 335, 336. Burns T
et al.Â (2011). Pressures to adhere to treatment ('leverage') in English
mental healthcare. British Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 145--50. Burti L
(2001). Italian psychiatric reform 20 plus years after. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 104, 41--6. Burton A et al.Â (2010). Do
financial incentives increase treatment adherence in people with severe
mental illness? A systematic review. Epidemiology and Psychiatric
Sciences, 19, 233--42. Bushnell M et al.Â (2013). Cognitive and emotional
control of pain and its disruption in chronic pain. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 14, 502--11 Butler RJ (2008). Wetting and soiling. In: M
Rutter et al.Â (eds.) Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 5th edn,
Blackwell, Oxford. pp. 916--29. Butler RW and Braff DL (1991).
Delusions: a review and integration. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 17,
633--47. Byrd AL and Manuck SB (2014). MAOA, childhood maltreatment, and
antisocial behavior: meta-analysis of a gene--environment interaction.
Biological Psychiatry, 75, 9--17. Cade JF (1949). Lithium salts in the
treatment of psychotic excitement. Medical Journal of Australia, 2,
349--52. Cadoret RJ (1978). Psychopathology in adopted-away offspring of
biologic parents with antisocial behaviour. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 35, 176--84.

Cain CK et al.Â (2013). Neurobiology of fear and anxiety: Contributions
of animal models to current understanding. In: DS Charney, JD Buxbaum, P
Sklaar, EJ Nestler (eds). Neurobiology of Mental Illness. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp.Â 549--66. Callicott JH et al.Â (2003).
Complexity of prefrontal cortical dysfunction in schizophrenia: more
than up or down. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 2209--15. Campbell
EJ, Scadding JG and Roberts RS (1979). The concept of disease. British
Medical Journal, ii, 757--62. Canetta S et al.Â (2014). Elevated maternal
C-reactive protein and increased risk of schizophrenia in a national
birth cohort. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 960--8. Cannon M,
Jones PB and Murray RM (2002). Obstetric complications and
schizophrenia. Historical and meta-analytic review. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 159, 1080--92. Cannon M et al.Â (2014). Priming the brain for
psychosis: maternal inflammation during fetal development and the risk
of later psychiatric disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171,
901--5. Cannon TD (2015). How schizophrenia develops: cognitive and
brain mechanisms underlying onset of psychosis. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 19, 744--56. Cape J et al.Â (2010). Brief psychological
therapies for anxiety and depression in primary care: meta-analysis and
meta-regression. BMC Medicine, 8, 1--11. Caplan G (1961). An Approach to
Community Mental Health. Tavistock Publications, London. Caplan G
(1964). Principles of Preventive Psychiatry. Basic Books, New York.
Cardno A, Owen MJ (2014). Genetic relationships between schizophrenia,
bipolar disorder, and schizoaffective disorder. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
40, 504--15. Cardno AG and Gottesman II (2000). Twin studies of
schizophrenia: from bow-and-arrow concordances to Star Wars Mx and
functional genomics. American Journal of Medical Genetics (Seminars in
Medical Genetics), 97, 12--17. Carhart-Harris RL et al.Â (2016). The
paradoxical psychological effects of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD).
Psychological Medicine, 46, 1379--90. Carota A and Calabrese P (2014).
Hysteria around the world. Frontiers of Neurology and Neuroscience, 35,
169--80. Carr A (1991). Milan systemic family therapy: a review of ten
empirical investigations. Journal of Family Therapy, 13, 237--63. Carr A
et al.Â (2016). The Handbook of Intellectual Disability and Clinical
Psychology Practice. Second Edition Routledge, Abingdon. Carroll A
(2009). Are you looking at me? Understanding and managing paranoid
personality disorder. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 15, 40--8.
Carter GL et al.Â (2007). Postcards from the edge: 24-month outcomes of a
randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated self-poisoning. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 191, 548--53. Caserta MT et al.Â (2009). Normal
brain aging: clinical, immunological, neuropsychological, and
neuroimaging features. International Review of Neurobiology, 84, 1--19.
Casey P (2009). Adjustment disorder: epidemiology, diagnosis and
treatment. CNS Drugs, (11) 23, 927--38. Cashman MD et al.Â (2016).
Irritable bowel syndrome: a clinical review. Current Rheumatology
Reviews, 12, 13--26.

809

References Caspi A and Shiner R (2008). Temperament and personality. In:
M Rutter et al.Â (eds.) Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 5th edn.
Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 182--98. Caspi A et al.Â (2003). Influence of life
stress on depression: moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene.
Science, 301, 386--9. Caspi A et al.Â (2010). Genetic sensitivity to the
environment: the case of the serotonin transporter gene and its
implications for studying complex diseases and traits. Focus, 8,
398--416. Castle D (2012). The truth, and nothing but the truth, about
early intervention in psychosis. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 46, 10--13. Castle D and Bosanac P (2012). Depression and
schizophrenia. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 18, 280--8. Castle D
et al.Â (1991). The incidence of operationally defined schizophrenia in
Camberwell, 1965--84. British Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 790--4. Castle
DJ et al.Â (1993). Does social deprivation during gestation and early
life predispose to later schizophrenia? Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 28, 1--4. Cattell RB (1963). The Sixteen
Personality Factor Questionnaire. Institute for Personality and Ability
Testing, Chicago, IL. Catts VS et al.Â (2008). Cancer incidence in
patients with schizophrenia and their first-degree relatives---a
meta-analysis. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 117, 323--36. Catty J,
Goddard K and Burns T (2005). Social services day care and health
services day care in mental health: do they differ? International
Journal of Psychoanalysis, 51, 151--61. Cavanagh JTO et al.Â (2003).
Psychological autopsy studies of suicide: a systematic review.
Psychological Medicine, 33, 395--405. Cermolacce M, Sass L and Parnas J
(2010). What is bizarre in bizarre delusions? A critical review.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 667--79. Chamberlain AS (1966). Early mental
hospitals in Spain. American Journal of Psychiatry, 123, 143--9. Chan
RCK et al.Â (2010). Neurological soft signs in schizophrenia. A
meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 1089--104. Chanen AM et
al.Â (2008). Early intervention for adolescents with borderline
personality disorder using cognitive analytic therapy: randomised
controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 193, 477--84. Charlton
J et al.Â (1993). Suicide deaths in England and Wales: trends in factors
associated with suicide deaths. Population Trends, 71, 34--42. Charman
T, Hood J and Howlin P (2008). Psychological assessment in the clinical
context. In: M Rutter et al.Â (eds.) Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 5th
edn. Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 299--316. Charman T et al.Â (2010). Defining
the cognitive phenotype of autism. Brain Research, 1380, 10--21. Chaste
P and Leboyer M (2012). Autism risk factors: Genes, environment, and
gene--environment interactions. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 14,
281--92. Cheeta S et al.Â (2004). Antidepressant-related deaths and
antidepressant prescriptions in England and Wales. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 184, 41--7. Chen J et al.Â (2014). Childhood sexual abuse and
the development of recurrent major depression in Chinese women. PloS
One, 9, e87569.

Cheng ATA and Lee CS (2000). Suicide in Asia and the Far East. In: K
Hawton and K van Heeringen (eds.) The International Handbook of Suicide
and Attempted Suicide. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. pp.Â 29--48.
Chibanda D et al.Â (2015). Psychological interventions for common mental
disorders for people living with HIV in low-and middle-income countries:
systematic review. Tropical Medicine and International Health, 20,
830--9. Chick J et al.Â (1988). Advice versus extended treatment for
alcoholism: a controlled study. British Journal of Addiction, 83,
159--70. Chisolm MS and Payne JL (2016). Management of psychotropic
drugs during pregnancy. British Medical Journal, 352, h5918. Chossegros
L et al.Â (2011). Predictive factors of chronic posttraumatic stress
disorder 6 months after a road traffic accident. Accident Analysis and
Prevention, 43, 471--7. Chouinard G et al.Â (1980). Extrapyramidal
symptom rating scale. Canadian Journal of Neurological Science, 7, 233.
Christensen J et al.Â (2013). Prenatal valproate exposure and risk of
autism spectrum disorders and childhood autism. JAMA, 309, 1696--703.
Christmas D et al.Â (2004). Neurosurgery for mental disorder. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 10, 189--99. Christodoulou GN (1991). The
delusional misidentification syndromes. British Journal of Psychiatry,
14, 65--9. Ciompi L (1980). The natural history of schizophrenia in the
long term. British Journal of Psychiatry, 136, 413--20. Cipriani A et
al.Â (2009) Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 12 new-generation
antidepressants: a multiple-treatments meta-analysis. The Lancet, 373,
746--58. Cipriani A, Rendell J and Geddes JR (2010). Olanzapine in the
long-term treatment of bipolar disorder: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 24, 1729--38. Cipriani A
et al.Â (2011). Comparative efficacy and acceptability of antimanic drugs
in acute mania: A multiple-treatments meta-analysis. The Lancet, 378,
1306--15. Cipriani A et al.Â (2013). Lithium in the prevention of suicide
in mood disorders: updated systematic review and meta-analysis. British
Medical Journal, 346, f3646. Cipriani A et al.Â (2016). Comparative
efficacy and tolerability of antidepressants for major depressive
disorder in children and adolescents: a network meta-analysis. Lancet,
S0140-6736, 30385-3. Citrome L (2013). A review of the pharmacology,
efficacy and tolerability of recently approved and upcoming oral
antipsychotics: an evidence-based medicine approach. CNS Drugs, 27,
879--911. Citrome L (2014). Vortioxetine for major depressive disorder:
a systematic review of the efficacy and safety profile for this newly
approved antidepressant---what is the number needed to treat, number
needed to harm and likelihood to be helped or harmed? International
Journal of Clinical Practice, 68, 60--82. Clancy MJ et al.Â (2014). The
prevalence of psychosis in epilepsy: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 14, 75. Clark A (2004). Working with
grieving adults. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 10, 164--70. Clark D
(2011). Implementing NICE guidelines for the psychological treatment of
depression and anxiety disorders: the IAPT experience. International
Review of Psychiatry, 23, 318--27.

809

810

810

References Clark DA, Beck AT (2010). Cognitive theory and therapy of
anxiety and depression: convergence with neurobiological findings.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 418--24. Clark DA and Beck AT (2011).
Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders: Science and practice. Guilford
Press, New York, NY. Clark L and Harrison J (2001). Assessment
instruments. In: W Livesley (ed.) Handbook of Personality Disorders:
theory, research, and treatment. Guilford Press, New York. pp.Â 277--306.
Clark L, Chamberlain SR and Sahakian BJ (2009). Neurocognitive
mechanisms in depression: implications for treatment. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 32, 57--74. Clarke A and Seymour J (2010). 'At the foot of
a very long ladder.' Discussing the end of life with older people and
informal care givers. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 40,
857--69. Clarke K et al.Â (2013). Psychosocial interventions for
perinatal common mental disorders delivered by providers who are not
mental health specialists in low- and middle-income countries: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Medicine, 10, e1001541. Clarke
S et al.Â (2013). Cognitive analytic therapy for personality disorder:
randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 202,
129--34. Clarkin JF et al.Â (1999). Transference-Focused Psychotherapy
for Borderline Personality Disorder Patients. Guilford Press, New York,
NY. Clauw DJ (2014). Fibromyalgia: a clinical review. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 311, 1547--55. Clayton AH et al.Â (2016).
Sexual dysfunction due to psychotropic medications. Psychiatric Clinics
of North America, 39, 427--63. Cleare AJ et al.Â (2015). Evidence-based
guidelines for treating depressive disorders with antidepressants: A
revision of the 2008 British Association for Psychopharmacology
guidelines. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29, 459--525. Cleckley HM
(1964). The Mask of Sanity: an attempt to clarify issues about the
so-called psychopathic personality, 4th edn. Mosby, St Louis, MO.
Clinical Psychiatry Committee (1965). Clinical trial of the treatment of
depression. British Medical Journal, i, 881--6. Clomipramine
Collaborative Study Group (1991). Clomipramine and the treatment of
patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 48, 730--8. Cloninger CR (2009). Assessment of personality.
In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor and JR Geddes (eds.) The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp.Â 78-84. Cloninger CR et al.Â (1988). Genetic heterogeneity and the
classification of alcoholism. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse,
7, 3--16. Cloninger CR et al.Â (1993). A psychobiological model of
temperament and character. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 975--90.
Close H et al.Â (2014). Renal failure in lithium-treated bipolar
disorder: a retrospective cohort study. PloS One, 9, e90169. Coccaro F,
Lee R and Kavoussi RJ (2010). Aggression, suicidality, and intermittent
explosive disorder: serotonergic correlates in personality disorder and
healthy control subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 435--44. Cochrane
AL (1972). Effectiveness and Efficiency: random reflections on health
services. Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust, London.

Cochrane AL (1979). 1931--1971: a critical review with particular
reference to the medical profession. In: Medicines for the Year 2000.
Office of Health Economics, London. pp.Â 1--11. Cohen CI et al.Â (2015).
New perspectives on schizophrenia in later life: implications for
treatment, policy, and research. Lancet Psychiatry, 2, 340--50. Cohen NJ
et al.Â (2015). Adoption. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 273--84. Cohen
P et al.Â (2005). The children in the community study of developmental
course of personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders 19,
466--86. Cohen SC et al.Â (2013). Clinical assessment of Tourette
syndrome and tic disorders. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 37,
997--1007. Cohen-Woods S et al.Â (2013). The current state of play of the
molecular genetics of depression. Psychological Medicine, 43, 673--87.
Coid J and Ullrich S (2010). Antisocial personality disorder is on a
continuum with psychopathy. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 51, 426--33. Coid
J et al.Â (2002). Ethnic differences in prisoners. 1: Criminality and
psychiatric morbidity. British Journal of Psychiatry, 181, 473--80. Coid
J et al.Â (2006). Prevalence and correlates of personality disorder in
Great Britain. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188, 423--31. Coid J et
al.Â (2013). The relationship between delusions and violence: findings
from the East London First Episode Psychosis Study. JAMA Psychiatry, 70,
465--71. Coleman E et al.Â (2012). Standards of care for the health of
transsexual, transgender, and gender-nonconforming people, version 7.
International Journal of Transgenderism, 13, 165--232. Collacott R et
al.Â (1998). Behaviour phenotype for Down's syndrome. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 172, 85--9. Collin G et al.Â (2016). Connectomics in
schizophrenia: from early pioneers to recent brain network findings.
Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 1,
199--208. Collinge J (2009). Prion disease. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen,
JJ Lopez-Ibor, JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd
edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 351--61. Collings S and
Llewellyn G. (2012). Children of parents with intellectual disability:
Facing poor outcomes or faring okay? Journal of Intellectual and
Developmental Disability, 37, 65--82. Collins PY et al.Â (2011). Grand
challenges in global mental health. Nature, 475, 27--30. Collishaw S.
(2015). Annual research review: Secular trends in child and adolescent
mental health. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines, 56, 370--93. Collishaw S et al.Â (2004). Time trends in
adolescent mental health. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
45, 1350--62. Collishaw S et al.Â (2007). Resilience to adult
psychopathology following childhood maltreatment: Evidence from a
community sample. Child Abuse & Neglect, 31, 211--29. Collishaw S et
al.Â (2010). Trends in adolescent emotional problems in England: a
comparison of two national cohorts twenty years apart. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 51, 885--94.

81

References Colom F et al.Â (2009). Group psychoeducation for stabilised
bipolar disorders: 5-year outcome of a randomised clinical trial.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 194, 260--5. Conner KR and Duberstein PR
(2004). Predisposing and precipitating factors for suicide among
alcoholics: empirical review and conceptual integration. Alcoholism:
Clinical and Expermental Research, 28, 6S--17S. Conron KJ et al.Â (2012).
Transgender health in Massachusetts: results from a household
probability sample of adults. American Journal of Public Health, 102,
118--22. CONVERGE consortium (2015). Sparse whole-genome sequencing
identifies two loci for major depressive disorder. Nature, 523, 588--91.
Cook JM, Gallagher-Thompson D and Hepple J (2005). Psychotherapy with
older adults. In: GO Gabbard, JS Beck and J Holmes (eds.) Oxford
Textbook of Psychotherapy. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 381--92.
Cooper C et al.Â (2011). A systematic review of treatments for refractory
depression in older people. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 681--8.
Cooper C et al.Â (2013). Treatment for mild cognitive impairment:
systematic review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 203, 255--64. Cooper
JE (1979). Crisis Admission Units and Emergency Psychiatric Services.
Public Health in Europe, No.Â 2. World Health Organization, Copenhagen.
Cooper JE, Kendell RE and Gurland BJ (1972). Psychiatric Diagnosis in
New York and London. Oxford University Press, London. Cooper PJ et
al.Â (2002). Impact of a mother---infant intervention in an indigent
peri-urban South African context. British Journal of Psychiatry, 180,
76--81. Cooper PJ et al.Â (2009). Improving quality of mother--infant
relationship and infant attachment in socioeconomically deprived
community in South Africa: randomised controlled trial. British Medical
Journal, 338, b974. Cooper S and Greene JDW (2005). The clinical
assessment of the patient with early dementia. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 76, 15--24. Cooper SA and Smiley E (2009).
Prevalence of intellectual disabilities and epidemiology of mental
ill-health in adults with intellectual disabilities. In: MG Gelder, NC
Andreasen, JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr, and JR Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp. 1825--9.
Cooper SJ et al.Â (2016). BAP guidelines on the management of weight
gain, metabolic disturbances and cardiovascular risk associated with
psychosis and antipsychotic drug treatment. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 30, 717--48. Copeland J et al.Â (1999). Depression in
Europe. Geographic distribution among older people. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 174, 312--21. Copeland WE et al.Â (2013). Adult psychiatric
outcomes of bullying and being bullied by peers in childhood and
adolescence. JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 419--26. Copeland WE et al.Â (2015).
Adult functional outcomes of common childhood psychiatric problems: a
prospective, longitudinal study. JAMA Psychiatry, 72, 892--9.

Copen CE et al.Â (2016). Sexual behavior, sexual attraction, and sexual
orientation among adults aged 18--44 in the United States: Data from the
2011--2013 National Survey of Family Growth. National Health Statistics
Reports, 88, 1--14. Coppus A. (2013). People with intellectual
disability: What do we know about adulthood and life expectancy?
Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 18, 6--16. Corbett A et
al.Â (2012). Assessment and treatment of pain in people with dementia.
Nature Reviews Neurology, 8, 264--72. Cordeiro L et al.Â (2010). Clinical
assessment of DSM-IV anxiety disorders in fragile X syndrome: prevalence
and characterization. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 3, 57.
Correll CU, Leucht S and Kane JM (2014). Lower risk for tardive
dyskinesia associated with second-generation antipsychotics: a
systematic review of 1-year studies. American Journal of Psychiatry,
161, 414--25. Coryell W and Young EA (2005). Clinical predictors of
suicide in primary major depressive disorder. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 66, 412--17. Costello E et al.Â (1996). The Great Smoky
Mountains Study of Youth: functional impairment and serious emotional
disturbance. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 1137--43. Costello EJ
and Angold A (2009). Epidemiology of psychiatric disorder in childhood
In: M Gelder et al.Â (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1594--9. Costello EJ and Maughan B (2015).
Annual research review: Optimal outcomes of child and adolescent mental
illness. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines, 56, 324--41. Couldwell A and Stickley T (2007). The Thorn
course: rhetoric and reality. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health
Nursing, 14, 625--34. Cousins DA, Butts K and Young A (2009). The role
of dopamine in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 11, 787--806.
Cousins L and Goodyer IM (2015). Antidepressants and the adolescent
brain. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29, 545--55. Cowen PJ (2015).
Neuroendocrine and neurochemical processes in depression. In: RJ
DeRubies, DR Strunk (eds). The Oxford Handbook of Mood Disorders. OUP,
Oxford. Cowen PJ and Anderson IM (2015). New approaches to treating
resistant depression. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 21, 315--23.
Cowen PJ, Ogilvie AD, Gama J (2005). Efficacy, safety and tolerability
of duloxetine 60 mg once daily in major depression. Current Medical
Research and Opinion, 21(3), 345. Craddock N (2013). Genome-wide
association studies: What a psychiatrist needs to know. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 19, 82--8. Craddock N and Mynors-Wallis L (2014).
Psychiatric diagnosis: impersonal, imperfect and important. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 2, 93--5. Craddock N and Sklar P (2013). Genetics
of bipolar disorder. The Lancet, 381, 1654--62. Crammer J (1990). Asylum
History: Buckinghamshire County Pauper Lunatic Asylum---St Johns.
Gaskell, London. Crawford M and Wessely S (1998). The changing
epidemiology of deliberate self-harm---implications for service
provision. Health Trends, 30, 66--8.

811

812

812

References Crawford MJ et al.Â (2012). Group art therapy as an adjunctive
treatment for people with schizophrenia: multicentre pragmatic
randomised trial. British Medical Journal, 344, e846. Crawford MJ et
al.Â (2012). The prevalence of personality disorder among ethnic
minorities: findings from a national household survey. Personal Mental
Health, 6, 175--82. Crow TJ (1985). The two-syndrome concept: origins
and current status. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 11, 471--86. Crow TJ (2002).
Handedness, language lateralisation and anatomical asymmetry: relevance
of protocadherin XY to hominid speciation and the aetiology of
psychosis. Point of view. British Journal of Psychiatry, 181, 295--7.
Crowe RR (1974). An adoption study of antisocial personality. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 31, 785--91. Crowley TJ et al.Â (2015).
Substance-related and addictive disorders. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds).
Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
pp.Â 931--49. Cuijpers P et al.Â (2013). The efficacy of psychotherapy and
pharmacotherapy in treating depressive and anxiety disorders: A
meta-analysis of direct comparisons. World Psychiatry, 12, 137--48.
Cuijpers P et al.Â (2014a). Adding psychotherapy to antidepressant
medication in depression and anxiety disorders: A metaanalysis. World
Psychiatry, 13, 56--67. Cuijpers P et al.Â (2014b). Psychological
treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: A meta-analysis. Clinical
Psychology Review, 34, 130--40. Cullum S (2013). Management of dementia.
In: T Dening, A Thomas (eds). Oxford Textbook of Old Age Psychiatry, 2nd
edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Cutajar MC et al.Â (2010). Suicide
and fatal drug overdose in child sexual abuse victims: a historical
cohort study. Medical Journal of Australia, 192, 184--7. Cutajar MC et
al.Â (2010). Psychopathology in a large cohort of sexually abused
children followed up to 43 years. Child Abuse & Neglect, 34, 813--22.
Cuthbert BN and Insel TR (2013). Toward the future of psychiatric
diagnosis: the seven pillars of RDoC. BMC Medicine, 11, 126. Czajkowski
N et al.Â (2011). The structure of genetic and environmental risk factors
for phobias in women. Psychological Medicine, 41, 1987--95. Da Costa RT,
Sardinha A and Nardi AE (2008). Virtual reality exposure in the
treatment of fear of flying. Aviation Space and Environmental Medicine,
79, 899--903. Dager SR et al.Â (2008). Research applications of magnetic
resonance spectroscopy to investigate psychiatric disorders. Topics in
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 19, 81--96. Danese A et al (2015) Child
maltreatment. In: A. Thapar et al. (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 364--75. Daniels AM et
al.Â (2014). Approaches to enhancing the early detection of autism
spectrum disorders: A systematic review of the literature. Journal of
the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 53, 141--52.
Danysz W and Parsons C (2012). Alzheimer's disease, betaamyloid,
glutamate, NMDA receptors and memantine--- searching for the
connections. British Journal of Pharmacology, 167, 324--52.

Darwish M, Atlantis E, Mohamed-Taysir T (2014). Psychological outcomes
after hysterectomy for benign conditions: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology and
Reproductive Biology, 174, 5--19. da Silva J et al.Â (2013). Affective
disorders and risk of developing dementia: systematic review. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 177--86. Datta V and Cleare AJ (2009).
Recent advances in bipolar disorder pharmacotherapy: focus on bipolar
depression and rapid cycling. Expert Review of Clinical Pharmacology, 2,
423--34. Dauwan M et al.Â (2016). Exercise improves clinical symptoms,
quality of life, global functioning, and depression in schizophrenia: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 42,
588--99. David A et al.Â (1995). Are there neurological and sensory risk
factors for schizophrenia? Schizophrenia Research, 14, 247--51. David AS
(2009a). Basic concepts in neuropsychiatry. In: David AS, Fleminger S,
Kopelman M et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry, 4th edn. Wiley
Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 3--27. David AS (2009b). Clinical assessment. In:
David AS, Fleminger S, Kopelman M et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic
Psychiatry, 4th edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 103--63. David AS and
Kopelman MD (2009). Neuropsychology in relation to psychiatry. In: David
AS, Fleminger S, Kopelman M, et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry,
4th edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 29--102. David AS et al.Â (2009)
Lishman's Organic Psychiatry, 4th edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford. David AS
and Prince M (2005). Psychosis following head injury: a critical review.
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 76(Suppl.1), 153--60.
Davidson K (2000). Cognitive Therapy for Personality Disorders. A guide
for clinicians. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford. Davies G et al.Â (2003). A
systematic review and meta-analysis of Northern Hemisphere season of
birth studies in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 29, 587--93.
Davies LE and Oliver C. (2014). The purported association between
depression, aggression, and self-injury in people with intellectual
disability: A critical review of the literature. American Journal on
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 119, 452--71. Davies SJC,
Esler M and Nutt DJ (2010). Anxiety---bridging the heart/mind divide.
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 24, 633--8. Davis DHJ et al.Â (2012).
Delirium is a strong risk factor for dementia in the oldest-old: a
population-based cohort study. Brain, 135, 2809--16. Davis DHJ et
al.Â (2017). Association of delirium with cognitive decline in late life:
a neuropathologic study of 3 populationbased cohort studies. JAMA
Psychiatry, 74, 244--51. Davison K and Bagley CR (1969).
Schizophrenia-like psychoses associated with organic disorders of the
central nervous system: a review of the literature. In: RN Herrington,
(ed). British Journal of Psychiatry Special Publication No.4, Current
Problems in Neuropsychiatry. Headley, Ashford. Dawson J (2005).
Community Treatment Orders: International comparisons. Otago University,
Dunedin. Dawson J and Burns T (2016). Reducing legal barriers to smooth
transition between forensic and general mental health care.

813

References In: L Wooton and A Buchanan (eds.) Care of the Mentally
Disordered Offender in the Community. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
de la Torre-Ubieta L et al.Â (2016). Advancing the understanding of
autism disease mechanisms through genetics. Nature Medicine, 22,
345--61. De la Tourette G (1885). Etude sur une affection nerveuse
valuation par l'incoordination motrice accompagnÃ©e d'Ã©cholalie et de
coprolalie. Archives de Neurologie, 9, 19--42. DeMaso DR et al.Â (2009).
Practice parameter for the psychiatric assessment and management of
physically ill children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy
of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 48, 213--33. Department of Health
(2012). Suicide Prevention Strategy for England. Policy Paper,
Department of Health, London. de Wilde EJ (2000). Adolescent suicidal
behaviour: a general population perspective. In: K Hawton and K van
Heeringen (eds.) The International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted
Suicide. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. pp.Â 249--60. Dean K et
al.Â (2007). Predictors of violent victimization amongst those with
psychosis. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 116, 345--53. Deary IJ,
Johnson W and Houlihan LM (2009). Genetic foundations of human
intelligence. Human Genetics, 126, 215--32. Deb S, Thomas M and Bright C
(2001). Mental disorder in adults with intellectual disability: 2. The
rate of behaviour disorder among a community-based population aged
between 16-- 64 years. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 45,
506--14. Debast I et al.Â (2014). Personality traits and personality
disorders in late middle and old age: do they remain stable? A
literature review. Clinical Gerontologist, 37, 253--71. De Hert M et
al.Â (2015). The use of continuous treatment versus placebo or
intermittent treatment strategies in stabilized patients with
schizophrenia: a systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized
controlled trials with first- and secondgeneration antipsychotics. CNS
Drugs, 29, 637--58. De J and Wand APF (2015). Delirium screening: a
systematic review of delirium screening tools in hospitalized patients.
Gerontologist, 55, 1079--99. DeLong MR and Wichmann T (2007). Circuits
and circuit disorders of the basal ganglia. Archives of Neurology, 64,
20--4. Demirkan A et al.Â (2013). Genetic risk profiles for depression
and anxiety in adult and elderly cohorts. Molecular Psychiatry, 16,
773--83. Dempster E et al.Â (2013). Epigenetic studies of schizophrenia:
progress, predicaments, and promise for the future. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 39, 11--16. Dening T (2013). Principles of service provision
in old age psychiatry. In: T Dening, A Thomas (eds). Oxford Textbook of
Old Age Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Denollet J
et al.Â (2010). A general propensity to psychological distress affects
cardiovascular outcomes: evidence from research on the Type D
(Distressed) personality profile. Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality
and Outcome, 3, 546--57. Department of Health (1990). The Care Programme
Approach for People with a Mental Illness Referred to the Special
Psychiatric Services. Department of Health, London. Department of Health
(1999). National Service Framework for Mental Health: Modern standards
and service models. Department of Health, London.

Department of Health (2000). The NHS Plan: A plan for investment, a plan
for reform. Department of Health, London. Department of Health (2009).
Living Well with Dementia: a National Dementia Strategy. www.dh.gov. uk/
en/ Publicationsandstatistics/ Publications/
PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_094058. Derby IM (1933).
Manic-depressive 'exhaustion' deaths. Psychiatric Quarterly, 7, 435--9.
Dervic K et al.Â (2004). Religious affiliation and suicide attempt.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 2303--8. Detering KM et al.Â (2010)
The impact of advance care planning on end of life care in elderly
patients: randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 340,
c1345. Devenand DP (2002). Comorbid psychiatric disorders in late life
depression. Biological Psychiatry, 52, 236--46. Devenand DP et
al.Â (2015). Olfactory deficits predict cognitive decline and Alzheimer
dementia in an urban community. Neurology, 84, 182--9. Devereaux PJ et
al.Â (2002). Double Blind, you have been voted off the Island! Evidence
Based Medicine Health Notebook, 5, 36--7. de Vos J et al.Â (2014).
Meta-analysis on the efficacy of pharmacotherapy versus placebo on
anorexia nervosa. Journal of Eating Disorders, 2, 27. Dhejne C et
al.Â (2014). An analysis of all applications for sex reassignment surgery
in Sweden, 1960--2010: prevalence, incidence, and regrets. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 43, 1535--45. Dickens CM et al.Â (2006). Contribution of
depression and anxiety to impaired health-related quality of life
following first myocardial infarction. British Journal of Psychiatry,
189, 367--72. Dickey CC, McCarley RW and Shenton ME (2002). The brain in
schizotypal personality disorder: a review of structural MRI and CT
findings. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 10, 1--15. Dilley MD and
Fleminger S (2009). Intracranial infections. In: David A, Fleminger S,
Kopelman M et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry. Wiley-Blackwell,
Oxford. pp.Â 397--472. Diniz BS et al.Â (2013). Late-life depression and
risk of vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis of community-based cohort studies. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 202, 329--35. Dixon LB and Stroup ST (2015). Medications for
schizophrenia: making a good start. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172,
209--11. Doherty JL and Owen MJ (2014). Genomic insights into the
overlap between psychiatric disorders: Implications for research and
clinical practice. Genomic Medicine, 6, 29. Dolan M and Bishay N (1996).
The effectiveness of cognitive therapy in the treatment of non-psychotic
morbid jealousy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 588--93. Dolan M et
al.Â (2002). Serotonergic and cognitive impairment in impulsive
aggressive personality disordered offenders: are there implications for
treatment? Psychological Medicine, 32, 105--17. Dold M et al.Â (2013).
Benzodiazepine augmentation of antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia: A
meta-analysis and Cochrane review of randomized controlled trials.
European Neuropsychopharmacology, 23, 1023--33. Done DJ et al.Â (1994).
Childhood antecedents of schizophrenia and affective illness: social
adjustment at ages 7 and 11. British Medical Journal, 309, 699--703.

813

814

814

References Dorahy MJ et al.Â (2014). Dissociative identity disorder: an
empirical overview. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
48, 402--17. D'Orban PT (1979). Women who kill their children. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 134, 560--71. Dorph-Petersen K-A and Lewis DA
(2011). Stereological approaches to identifying neuropathology in
psychosis. Biological Psychiatry, 69, 113--26. Dosen A (2009).
Psychiatric and behaviour disorders among adult persons with
intellectual disability. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr,
and Geddes JR (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1854--60. Doty RL (2012). Olfactory
dysfunction in Parkinson disease. Nature Reviews Neurology, 8, 329--39.
Dougherty DD et al.Â (2002). Prospective long-term follow-up of 44
patients who received cingulotomy for treatment-refractory
obsessive-compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159,
269--75. Dowden C, Antonowiez D and Andrews DA (2003). The effectiveness
of relapse prevention with offenders: a meta-analysis. International
Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 47, 516--28.
Drake RE, Mueser KT and Brunette MF (2007). Management of persons with
co-occurring severe mental illness and substance use disorder: program
implications. World Psychiatry, 6, 131--6. Drescher J et al.Â (2012).
Minding the body: Situating gender identity diagnoses in the ICD-11.
International Review of Psychiatry, 24, 568--77. Drescher J et
al.Â (2016). Gender incongruence of childhood in the ICD-11:
controversies, proposal, and rationale. Lancet Psychiatry, 3, 297--304.
Dressing H, Kuehner C and Gass P (2006). The epidemiology and
characteristics of stalking. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 19, 395--9.
Driessen E et al.Â (2010). Does pre-treatment severity moderate the
efficacy of psychological treatment of adult outpatient depression? A
meta-analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78,
668--80. Driessen E et al.Â (2015). The efficacy of short-term
psychodynamic psychotherapy for depression: A meta-analysis update.
Clinical Psychology Review, 42, 1--15. Driver DI, Gogtay N and Rapoport
JL (2013) Childhood onset schizophrenia and early onset schizophrenia
spectrum disorders. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North
America, 22(4), 539--5. Druss BG et al.Â (2014). Randomized trial of an
electronic personal health record for patients with serious mental
illnesses. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 360--8. Ducat L et
al.Â (2014). The mental health comorbidities of diabetes. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 312, 691--2. Duffy RM and Kelly BD (2015).
Psychiatric assessment and treatment of survivors of torture. Advances
in Psychiatric Treatment, 21, 106--15. Dugbartey AT (1998).
Neurocognitive aspects of hypothyroidism. Archives of Internal Medicine,
158, 1413--18. Duman RS (eds.) (2009). Neurochemical Theories of
Depression. Oxford University Press, New York. Dunbar HF (1954).
Emotions and Bodily Changes. Columbia University Press, New York.

Dunn M et al.Â (2014). The use of leverage in community mental health:
Ethical guidance for practitioners. International Journal of Social
Psychiatry, 60, 759--65. Duric V and Duman RS (2013). Depression and
treatment response: Dynamic interplay of signaling pathways and altered
neural processes. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 70, 39--53.
Durkheim E (1951). Suicide: A study in sociology (transl. JA Spaulding
and G Simpson). Free Press, Glencoe, IL. Duyckaerts C et al.Â (2009).
Classification and basic pathology of Alzheimer disease. Acta
Neuropathologica, 118, 5--36. Dwyer J and Reid S (2004). Ganser's
syndrome. Lancet, 364, 471--3. Eastwood S and Bisson JI (2008).
Management of factitious disorders: a systematic review. Psychotherapy
and Psychosomatics, 77, 209--18. Eaton J et al.Â (2011). Scale up of
services for mental health in low-income and middle-income countries.
Lancet, 378, 1592--603. Ecker C et al.Â (2015). Neuroimaging in autism
spectrum disorder: Brain structure and function across the lifespan.
Lancet Neurology, 14, 1121--34. Edelstyn NMJ and Oyebode F (1999). A
review of the phenomenology and cognitive neuropsychological origins of
the Capgras syndrome. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14,
48--59. Edwards G (1977). Alcoholism: a controlled trial of 'treatment'
and 'advice'. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 38, 1004--31. Edwards J,
McGorry PD and Pennell K (2000). Models of early intervention in
psychosis: an analysis of service approaches. In: Birchwood M, Fowler D
and Jackson C (eds.) Early Intervention in Psychosis: a guide to
concepts, evidence and interventions. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
pp.Â 281--314. Egan MF et al.Â (2001). Effect of COMT Val108--158 Met
genotype on frontal lobe function and risk for schizophrenia.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 98, 6917--22. Egger HL and Angold A (2006). Common emotional
and behavioral disorders in preschool children: presentation, nosology,
and epidemiology. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47(3-4),
313--37. Ehlers A (2009). Post-traumatic stress disorder. In: MG Geder
et al.Â (eds). New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, OUP, Oxford, pp.
700--13. Ehlers A, Harvey AG and Bryant RA (2009). Stress-related and
adjustment disorders. In: MG Gelder et al.Â (eds). New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, OUP, Oxford, pp.Â 693--700. Ehlers A, Ehring T and Kleim B
(2012). Information processing in posttraumatic stress disorder. The
Oxford Handbook of Traumatic Stress Disorders, OUP, New York,
pp.Â 191--218. Einfeld SL, Ellis LA and Emerson E (2011). Comorbidity of
intellectual disability and mental disorder in children and adolescents:
A systematic review. Journal of Intellectual and Developmental
Disability, 36(2), 137--43. Eisenberg L (1986). Mindlessness and
brainlessness in psychiatry. British Journal of Psychiatry, 148,
497--508. Eisler I et al.Â (2015). Family interventions. In: A. Thapar et
al. (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, pp.Â 510--20.

815

References Ekers D et al.Â (2014). Behavioural activation for depression:
An update of meta-analysis of effectiveness and sub group analysis. PLoS
One, 9, e100100. Ellison-Wright I, Bullmore E (2010). Anatomy of bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia: a meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research,
117, 1--12. Ellison-Wright Z and Boardman C (2015). Diagnosis and
management of ASD in children and adolescents. Progress in Neurology and
Psychiatry, 19, 28--32. Eng B et al.Â (2013). A guide to intellectual
disability psychiatry assessments in the community. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 19, 429--36. Engel GL (1977). The need for a new
medical model: a challenge for biomedicine. Science, 196, 129--96.
Engels et al.Â (2014). Clinical pain in schizophrenia. A systematic
review. Journal of Pain, 15, 457--67. Ennis L et al.Â (2014).
Collaborative development of an electronic Personal Health Record for
people with severe and enduring mental health problems. BMC Psychiatry,
14, 305. Epping EA et al.Â (2016). Longitudinal psychiatric symptoms in
prodromal Huntington's disease: a decade of data. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 173, 184--92. Eranti SV et al.Â (2013). Gender difference in
age of onset of schizophrenia: a meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine,
43, 155--67. Ernst C, Mechawar N and Turcecki G (2009). Suicide
neurobiology. Progress in Neurobiology, 89, 315--33. Eronen M, Hakola P
and Tiihonen J (1996). Mental disorders and homicidal behaviour in
Finland. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 497--501. Erskine HE et
al.Â (2013). Research review: Epidemiological modelling of
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and conduct disorder for the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 54, 1263--74. Escriba PV, Ozaita A and Garcia-Sevilla JA
(2004). Increased mRNA expressions of alpha2A-adrenoceptors, serotonin
receptors and mu-opioid receptors in the brains of suicide victims.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 1512--21. Espie CA and Kyle SD (2009).
Primary insomnia: an overview of practical management using cognitive
behavioural techniques. Sleep Medicine Clinics, 4, 559--69. Essen-MÃ¸ller
E (1971). Suggestions for further improvement of the international
classification of mental disorders. Psychological Medicine, 1, 308--11.
Essex B, Doig R and Renshaw J (1990). Pilot study of records of shared
care for people with mental illnesses. British Medical Journal, 300,
1442. Eysenck HJ (1970a). The Structure of Human Personality. Methuen,
London. Eysenck HJ (1970b). A dimensional system of psychodiagnosis. In:
AR Mahrer (ed.) New Approaches to Personality Classification. Columbia
University Press, New York. pp.Â 169--207. Eysenck HJ and Eysenck SBG
(1976). Psychoticism as a Dimension of Personality. Hodder and
Stoughton, London. Fabrega H (2000). Culture, spirituality and
psychiatry. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 13, 525--53. Fairburn C
(1999). Risk factors for anorexia nervosa: three integrated case-control
comparisons. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 468--76.

Fairburn CG (2013). Overcoming Binge Eating, 2nd edn. Guilford Press,
New York, NY. Fairburn CG and Harrison PJ (2003). Eating disorders.
Lancet, 361, 407--16. Fairburn CG et al.Â (1999). A cognitive-behavioural
theory of anorexia nervosa. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 1--13.
Fairburn CG et al.Â (2009a). Transdiagnostic cognitivebehavioural therapy
for patients with eating disorders: a two-site trial with 60-week
follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 311--19. Fairburn CG et
al.Â (2009b). Bulimia nervosa. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor
JJJr and Geddes JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn.
Oxford Univesity Press, Oxford, pp.Â 800--11. Fairburn CG et al.Â (2013)
Enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy for adults with anorexia nervosa.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, 2--8. Fairburn CG et al.Â (2015). A
transdiagnostic comparison of enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy
(CBT-E) and interpersonal psychotherapy in the treatment of eating
disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 70, 64--71. Falkai P and
Bogerts B. Neuropathology (2009). In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ
Lopez-Ibor, JR Geddes (eds). New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. OUP,
Oxford, pp.Â 177--85. Fanous AH and Kendler KS (2004). The genetic
relationship of personality to major depression and schizophrenia.
Neurotoxicity Research, 6, 43--50. Faris REL and Dunham HW (1939).
Mental Disorders in Urban Areas. Chicago University Press, Chicago, IL.
Farrington DP (2002). Key results from the first forty years of the
Cambridge study in delinquent development. In: TP Thornberry and MD Kern
(eds.) Taking Stock of Delinquency: An overview of findings from
contemporary longitudinal studies. Kluwer/Plenum, New York. Farrington
DP (2009). Psychosocial causes of offending. In: MG Gelder, NC
Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, and J Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.1908--16. Farrington DP
and Welsh BC (2008). Saving Children from a Life of Crime: Early risk
factors and effective interventions. Oxford University Press, New York.
Farrington DP et al.Â (1988). Are there any successful men from
criminogenic backgrounds? Psychiatry, 51, 116--30. Fazel M (2015).
Methylphenidate for ADHD. British Medical Journal, 351, h5875. Fazel M,
Wheeler J and Danesh J (2005). Prevalence of serious mental disorder in
7000 refugees resettled in western countries: a systematic review.
Lancet, 365, 1309--14. Fazel M et al.Â (2012a). Mental health of
displaced and refugee children resettled in high-income countries: risk
and protective factors. Lancet, 379, 266--82. Fazel M et al.Â (2014a).
Mental health interventions in schools 1: Mental health interventions in
schools in high-income countries. Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 377--87. Fazel M
et al.Â (2014b). Mental health interventions in schools in low-income and
middle-income countries. Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 388--98. Fazel M et
al.Â (2015). Refugee, asylum-seeking and internally displaced children
and adolescents. In: M Rutter et al.Â (eds.)

815

816

816

References Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 6th edn. Blackwell, Oxford.
pp. 573--85. Fazel S and Danesh J (2002). Serious mental disorder in
23,000 prisoners: a systematic review of 62 surveys. Lancet, 359,
545--50. Fazel S and Grann M (2004). Psychiatric morbidity among
homicide offenders: a Swedish population study. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 161, 2129--31. Fazel S and Grann M (2006) The population
impact of severe mental illness on violent crime. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 163, 1397--1403. Fazel S et al.Â (2001). Hidden psychiatric
morbidity in elderly prisoners. British Journal of Psychiatry, 179,
535--9. Fxazel S, Vassos E and Danesh J (2002). Prevalence of epilepsy
in prisoners: systematic review. British Medical Journal, 324, 1495.
Fazel S et al.Â (2005). Suicides in male prisoners in England and Wales,
1978--2003. Lancet, 366, 1301--2. Fazel S et al.Â (2007). Severe mental
illness and risk of sexual offending in men: a case-control study based
on Swedish national registers. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 68,
588--96. Fazel S et al.Â (2009a). Schizophrenia and violence: systematic
review and meta-analysis. PloS Med 6(8): e1000120. Fazel S et
al.Â (2009b). Neurological disorders and violence: a systematic review
and meta-analysis with a focus on epilepsy and traumatic brain injury.
Journal of Neurology, 256, 1591--602. Fazel S et al.Â (2011a). Risk of
violent crime in individuals with epilepsy and traumatic brain injury: A
35-year Swedish population study. PLoS Medicine, 8, e1001150. Fazel S et
al.Â (2011b). Prison suicide in 12 countries: an ecological study of 861
suicides during 2003--2007. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 46, 191--5. Fazel S et al.Â (2011c). Use of risk assessment
instruments to predict violence and antisocial behaviour in 73 samples
involving 24 827 people: systematic review and meta-analysis. British
Medical Journal, 345, e4692. Fazel S et al.Â (2012). Use of risk
assessment instruments to predict violence and antisocial behaviour in
73 samples involving 24 827 people: systematic review and meta-analysis.
British Medical Journal, 345, e4692. Fazel S et al.Â (2013). Premature
mortality in epilepsy and the role of psychiatric comorbidity: a total
population study. Lancet, 382, 1646--54. Fazel S et al.Â (2014a). Violent
crime, suicide, and premature mortality in patients with schizophrenia
and related disorders: a 38-year total population study in Sweden.
Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 44--54. Fazel S et al.Â (2014b). Suicide, fatal
injuries, and other causes of premature mortality in patients with
traumatic brain injury: a 41-year Swedish population study. JAMA
Psychiatry, 71, 326--33. Fazel S et al.Â (2014c). The health of the
homeless in high-income countries: descriptive epidemiology and risk
factors. Lancet, 384, 1529--40. Fearon P et al.Â (2006). Incidence of
schizophrenia and other psychoses in ethnic minority groups in three
English cities: results from the MRC ÃSOP study. Psychological Medicine,
36, 1541--50. Feighner et al.Â (1972). Diagnostic criteria for use in
psychiatric research. Archives of General Psychiatry, 26, 57--63.

Feinstein A et al.Â (2014). The link between multiple sclerosis and
depression. Nature Reviews Neurology, 10, 507--17. Fergusson DM, Horwood
LJ and Lynskey MT (1993). Prevalence and comorbidity of DSM-III-R
diagnoses in a birth cohort of 15-year-olds. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 32, 1127--34. Fergusson DM,
Horwood LJ and Boden JM (2009). Reactions to abortion and subsequent
mental health. British Journal of Psychiatry, 195, 420--6. Fergusson DM
et al.Â (2012). Life stress, 5-HTTLPR and mental disorder. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 198, 129--35. Fersum K et al.Â (2013). Efficacy of
classification-based cognitive functional therapy in patients with
non-specific chronic low back pain: a randomized controlled trial.
European Journal of Pain, 17, 916--28. Fiedorowicz JG et al.Â (2011).
Subthreshold hypomanic symptoms in progression from unipolar major
depression to bipolar depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168,
40--8. Fiest KM et al.Â (2013). Depression in epilepsy. A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Neurology, 80, 590--9. Fineberg NA et
al.Â (2014). New developments in human neurocognition: Clinical, genetic,
and brain imaging correlates of impulsivity and compulsivity. CNS
Spectrums, 19, 69--89. Fink M, Shorter E and Taylor MA (2010). Catatonia
is not schizophrenia: Kraepelin's error and the need to recognize
catatonia as an independent syndrome in medical nomenclature.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 314--20. Finnerup NB et al.Â (2015).
Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in adults: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet Neurology, 14, 162--73. Finney GR (2009). Normal
pressure hydrocephalus. International Review of Neurobiology, 84,
263--81. Fioritti A, Lo RL and Melega V (1997). Reform said or done? The
case of Emilia-Romagna within the Italian psychiatric context. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 94--8. Firn M et al.Â (2012). A dismantling
study of assertive outreach services: comparing activity and outcomes
following replacement with the FACT model. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 48, 997--1003. First MB et al.Â (1997).
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders
(SCID-II). American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC. Fish FJ
(1962). Schizophrenia. John Wright, Bristol. Fiske A et al.Â (2009).
Depression in older adults. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 5,
363--89. Flament MF and Robaey P. (2009). Obsessive-compulsive disorder
and tics in children and adolescents. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ
Lopez-Ibor, JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1680--93. Fleminger S (2009). Head injury.
In: AS David, S Fleminger, MD Kopelman, S Lovestone, JDC Mellers (eds).
Lishman's Organic Psychiatry, 4th edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford,
pp.Â 167--279. Fleminger S (2009). Cerebrovascular disorders. In: David
AS, Fleminger S, Kopelman M et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry,
4th edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 473--542. Foley K-R et al.Â (2014).
Relationship between family quality of life and day occupations of young
people with Down syndrome. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 49, 1455--65.

871

References Folstein MF, Folstein SE and McHugh PR (1975). 'Mini-mental
state'. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients
for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12, 189--98.
Fombonne E (2009). Epidemiology of pervasive developmental disorders.
Pediatric Research, 65(6), 591--98. Fonagy P and KÃ¤chele H (2009).
Psychoanalysis and other longterm dynamic psychotherapies. In: Gelder M,
Andreasen N, Lopez-Ibor J, Geddes J (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1337--50. Fonagy P and
Target M (2009). Psychodynamic child psychotherapy. In: MG Gelder, NC
Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1769--77. Forneris CA
et al.Â (2013). Interventions to prevent post-traumatic stress disorder:
A systematic review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 44,
635--50. Forti-Buratti MA et al.Â (2016). Psychological treatments for
depression in pre-adolescent children (12 years and younger): systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. European Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 25, 1045--54. Fossey J et al.Â (2006). Effect
of enhanced psychosocial care on antipsychotic use in nursing home
residents with severe dementia: cluster randomized trial. British
Medical Journal, 332, 756--758A. Foster T, Gillespie K and McClelland R
(1997). Mental disorders and suicide in Northern Ireland. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 447--52. Foulkes SH and Lewis E (1944).
Group analysis: a study in the treatment of groups on psychoanalytic
lines. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 20, 175--82. Fraguas D et
al.Â (2014). Duration of untreated psychosis predicts functional and
clinical outcome in children and adolescents with first-episode
psychosis: A 2-year longitudinal study. Schizophrenia Research, 152,
130--8. Frances AJ and Nardo JM (2013). ICD-11 should not repeat the
mistakes made by DSM-5. Br J Psychiatry, 1, 1--2. Frank E, Kupfer DJ and
Perel JM (1990). Three-year outcomes of maintenance therapies in
recurrent depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1053--9. Frank
JD (1967). Persuasion and Healing. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD.
Franko DL et al.Â (2013). A longitudinal investigation of mortality in
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry,
170, 917--25. Fraser LM, O'Carroll RE and Ebmeier KP (2008). The effect
of electroconvulsive therapy on autobiographical memory: a systematic
review. The Journal of ECT, 24, 10--17. Frazer KA, Murrasy SS, Schork NJ
and Topol EJ (2009) Human genetic variation and its contribution to
complex traits. Nature Reviews Genetics, 10, 241--51. Freeman CP (2013).
Cognitive adverse effects of ECT. In: J Waite, A Eaton (eds.) The ECT
Handbook. RCPsych Publications, London. pp.Â 76--86. Freeman D and Garety
P (2014). Advances in understanding and treating persecutory delusions:
a review. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 49, 1179--89.

Freeman W and Watts JW (1942). Psychosurgery. Thomas, Springfield, IL.
Freemantle N (2004). Is NICE delivering the goods? British Medical
Journal, 329, 1003. Freud S (1917). Mourning and melancholia. In: The
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works, Vol. 14. Hogarth
Press, London. pp.Â 243--58. Friedman JI et al.Â (2014). Pharmacological
treatments of nonsubstance-withdrawal delirium: a systematic review of
prospective trials. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 151--9.
Friedman M and Rosenman RH (1959). Association of specific behaviour
pattern with blood and cardiovascular findings. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 169, 1286--96. Frisell T et al.Â (2011). Violent
crime runs in families: a total population study of 12.5 million
individuals. Psychological Medicine, 41, 97--105. Frith C (1996).
Neuropsychology of schizophrenia: what are the implications of
intellectual and experiential abnormalities for the neurobiology of
schizophrenia? British Medical Bulletin, 52, 618--26. Fromm-Reichmann F
(1948). Notes on the development of treatment of schizophrenia by
psychoanalytic psychotherapy. Psychiatry, 11, 263--73. FrÃ¼hauf S et
al.Â (2013). Efficacy of psychological interventions for sexual
dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 42, 915--33. Fukuda K et al.Â (1994). Chronic fatigue syndrome:
a comprehensive approach to its definition and management. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 121, 953--9. Fuhrmann D et al.Â (2015). Adolescence as
a sensitive period of brain development. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
19, 558--66. Fulford K, Peile E and Caroll H (2012). Essential
Values-Based Practice. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Fulford
KWM (1989). Moral Theory and Medical Practice. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge. Fulton M and Winokur G (1993). A comparative study of
paranoid and schizoid personality disorders. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 150, 1363--7. Furukawa TA (2004). Meta-analyses and
mega-trials: neither is the infallible, universal standard. Evidence
Based Medicine Health Notebook, 7, 34--5. Fusar-Poli P et al.Â (2013a).
The psychosis high-risk state. A comprehensive state-of-the-art review.
JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 107--20. Fusar-Poli P et al.Â (2013b). Progressive
brain changes in schizophrenia related to antipsychotic treatment? A
meta-analysis of longitudinal MRI studies. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 37, 1680--91. Fusar-Poli et al.Â (2015).
Treatments of negative symptoms in schizophrenia: meta-analysis of 168
randomized placebocontrolled trials. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 41, 892--9.
Fusar-Poli P et al.Â (2016). Prognosis of brief psychotic episodes. A
meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 73, 211--20. Fyer AJ et al.Â (1995).
Specificity in familial aggregation of phobic disorders. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 52, 564--73. Fyer MR et al.Â (1988). Co-morbidity of
borderline personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45,
348--52. Gabbard G (2007). Personality Disorders. Gabbard's treatment of
psychiatric disorders, 4th edn. APPI, Washington DC.

817

81

818

References Gage S et al.Â (2015). Association between cannabis and
psychosis: epidemiologic evidence. Biological Psychiatry, 79, 549--56.
Gajalakshmi V and Peto R (2007). Suicide rates in rural Tamil Nadu,
South India: verbal autopsy of 39 000 deaths in 1997-- 98. International
Journal of Epidemiology, 36, 203--7. Galappathie N and Khan ST (2016).
End-of-life care in psychiatry: 'one chance to get it right.' BJPsych
Bulletin 40, 38--40. Galimbeti D et al.Â (2015). Psychiatric symptoms in
frontotemporal dementia: epidemiology, phenotypes, and differential
diagnosis. Biological Psychiatry, 78, 684--92. Galletly C et al.Â (2016).
Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists clinical
practice guidelines for the management of schizophrenia and related
disorders. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 50,
410--72. Games D et al.Â (1995). Alzheimer-type neuropathology in
transgenic mice overexpressing V717F beta-amyloid precursor protein.
Nature, 373, 523--7. Gandaglia G et al.Â (2014). A systematic review of
the association between erectile dysfunction and cardiovascular disease.
European Urology, 65, 968--78. Gannon TA and Rose MR (2008). Female
child sexual offenders: towards integrating theory and practice.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 13, 442--61. Garber HL (1988). The
Milwaukee Project: Preventing mental retardation in children at risk.
American Association on Mental Retardation, Washington, DC. Gardner W et
al.Â (1993). Two scales for measuring patients perceptions for coercion
during mental-hospital admission. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 11,
307--21. Garety PA and Freeman D (2013). The past and future of
delusions research: from the inexplicable to the treatable. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 203, 327--33. Garner M et al.Â (2009). Research in
anxiety disorders: from the bench to the bedside. European
Neuropsychopharmacolgy, 19, 381--90. Garralda ME et al.Â (2015).
Somatoform and related disorders. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
pp.Â 1035--54. Gartlehner G et al.Â (2008). Comparative benefits and harms
of second-generation antidepressants: background paper for the American
College of Physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine, 149, 734--50. Gath A
(1978). Down's Syndrome and the Family. Academic Press, London. Gath A
and McCarthy J (2009). Families with a member with intellectual
disability and their needs. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr
and JR Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1883--6. Gath D, Cooper P and Day A
(1982). Hysterectomy and psychiatric disorder: 1. Levels of psychiatric
morbidity before and after hysterectomy. British Journal of Psychiatry,
140, 335--42. Gaugler JE et al.Â (2009). Predictors of change in
caregiver burden and depressive symptoms following nursing home
admission. Psychology and Aging, 24(20), 385--96. Gaupp R (1974). The
scientific significance of the case of Ernst Wagner. In: SR Hirsch and M
Shepherd (eds.) Themes and Variations in European Psychiatry. John
Wright and Sons, Bristol.

Gauron EF and Dickinson JK (1966). Diagnostic decision making in
psychiatry. Archives of General Psychiatry, 14, 225--32. Gavin NI et
al.Â (2005). Perinatal depression: a systematic review of prevalence and
incidence. Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 106, 1071--83. Gazzaniga MS
(2000). Cerebral specialization and interhemispheric communication. Does
the corpus callosum enable the human condition? Brain, 123, 1293--326.
Geddes J (1999). Asking structured and focused clinical questions:
essential first step of evidence-based practice. Evidence Based Mental
Health, 2, 35--6. Geddes JR et al.Â (2003). Relapse prevention with
antidepressant drug treatment in depressive disorders: a systematic
review. Lancet, 361, 653--61. Geddes JR et al.Â (2004). Long-term lithium
therapy for bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161,
217--22. Geddes JR and Miklowitz DJ (2013). Treatment of bipolar
disorder. The Lancet, 381, 1672--82. Geddes JR et al.Â (2009).
Lamotrigine for treatment of bipolar depression: independent
meta-analysis and meta-regression of individual patient data from five
randomized trials. British Journal of Psychiatry, 194, 4--9. Geddes JR
et al.Â (2016). Comparative evaluation of quetiapine plus lamotrigine
combination versus quetiapine monotherapy (and folic acid versus
placebo) in bipolar depression (CEQUEL): a 2 Ã 2 factorial randomized
trial. Lancet Psychiatry, 3, 31--9. Gelauff J et al.Â (2014). The
prognosis of functional (psychogenic) motor symptoms. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 85, 220--6. Gelder MG (1986).
Neurosis: another tough old word. British Medical Journal, 292, 972--3.
Gelder MG, Marks IM and Wolff H (1978). Desensitization and
psychotherapy in phobic states: a controlled enquiry. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 113, 53--73. Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr and
Geddes JR (eds.) (2009). The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJ Jr, and
Geddes JR (eds) (2009). Section 9: Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. In:
New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
General Medical Council (2009a). Confidentiality. General Medical
Council, London. General Medical Council (2009b). Tomorrow's Doctors.
Outcomes and Standards for Undergraduate Medical Education. General
Medical Council, London, pp.104. George N et al.Â (2016). The current
treatment of non-cardiac chest pain. Alimentary Pharmacology, 43,
213--39. Gerger H, Munder T, Barth J (2014). Specific and nonspecific
psychological interventions for PTSD symptoms: A meta-analysis with
problem complexity as a moderator. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
70(7), 601--15. Gerger H et al.Â (2015). Does it matter who provides
psychological interventions for medically unexplained symptoms? A
metaanalysis. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 84, 217--26. Gershon ES
and Alliey-Rodriguez N (2013). New ethical issues for genetic counseling
in common mental disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170,
968--76.

819

References Ghodse H et al.Â (2010). Trends in UK Deaths Associated with
Abuse of Volatile Substances, 1971--2008. Volatile Substance Abuse (VSA)
Mortality Project International Centre for Drug Policy (ICDP), St
Georges, University of London, London. Gibbons R et al.Â (2007). Early
evidence on the effects of regulators' suicidality warnings on SSRI
prescriptions and suicide in children and adolescents. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 164, 1356--63. Gigante AD et al.Â (2012). Brain glutamate
levels measured by magnetic resonance spectroscopy in patients with
bipolar disorder: a meta-analysis. Bipolar Disorders, 14, 478--87.
Gilbody SM, House AO and Sheldon T (2002). Routine administration of
Health Quality of Life (HRQoL) and needs assessment instruments to
improve psychological outcome---a systematic review. Psychological
Medicine, 32, 1345--56. Gill B et al.Â (1996). Psychiatric Morbidity
among Homeless People. HMSO, London. Gill ON et al.Â (2013). Prevalent
abnormal prion protein in human appendixes after bovine spongiform
encephalopathy epizootic: large scale survey. British Medical Journal,
347, f5675. Gillam SJ et al.Â (1989). Ethnic differences in consultation
rates in urban general practice. British Medical Journal, 299, 958--60.
Gillies D, Taylor F, Gray C, O'Brien L and D'Abrew N (2013).
Psychological therapies for the treatment of post-traumatic stress
disorder in children and adolescents (Review). EvidenceBased Child
Health: A Cochrane Review Journal, 8(3), 1004--116. Gillman K and Whyte
I (2004). Adverse Syndromes and Psychiatric Drugs. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. Gilman JM et al.Â (2012). Subjective and neural responses
to intravenous alcohol in young adults with light and heavy drinking
patterns. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37, 467--77. Giordano S. (2013).
Children with Gender Identity Disorder: A Clinical, Ethical, and Legal
Analysis (Vol. 9): Routledge, Abingdon. Gitlin DF, Levenson JL and
Lyketsos CG (2004). Psychosomatic medicine: a new psychiatric
subspecialty. Academic Psychiatry, 28, 4--11. Glenn AL and Raine A
(2014). Neurocriminology: implications for the punishment, prediction
and prevention of criminal behavior. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 15,
54--63. Glaser D et al.Â (2015) Child sexual abuse. In: A Thapar et
al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 6th edition. Wiley,
Chichester, pp.Â 376--88. Glenn T and Monteith S (2014). New measures of
mental state and behaviour based on data collected from sensors,
smartphones, and the Internet. Current Psychiatry Reports, 16, 523.
Glover G, Arts G and Babu KS (2006). Crisis resolution/home treatment
teams and psychiatric admission rates in England. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 189, 441--45. Goate A et al.Â (1991). Segregation of a
missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with familial
Alzheimer's disease. Nature, 349, 704--6. Goffman E (1961). Asylums:
Essays on the social situation of mental patients and other inmates.
Doubleday, New York. Gold PW. (2015). The organization of the stress
system and its dysregulation in depressive illness. Molecular
Psychiatry, 20, 32--47.

Goldberg D (1972). The Detection of Psychiatric Illness by
Questionnaire. Maudsley Monograph No.Â 21. Oxford University Press,
London. Goldberg D (2010). The classification of mental disorder: a
simpler system for DSM-V and ICD-11. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment,
16, 14--19. Goldberg D (ed.) (1997). The Maudsley Handbook of Practical
Psychiatry. Oxford Medical Publications, Oxford. Goldberg D and Hillier
VP (1979). A scaled version of the General Health Questionnaire.
Psychological Medicine, 9, 139--45. Goldberg D and Huxley P (1980).
Mental Illness in the Community. Tavistock Publications, London.
Goldberg D et al.Â (1976). A comparison of two psychiatric screening
tests. British Journal of Psychiatry, 129, 61--7. Goldberg D, Steele J
and Smith J (1980). Teaching psychiatric interview techniques to family
doctors. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 62, 41--7. Goldberg D, Tylee A
and Walters P (2009). Psychiatry in primary care. In: Gelder MG,
Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr and Geddes JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1480--9.
Goldberg EM and Morrison SL (1963). Schizophrenia and social class.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 109, 785--802. Goldman H and Morrissey JP
(1985). The alchemy of mental health policy: homelessness and the fourth
cycle of reform. American Journal of Public Health, 75, 727--31.
Goldstein RB et al.Â (1991). The prediction of suicide: sensitivity,
specificity, and predictive value of a multivariate model applied to
suicide among 1906 patients with affective disorders. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 48, 418--22. Goncalves DC and Byrne GJ (2012).
Interventions for generalized anxiety disorder in older adults:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26,
1--11. Gonzalez A et al.Â (2014). Subtypes of exposure to intimate
partner violence within a Canadian child welfare sample: Associated
risks and child maladjustment. Child Abuse & Neglect, 38, 1934--44.
Gonzalez-Burgos G et al.Â (2015). Alterations in cortical network
oscillations and parvalbumin neurons in schizophrenia. Biological
Psychiatry, 77, 1031--40. Goodkind M et al.Â (2013). Functional
neurocircuitry and neuroimaging studies of anxiety disorders. In: DS
Charney, JD Buxbaum, P Sklaar, EJ Nestler (eds). Neurobiology of Mental
Illness. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.Â 606--20. Goodman R,
Simonoff E and Stevenson J (1995). The impact of child IQ, parent IQ and
sibling IQ on child behavioural deviance scores. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 36(3), 409--425. Goodman JH et al.Â (2014).
Anxiety disorders during pregnancy: a systematic review. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 75, e1153--84. Goodman SH et al.Â (2011). Maternal
depression and child psychopathology: a meta-analytic review. Clinical
Child and Family Psychology Review, 14, 1--27. Goodwin FK and Jamison KR
(2007). Manic-depressive Illness: Bipolar disorders and recurrent
depression, 2nd edn. New York: Oxford University Press. Goodwin GM et
al.Â (2016). Evidence-based guidelines for treating bipolar disorder:
revised third edition recommendations

819

820

820

References from the British Association for Psychopharmacology. Journal
of Psychopharmacology, 30, 495--553. Gordon H and Grubin D (2004).
Psychiatric aspects of the assessment and treatment of sex offenders.
Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 10, 73--80. Gore FM et al.Â (2011).
Global burden of disease in young people aged 10-24 years: a systematic
analysis. Lancet, 377, 2093--102. Gorin-Lazard A et al.Â (2012). Is
hormonal therapy associated with better quality of life in transsexuals?
A cross-sectional study. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 9, 531--41.
Gottesman I (1991). Schizophrenia Genesis: The origins of madness. W. H.
Freeman, New York. Gottesman II and Gould TD (2003). The endophenotype
concept in psychiatry: etymology and strategic intentions. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 636--45. Gottesman I and Shields J (1967). A
polygenic theory of schizophrenia. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA, 58, 199--205. Goudriaan AE et al.Â (2004). Pathological
gambling: a comprehensive review of biobehavioral findings.
Neurosciences and Biobehavioral Reviews, 28, 123--41. Gould MS et
al.Â (2005). Evaluating iatrogenic risk of youth suicide screening
programs: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 293, 1635--43. Gournellis
R et al.Â (2014). Psychotic major depression in older people: a
systematic review. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 29,
784--96. Graham P (2009). Cognitive behaviour therapies for children and
families. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor and JR Geddes
(eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. pp.Â 1777--86. Graham SA and Fisher SE (2013). Decoding the
genetics of speech and language. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 23,
43--51. Grandhe R et al.Â (2016). New chronic pain treatments in the
outpatient setting. Current Pain and Headache Reports, 20, 33. Grann M
and Fazel S (2004). Substance misuse and violent crime: Swedish
population study. British Medical Journal, 328, 1233--4. Grant BF et
al.Â (2004). Prevalence, correlates, and disability of personality
disorders in the United States: results from the national epidemiologic
survey on alcohol and related conditions. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 65, 948--58. Grant BF et al.Â (2015). Epidemiology of DSM-5
alcohol use disorder: results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions III. JAMA Psychiatry, 72, 757--66. Grant
JE et al.Â (2010). Introduction to behavioral addictions. American
Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 36, 233--41. Gratten J et al.Â (2014).
Large-scale genomics unveils the genetic architecture of psychiatric
disorders. Nature Neuroscience, 17, 782--90. Gray J et al.Â (1991). The
neuropsychology of schizophrenia. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14,
1--84. Gray R et al.Â (2016). Is adherence therapy an effective adjunct
treatment for patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders? A
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 16, 90. Gray SL et
al.Â (2015). Cumulative use of strong anticholinergics and incident
dementia: a prospective cohort study. JAMA Internal Medicine, 175,
401--7.

Green EK et al.Â (2016). Copy number variation in bipolar disorder.
Molecular Psychiatry, 21, 89--93. Green JG et al.Â (2010). Childhood
adversities and adult psychiatric disorders in the national comorbidity
survey replication I: Associations with first onset of DSM-IV disorders.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 113--23. Green MF (2006). Cognitive
impairment and functional outcome in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67 (Suppl. 9), 3--8. Green MF et
al.Â (2015). Social cognition in schizophrenia. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 16, 620--31. Greenberg MT et al.Â (2015). Prevention of
mental disorders and promotion of competence. In: A. Thapar et
al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, pp.Â 215--26. Greenfield SF et al.Â (2010). Substance abuse in
women. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33, 339--55. Greenhalgh T
(2010). How to Read a Paper. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. Greeven A et
al.Â (2014). Personality predicts time to remission and clinical status
in hypochondriasis during a 6-year followup. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 202, 402--7. Gressier F et al.Â (2015). Post-partum
depressive symptoms and medically assisted conception: a systematic
review and metaanalysis. Human Reproduction, 30, 2575--86. Griebel G and
Holsboer F (2012). Neuropeptide receptor ligands as drugs for
psychiatric diseases: the end of the beginning? Nature Reviews Drug
Discovery, 11, 462--78. Griesinger W (1867). Mental Pathology and
Therapeutics, 2nd edn. (transl. CL Robertson and J Rutherford). New
Sydenham Society, London. p.Â 130. Griffiths KM et al.Â (2014).
Effectiveness of programs for reducing the stigma associated with mental
disorders. A metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. World
Psychiatry, 2, 161--75. Grote NK et al.Â (2010). A meta-analysis of
depression during pregnancy and the risk of preterm birth, low birth
weight and intrauterine growth restriction. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 67, 1012--24. Groves JO (2007). Is it time to reassess the
BNDF hypothesis of depression? Molecular Psychiatry, 12, 1079--88.
Gudjonsson GH (1992). The Psychology of Interrogations, Confessions and
Testimony. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. Gunderson JG and Links PL
(2014). Handbook of Good Psychiatric Management (GPM) for Borderline
Patients. American Psychiatric Press, Washington DC. Gunillo P et
al.Â (2015). Does tobacco use cause psychosis? Systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 2, 718--25. Gunn J and Taylor P
(2014). Forensic Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Hodder Arnold, London. Gunnell D
et al.Â (1995). Relation between parasuicide, suicide, psychiatric
admissions, and socioeconomic deprivation. British Medical Journal, 311,
226--30. Gunnell D, Saperia J and Ashby D (2005). Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and suicide in adults: meta-analysis of drug
company data from placebo-controlled, randomized controlled trials
submitted to the MHRRA's safety review. British Medical Journal, 330,
385.

821

References Guralnick MJ (2005). Early intervention for children with
intellectual disabilities: Current knowledge and future prospects.
Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 18, 313--24.
Guralnick MJ (2016). Early intervention for children with intellectual
disabilities: An update. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual
Disabilities. doi:10.1111/jar.12233. Gureje O et al.Â (1997).
Somatization in cross-cultural perspective: a World Health Organization
study in primary care. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 989--95.
Gureje O et al.Â (1998). Persistent pain and well-being: a World Health
Organization Study in Primary Care. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 280, 147--51. Guthrie E (2008). Medically unexplained
symptoms in primary care. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 14,
432--40. Guthrie E et al.Â (2001). Randomised controlled trial of brief
psychological intervention after deliberate self-poisoning. British
Medical Journal, 323, 135--8. Guy W (1976). Clinical Global Impressions
(CGI). ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology (revised). US
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, NIMH, Rockville, MD. Guze S
(1989). Biological psychiatry: is there any other kind? Psychological
Medicine, 19, 315--23. Guzzetta F and de Girolamo G (2009). Epidemiology
of personality disorders. In: M Gelder et al.Â (eds.) New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 881--6.
Hachinski V, Lassen NA and Marshall J (1974). Multi-infarct dementia.
Lancet, ii, 207--9. Hackman A et al.Â (2011). Oxford Guide to Imagery in
Cognitive Therapy. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Haddad PM and
Anderson IM (2007). Recognising and managing antidepressant
discontinuation symptoms. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 13, 44--57.
Haggarty SJ and Perlis RH (2014). Translation: Screening for novel
therapeutics with disease-relevant cell types derived from human stem
cell models. Biological Psychiatry, 75, 952--60. Hajima SV et
al.Â (2013). Brain volumes in schizophrenia: a metaanalysis in over
18,000 subjects. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39, 1129--38. Hale B et
al.Â (2015). Legal issues in the care and treatment of children with
mental health problems. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 239--49. Hales
SA, Abbey SE and Rodin GM (2009). Psychiatric aspects of surgery
(including transplantation). In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ
LÃ³pez-IborJr and JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp. 1096--9. Halford J and Brown T
(2009). Cognitive behavioural therapy as an adjunctive treatment in
chronic physical illness. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 15,
306--17. Hall J et al.Â (2015). Genetic risk for schizophrenia:
convergence on synaptic pathways involved in plasticity. Biological
Psychiatry, 77, 52--8. Hall W (2015). What has research over the past
two decades revealed about the adverse health effects of recreational
cannabis use? Addiction, 110, 19--35. Hall W and Degenhardt L (2011).
Cannabis and the increased incidence and persistence of psychosis.
British Medical Journal, 342, 511--12.

Hallahan B et al.Â (2011). Structural magnetic resonance imaging in
bipolar disorder: An international collaborative mega-analysis of
individual adult patient data. Biological Psychiatry, 69, 326--35.
Hamburg DA et al.Â (1953). Clinical importance of emotional problems in
the care of patients with burns. New England Journal of Medicine, 248,
355--9. Hamilton CE, Falshaw L and Browne KD (2002). The link between
recurrent maltreatment and offending behaviour. International Journal of
Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 46, 75--94. Hamilton M
(1959). The assessment of anxiety states by rating. British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 32, 50--5. Hamilton M (1967). Development of a
rating scale for primary depressive illness. British Journal of Social
and Clinical Psychology, 6, 278--96. Hanlon C et al.Â (2015). District
mental healthcare plans for five low- and middle-income countries:
commonalities, variations and evidence gaps. British Journal of
Psychiatry, s1--s8. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.153767. Hanly JG (2014).
Diagnosis and management of neuropsychiatric SLE. Nature Reviews
Immunology, 10, 338--47. Hardy J and Revesz T (2012). The spread of
neurodegenerative disease. New England Journal of Medicine, 366,
2126--8. Hardy JA and Higgins GA (1992). Alzheimer's disease: the
amyloid cascade hypothesis. Science, 256, 184--5. Hare EH (1973). A
short note on pseudo-hallucinations. British Journal of Psychiatry, 122,
469--73. Hare RD (1983). Diagnosis of antisocial personality in two
prison populations. American Journal of Psychiatry, 140, 887--90. Hare
RD (1991). The Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R). MultiHealth
Systems, Toronto. Harmer CJ et al.Â (2009). Why do antidepressants take
so long to work? A cognitive neuropsychological model of antidepressant
drug action. British Journal of Psychiatry, 195, 102--8. Harris AM et
al.Â (2009). Somatization increases disability independent of
comorbidity. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 24(2), 155--61.
Harris EC and Barraclough B (1997). Suicide as an outcome for mental
disorders: a meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 205--28.
Harris EC and Barraclough B (1998). Excess mortality of mental disorder.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 11--53. Harris JC (2014). New
classification for neurodevelopmental disorders in DSM-5. Current
Opinion in Psychiatry, 27, 95--7. Harrison G et al.Â (2001). Recovery
from psychotic illness: a 15and 25-year international follow-up study.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 178, 506--17. Harrison G et al.Â (1994).
Residence of incident cohort of psychotic patients after 13 years of
follow-up. British Medical Journal, 308, 813--19. Harrison JR and Owen
MJ (2016). Alzheimer's disease: the amyloid hypothesis on trial. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 208, 1--3. Harrison NA and Kopelman MD (2009).
Endocrine diseases and metabolic disorders. In: David A, Fleminger S and
Kopelman M et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry. Wiley Blackwell,
Oxford. pp.Â 617--88. Harrison PJ (1999). The neuropathology of
schizophrenia. A criticial review of the data and their interpretation.
Brain, 122, 593--624.

821

82

822

References Harrison PJ (2004). The hippocampus in schizophrenia: a
review of the neuropathological evidence and its pathophysiological
implications. Psychopharmacology, 174, 151--62. Harrison PJ (2015a).
Recent genetic findings in schizophrenia and their therapeutic
relevance. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29, 85--96. Harrison PJ
(2015b). The current and potential impact of genetics and genomics on
neuropsychopharmacgoloy. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 25, 671--81.
Harrison PJ (2016). Molecular neurobiological clues to the pathogenesis
of bipolar disorder. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 36, 1--6. Harrison
PL and Oakland T (2000). Adaptive Behavior Assessment System. San
Antonio, TX, The Psychological Corporation. Hart AB and Kranzler HR
(2015). Alcohol dependence genetics: lessons learned from genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) and post-GWAS analyses. Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research, 39, 1312--27. Hart H et al.Â (2014). Pattern
classification of response inhibition in ADHD: Toward the development of
neurobiological markers for ADHD. Human Brain Mapping, 35, 3083--94.
Harvey AG et al.Â (2015). Sleep interventions: a developmental
perspective. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp. 999--1015. Harvey SB and
Wessely S (2009). Chronic fatigue syndrome: identifying zebras amongst
the horses. BMC Medicine, 7, 58. Harwood D and Jacoby R (2000). Suicidal
behaviour among the elderly. In: K Hawton and K van Heeringen (eds.) The
International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide. John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester. pp.Â 275--92. Harwood D et al.Â (2000). Suicide in older
people: mode of death, demographic factors, and medical contact before
death. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15, 736--43.
Harwood D et al.Â (2001). Psychiatric disorder and personality factors
associated with suicide in older people: a descriptive and case-control
study. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16, 155--65.
Harwood D et al.Â (2006). Life problems and physical illness as risk
factors for suicide in older people: a descriptive and casecontrol
study. Psychological Medicine, 36, 1265--74. Hasler G et al.Â (2008).
Altered cerebral Î³-aminobutyric acid type a-benzodiazepine receptor
binding in panic disorder determined by \[11C\]flumazenil positron
emission tomography. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65, 1166--75.
Hassan L et al.Â (2011). Prospective cohort study of mental health during
imprisonment. British Journal of Psychiatry, 198, 37--42. Haw C et
al.Â (2001). Psychiatric and personality disorders in deliberate
self-harm patients. British Journal of Psychiatry, 178, 48--54. Hawton K
(2000). General hospital management of suicide attempters. In: K Hawton
and K van Heeringen (eds.) The International Handbook of Suicide and
Attempted Suicide. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. pp.Â 519--38. Hawton K
(ed.) (2005). Prevention and Treatment of Suicidal Behaviour: From
science to practice. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Hawton K (2012).
Self-harm and suicide in adolescents. Lancet, 379, 2373--82.

Hawton K and van Heeringen K (2009). Suicide. Lancet, 373, 1372--81.
Hawton K, Houston K and Shepherd R (1999). Suicide in young people:
study of 174 cases, aged under 25 years, based on coroner's and medical
records. British Journal of Psychiatry, 175, 271--4. Hawton K et
al.Â (2000). Doctors who kill themselves: a study of the methods used for
suicide. Quarterly Journal of Medicine, 93, 351--7. Hawton K et
al.Â (2001). Suicide in doctors: a study of risk according to gender,
seniority and specialty in medical practitioners in England and Wales,
1979--1995. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 55, 296--300.
Hawton K et al.Â (2001). The influence of economic and social environment
on deliberate self-harm and suicide: an ecological and person-based
study. Psychological Medicine, 31, 827--36. Hawton K et al.Â (2002).
Deliberate self-harm among adolescents: self-report survey in schools in
England. British Medical Journal, 325, 1207--11. Hawton K, Zahl D and
Weatherall R (2003a). Suicide following deliberate self-harm; long-term
follow-up of patients who presented to a general hospital. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 537--42. Hawton K et al.Â (2003b). Deliberate
self-harm in Oxford, 1990-- 2000: a time of change in patient
characteristics. Psychological Medicine, 33, 987--95. Hawton K et
al.Â (2003c). Deliberate self-harm in adolescents: a study of
characteristics and trends in Oxford, 1990--2000. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 44, 1191--8. Hawton K, Malmberg A and Simkin
S (2004a). Suicide in doctors: a psychological autopsy study. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 57, 1--4. Hawton K et al.Â (2004b). UK
legislation on analgesic packs: before and after study of long-term
effects on poisonings. British Medical Journal, 329, 1076--9. Hawton K
et al.Â (2004c). Self-cutting: patient characteristics compared with
self-poisoners. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behaviour, 34, 199--207.
Hawton K et al.Â (2007). Self-harm in England: a tale of three cities.
Multicentre study of self-harm. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 42, 513--21. Hawton K, Bergen H and Simkin S (2010).
Toxicity of antidepressants: rates of suicide relative to prescribing
and non-fatal overdose. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 354--8.
Hawton K et al.Â (2012). Self-harm and suicide in adolescents. Lancet,
379, 2373--82. Hay P et al.Â (2014). Royal Australian and New Zealand
College of Psychiatrists clinical practice guidelines for the treatment
of eating disorders. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
48, 977--1008. Hay PJ (2009). Post-partum psychosis: Which women are at
highest risk? PLoS Medicine, 6, e1000027, 130--1. Hay PJ et al.Â (1993).
Treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder by psychosurgery. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 87, 197--207. Hay P et al.Â (2012). Treatment
for severe and enduring anorexia nervosa: a review. Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 46, 1136--44. Hay P (2013). A systematic
review of evidence for psychological treatments in eating disorders
2005--2012. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 46, 46--69.

823

References Haynes B (1999). Can it work? Does it work? Is it worth it?
British Medical Journal, 319, 652--3. Health and Social Care Information
Centre (2015). Statistics on alcohol.
http://www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB17712/alceng-2015-rep.pdf Hecker E
(1871). Die Hebephrenie. Virchows Archiv fÃ¼r Pathologie and Anatomie,
52, 394--429. Hegarty JD et al.Â (1994). One hundred years of
schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of the outcome literature. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1409--16. Hegeman JM et al.Â (2012).
Phenomenology of depression in older compared with younger adults:
meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 200, 275--81. Heijnen WT
et al.Â (2010). Antidepressant pharmacotherapy failure and response to
subsequent electroconvulsive therapy: a meta-analysis. Journal of
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 30, 616--19. Heiman JR (2002).
Psychological treatments for female sexual dysfunction: are they
effective and do we need them? Archives of Sexual Behavior, 31, 445--50.
Heinrich TW and Marcangelo M (2009). Psychiatric issues in solid organ
transplantation. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 17, 398--496. Hejl A,
Hogh P and Waldemar G (2002). Potentially reversible conditions in 1000
consecutive memory clinic patients. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery
and Psychiatry, 73, 390--4. Helbig-Lang S et al.Â (2014). The role of
safety behaviors in exposure-based treatment for panic disorder and
agoraphobia: Associations to symptom severity, treatment course, and
outcome. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 28, 836--44. Helfer B et
al.Â (2016). Efficacy and safety of antidepressants added to
antipsychotics for schizophrenia: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 876--86. Hem E et al.Â (2004).
Suicide risk in cancer patients from 1960 to 1999. Journal of Clinical
Oncology, 22, 4209--16. Hemmeter UM, Hemmeter-Spernal J and Krieg JC
(2010). Sleep deprivation in depression. Expert Review in
Neurotherapeutics, 10, 1101--15. Henderson C, Evans-Lacko S and
Thornicroft G (2013). Mental illness stigma, help seeking, and public
health programs. American Journal of Public Health, 103, 777--80.
Henderson M and Mellers JDC (2009). Movement disorders. In: David A et
al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford.
pp.Â 745--816. Henderson S and Fratiglioni L (2009). The ageing
population and the epidemiology of mental disorders among the elderly.
In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor JJ and Geddes JR (eds.) New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
pp.Â 1517--23. Hennegan JM et al.Â (2015). Contact with the baby following
stillbirth and parental mental health and wellbeing: a systematic
review. BMJ Open, 5, e008616. Heppner FL et al.Â (2015). Immune attack:
the role of inflammation in Alzheimer disease. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 16, 358--72. Hermans D et al.Â (2008). Autobiographical
memory specificity and affect regulation: coping with a negative life
event. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 787--92

Heslop P et al.Â (2014). The Confidential Inquiry into premature deaths
of people with intellectual disabilities in the UK: a population-based
study. Lancet, 383, 889--95. Heston LL (1966). Psychiatric disorders in
foster home reared children of schizophrenic mothers. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 112, 819--25. Hettema JM (2008). What is the genetic
relationship between anxiety and depression? American Journal of Medical
Genetics, 148C, 140--6. Hettema JM et al.Â (2003). A twin study of the
genetics of fear conditioning. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60,
702--8. Hettema JM, Prescott CA and Kendler KS (2004). Genetic and
environmental sources of covariation between generalized anxiety
disorder and neuroticism. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 1581--7.
Hettema JM et al.Â (2005). The structure of genetic and environmental
risk factors for anxiety disorders in men and women. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62, 182--9. Heussler HS (2016). Management of sleep
disorders in neurodevelopmental disorders and genetic syndromes. Current
Opinion in Psychiatry, 29, 138--43. Heylens G et al.Â (2012). Gender
identity disorder in twins: A review of the case report literature.
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 9, 751--7. Heylens G et al.Â (2014). Effects
of different steps in gender reassignment therapy on psychopathology: a
prospective study of persons with a gender identity disorder. Journal of
Sexual Medicine, 11, 119--26. Heyman I et al.Â (2015). Brain disorders
and psychopathology. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 389--402. Hill
J (2003). Early identification of individuals at risk for antisocial
personality. British Journal of Psychiatry, 44, S11--14. Hill J et
al.Â (2001). Child sexual abuse, poor parental care and adult depression:
evidence for different mechanisms. British Journal of Psychiatry, 179,
104--9. Hill K et al.Â (2004). Hypofrontality in schizophrenia: a
metaanalysis of functional imaging studies. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 110, 243--56. Hjelmeland H et al.Â (2002). Why people
engage in parasuicide: a cross-cultural study of intentions. Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behaviour, 32, 380--93. Hjorthoj C et al.Â (2015).
Association between alcohol and substance use disorders and all-cause
and cause-specific mortality in schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and
unipolar depression: a nationwide, prospective, register-based study.
Lancet Psychiatry, 2, 801--8. Ho RCM et al.Â (2012). Neuropsychiatric
aspects of carbon monoxide poisoning: diagnosis and management. Advances
in Psychiatric Treatment, 18, 94--101. Hobbs M (2005). Brief dynamic
psychotherapy. In: Bloch S (ed.) An Introduction to the Psychotherapies,
4th edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Hodes GE et al.Â (2015).
Neuroimmune mechanisms of depression. Nature Neuroscience, 18, 1386--93.
Hodgins D C et al.Â (2011). Gambling disorders. The Lancet, 378,
1874--84. Holland AJ (2009). Classification, diagnosis, psychiatric
assessment, and needs assessment. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC,

823

824

824

References LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr, and Geddes JR (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp. 1819--24.
Holland T, Clare IC and Mukhopadhyay T (2002). Prevalence of criminal
offending by men and women with intellectual disability and the
characteristics of offenders: implications for research and service
development. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 46, 6--20.
Hollingshead AB and Redlich FC (1958). Social Class and Mental Illness:
A community study. John Wiley & Sons, New York. Hollis C (2015).
Schizophrenia in children and adolescents. BJPsych Advances, 21,
333--41. Holloway F, Oliver N, Collins E and Carson J (1995). Case
management: a critical review of the outcome literature. European
Psychiatry, 10, 113--28. Holmes J (2000). Object relations, attachment
theory, selfpsychology, and interpersonal psychoanalysis. In: MG Gelder,
JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr and NC Andreasen (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp. 306--12. Holmes J et
al.Â (2014). Effects of minimum unit pricing for alcohol on different
income and socioeconomic groups: a modelling study. The Lancet, 383,
1655--64. Holmes T and Rahe RH (1967). The social adjustment rating
scale. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 11, 213--18. Holoyda BJ and
Kellaher DC. (2016). The biological treatment of paraphilic disorders:
an updated review. Current Psychiatry Reports, 18, 1--7. Holt RIG and
Mitchell AJ (2015). Diabetes mellitus and severe mental illness:
mechanisms and clinical implications. Nature Reviews Endocrinology, 11,
79--89. Holt RIG et al.Â (2014). NIDDK International Conference Report on
Diabetes and Depression: current understanding and future directions.
Diabetes Care, 37, 2067--77. Hookway C et al.Â (2015). Irritable bowel
syndrome in adults in primary care: summary of updated NICE guidance.
British Medical Journal, 350, h701. Hope T et al.Â (1999). Natural
history of behavioural changes and psychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer's
disease. A longitudinal study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 174,
39--44. Hope T, Savelescu J and Hendrick J (2008) Medical Ethics and
Law: The core curriculum, 2nd edn. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Hoppe C and Elger CE (2011). Depression in epilepsy: a critical review
from a clinical perspective. Nature Reviews Neurology, 7, 462--72.
Horwood J, Thomas K, Duffy L, Gunnell D, Hollis C, Lewis G, Thompson A,
Wolke D, Zammitt S and Harrison G, (2008). 108--Frequency of
psychosis-like symptoms in a non-clinical population of 12 year olds:
Results from the Alspac Birth Cohort. Schizophrenia Research, 98,
77--78. Hotopf M (2004). Preventing somatization. Psychological
Medicine, 34, 195--8. Hotopf MH, Noah N and Wessely S (1996). Chronic
fatigue and psychiatric morbidity following viral meningitis: a
controlled study. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 60,
504--9. Hou RH et al.Â (2012). When a minor head injury results in
enduring symptoms: a prospective investigation of risk factors for
postconcussional syndrome after mild traumatic

brain injury. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 83,
217--23. Hoult J (1986). Community care of the acutely mentally ill.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 137--44. Houston K, Hawton K and
Shepperd R (2001). Suicide in young people aged 15--24: a psychological
autopsy study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 63, 159--70. Howard LM et
al.Â (2014a). Non-psychotic mental disorders in the perinatal period.
Lancet, 384, 1775--88. Howard LM et al.Â (2014b). No health without
perinatal mental health. Lancet, 384, 1723--24. Howard R et al.Â (1995).
Magnetic resonance imaging volumetric measurements of the superior
temporal gyrus, hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, frontal and temporal
lobes in late paraphrenia. Psychological Medicine, 25, 495--503. Howard
R et al.Â (2012). Donepezil and memantine for moderateto-severe
Alzheimer's disease. New England Journal of Medicine, 366, 893--903.
Howe AS et al.Â (2016). Candidate genes in panic disorder: Metaanalyses
of 23 common variants in major anxiogenic pathways. Molecular
Psychiatry, 21, 665--79. Howell MJ (2012). Parasomnias: an updated
review. Neurotherapeutics, 9, 753--75. Howes OD, Murray RM (2014).
Schizophrenia: an integrated sociodevelopmental-cognitive model. Lancet,
383, 1677--87. Howes OD et al.Â (2012). The nature of dopamine
dysfunction in schizophrenia and what this means for treatment.
Metaanalysis of imaging studies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69,
776--86. Howes OD et al.Â (2015). Glutamate and dopamine in
schizophrenia: an update for the 21st century. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 29, 97--115. Howes OD et al.Â (2017)
Treatment-resistant schizophrenia: treatment response and resistance in
psychosis (TRRIP) working group consensus guidelines on diagnosis and
terminology. American Journal of Psychiatry 174, 216--229. Howlett JR
and Stein MB (2016). Prevention of trauma and stressor-related
disorders: A review. Neuropsychopharmacology, 41, 357--69. Howlin P
(2008). Special education. In: M Rutter et al.Â (eds.) Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 5th edn. Blackwell, Oxford. pp. 1189--206. Hoyer
J et al.Â (2009). Worry exposure versus applied relaxation in the
treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 78, 106--15. Huang B et al.Â (2006). Race-ethnicity and
the prevalence and co-occurrence of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, alcohol and drug use disorders and
Axis I and II disorders: United States, 2001 to 2002. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 47, 252--7. Huang Y et al.Â (2009). DSM-IV personality
disorders in the WHO world mental health surveys. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 195, 46--53. Huang CQ et al.Â (2010). Chronic diseases and
risk of depression in old age: a meta-analysis of published literature.
Ageing Research Reviews, 9, 131--41. Hubert J and Hollins S (2006). Men
with severe learning disabilities and challenging behaviour in long-stay
hospital care. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 188(1), 70--4.

825

References Hucker S (2009). Child molesters and other sex offenders. In:
MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, and J Geddes (eds.) The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp.Â 1960--5. Hughes N (2012). Nobody made the connection: The prevalence
of neurodisability in young people who offend. The Office of the
Children's Commissioner, London.
https://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/ sites/ default/ files/
publications/ Nobody%20made%20the%20connection.pdf Huline-Dickens S
(2013). The mental state examination. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment,
19, 97--8. Hulme C et al.Â (2015). Educational interventions for
children's learning difficulties. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.
533--44. Hunt IM et al.Â (2009). Suicide in recently discharged
psychiatric patients. Psychological Medicine, 39, 443--9. Hunter R and
MacAlpine I (eds.) (1963). Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry. Oxford
University Press, London. Hurley TD and Edenberg HJ (2012). Genes
encoding enzymes involved in ethanol metabolism. Alcohol Research, 34,
339--44. Huybrechts KF et al.Â (2014). Antidepressant use in pregnancy
and the risk of cardiac defects. New England Journal of Medicine, 370,
2397--407. Huybrechts KF et al.Â (2015). Antidepressant use late in
pregnancy and risk of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn.
JAMA, 313, 2142--51. Hwang SW and Burns T (2014). Health interventions
for people who are homeless. Lancet, 384, 1541--7. Hyde TM and Ron MA
(2011). The secondary schizophrenias. In: D Weinberger and PJ Harrison
(eds.) Schizophrenia, 3rd edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford, pp.Â 165--84.
Hyman S (2007). Can neuroscience be integrated into the DSMV? Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 725--32. Iadecola C (2013). The pathobiology of
vascular dementia. Neuron, 80, 844--66. Iivanainen M (2009). Epilepsy
and epilepsy-related behavior disorders among people with intellectual
disability. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr, and Geddes JR
(eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1860--70. Ijzendoorn MH et al.Â (2015). Residential
and foster care. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 261--72.
Imboden JB, Canter A and Cluff LE (1961). Convalescence from influenza:
a study of the psychological and clinical determinants. Archives of
Internal Medicine, 108, 393--9. Ingvar DH and Franzen G (1974).
Anomalies of cerebral blood flow distribution in patients with chronic
schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 50, 425--62. Inouye SK et
al.Â (2014a). Delirium in elderly people. Lancet, 383, 911--22. Inouye SK
et al.Â (2014b). Doing damage in delirium: the hazards of antipsychotic
prescribing in elderly people. Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 312--14. Inskip HM,
Harris EC and Barraclough B (1998). Lifetime risk of suicide for
affective disorder, alcoholism and schizophrenia. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 172, 35--7.

Inter-Agency Standing Committee (2007). IASC Guidelines on Mental Health
and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings, 2007. Geneva: IASC.
International League Against Epilepsy (1989). Commission on
Classification and Terminology: proposal for revised classification of
epilepsies and epileptic syndromes. Epilepsia, 30, 389--99. Iqbal K et
al.Â (2016). Tau and neurodegenerative disease: the story so far. Nature
Reviews Neurology, 12, 15--27. Irwin DJ et al.Â (2013). Parkinson's
disease dementia: convergence of Î±-synuclein, tau and amyloid-Î²
pathologies. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14, 626--36. Isaac MI and
Paauw DS (2014). Medically unexplained symptoms. Medical Clinics of
North America, 98, 663--72. Isacsson G et al.Â (2010). The increased use
of antidepressants has contributed to the worldwide reduction in suicide
rates. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 429--33. IsHak WW and Tobia
G. (2013). DSM-5 changes in diagnostic criteria of sexual dysfunctions.
Reproductive System & Sexual Disorders, 2, 122. Isomura K et al.Â (2015).
Population-based, multi-generational family clustering study of social
anxiety disorder and avoidant personality disorder. Psychological
Medicine, 45, 1581--9. Ives R (2009). Disorders relating the use of
volatile substances. In: Gelder MG, Andreason NC, Lopez-Ibor JJ, Geddes
JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. pp.Â 502--6. Iyegbe C et al.Â (2014). The emerging molecular
architecture of schizophrenia, polygenic risk scores and the clinical
implications for GxE research. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 49, 169--82. Jaaskelainen E et al.Â (2013). A systematic
review and metaanalysis of recovery in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 39, 1296--306. Jablensky A (2016). Psychiatric
classifications: validity and utility. World Psychiatry, 15, 26--31.
Jablensky A et al.Â (1992). Schizophrenia: manifestations, incidence and
course in different cultures: a World Health Organization 10-Country
study. Psychological Medicine. Monograph Supplement, 20, 1--97.
Jablensky A, Kirkbride JB and Jones PB (2011). Schizophrenia: the
epidemiological horizon. In: D Weinberger and PJ Harrison (eds.)
Schizophrenia, 3rd edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 185--225. Jack CR
et al.Â (2013). Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer's
disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers. Lancet
Neurology, 12, 207--16. Jacob A et al.Â (2004). Charles Bonnet
syndrome---elderly people and visual hallucinations. British Medical
Journal, 328, 1552--4. Jacobi F et al.Â (2004). Prevalence, co-morbidity
and correlates of mental health disorders in the general population:
results from the German Health Interview and Examination Survey (GHS).
Psychological Medicine, 34, 597--611. Jacobs R and Barrenho E (2011).
Impact of crisis resolution and home treatment teams on psychiatric
admissions in England. British Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 71--6.
Jacobson E (1938). Progressive Relaxation. Chicago University Press,
Chicago.

825

826

826

References Jacoby R (2009). Assessment of mental disorder in older
patients. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor and JR Geddes
(eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1524--9. Jaffee SR and Price TS (2007).
Gene--environment correlations: a review of the evidence and
implications for prevention of mental illness. Molecular Psychiatry, 12,
432--42. JÃ¤ger M and RÃ¶ssler W (2010). Enhancement of outpatient
treatment adherence: Patients' perceptions of coercion, fairness and
effectiveness. Psychiatry Research, 180, 48--53. Jakubovski E et
al.Â (2015). Systematic review and meta-analysis: dose-response
relationship of selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors in major
depressive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 174--83. James
A et al.Â (2004). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and suicide: a
review of possible associations. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 110,
408--15. James A et al.Â (2015). Provision of intensive treatment:
intensive outreach, day units, and in-patient units. In: A. Thapar et
al. (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, pp.Â 648--60. James AC et al.Â (2013). Cognitive behavioural
therapy for anxiety disorders in children and adolescents. Cochrane
Database Systematic Reviews, 6. Janakiraman R and Benning T (2010).
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 16(2),.96--104. Jansen WJ et al.Â (2015).
Prevalence of cerebral amyloid pathology in persons without dementia. A
meta-analysis. JAMA, 313, 1924--38. Jarde A et al.Â (2016). Neonatal
outcomes in women with untreated antenatal depression compared with
women without depression. A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA
Psychiatry, 73, 826--37. Jardri R et al.Â (2011). Cortical activations
during auditory verbal hallucinations in schizophrenia. A
coordinate-based metaanalysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168,
73--81. Jaspers K (1913). Allgemeine Psychopathologie. Springer, Berlin.
Jaspers K (1963). General Psychopathology (translated from the 7th
German edition by J Hoenig and MW Hamilton). Manchester University
Press, Manchester. Jaspers K (1968). The phenomenological approach in
psychopathology. British Journal of Psychiatry, 114, 1313--23. Jauhar S
et al.Â (2014a). Cognitive-behavioural therapy for the symptoms of
schizophrenia: systematic review and metaanalysis with examination of
potential bias. British Journal of Psychiatry, 204, 20--9. Jauhar S et
al.Â (2014b). Alcohol and cognitive impairment. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 20, 304--13. Javitt DC and Zukin SR (1991). Recent advances
in the phencyclidine model of schizophrenia. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 148, 1301--8. Jay EL et al.Â (2014). Testing a
neurobiological model of depersonalization disorder using repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation. Brain Stimulation, 7, 252--9. Jenkins
J et al.Â (2015). Psychosocial adversity. In: A. Thapar et al. (eds).
Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
pp.Â 330--40. Jenkins R et al.Â (2005). Psychiatric and social aspects of
suicidal behaviour in prisons. Psychological Medicine, 35, 257--69.

Ji WY et al.Â (2006). A twin study of personality disorder heritability.
Chinese Journal of Epidemiology, 27, 137--41. Jick H, Kaye JA and Jick
SS (2004). Antidepressants and the risk of suicidal behaviours. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 292, 338--43. Jilek WG (2000).
Traditional non-Western folk healing as relevant to psychiatry. In: MG
Gelder, JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr and NC Andreasen (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Johns A (2009).
Offending, substance misuse, and mental disorder. In: MG Gelder, NC
Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, and J Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.Â 1926--8. Johnson AR et
al.Â (2015). Postnatal depression among women availing maternal health
services in a rural hospital in South India. Pakistan Journal of Medical
Sciences, 31, 408. Johnson J et al.Â (1999). Childhood maltreatment
increases risk for personality disorders during early adulthood.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 600--6. Johnson LA et al.Â (2013).
Current 'legal highs'. Journal of Emergency Medicine, 44, 1108--15.
Johnson S et al.Â (2005). Randomised controlled trial of acute mental
health care by a crisis resolution team: the north Islington crisis
study. British Medical Journal, 331, 599. Johnstone EC et al.Â (1976).
Cerebral ventricular size and cognitive impairment in chronic
schizophrenia. Lancet, ii, 924--6. Johnstone EC, Macmillan JF and Crow
TJ (1987). The occurrence of organic disease of possible or probable
aetiological significance in a population of 268 cases of first episode
schizophrenia. Psychological Medicine, 17, 371--9. Joinson C et
al.Â (2011). Timing of menarche and depressive symptoms in adolescent
girls from a UK cohort. British Journal of Psychiatry, 198, 17--23.
Joinson C et al.Â (2015). Early childhood psychological factors and risk
for bedwetting at school age in a UK cohort. European Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 25, 519--28. Jokinen J (2011). CSF 5-HIAA and exposure to
and expression of interpersonal violence in suicide attempters. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 132, 173--8. Jonas DE et al.Â (2014).
Pharmacotherapy for adults with alcohol use disorders in outpatient
settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA, 311, 1889--900.
Jonas RK et al.Â (2014). The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome as a window into
complex neuropsychiatric disorders over the lifespan. Biological
Psychiatry, 75, 351--60. Jones DPH (2009). Assessment of parenting for
the family court. Psychiatry, 8, 38--42. Jones E and Wessely S (2003).
"Forward psychiatry" in the military: Its origins and effectiveness.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16, 411--19. Jones, E and Wessely S (2014).
"Battle for the mind: World War 1 and the birth of military psychiatry."
The Lancet, 384, 1708--14. Jones I et al.Â (2014). Bipolar disorder,
affective psychosis, and schizophrenia in pregnancy and the post-partum
period. Lancet, 384, 1789--99. Jones K (1992). A History of the Mental
Health Services. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London. Jones M (1968). Social
Psychiatry in Practice. Penguin Books, Harmondsworth.

872

References Jones P et al.Â (1994). Child development risk factors for
adult schizophrenia in the British 1946 birth cohort. Lancet, 344,
1398--402. Jones WR et al.Â (2012). Eating disorders: clinical features
and the role of the general psychiatrist. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 18, 34--43. Josephs KA (2007). Capgras syndrome and its
relationship to neurodegenerative disease. Archives of Neurology, 64,
1762--6. Joyce PR (2009). Epidemiology of mood disorders. In: MG Gelder,
NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor and JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 645--50. Judd LL et
al.Â (2002). The long-term natural history of the weekly symptomatic
status of bipolar I disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59,
530--7. Julian MM (2013). Age at adoption from institutional care as a
window into the lasting effects of early experiences. Clinical Child and
Family Psychology Review, 16(2), 101--145. Judge C et al.Â (2015). Gender
dysphoria--prevalence and comorbidities in an Irish adult population.
Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders in Endocrine Diseases, 17, 24.
Juruena FM et al.Â (2015). Early life stress in depressive patients: Role
of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors and of
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity. Current Pharmaceutical
Design, 21, 1369--78. Kader L and Pantelis C (2009). Ethical aspects of
drug treatment. In: Bloch S and Green S (eds.) Psychiatric Ethics.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 339--400. Kahlbaum K (1863). Die
Gruppierung der Psychischen Krankheiten. Kafemann, Danzig. Kahn E
(1928). Die psychopathischen Personlichkeiten. In: Handbuch der
Geisteskrankheiten, Springer, Berlin. p.Â 227. Kahn RS and Keefe RSE
(2013). Schizophrenia is a cognitive illness. Time for a change in
focus. JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 1107--12. Kahn RS and Sommer I (2015). The
neurobiology and treatment of first-episode schizophrenia. Molecular
Psychiatry, 20, 84--97. Kahn RS et al.Â (2015). Schizophrenia. Nature
Reviews Disease Primers, 1, 1--23. Kaiser RH et al.Â (2015). Large-scale
network dysfunction in major depressive disorder: A meta-analysis of
resting-state functional connectivity. JAMA Psychiatry, 72, 603--11.
Kakuma R et al.Â (2011). Human resources for mental health care: current
situation and strategies for action. Lancet, 378, 1654--63. Kales HC et
al.Â (2011) Trends in antipsychotic use in dementia 1999--2007. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 68, 190--7. Kales HC et al.Â (2015). Assessment
and management of behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia.
British Medical Journal, 250, h369. Kalia LV and Lang AE (2015).
Parkinson's disease. Lancet, 386, 896--912. Kaltiala-Heino R (2009).
Involuntary psychiatric treatment. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 50,
27--34 http://dx.doi.org/ 10.3109/08039489609081385 Kambeitz JP and
Howes OD (2015). The serotonin transporter in depression: Meta-analysis
of in vivo and post mortem findings and implications for understanding
and treating depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 186, 358--66.

Kanaan RAA, Lepine JP and Wessely SC (2007). The association or
otherwise of the functional somatic syndromes. Psychosomatic Medicine,
69, 855--9. Kandel DB et al.Â (2013). Epidemiology of substance use
disorders. In: DS Charney, JD Buxbaum, P Sklaar, EJ Nestler (eds),
Neurobiology of Mental Illness, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp.Â 772--87. Kandel ER (1998). A new intellectual framework for
psychiatry. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 457--69. Kane J et
al.Â (1988). Clozapine for the treatment-resistant schizophrenic. A
double-blind comparison with chlorpromazine. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 45, 789--96. Kane JC et al.Â (2014). Mental, neurological,
and substance use problems among refugees in primary health care:
analysis of the Health Information System in 90 refugee camps. BMC
Medicine, 12, 1. Kane JM and Correll CU (2016). The role of clozapine in
treatment-resistant schizophrenia. JAMA Psychiatry, 73, 187--8. Kanner
AM (2016). Management of psychiatric and neurological comorbidities in
epilepsy. Nature Reviews Neurology, 12, 106--16. Kanner L (1943).
Autistic disturbance of affective contact. Nervous Child, 2, 217--50.
Kapil V et al.Â (2014). Misuse of the Î³-aminobutyric acid analogues
baclofen, gabapentin and pregabalin in the UK. British Journal of
Clinical Pharmacology, 78, 190--1. Kapur N and House A (1998). Against a
high-risk strategy in the prevention of suicide. Psychiatric Bulletin,
22, 534--6. Kapur S (2003). Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a
framework linking biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology in
schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 13--23. Kapur S,
Zipursky RB and Remington G (1999). Clinical and theoretical
implications of 5-HT2 and D2 receptor occupancy of clozapine,
risperidone, and olanzapine in schizophrenia. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 156, 286--93. Kapur S et al.Â (2005). Evidence for onset of
antipsychotic effects within the first 24 hours of treatment. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 939--46. Karch CM and Goate AM (2015).
Alzheimer's disease risk genes and mechanisms of disease pathogenesis.
Biological Psychiatry, 77, 43--51. Karg K et al.Â (2011). The serotonin
transporter promoter variant (5-HTTLPR), stress, and depression
meta-analysis revisited. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 444--54.
Kasanin J (1994). The acute schizoaffective psychoses. 1933. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 144--54. Kaski M (2009). Aetiology of
intellectual disability: general issues and prevention. In: Gelder MG,
Andreasen NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr and Geddes JR (eds.) The New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
pp.Â 1830--7. Katerndahl DA (1993). Lifetime prevalence of panic states.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 246--9. Katon W et al.Â (1990).
Distressed high utilizers of medical care: DSM-III-R diagnoses and
treatment needs. General Hospital Psychiatry, 12, 355--62. Katon W, Lin
EHB and Kroenke K (2007). The association of depression and anxiety with
medical symptom burden in patients with chronic medical illness. General
Hospital Psychiatry, 29, 147--55.

827

82

828

References Katon WJ (2003). Clinical and health services relationships
between major depression, depressive symptoms, and general medical
illness. Biological Psychiatry, 54, 216--26. Katsakou C et al.Â (2011).
Why do some voluntary patients feel coerced into hospitalization? A
mixed-methods study. Psychiatry Research, 187, 275--82. Kaufman DM,
Milstein MJ (2017). Kaufman's Clinical Neurology for Psychiatrists, 8th
edn. Elsevier, Amsterdam. Kay DW et al.Â (1976). The differentiation of
paranoid from affective psychoses by patients' premorbid
characteristics. British Journal of Psychiatry, 129, 207--15. Kay DWK
and Roth M (1961). Environmental and hereditary factors in the
schizophrenias of old age ('late paraphrenia') and their bearing on the
general problem of causation in schizophrenia. Journal of Mental
Science, 107, 649--86. Kay DWK, Beamish P and Roth M (1964). Old age
mental disorders in Newcastle-upon-Tyne: 1: a study in prevalence.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 110, 146--58. Kay SR, Fiszbein A and
Opler LA (1987). The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13, 261--76. Kaye C and Lingiah T
(2000). Culture and Ethnicity in Secure Psychiatric Practice: Working
with difference. Jessica Kingsley, London. Kaye WH et al.Â (2013).
Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels: the neurobiology of anorexia
nervosa. Trends in Neurosciences, 36, 110--20. Keel P and Forney KJ
(2013). Psychosocial risk factors for eating disorder. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 46, 433--9. Kehagia AA, Barker RA and
Robbins TW (2010). Neuropsychological and clinical heterogeneity of
cognitive impairment and dementia in patients with Parkinson's disease.
Lancet Neurology, 9, 1200--13. Kelleher I et al.Â (2012). Prevalence of
psychotic symptoms in childhood and adolescence: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of population-based studies. Psychological Medicine, 42,
1857--63. Kellner CH et al.Â (2006). Continuation electroconvulsive
therapy vs pharmacotherapy for relapse prevention in major depression: a
multisite study from the Consortium for Research in Electroconvulsive
Therapy (CORE). Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 1337--44. Kellner CH
et al.Â (2010). Bifrontal, bitemporal and right unilateral electrode
placement in ECT: randomised trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196,
226--34. Kelly BD (2015). Best interests, mental capacity legislation
and the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
BJPsych Advances, 21, 188--95. Kelly C (2008). Memory clinics.
Psychiatry, 7, 61--3. Kemner SM et al.Â (2015). The role of life events
and psychological factors in the onset of first and recurrent mood
episodes in bipolar offspring: Results from the Dutch Bipolar Offspring
Study. Psychological Medicine, 45, 2571--81. Kendall T et al.Â (2013).
Management of autism in children and young people: summary of NICE and
SCIE guidance. British Medical Journal, 347, f4865. Kendell L et
al.Â (2014). Crime and psychiatric disorders among youth in the US
population: an analysis of the national comorbidity survey---adolescent
supplement. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 53, 888--98.

Kendell RE (1975). The Role of Diagnosis in Psychiatry. Blackwell,
Oxford. Kendler KS (1982). Demography of paranoid psychosis (delusional
disorder). Archives of General Psychiatry, 39, 890--902. Kendler KS
(1997). The diagnostic validity of melancholic major depression in a
population-based sample of female twins. Archives of General Psychiatry,
54, 299--304. Kendler KS (2001). Twin studies of psychiatric
illness---an update. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 1005--14.
Kendler KS (2005). 'A gene for...': the nature of gene action in
psyhiatric disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1243--52.
Kendler KS and Walsh D (1995). Schizophreniform disorder, delusional
disorder and psychotic disorder not otherwise specified: clinical
features, outcome and familial psychopathology. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 91, 370--8. Kendler KS, Gruenberg AM and Strauss JS
(1981). An independent analysis of the Copenhagen sample for the Danish
adoption study of schizophrenia. The relationship between schizotypal
personality disorder and schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry,
38, 982--7. Kendler KS, Masterson CC and Davis KL (1985). Psychiatric
illness in first-degree relatives of patients with paranoid psychosis,
schizophrenia and medical illness. British Journal of Psychiatry, 47,
524--31. Kendler KS, Neale MC and Walsh D (1995). Evaluating the
spectrum concept of schizophrenia in the Roscommon Family Study.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 749--54. Kendler KS et al.Â (2001).
The genetic epidemiology of irrational fears and phobias in men.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 257--65. Kendler KS, Gardner CO and
Prescott CA (2002). Toward a comprehensive developmental model for major
depression in women. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 1133--45.
Kendler KS et al.Â (2003). Life event dimensions of loss, humiliation,
entrapment and danger in the prediction of onsets of major depression
and generalized anxiety. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 789--96.
Kendler KS, Kuhn J and Prescott CA (2004). The interrelationship of
neuroticism, sex, and stressful life events in the prediction of
episodes of major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161,
631--6. Kendler KS et al.Â (2006). Dimensional representations of DSM-IV
cluster A personality disorders in a population-based sample of
Norwegian twins: a multivariate study. Psychological Medicine, 36,
1583--91. Kendler KS et al.Â (2007). The heritability of cluster A
personality disorders assessed by both personal interview and
questionnaire. Psychological Medicine, 37, 655--65. Kendler KS et
al.Â (2013). Familial influences on conduct disorder reflect 2 genetic
factors and 1 shared environmental factor. JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 78--86.
Kendrick T, Burns T and Freeling P (1995). Randomised controlled trial
of teaching general practitioners to carry out structured assessments of
their long-term mentally ill patients. British Medical Journal, 311,
93--8. Kennedy N et al.Â (2004). Ethnic differences in first clinical
presentation of bipolar disorder: Results from an epidemiological study.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 83, 161--8.

829

References Kennedy Bergen R, Edleson JL and Renzetti CM (2005). Violence
against Women: Classic papers. Pearson Education, Inc., Boston, MA.
Kenworthy T et al.Â (2004). Psychological Interventions for those who
have Sexually Offended or are at risk of Offending (Review). The
Cochrane Collaboration, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. Keown P et
al.Â (2011). Association between provision of mental illness beds and
rate of involuntary admissions in the NHS in England 1988--2008:
ecological study. British Medical Journal, 343, d3736. Kerkhof A (2000).
Attempted suicide; patterns and trends. In: K Hawton and K van Heeringen
(eds.) The International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide. John
Wiley & Sons, Chichester. pp.Â 49--64. Kernberg OF (1975). Borderline
Conditions and Pathological Narcissism. Jason Aronson, New York.
Keshavan MS et al.Â (2014). Changes in the adolescent brain and the
pathophysiology of psychotic disorders. Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 549--58.
Kessing LV et al.Â (2015). Use of lithium and anticonvulsants and the
rate of chronic kidney disease: a nationwide populationbased study. JAMA
Psychiatry, 72, 1182--191. Kessing LV et al.Â (2015). Causes of decreased
life expectancy over the life span in bipolar disorder. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 180, 142--7. Kessler RC, Zhao S and Katz SJ (1999).
Past-year use of outpatient services for psychiatric problems in the
National Comorbidity Survey. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156,
115--23. Kessler RC (2004). The epidemiology of dual diagnosis.
Biological Psychiatry, 56, 730--7. Kessler RC et al.Â (2005a). Lifetime
prevalence and age-ofonset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry,
62, 593--602. Kessler RC et al.Â (2005b). Prevalence, severity and
comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617--27. Kessler
RC et al.Â (2005c) Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of
DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey replication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593--602. Kessler RC et al.Â (2012).
Twelve-month and lifetime prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety
and mood disorders in the United States. International Journal of
Methods in Psychiatric Research, 21, 169--84. Kessler RC et al.Â (2013)
The prevalence and correlates of binge eating disorder in the World
Health Organization World Mental Health Surveys. Biological Psychiatry,
73, 904--14. Kety SS et al.Â (1994). Mental illness in the biological and
adoptive relatives of schizophrenic adoptees. Replication of the
Copenhagen Study in the rest of Denmark. Archives of General Psychiatry,
51, 442--55. Khandaker GM et al.Â (2011). A quantitative meta-analysis of
population-based studies of premorbid intelligence and schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research, 132, 220--7. Khandaker GM et al.Â (2013).
Prenatal maternal infection, neurodevelopment and adult schizophrenia: a
systematic review of population-based studies. Psychological Medicine,
43, 239--57.

Khasraw M and Posner JB (2010). Neurological complications of systemic
cancer. Lancet Neurology, 9, 1214--27. Kieling C et al.Â (2011). Child
and adolescent mental health worldwide: evidence for action. Lancet,
378, 1515--25. Kilbourne EM et al.Â (1996). Tryptophan produced by Showa
Denko and epidemic eosinophilic-myalgia syndrome. Journal of
Rheumatology, 23, 81--8. Killaspy H et al.Â (2006). The REACT study:
randomised evaluation of assertive community treatment in north London.
British Medical Journal, 332, 815--18. Kiloh LG, Smith JS and Johnson GF
(1988). Physical Treatments in Psychiatry. Blackwell Scientific
Publications, Oxford. Kilpatrick DG and Acierno R (2003). Mental health
needs of crime victims: epidemiology and outcomes. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 16, 119--32. King-Hele S et al.Â (2009). Risk of stillbirth and
neonatal death linked with maternal mental illness: a national cohort
study. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 94, F105--10. Kipps CM and
Hodges JR (2005). Cognitive assessment for clinicians. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 76 (Suppl. 1), i22--30.
Kirkbride J et al.Â (2012a). Incidence of schizophrenia and other
psychoses in England, 1950--2009: A systematic review and meta-analyses.
PLoS One, 7, e31660. Kirkbride J et al.Â (2012b). Prenatal nutrition,
epigenetics and schizophrenia risk: can we test causal effects?
Epigenomics, 4, 303--15. Kirov G et al.Â (2015). What a psychiatrist
needs to know about copy number variants. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 21, 157--63. Kisely SR and Goldberg DP (1996). Physical and
psychiatric comorbidity in general practice. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 169, 236--42. Kiser DP et al.Â (2015). Annual Research
Review: The (epi) genetics of neurodevelopmental disorders in the era of
wholegenome sequencing--unveiling the dark matter. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 56, 278--95. Kishi T et al.Â (2012). Are
antipsychotics effective for the treatment of anorexia nervosa? Results
from a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 73, 757--66. Klein M (1952). Notes on some schizoid
mechanisms. In: J Jacobs and J Riviere (eds.) Developments in
Psychoanalysis. Hogarth Press, London. pp.Â 292--320. Klein M (1964).
Delineation of two drug-responsive anxiety syndromes.
Psychopharmacologia, 5, 397--408. Klein RG et al.Â (2012). Clinical and
functional outcome of childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
33 years later. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 1295--303. Kleinman
A (2009). Global mental health: a failure of humanity. Lancet, 374,
603--4. Kleinridders A et al.Â (2014). Insulin action in brain regulates
systemic metabolism and brain function. Diabetes, 63, 2232--43. Klerman
GL et al.Â (1984). Interpersonal Psychotherapy of Depression. Basic
Books, New York. Klerman GL et al.Â (1987). Efficacy of a brief
psychosocial intervention for symptoms of stress and distress among
patients in primary care. Medical Care, 25, 1078--88. Kliegman RM et
al.Â (eds.)(2016). Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 20th edn. Elsevier,
Philadelphia.

829

830

830

References Knapp M et al.Â (1999). Private, voluntary or public?
Comparative cost-effectiveness in community mental health care. Policy
and Politics, 27, 25--41. Knappe S et al.Â (2012). Re-examining the
differential familial liability of agoraphobia and panic disorder.
Depression and Anxiety, 29, 931--8. Knight T et al.Â (2012). Prevalence
of tic disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pediatric
Neurology, 47, 77--90. Knott CS et al.Â (2015). All cause mortality and
the case for age specific alcohol consumption guidelines: pooled
analyses of up to 10 population based cohorts. British Medical Journal,
350, h384. Koch H et al.Â (2007). Demographic characteristics and quality
of life of patients with unexplained complaints: a descriptive study in
general practice. Quality of Life Research, 16, 1483--9. Koch JLA
(1891). Die Psychopathischen Minderwertigkeiter. Dorn, Ravensburg.
Koenig HG and Blazer DG (1992). Epidemiology of geriatric affective
disorders. Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 8, 235--51. Koesters M et
al.Â (2013). Agomelatine efficacy and acceptability revisited: systematic
review and meta-analysis of published and unpublished randomised trials.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 203, 179--87. Koning JPF et al.Â (2010).
Dyskinesia and parkinsonism in antipsychotic-naive patients with
schizophrenia, first-degree relatives and healthy controls: a
meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 723--31. Konrad N et
al.Â (2015). Paraphilias. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 28, 440--4.
Koopmans GT, Donker MCH and Rutten FHH (2005). Length of hospital stay
and health services use of medical inpatients with comorbid noncognitive
mental disorders: a review of the literature. General Hospital
Psychiatry, 27, 44--56. Kooyman I and Walsh E (2011). Societal outcomes
in schizophrenia. In: D Weinberger and PJ Harrison (eds.) Schizophrenia,
3rd edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 644--65. Kotov R et al.Â (2013).
Boundaries of schizoaffective disorder. Revisiting Kraepelin. JAMA
Psychiatry, 70, 1276--86. Kowalski RM et al.Â (2014). Bullying in the
digital age: A critical review and meta-analysis of cyberbullying
research among youth. Psychological Bulletin, 140, 1073. Kozma A,
Mansell J and Beadle-Brown J (2009). Outcomes in different residential
settings for people with intellectual disability: a systematic review.
American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 114,
193--222. Kraepelin E (1904). Clinical Psychiatry: A textbook for
students and physicians. Macmillan, New York. Kraepelin E (1919).
Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia. Livingstone, Edinburgh. Kraepelin E
(1921). Manic Depressive Insanity and Paranoia. Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Kreitman N (1961). The reliability of psychiatric diagnosis. Journal of
Mental Science, 107, 876--86. Kreitman N (1976). The coal gas story.
United Kingdom suicide rates, 1960--71. British Journal of Preventative
and Social Medicine, 30, 86--93. Kreitman N (ed.) (1977). Parasuicide.
John Wiley & Sons, London. Kretschmer E (1927). Der sensitive
Beziehungswahn. Reprinted and translated as Chapter 8 in Themes and
Variations in European Psychiatry (eds.Â SR Hirsch and M Shepherd).
Wright, Bristol (1974).

Kril JJ and Harper CG (2012). Neuroanatomy and neuropathology associated
with Korsakoff's syndrome. Neuropsychology Review, 22, 72--80. Kroenke
K, Spitzer MD and Williams DSW (2001). The PHQ9: validity of a brief
depression severity measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 16,
606--13. Krstic D and Knuesel I (2013). Deciphering the mechanism
underlying late-onset Alzheimer disease. Nature Reviews Neurology, 9,
25--34. Krupa T et al.Â (2005). How do people who receive assertive
community treatment experience this service? Psychiatric Rehabilitation
Journal, 29, 18--24. Kubler-Ross E (1969). On Death and Dying.
Macmillan, New York. Kuhn S and Gallinat J (2013). Resting-state brain
activity in schizophrenia and major depression: a quantitative
metaanalysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39, 358--65. Kumari V and Postma P
(2005). Nicotine use in schizophrenia: the self-medication hypotheses.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 29, 1021--34. Kumsta R, Kreppner
J, Kennedy M, Knights N, Rutter M and Sonuga-Barke E (2015).
Psychological consequences of early global deprivation. European
Psychologist. Kuyken W et al.Â (2015). Effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of mindfulness based cognitive therapy compared with
maintenance antidepressant treatment in the prevention of depressive
relapse of recurrence (PREVENT): A randomised controlled trial. The
Lancet, 386, 63--73. Kvale G, Berggren U and Milgrom P (2004). Dental
fear in adults: a meta-analysis of behavioural interventions. Community
Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology, 32, 250--64. Lachs MS and Pillemer KA
(2015). Elder abuse. New England Journal of Medicine, 373, 1947--56.
Lally J et al.Â (2016). Augmentation of clozapine with electroconvulsive
therapy in treatment resistant schizophrenia: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 171, 215--24. Lamontagne Y et
al.Â (2000). Anxiety, significant losses, depression and irrational
beliefs in first-offence shop-lifters. Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry,45, 63--9. Landi P et al.Â (2016). Insight in psychiatry and
neurology: state of the art, and hypotheses. Harvard Review of
Psychiatry, 24, 214--28. Landsberger SA et al.Â (2013). Assessment and
treatment of deaf adults with psychiatric disorders: a review of the
literature for practitioners. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 19,
87--97. Langa KM and Levine DA (2014). The diagnosis and management of
mild cognitive impairment. A clinical review. JAMA, 312, 2551--61.
Langbaum JB et al.Â (2013). Ushering in the study and treatment of
preclinical Alzheimer disease. Nature Reviews Neurology, 9, 371--81.
Langdon R et al.Â (2014). The Fregoli delusion: A disorder of person
identification and tracking. Topics in Cognitive Science, 6, 615--31.
Lange J (1931). Crime as Destiny (transl. C Haldane). George Allen,
London. Langfeldt G (1961). The erotic jealousy syndrome. A clinical
study. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 36 (Suppl. 151), 7--68. Langguth
B et al.Â (2013). Tinnitus: causes and management. Lancet Neurology, 12,
920--30.

831

References LÃ¥ngstrÃ¶m et al.Â (2015). Sexual offending runs in families: A
37year nationwide study. International Journal of Epidemiology, 44,
713--20. Large M et al.Â (2008). Homicide due to mental disorder in
England and Wales over 50 years. British Journal of Psychiatry, 193,
130--3. Large M et al.Â (2011). Cannabis use and earlier onset of
psychosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 555--61. Larsen ER et
al.Â (2015). Use of psychotropic drugs during pregnancy and
breast-feeding. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 445, 1--28. LasÃ¨gue C
(1877). Les exhibitionnistes. Union Medicale, 23, 709--14. Lau JYF and
Eley TC (2010). The genetics of mood disorders. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 6, 313--37. Laursen TM et al.Â (2014). Excess early
mortality in schizophrenia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 10,
425--48. Lawrence AA. (2010). Sexual orientation versus age of onset as
bases for typologies (subtypes) for gender identity disorder in
adolescents and adults. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 514--45. Lawrie
S et al.Â (2016a). Improving classification of psychoses. Lancet
Psychiatry, 3, 367--74. Lawrie S et al.Â (2016b). Towards diagnostic
markers for the psychoses. Lancet Psychiatry, 3, 375--85. Lazare A
(1973). Hidden conceptual models in clinical psychiatry. New England
Journal of Medicine, 288, 345--51. Leadership Alliance for the Care of
Dying People (2014). One Chance to get it Right: Improving people's
experience of care in the last few days and hours of life. LACDP.
Leckman JF et al.Â (2015). Clinical assessment and diagnostic
formulation. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 403--18. Le Couteur A et
al.Â (2015). Autism spectrum disorder. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds).
Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
pp.Â 661--82. Lecrubier Y et al.Â (1997). The Mini International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI). A short diagnostic structured
interview: Reliability and validity according to the CIDI. European
Psychiatry, 12, 224--31. LeDoux J (1998). The Emotional Brain.
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London. Lee RS et al.Â (2014). A meta-analysis of
neuropsychological functioning in first-episode bipolar disorders.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 57, 1--11. Leentjens AFG et al.Â (2011).
Psychosomatic medicine and consultation-liaison psychiatry: scope of
practice, processes, and competencies for psychiatrists or psychosomatic
medicine specialists: a consensus statement of the European Association
of Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry and the Academy of Psychosomatic
Medicine. Psychosomatics, 52, 19--25. Leff J (1993). All the homeless
people---where do they all come from? British Medical Journal, 306,
669--70. Leff J et al.Â (1982). A controlled trial of social intervention
in the families of schizophrenic patients. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 141, 121--34. Leff J et al.Â (1985). A controlled trial of
social intervention in the families of schizophrenic patients: two-year
follow-up. British Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 594--600.

Leggio L et al.Â (2009). Typologies of alcohol dependence: from Jellinek
to genetics and beyond. Neuropsychology Review, 19, 115--29. Le Grange D
et al.Â (2015). Randomized clinical trial of familybased treatment and
cognitive-behavioral therapy for adolescent bulimia nervosa. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 54, 886--94.
Lehmann SW (2003). Psychiatric disorders in older women. International
Review of Psychiatry, 15, 269--79. Lehn A et al.Â (2016). Functional
neurological disorders: mechanisms and treatment. Journal of Neurology,
263, 611--20. Lehrke R (1972). A theory of X-linkage of major
intellectual traits. American Journal of Mental Deficiency, 76, 611--19.
Leibenluft E et al.Â (2015). Bipolar disorder in childhood. In: A. Thapar
et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 858--73. Lemoine P and Nava Z (2012).
Prolonged-release formulation of melatonin (Circadin) for the treatment
of insomnia. Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy, 13, 895--905. Lemoine P
and Zisapel N (2012). Prolonged-release formulation of melatonin
(Circadin) for the treatment of insomnia. Expert Opinion on
Pharmacotherapy, 13(6), 895--905. Lennox B, Coles A and Vincent A
(2012). Antibody-mediated encephalitis: a treatable cause of
schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 200, 92--4. Lennox B et
al.Â (2017) Prevalence and clinical associations of neuronal cell surface
antibodies in acute first episode psychosis: a cohort study. Lancet
Psychiatry, 4, 42--48. Leonhard K (1957). The Classification of
Endogenous Psychoses, 8th edn. (transl. R Berman). Irvington, New York.
Leonhard K, Korff I and Schultz H (1962). Die Temperamente und den
Familien der monopolaren und bipolaren phasishen Psychosen. Psychiatrie
und Neurologie, 143, 416--34. Lepping P, Russell I and Freudenmann RW
(2007). Antipsychotic treatment of primary delusional
parasitosis---systematic review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 191,
198--205. Lepping P, Baker C and Freudenmann RW (2010). Delusional
infestation in dermatology in the UK: prevalence, treatment strategies,
and feasibility of a randomized controlled trial. Clinical and
Experimental Dermatology, 35, 841--84. Lesca G et al.Â (2013). GRIN2A
mutations in acquired epileptic aphasia and related childhood focal
epilepsies and encephalopathies with speech and language dysfunction.
Nature Genetics, 45, 1061--6. Lesch KP et al.Â (1996). Association of
anxiety-related traits with a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter
gene regulatory region. Science, 274, 1527--31. Lester G et al.Â (2004).
Unusually persistent complainants. British Journal of Psychiatry, 184,
352--6. Leucht S, Kissling W and McGrath J (2004). Lithium for
schizophrenia revisited: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65,
177--86. Leucht S et al.Â (2009). Second-generation versus
first-generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: a meta-analysis.
Lancet, 373, 31--41. Leucht S et al.Â (2012a). Putting the efficacy of
psychiatric and general medicine medication into perspective: Review of
meta-analyses. British Journal of Psychiatry, 200, 97--106.

831

832

832

References Leucht S et al.Â (2012b). Antipsychotic drugs versus placebo
for relapse prevention in schizophrenia: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet, 379, 2063--71. Leucht S et al.Â (2013).
Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 15 antipsychotic drugs in
schizophrenia: a multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Lancet, 382,
951--62. Leung CM, Chung WS and So EP (2002). Burning charcoal: an
indigenous method of suicide in Hong Kong. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 63, 447--50. Levin E (1997). Carers. In: R Jacoby and C
Oppenheimer (eds.) Psychiatry in the Elderly. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. pp. 392--402. Levkovitz Y et al.Â (2011). Efficacy of
antidepressant for dysthymia: A meta-analysis of placebo-controlled
randomized trials. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 509--14. Lewis AJ
(1934). Melancholia: a clinical survey of depressive states. Journal of
Mental Science, 80, 277--8. Lewis AJ (1936). Problems of obsessional
neurosis. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 29, 352--36.
Lewis AJ (1953). Health as a social concept. British Journal of
Sociology, 4, 109--24. Lewis AJ (1970). Paranoia and paranoid: a
historical perspective. Psychological Medicine, 1, 2--12. Lewis EO
(1929). Report on an Investigation into the Incidence of Mental
Deficiency in Six Areas 1925--27. HMSO, London. Lewis G and Appleby L
(1988). Personality disorder: the patients psychiatrists dislike.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 44--9. Lewis G, Hawton K and Jones P
(1997). Strategies for preventing suicide. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 171, 351--4. Lezak MD et al.Â (2012). Neuropsychological
Assessment. 5th edn. Oxford University Press, New York. Li M et
al.Â (2016). Maltreatment in childhood substantially increases the risk
of adult depression and anxiety in prospective cohort studies:
Systematic review, meta-analysis, and proportional attributable
fractions. Psychological Medicine, 46, 717--30. Lichtenstein P et
al.Â (2009). Common genetic determinants of schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder in Swedish families: a population-based study. Lancet, 373,
234--9. Licinio J and Wong M-L (2016). Serotonergic neurons derived from
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs): A new pathway for research on
the biology and pharmacology of major depression. Molecular Psychiatry,
21, 1--2. Liddle PF (1987). The symptoms of chronic schizophrenia. A
re-examination of the positive--negative dichotomy. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 151, 145--51. Liddle PF (2013). Tardive dyskinesia in
schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 203, 6--7. Liddle PF et
al.Â (1992). Patterns of cerebral blood flow in schizophrenia. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 179--86. Lieb K et al.Â (2004). Borderline
personality disorder. Lancet, 364, 453--61. Lieb K et al.Â (2010).
Pharmacotherapy for borderline personality disorder. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 196, 4--12. Lievesley K et al.Â (2014). A review of the
predisposing, precipitating and perpetuating factors in chronic fatigue
syndrome in children and adolescents. Clinical Psychology Review, 34,
233--48. Lin JJ et al.Â (2012). Uncovering the neurobehavioural
comorbidities of epilepsy across the lifespan. Lancet, 380, 1180--92.

Linde K (2009). St John's Wort. Forschende Komplementarmedizin, 16,
146--55. Linde K et al.Â (2005). St John's Wort for depression:
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 186, 99--107. Lindesay J (2008) Neurotic disorders. In: R
Jacoby, C Oppenheimer, T Dening and A Thomas (eds.) The Oxford Textbook
of Old Age Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 573--90.
Linehan MM (1993). Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline
Personality Disorder. Guilford, New York. Linehan MM et al.Â (1991).
Cognitive-behavioral treatment of chronically parasuicidal borderline
patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1060--4. Linehan MM et
al.Â (1994). Interpersonal outcome of cognitive behavioural treatment for
chronically suicidal borderline patients. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 151, 1771--6. Lingford-Hughes A et al.Â (2010).
Neuropharmacology of addiction and how it informs treatment. British
Medical Bulletin, 96, 93--110. Lingford-Hughes AR et al.Â (2012). BAP
updated guidelines: evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacological
management of substance abuse, harmful use, addiction and comorbidity:
recommendations from BAP. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 26, 899--52.
Linnoila MI and Virkkunen M (1992). Aggression, suicidality and
serotonin. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 53, 46--51. Linschoten M et
al.Â (2016). Sensate focus: a critical literature review. Sexual and
Relationship Therapy, 31, 230--47. Linscott RJ and van Os J (2013). An
updated and conservative systematic review and meta-analysis of
epidemiological evidence on psychotic experiences in children and
adults: on the pathway from proneness to persistence to dimensional
expression across mental disorders. Psychological Medicine, 43,
1133--49. Linton SJ (2000). A review of psychological risk factors in
back and neck pain. Spine, 25, 1148--56. Lipowski ZJ (1988).
Somatization: the concept and its clinical application. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 145, 1358--68. Litt MD et al.Â (2009). Momentary pain and
coping in temporomandibular disorder pain: exploring mechanisms of
cognitive behavioural treatment for chronic pain. Pain, 145, 160--8.
Littlewood R and Lipsedge M (1997). Aliens and Alienists, 3rd edn.
Routledge, London. Liu CC et al.Â (2013). Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer
disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nature Reviews Neurology, 9,
106--18. Livingston G et al.Â (2014a). Long-term clinical and
costeffectiveness of psychological intervention for family carers of
people with dementia: a single-blind, randomised, controlled trial.
Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 539--48. Livingston G et al.Â (2014b).
Non-pharmacological interventions for agitation in dementia: systematic
review of randomized controlled trials. British Journal of Psychiatry,
205, 436--42. Llaneza P et al.Â (2012). Depressive symptoms and the
menopause transition. Maturitas, 71, 120--30. Lock J (2015). An update
on evidence-based psychosocial treatments for eating disorders in
children and adolescents. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent
Psychology, 44, 707--21.

83

References Lodhi S and Agrawal N (2012). Neurocognitive problems in
epilepsy. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 18, 232--40. Logue MW et
al.Â (2015). The Psychiatric Genomics Consortium Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder Workgroup: Posttraumatic stress disorder enters the age of
large-scale genomic collaboration. Neuropsychopharmacology, 40,
2287--97. Lopresti AL and Drummond PD (2013). Obesity and psychiatric
disorders: commonalities in dysregulated biological pathways and their
implications for treatment. Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology and
Biological Psychiatry, 45, 92--9. Loranger AW, Janca A and Sartorius N
(eds.) (1997). Assessment and Diagnosis of Personality Disorders: the
ICD-10 International Personality Disorder Examination (IPDE). Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge. Lovestone S (2009a). Dementia: Alzheimer's
disease. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor JJJr and Geddes JR
(eds) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. pp.Â 333--43. Lovestone S (2009b). Other disorders of the nervous
system. In: David A et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry. Wiley
Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 845--905. Loy CT et al.Â (2014). Genetics of
dementia. Lancet, 383, 828--40. Lu H, Yang Y, Liu P (2013). Brain
imaging methodologies, 4th edn. In: Charney DS, Sklar P, Buxbaum JD and
Nester EJ (eds.) Neurobiology of Mental Illness. Open University Press,
New York. Ch. 15. Lu H-C and Mackie K (2016). An introduction to the
endogenous cannabinoid system. Biological Psychiatry, 79, 516--25. Lubke
GH et al.Â (2014). Genome-wide analyses of borderline personality
features. Molecular Psychiatry, 19, 923--9. Lubs HA et al.Â (2012).
Fragile X and X-linked intellectual disability: four decades of
discovery. The American Journal of Human Genetics, 90, 579--90. Luby JL
et al.Â (2003). The clinical picture of depression in preschool children.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 42,
340--8. Luciano M (2014). Proposals for ICD-11: a report for WPA
membership. World Psychiatry, 13, 206--8. Lund C et al.Â (2011). Poverty
and mental disorders: breaking the cycle in low-income and middle-income
countries. Lancet, 378, 1502--14. Lund C et al.Â (2016). Integration of
mental health into primary care in low- and middle-income countries: the
PRIME mental healthcare plans. British Journal of Psychiatry, 208,
s1--s3. Luppa M et al.Â (2012). Age- and gender-specific prevalence of
depression in latest-life---systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 136, 212--21. Lustyk MKB et al.Â (2009).
Cognitive-behavioural therapy for premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual
dysphoric disorder: a systematic review. Archives of Women's Mental
Health, 12, 85--96. Luty J (2014). Drug and alcohol addiction: new
challenges. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 20, 413--21. Luty J
(2015a). Drug and alcohol addiction: do psychosocial treatments work?
Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 21, 132--43. Luty J (2015b). Drug and
alcohol addiction: new pharmacotherapies. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 21, 33--41. Lyons MJ et al.Â (1995). Differential
hereditability of adult and juvenile antisocial traits. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 52, 906--15.

Lyst MJ and Bird A (2015). Rett syndrome: a complex disorder with simple
roots. Nature Reviews Genetics, 16, 261--75. Mace C (2001). All in the
mind? The history of hysterical conversion as a clinical concept. In: PW
Halligan, C Bass and JC Marshall (eds.) Contemporary Approaches to the
Study of Hysteria: Clinical and theoretical perspectives. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Mackenzie IR et al.Â (2010). Nomenclature and
nosology for neuropathologic subtypes of frontotemporal lobar
degeneration: an update. Acta Neuropathologica, 119, 1--4. MacLeod R et
al.Â (2013). Recommendations for the predictive genetic test in
Huntington's disease. Clinical Genetics, 83, 221--31. Macritchie KA and
Young AH (2004). Adverse syndromes associated with lithium. In: P
Haddad, S Dursun and B Deakin (eds.) Adverse Syndromes and Psychiatric
Drugs. Oxford University Press, New York. pp.Â 90--124. Maden A (2007).
Dangerous and severe personality disorder: antecedents and origins.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 8--11. Maercker A et al.Â (2008).
Adjustment disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder and depressive
disorders in old age: findings from a community survey. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 49, 113--20. Maes M et al.Â (2011). The new '5-HT' hypothesis
of depression: cell-mediated immune activation induces indoleamine 2,
3-dioxgenase which leads to lower plasma tryptophan and an increased
synthesis of detrimental tryptophan catabolites (TRYCATs), both of which
contribute to the onset of depression. Progress in
Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 35, 702--21. Maguire
M et al.Â (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Criminology, 5th edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Maher B (2008). The case of the missing
heritability. Nature, 456, 18--21. Mahlios et al.Â (2013). The autoimmune
basis of narcolepsy. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 23, 767--73.
Maiden NL et al.Â (2003). Quantifying the burden of emotional ill-health
amongst patients referred to a specialist rheumatology service.
Rheumatology, 42, 750--7. Maina G, Forner F and Bogetto F (2005).
Randomized controlled trial comparing brief dynamic and supportive
therapy with waiting list condition in minor depressive disorders.
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 74, 43--50. Maj M (2005). 'Psychiatric
comorbidity': an artefact of current diagnostic systems? British Journal
of Psychiatry, 186, 182--4. Malhi GS (2015). Antidepressants in bipolar
depression: yes, no, maybe? Evidence-based. Mental Health, 18, 100--2.
Malmberg A, Simkin S and Hawton K (1999). Suicide in farmers. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 175, 103--5. Malt UF (2009). Psychiatric aspects
of accidents, burns and other trauma. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ
LÃ³pez-IborJr and JR Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry,
2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.1105--13. Mandy W and Lai
MC (2016). Annual Research Review: The role of the environment in the
developmental psychopathology of autism spectrum condition. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 57, 271--92.
Maniglio R. (2013). Prevalence of child sexual abuse among adults and
youths with bipolar disorder: A systematic review. Clinical Psychology
Review, 33, 561--73.

833

834

834

References Mann J et al.Â (2005). Suicide prevention strategies: a
systematic review. Journal of the American Medical Association, 294,
2064--76. Mann KF and Kiefer F (2009). Alcohol and psychiatric and
physical disorders. In: Gelder MG, Andreason NC, Lopez-Ibor JJJr and
Geddes JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 442--7. Manoranjitham SD et al.Â (2010).
Risk factors for suicide in rural south India. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 196, 26--30. Manschreck TC and Khan NL (2006). Recent
advances in the treatment of delusional disorder. Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry, 51, 114--19. Manu P et al.Â (2014). Markers of inflammation
in schizophrenia: association vs.Â causation. World Psychiatry, 13,
189--92. March JS and Vitiello B (2009). Clinical messages from the
Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS). American Journal
of Psychiatry, 166, 1118--23. Marcks BA et al.Â (2011). Longitudinal
course of obsessivecompulsive disorder in patients with anxiety
disorders: A 15year prospective follow-up study. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 52, 670--7. Marcus MD and Wildes JE (2009). Obesity: is it a
mental disorder? International Journal of Eating Disorders, 42, 739--53.
Marder SR and Galderisi S (2017). The current conceptualization of
negative symptoms in schizophrenia. World Psychiatry, 16, 14--24.
Margoshes BG and Webster BS (2000). Why do occupational injuries have
different health outcomes? In: TG Mayer, RJ Gatchel and PB Polatin
(eds.) Occupational Musculoskeletal Disorders. Lippincott, Williams &
Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA. Markowitsch HJ and Staniloiu A (2012).
Amnesic disorders. Lancet, 380, 1429--40. Markowitz JC (2003).
Interpersonal psychotherapy for chronic depression. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 59, 847--58. Marneros A et al.Â (2012). Delusional
disorders---are they simply paranoid schizophrenia? Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 38, 561--8. Marques JK et al.Â (2005). Effects of a relapse
prevention program on sexual recidivism: final results from California's
Sex Offender Treatment and Evaluation Project (SOTEP). Sexual Abuse: a
Journal of Research and Treatment, 17(1), 79--107. Marshall EJ (2008).
Doctors' health and fitness to practice: treating addicted doctors.
Occupational Medicine, 58, 334--40. Marshall M (2003). Acute psychiatric
day hospitals. British Medical Journal, 327, 116--17. Marshall M and
Lockwood A (1998). Assertive community treatment for people with severe
mental disorders. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 2,
CD001089. Marshall M et al.Â (2003). Day hospital versus admission for
acute psychiatric disorders. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
Issue 1, CD004026. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004026. Marshall WL and
Marshall LE. (2015). Psychological treatment of the paraphilias: a
review and an appraisal of effectiveness. Current Psychiatry Reports,
17, 1--6. Marshall M, Gray A, Lockwood A and Green R (1997). Case
management for severe mental disorders. The Cochrane Collaboration. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD000050. Marteau TM et al.Â (2009). Changing behaviour
through state intervention. British Medical Journal, 338, b1415.
MÃ¥rtensson B et al.Â (2015). Bright white light therapy in depression: a
critical review of the evidence. Journal of Affective Disorders, 182,
1--7.

Martin G et al.Â (2004). Correlates of firesetting in a community sample
of young adolescents. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
38, 148--54. Martin J et al.Â (2015). The relative contribution of common
and rare genetic variants to ADHD. Translational Psychiatry, 5, e506.
Masters WH and Johnson VE (1970). Human Sexual Inadequacy. Churchill,
London. Mataix-Cols D et al.Â (2010). Hoarding disorder: a new diagnosis
for DSM-V? Depression and Anxiety, 27(6), 556--72. Matson JL and
Williams LW. (2013). Differential diagnosis and comorbidity:
distinguishing autism from other mental health issues. Neuropsychiatry,
3, 233--43. Matsunaga S et al.Â (2015a). Memantine monotherapy for
Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One,
10, 30123289. Matsunaga S et al.Â (2015b). Combination therapy with
cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine for Alzheimer's disease: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. International Journal of
Neuropsychopharmacology, 18, 5. Mattheisen M et al.Â (2015). Genome-wide
association study in obsessive-compulsive disorder: Results from the
OCGAS. Molecular Psychiatry, 20, 337--44. Matthews FE et al.Â (2013). A
two-decade comparison of prevalence of dementia in individuals aged 65
years and older from three geographical areas of England: results of the
Cognitive Function and Ageing Study I and II. Lancet, 382, 1405--12.
Matthews G and Deary IJ (2009). Personality Traits, 3rd edn. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge. Maudsley H (1879). The Pathology of the
Mind. Macmillan, London. Maudsley H (1885). Responsibility in Mental
Disease. Kegan Paul and Trench, London. Maurer K, Volk S and Gerbaldo H
(1997). Auguste D and Alzheimer's disease. Lancet, 349, 1546--9. Maust
DT et al.Â (2015). Antipsychotics, other psychotropics, and the risk of
death in patients with dementia: number needed to harm. JAMA Psychiatry,
72, 438--45. Mavridis D et al.Â (2015). A primer on network meta-analysis
with emphasis on mental health. Evidence Based Mental Health, 18, 40--6.
May PA et al.Â (2014). Prevalence and characteristics of fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders. Pediatrics, 134, 855--66. Maynard BR et al.Â (2015).
Treatment for school refusal among children and adolescents: A
systematic review and metaanalysis. Research on Social Work Practice,
doi: 10.1177/ 1049731515598619. Mayou R (2014). Is the DSM-5 chapter on
somatic symptom disorder any better than DSM-IV somatoform disorder?
British Journal of Psychiatry, 204, 418--19. Mayou R and Farmer A
(2002). ABC of psychological medicine: functional somatic symptoms and
syndromes. British Medical Journal, 325, 265--8. Mayou RA, Ehlers A and
Hobbs M (2000). Psychological debriefing for road traffic accident
victims: three-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 589--93. Mazure CM and Maciejewski PK
(2003). A model of risk for major depression: effects of life stress and
cognitive style vary by age. Depression and Anxiety, 17, 26--33.

835

References McCartt AT, Hellinga LA and Kirley B (2010). The effects of
minimum legal drinking age 21 laws on alcohol-related driving in the
United States. Journal of Safety Research, 41, 173--81. McClellan J and
Stock S. (2013). Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of
children and adolescents with schizophrenia. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 52, 976--90. McClure GMG
(2000). Changes in suicide in England and Wales 1960--1997. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 64--7. McConnell D et al.Â (2014). Resilience
in families raising children with disabilities and behavior problems.
Research in Developmental Disabilities, 35, 833--48. McCool ME et
al.Â (2016). Prevalence of female sexual dysfunction among premenopausal
women: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies.
Sexual Medicine Reviews, 4, 197--212. McCutcheon P et al.Â (2015).
Treatment resistant or resistant to treatment? Antipsychotic plasma
levels in patients with poorly controlled psychotic symptoms. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 29, 892--7. McElroy S et al.Â (2012). Current
pharmacotherapy options for bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder.
Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy, 13, 2015--26. McElroy S et
al.Â (2015). Overview of the treatment of binge eating disorder. CNS
Spectrums, 20, 546--56. McElroy SL and Keck PE (2009). Habit and impulse
control disorder. In: MG Geder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, JR Geddes
(eds). New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp.Â 911--19. McEvoy J (2016). Supporting People with
Intellectual Disabilities Experiencing Loss and Bereavement: Theory and
Compassionate Practice. Sue Read (ed.). Jessica Kingsley Publishers,
London, 2014. McGirr A et al.Â (2015). A systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trials of
ketamine in the rapid treatment of major depressive episodes.
Psychological Medicine, 45, 693--704. McGorry PD (2015). Early
intervention in psychosis: obvious, effective, overdue. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 203, 310--18. McGrath J et al.Â (2008).
Schizophrenia: a concise overview of incidence, prevalence, and
mortality. Epidemiologic Reviews, 30, 67--76. McGrath JJ and Murray RM
(2011). Environmental risk factors in schizophrenia. In: D Weinberger
and PJ Harrison (eds.) Schizophrenia, 3rd edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
pp.Â 226--44. McGuffin P and Thapar A (1992). The genetics of personality
disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 12--23. McGuire J (2008).
A review of effective interventions for reducing aggression and
violence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 363,
2577--97. McKeith IG et al.Â (2017). Diagnosis and management of dementia
with Lewy bodies: fourth consensus report of the DLB Consortium.
Neurology, 89, 88--110. McKenna PJ (1984). Disorders with overvalued
ideas. British Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 579--85. McLaughlin KA et
al.Â (2012). Childhood adversities and first onset of psychiatric
disorders in a national sample of US adolescents. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 69, 1151--60.

McManus MA et al.Â (2013). Paraphilias: definition, diagnosis and
treatment. F1000prime Reports, 5, 36. McManus S et al.Â (2009). Adult
Psychiatric Morbidity in England, 2007. NHS Information Centre for
Health and Social Care, Leeds. McNally MR and Fremouw WJ. (2014).
Examining risk of escalation: A critical review of the exhibitionistic
behavior literature. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 19, 474--85.
McShane R et al.Â (1997). Do neuroleptic drugs hasten cognitive decline
in dementia? Prospective study with necropsy followup. British Medical
Journal, 314, 266--70. Meadow R (1985). Management of Munchausen
syndrome by proxy. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 60, 385--93.
Mechanic D (1978). Medical Sociology, 2nd edn. Free Press, Glencoe, IL.
Medalia A, Saperstein AM (2013). Does cognitive remediation for
schizophrenia improve functional outcomes? Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 26, 151--7. Medic G et al.Â (2013). Dosing frequency and
adherence in chronic psychiatric disease: systematic review and
metaanalysis. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 9, 1119--31.
Mefford HC et al.Â (2012). Genomics, intellectual disability, and autism.
New England Journal of Medicine, 366, 733--43. Mehlum L et al.Â (1991).
Personality disorders 2--5 years after treatment: a prospective
follow-up study. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 84, 72--7. Mehta S et
al.Â (2010). Risk of cerebrovascular adverse events in older adults using
antipsychotic agents: a propensity-matched retrospective cohort study.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71, 689--98. Meichenbaum DH (1977).
Cognitive-Behaviour Modification. Plenum, New York. Meijer A et
al.Â (2011). Prognostic association of depression following myocardial
infarction with mortality and cardiovascular events: a meta-analysis of
25 years of research. General Hospital Psychiatry, 33, 203--16. Meijer A
et al.Â (2013). Adjusted prognostic association of depression following
myocardial infarction with mortality and cardiovascular events:
individual patient data meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry,
203, 90--102. Meltzer H, Gatward R, Goodman R and Ford T (2000). The
Mental Health of Children and Adolescents in Great Britain. HM
Stationery Office. Mellado-Calvo N and Fleminger S (2009). Cerebral
tumours. In: David AS et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry, 4th
edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. pp.Â 281--308. Mellers JD (2009). Epilepsy.
In: David AS et al.Â (eds.) Lishman's Organic Psychiatry, 4th edn. Wiley
Blackwell, Oxford. pp. 309--95. Meltzer H et al.Â (2008). Patterns of
suicide by occupation in England and Wales: 2001--2005. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 193, 73--6. Meltzer HY (2004). What's atypical about
atypical antipsychotic drugs? Current Opinion in Pharmacology, 1, 53--7.
Meltzer HY et al.Â (2003). Clozapine treatment for suicidality in
schizophrenia: International Suicide Prevention Trial (InterSePT).
Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 82--91. Menon V (2011). Large-scale
brain networks and psychopathology: a unifying triple network model.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15, 483--506.

835

836

836

References Mercer CH et al.Â (2003). Sexual function problems and help
seeking behaviour in Britain: national probability sample survey.
British Medical Journal, 327, 426--7. Merikangas KR et al.Â (2010).
Lifetime prevalence of mental disorders in U.S. adolescents: results
from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication---Adolescent Supplement
(NCS-A). Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 49, 980--9. Mersfelder TL and Nichols WH (2016). Gabapentin
abuse, dependence, and withdrawal. Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 50,
229--23. Merskey H (2000). Conversion and dissociation. In: MG Gelder,
JJ Lopez-IborJr and NC Andreasen (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Merritt K et al.Â (2016).
Nature of glutamate alterations in schizophrenia. A meta-analysis of
proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies. JAMA Psychiatry, 73,
665--74. Mesholam-Gately R and Giuliano AJ (2009). Neurocognition in
first-episode schizophrenia. A meta-analytic review. Neuropsychology,
23, 315--36. Mesulam MM (1998). From sensation to cognition. Brain, 121,
1013--52. Meyer IH (2013). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health
in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: Conceptual issues and
research evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 1, 3--26. Meyer JH (2013).
Neurochemical imaging and depressive behaviours. In: Cowen PJ, Sharp T,
Lau JYF (eds.) Behavioral Neurobiology of Depression and Its Treatment.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.Â 101--34. Meyer-Lindenberg A (2010). From
maps to mechanisms through neuroimaging of schizophrenia. Nature, 468,
194--202. Mezey GC and Robbins I (2009). The impact of criminal
victimization. In: Gelder M, Andreasen N, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJr and Geddes J
(eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1984--90. Miglis MG and Guilleminault C (2014).
Kleine--Levin syndrome: a review. Nature and Science of Sleep, 6,
19--26. Milad MR and Rauch SL (2012). Obsessive-compulsive disorder:
Beyond segregated cortico-striatal pathways. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 16, 43--51. Miller B et al.Â (2011). Meta-analysis of paternal
age and schizophrenia risk in male versus female offspring.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37, 1039--47. Ministry of Justice (2015). Youth
Justice Statistics 2013/14, England and Wales. London, UK. Minuchin S,
Rosman B and Baker L (1978). Psychosomatic Families: Anorexia nervosa in
context. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. Minzenberg MJ et
al.Â (2009). Meta-analysis of 41 functional neuroimaging studies of
executive function in schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66,
811--22. Miresco MJ and Kirmayer LJ (2006). The persistence of mind--
brain dualism in psychiatric reasoning about clinical scenarios.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 913--18. Mirra SS et al.Â (1991).
The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD).
Part II. Standardization of the neuropathologic assessment of
Alzheimer's disease. Neurology, 41, 479--86. Mishara BL (2007).
Prevention of deaths from intentional pesticide poisoning. Crisis, 28,
10--20.

Mitchell AJ (2009). A meta-analysis of the accuracy of the MiniMental
State Examination in the detection of dementia and mild cognitive
impairment. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 43, 411--31. Mitchell AJ et
al.Â (2011). Clinical recognition of dementia and cognitive impairment in
primary care: a meta-analysis of physician accuracy. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 124, 165--83. Mitchell AJ et al.Â (2013). Is the prevalence
of metabolic syndrome and metabolic abnormalities increased in early
schizophrenia? A comparative meta-analysis of first episode, untreated
and treated patients. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39, 295--305. Mitchell AJ
et al.Â (2014). Accuracy of one or two simple questions to identify
alcohol-use disorder in primary care: a metaanalysis. British Journal of
General Practice, 64, e408--18. Mitchell JE and Crow S (2006). Medical
complications of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Current Opinion
in Psychiatry, 19, 438--43. Mitchell PB et al.Â (2011). Comparison of
depressive episodes in bipolar disorder and in major depressive disorder
within bipolar disorder pedigrees. The British Journal of Psychiatry,
199, 303--9. Mitchell SL et al.Â (2009). The clinical course of advanced
dementia. New England Journal of Medicine, 361, 1529--38. Mittan RJ
(2009). Psychosocial treatment programs in epilepsy: a review. Epilepsy
and Behavior, 16, 371--80. Miura T et al.Â (2014). Comparative efficacy
and tolerability of pharmacological treatments in the maintenance
treatment of bipolar disorder: a systematic review and network
metaanalysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 351--9. Miyamoto S et al.Â (2015).
Schizophrenia: when clozapine fails. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 28,
243--48. Moberg PJ et al.Â (2014). Meta-analysis of olfactory function in
schizophrenia, first-degree family members, and youths at-risk for
psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 40, 50--9. Moberg T et al.Â (2011).
CSF 5-HIAA and exposure to and expression of interpersonal violence in
suicide attempters. Journal of Affective Disorders, 132(1), 173--8.
Modrego PJ (2010) Depression in Alzheimer's disease. Pathophysiology,
diagnosis, and treatment. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 21, 1077--87.
Moeschler JB et al.Â (2014). Comprehensive evaluation of the child with
intellectual disability or global developmental delays. Pediatrics, 134,
e903--e918. Moestrup L and Hansen HP (2015). Existential concerns about
death: A qualitative study of dying patients in a Danish hospice.
American Journal of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, 32, 427--36. Mohatt
J et al.Â (2014). Treatment of separation, generalized, and social
anxiety disorders in youths. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171,
741--8. Moher D et al.Â (2009). Preferred reporting items for systematic
reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 151, 264--9. Mollica RF, Culhane MA and Hovelson DH (2009).
The special psychiatric problems of refugees. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen
NC, LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr and Geddes JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp. 1493--549.

873

References Monahan J (1997). Clinical and actuarial predictions of
violence. In: D Faigman, D Kaye, M Saks and J Sanders (eds.) Modern
Scientific Evidence: the law and science of expert testimony. West
Publishing, St Paul, MN. pp.Â 309. Monahan J et al.Â (2005). Use of
leverage to improve adherence to psychiatric treatment in the community.
Psychiatric Services, 56, 37--44. Moncrieff J (2015). Antipsychotic
maintenance treatment: time to rethink? PLoS Medicine, 8, e1001861.
Montgomery SA and Asberg M (1979). A new depression rating scale
designed to be sensitive to change. British Journal of Psychiatry, 134,
382--9. Montgomery SA et al.Â (2014). A randomised, double-blind study in
adults with major depressive disorder with an inadequate response to a
single course of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor or
serotonin--noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor treatment switched to
vortioxetine or agomelatine. Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical and
Experimental, 29(5), 470--82. Moran P (2002). The epidemiology of
personality disorders. Psychiatry, 1, 8--11. Moran P et al.Â (2000). The
prevalence of personality disorder among UK primary care attenders. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 102, 52--7. Morgan C and Gayer-Anderson C
(2016). Childhood adversities and psychosis: evidence, challenges,
implications. World Psychiatry, 15, 93--102. Morgan C et al.Â (2005).
Pathways to care and ethnicity. 1: Sample characteristics and compulsory
admission. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 281--9. Morgan C et
al.Â (2010). Migration, ethnicity, and psychosis: toward a
sociodevelopmental model. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 655--64. Morgan C
et al.Â (2014). Reappraising the long-term course and outcome of
psychotic disorders: the AESOP-10 study. Psychological Medicine, 44,
2713--26. Morgan C et al.Â (2005). Pathways to care and ethnicity. 1:
Sample characteristics and compulsory admission. Report from the AESOP
study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 281--9. Morgan VA et
al.Â (2008). Intellectual disability co-occurring with schizophrenia and
other psychiatric illness: population-based study. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 193, 364--72. Morgenthaler TI et al.Â (2007). Practice
parameters for the clinical evaluation and treatment of circadian rhythm
sleep disorders. Sleep, 30, 1445--59. Morley S et al.Â (2013). Examining
the evidence about psychological treatment for chronic pain. Time for a
paradigm shift? Pain, 154, 1929--31. Morris J et al.Â (2011). Treated
prevalence of and mental health services received by children and
adolescents in 42 low and middle income countries. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 52, 1239--46. Morris JB and Beck AT (1974).
The efficacy of antidepressant drugs. A review of research (1958--1972).
Archives of General Psychiatry, 30, 667--74. Morris JK and Alberman E.
(2009). Trends in Down's syndrome live births and antenatal diagnoses in
England and Wales from 1989 to 2008: analysis of data from the National
Down Syndrome Cytogenetic Register. BMJ, 339, b3794.

Morris K et al.Â (2012). Psychiatrists and termination of pregnancy.
Clinical, legal and ethical aspects. Australian and New Zealand Journal
of Psychiatry, 46, 18--27. Morrison AP et al.Â (2014). Cognitive therapy
for people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders not taking
antipsychotic drugs: a single-blind randomised controlled trial. Lancet,
383, 1395--403. Mortimer AM (2011). Using clozapine in clinical
practice. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 17, 256--63. Moscovitch DA
(2009). What is the core fear in social phobia? A new model to
facilitate individualized case conceptualization and treatment.
Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 16, 123--34. Moshe SL et al.Â (2015).
Epilepsy: new advances. Lancet, 385, 884--98. Moussavi S et al.Â (2007).
Depression, chronic diseases, and decrements in health: results from the
World Health Surveys. The Lancet, 370, 851--8. Mufson L et al.Â (2004). A
randomised effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for
depressed adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 577--84.
Mukherjee S, Sackheim HA and Lee C (1988). Electroconvulsive therapy of
acute manic episodes: a review of fifty years experience. Convulsive
Therapy, 4, 74--80. Mullen PE (2004). The autogenic (self-generated)
massacre. Behaviour Sciences and the Law, 22, 311--23. Mullen PE and
Maack LH (1985). Jealousy, pathological jealousy and aggression. In: DP
Farington and J Gunn (eds.) Aggression and Dangerousness. John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester. Mullen PE and Ogloff JRP (2009). Assessing and
managing the risk of violence towards others. In: MG Gelder, NC
Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor JJ and JR Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp. 1991--2002.
Mullen PE et al.Â (2006). Assessing and managing the risks in the
stalking situation. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and
the Law, 34, 439--50. Mullen PE, PathÃ© M and Purcell R (2009). Stalkers
and their Victims, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Muller A et al.Â (2013). Psychiatric aspects of bariatric surgery.
Current Psychiatry Reports, 15, 397. Muller N et al.Â (2015). The role of
inflammation in schizophrenia. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 9, 372. Munro
A (2009). Persistent delusional symptoms and disorders. In: MG Gelder,
NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor and JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.Â 609--28. Murad
MH et al.Â (2010). Hormonal therapy and sex reassignment: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of quality of life and psychosocial outcomes.
Clinical Endocrinology, 72, 214--31. Murphy BP and Brewer W (2011).
Early intervention in psychosis: clinical aspects of treatment. Advances
in Psychiatric Treatment, 17, 408--18. Murphy SE et al.Â (2013). The
effect of the serotonin transporter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) on amygdala
function: A metaanalysis. Molecular Psychiatry, 18, 512--20. Murray J
and Williams P (1986). Self--reported illness and general practice
consultations in Asian born and British born residents of West London.
Social Psychiatry, 21, 139--45.

837

83

838

References Murray L et al.Â (2009). The development of anxiety disorders
in childhood: an integrative review. Psychological Medicine, 39,
1413--23. Murray LK et al.Â (2014). A common elements treatment approach
for adult mental health problems in low- and middle-income countries.
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 21, 111--23. Murray RM and Lewis SW
(1987). Is schizophrenia a neurodevelopmental disorder? British Medical
Journal, 295, 681--2. Murray RM and Reveley A (1981). The genetic
contribution to the neuroses. British Journal of Hospital Medicine, 25,
185--90. Musiek ES and Holtzman DM (2015). Three dimensions of the
amyloid hypothesis: time, space and 'wingmen'. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 18, 800--6. Mynors-Wallis LM et al.Â (1995). Randomized
controlled trial comparing problem solving treatment with amitriptyline
and placebo for major depression in primary care. British Medical
Journal, 310, 441--5. Nair A et al.Â (2014). Relationship between
cognition, clinical and cognitive insight in psychotic disorders: a
review and metaanalysis. Schizophrenia Research, 152, 191--200. Naito A
(2007). Internet suicide in Japan: implications for child and adolescent
mental health. Clinical Child Psychology Psychiatry, 12, 583--97. Nanni
V, Uher R, Danese A (2012). Childhood maltreatment predicts unfavorable
course of illness and treatment outcome in depression: a meta-analysis.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(2), 141--51. Napier AD et
al.Â (2014). Culture and health. Lancet, 384, 1607--39. Narrow WE et
al.Â (2002). Revised prevalence estimates in mental disorders in the
United States: using a clinical significance criterion to reconcile two
surveys' estimates. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 115--23. Nash JR
et al.Â (2008). Serotonin 5-HT1A receptor binding in people with panic
disorder. Positron emission tomography study. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 193, 229--34. National Center for Juvenile Justice (2014).
Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 2014 National Report. Pittsburgh, USA.
National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide (2015). National
Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental
Illness: Annual Report: England and Wales. University of Manchester,
Manchester. National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2003). Guidance
on the Use of Electroconvulsive Therapy. Technology Appraisal 59.
National Institute for Clinical Excellence, London. National Institute
for Clinical Excellence (2004a). Eating Disorders: Core interventions in
the treatment and management of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and
eating disorders. Clinical Guideline 9. National Institute for Clinical
Excellence, London. National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2004b).
Self-Harm: the short-term physical and psychological management and
secondary prevention of self-harm in primary and secondary care.
Clinical Guideline 16. National Institute for Clinical Excellence,
London. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2005a).
Obsessive--Compulsive Disorder: Core interventions in the treatment of
obsessive--compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder. Clinical
Guideline 31. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
London.

National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2005c). Violence.
The short-term management of disturbed/violent behaviour in psychiatric
in-patient settings and emergency departments. Clinical Guideline 25.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, London. National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2005d). Depression in
Children and Young People: Identification and management in primary,
community and secondary care. National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence, London. National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2007). Drug Misuse: Psychosocial interventions. Clinical
Guideline 51. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
London. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2009a).
Depression: the treatment and management of depression in adults.
Clinical Guideline 90. National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence, London. National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2009b). Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD). Clinical
Guideline 78. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
London. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2010).
Anxiety: Management of anxiety (panic disorder, with and without
agoraphobia, and generalized anxiety disorder) in adults in primary,
secondary and community care. Clinical Guideline 22. National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence, London. National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence (2011a). Alcohol-Use Disorders:
Diagnosis, assessment and management of harmful drinking and alcohol
dependence. Clinical Guideline 115. National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence, London. National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2011b). Psychosis with Coexisting Substance Misuse. Clinical
Guideline 120. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
London. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2013a).
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Evidence Update 49. A summary of
selected new evidence relevant to NICE clinical guideline 26 'The
management of PTSD in adults and children in primary and secondary care'
(2005). NICE, Manchester. National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (2013b). Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Children and Young
People: Recognition and management. Clinical Guideline 155. National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, London. National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence (2014a). Psychosis and Schizophrenia
in Adults: Treatment and management. Clinical Guideline 178. National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, London. National Institute
for Care and Health Excellence (2013c). Antisocial behaviour and conduct
disorders in children and young people: recognition and management.
Clinical Guideline CG158. NICE, London. National Institute for Care and
Health Excellence (2014b). Bipolar disorder: the assessment and
management of bipolar disorder in adults, children and young people in
primary and secondary care. National Clinical Guideline, 185. NICE,
London. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2014c).
Antenatal and Postnatal Mental Health: Clinical management and service
guidance. NICE guidelines \[CG192\], London. National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (2015a). Hypnotics. NICE advice \[KTT6\],
London.

839

References National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
(2015b). Guideline NG10: Violence and Aggression: short-term management
in mental health, health and community settings. NICE, London. National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2016). Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder: Diagnosis and Management of ADHD in Children,
Young People and Adults. NICE Clinical Guidelines, No.Â 72. 2016 update.
National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (UK). National Institute
for Mental Health in England (NIMHE) (2003). Personality Disorder: No
longer a diagnosis of exclusion. Policy implementation guidance for the
development of services for people with personality disorder. Department
of Health, London. Neeleman J and Wessely S (1997). Changes in
classification of suicide in England and Wales: time trends and
associations with coroners' professional backgrounds. Psychological
Medicine, 21, 467--72. Nelson JC and Papakostas GI (2009). Atypical
antipsychotic augmentation in major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis
of placebo-controlled randomized trials. American Journal of Psychiatry,
166, 980--91. Nelson JC et al.Â (2014) A systematic review and
meta-analysis of lithium augmentation of tricyclic and second generation
antidepressants in major depression. Journal of Affective Disorders,
168, 269--75. Nemeroff CB and Goldschmidt-Clermont PJ (2012). Heartache
and heartbreak---the link between depression and cardiovascular disease.
Nature Reviews Cardiology, 9, 526--39. Nemeth G et al.Â (2017).
Cariprazine versus risperidone monotherapy for the treatment of
predominant negative symptoms in patients with schizophrenia: a
randomised, double-blind, controlled trial. Lancet, 389, 1103--13.
Neuropathology Group of the Medical Research Council Cognitive Function
and Ageing Study (2001). Pathological correlates of late-onset dementia
in a multicentre, community-based population in England and Wales.
Lancet, 357, 169--75. New AS et al.Â (2004). Low prolactin response to
fenfluramine in impulsive aggression. Journal of Psychiatric Research,
38, 223--30. New AS et al.Â (2008). Recent advances in the biological
study of personality disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America,
31, 441--61. Newton-Howes G et al.Â (2010). The prevalence of personality
disorder, its comorbidity with mental state disorders and its clinical
significance in community mental health teams. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 45, 453--60. Newton-Howes G et al.Â (2015).
Personality disorder across the life course. Lancet, 385, 727--34. Ng B
and Atkins M (2012). Home assessment in old age psychiatry: a practical
guide. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 18, 400--7. Nicholls D and
Barrett E (2015). Eating disorders in children and adolescents. BJPsych
Advances, 21, 206--16. Nickerson A et al.Â (2011). A critical review of
psychological treatments of posttraumatic stress disorder in refugees.
Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 399--417. Nicodemus KK et al.Â (2008).
Serious obstetric complications interact with
hypoxia-regulated/vascular-expression

genes to influence schizophrenia risk. Molecular Psychiatry, 13, 873--7.
Nicodemus KK et al.Â (2010). Biological validation of increased
schizophrenia risk with NRG1, ERBB4, and AKT1 epistasis via functional
neuroimaging in healthy controls. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67,
991--1001. Niculescu AB et al.Â (2015) Understanding and predicting
suicidality using a combined genomic and clinical risk assessment
approach. Molecular Psychiatry, 20, 1266--1285. Niederkrotenthaler T et
al.Â (2010). Role of media reports in completed and prevented suicide:
Werther v. Papageno effects. British Journal of Psychiatry, 197,
234--43. Nielsen RE et al.Â (2015). Second-generation antipsychotic
effect on cognition in patients with schizophrenia---a meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 131,
185--96. Nolen WA, Van de Putte JJ and Dijken WA (1988). Treatment
strategy in depression. 2. MAO inhibitors in depression resistant
tricyclic antidepressants: two controlled cross-over studies with
tranylcypromine versus 1,5-hydroxytryptophan and nomifensine. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 78, 676--83. Norbury CF et al.Â (2015).
Disorders of speech, language, and communication. In: A. Thapar et
al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, pp. 683--701. Nord M and Farde L (2011). Antipsychotic
occupancy of dopamine receptors in schizophrenia. CNS Neuroscience and
Therapeutics, 17, 97-- 103. Nordentoft M, Mortensen PB and Pedersen CB.
(2011). Absolute risk of suicide after first hospital contact in mental
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 1058--64. Norton S et
al.Â (2014). Potential for primary prevention of Alzheimer's disease: an
analysis of population data. Lancet Neurology, 13, 788--94. Novak B et
al.Â (2007). Sex offenders and insanity: an examination of 42 individuals
found not guilty by reason of insanity. Journal of the American Academy
of Psychiatry and the Law, 35, 444--5. Nowell PD et al.Â (1997).
Benzodiazepines and zolpidem for chronic insomnia: a meta-analysis of
treatment efficacy. Journal of the American Medical Association, 278,
2170--7. Noyes R (2009). Hypochondriasis (health anxiety). In: MG
Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr and JR Geddes (eds.) The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
pp.Â 1021--8. Nuechterlein KH et al.Â (2008). The MATRICS Consensus
Cognitive Battery, Part 1: Test selection, reliability, and validity.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 203--13. Nuesch E et al.Â (2013).
Comparative efficacy of pharmacological and non-pharmacological
interventions in fibromyalgia syndrome: network meta-analysis. Annals of
the Rheumatic Diseases, 72, 955--62. Nutt DJ et al.Â (2015). The dopamine
theory of addiction: 40 years of highs and lows. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 16, 305--12. Oberlander JG and Henderson LP (2012). The
Sturm und Drang of anabolic steroid use: angst, anxiety, and aggression.
Trends in Neurosciences, 35, 382--92. O'Brien JT and Thomas A (2015).
Vascular dementia. Lancet, 386, 1698--706.

839

840

840

References O'Brien JT et al (2017) Clinical practice with anti-dementia
drugs: a revised (third) consensus statement from the British
Association for Psychopharmacology, Journal of Psychopharmacology, 31,
147--68. O'Brien S et al.Â (2011). Diagnosis and management of
premenstrual disorders. British Medical Journal, 342, d2994. O'Connell H
et al.Â (2014). Managing delirium in everyday practice: towards
cognitive-friendly hospitals. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 20,
380--9. O'Connor E et al.Â (2016). Primary care screening and treatment
of depression in pregnant and postpartum women. Evidence report and
systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA, 315,
388--406. O'Connor N (1968). Psychology and intelligence. In: M Shepherd
and DL Davis (eds.) Studies in Psychiatry. Oxford University Press,
London. O'Connor TG et al.Â (2016). Maternal affective illness in the
perinatal period and child development: findings on developmental
timing, mechanisms, and intervention. Current Psychiatry Reports, 18,
1--5. Ãdegaard Ã (1932). Emigration and insanity. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, Suppl. 4. Ogloff JRP (2009). Mental disorders among
offenders in correctional settings. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ
Lopez-Ibor, and J Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.Â 1933--7. O'Grady J (2009). The
expert witness in the Criminal Court: assessment, reports and testimony.
In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, and J Geddes (eds.) The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp.Â 2003--9. Ohi K et al.Â (2012). Personality traits and schizophrenia:
evidence from a case-control study and meta-analysis. Psychiatry
Research, 198, 7--11. O'Keefe JH et al.Â (2014). Alcohol and
cardiovascular health: the dose makes the poison ... or the remedy. Mayo
Clinic Proceedings, 89, 382--93. Okkels N et al.Â (2013). Changes in the
diagnosed incidence of early onset schizophrenia over four decades. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 127, 62--8. Olatunji BO, Cisler JM and Deacon
BJ (2010. Efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety
disorders: a review of metaanalytic findings. Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 33, 557--77. Olde Hartman TC et al.Â (2009). Medically
unexplained symptoms, somatisation disorder and hypochondriasis: course
and prognosis. A systematic review. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
66, 363--77. Olden KW and Chepyala P (2008). Functional nausea and
vomiting. Nature Clinical Practice Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 5,
202--8. Olfson M et al.Â (2015). Trends in mental health care among
children and adolescents. New England Journal of Medicine, 373, 1079.
Olney JW and Farber NB (1995). Glutamate receptor dysfunction and
schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 998--1007. Olweus D
(2013). School bullying: Development and some important challenges.
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 9, 751--80. Opjordsmoen S (2014).
Delusional disorder as a partial psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 40,
244--7.

Oppenheimer C (2009). Special features of psychiatric treatment for the
elderly. In: Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor JJ and Geddes JR (eds.)
New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. pp.Â 1571--8. Oppenheimer C (2013). Personality in later life:
personality disorder and the effects of illness on personality. In:
Dening T and Thomas A (eds.) Oxford Textbook of Old Age Psychiatry, 2nd
edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, Chapter 53. Oro AB et al.Â (2014).
Autistic Behavior Checklist (ABC) and Its Applications: Comprehensive
Guide to Autism. Springer, New York, pp.Â 2787--98. Ãst LG and Breitholtz
E (2000). Applied relaxation vs.Â cognitive therapy in the treatment of
generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38,
777--90. Ãst LG et al.Â (2001). One versus five sessions of exposure and
five sessions of cognitive therapy in the treatment of claustrophobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 167--81. Overall JE and Gorham DR
(1962). The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale. Psychological Reports, 10,
799--812. Owen MJ (2014). New approaches to psychiatric diagnostic
classification. Neuron, 84, 564--71. Owen MJ et al.Â (2016).
Schizophrenia. Lancet,388, 86--97. Owens D, Horrocks J and House A
(2002). Fatal and non-fatal repetition of self-harm: systematic review.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 181, 193--9. Oyebode F (2014). Sims'
Symptoms in the Mind: an introduction to descriptive psychopathology,
5th edn. Saunders, London. Palazzoli M et al.Â (1978). Paradox and
Counterparadox. Aronson, New York. Palmer BW et al.Â (2009). What do we
know about neuropsychological aspects of schizophrenia? Neuropsychology
Review, 19, 365--84. Palmu R et al.Â (2011). Mental disorders after burn
injury: a prospective study. Burns, 37(4), 601--9. Palpacuer C et
al.Â (2015). Risks and benefits of nalmefene in the treatment of adult
alcohol dependence: A systematic literature review and meta-analysis of
published and unpublished doubleblind randomized controlled trials. PLoS
Medicine, 12, e1001924. Papakostas GI et al.Â (2008). Treatment of
SSRI-resistant depression: a meta-analysis comparing within- versus
across-class switches. Biological Psychiatry, 63, 699--704. Paris J and
Black DW. (2015). Borderline personality disorder and bipolar disorder:
What is the difference and why does it matter? Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 203, 3--7. Park M and Unutzer J (2011). Geriatric
depression in primary care. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 34,
469-87. Park RJ et al.Â (2017). Deep brain stimulation in anorexia
nervosa: hope for the hopeless or explotation of the vulnerable? The
Oxford Neuroethics Gold Standard Framework. Frontiers in Psychiatry.
Doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00044. Parker C, Coupland C and Hippisley-Cox
J (2010). Antipsychotic drugs and risk of venomous thromboembolism:
nested case-- control study. British Medical Journal, 641, c4245. Parker
G and Hadzi-Pavlovic D (1992). Parental representations of melancholic
and non-melancholic depressives: examining for specificity to depressive
type and for evidence of additive effects. Psychological Medicine, 22,
657--65. Parker G et al.Â (2015). Melancholia and catatonia: disorders or
specifiers? Current Psychiatry Reports, 17, 536.

841

References Parkes CM, Benjamin B and Fitzgerald RG (1969). Broken heart:
a statistical study of increased mortality among widowers. British
Medical Journal, i, 740--3. Parnas J et al.Â (1982). Perinatal
complications and clinical outcome within the schizophrenia spectrum.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 140, 416--20. Parrott AC (2013). Human
psychobiology of MDMA or 'Ecstasy': an overview of 25 years of empirical
research. Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical and Experimental, 28,
289--307. Parry-Jones WL (1972). The Trade in Lunacy. Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London. Parsons T (1951). The Social System. Free Press, Glencoe,
IL. Paschou P (2013). The genetic basis of Gilles de la Tourette
syndrome. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 37, 1026--39.
Pasmanick B, Scarpitti FR and Lefton M (1964). Home versus hospital care
for schizophrenics. Journal of the American Medical Association, 187,
177--81. Patel B et al.Â (2014) Psychosocial interventions for dementia:
from evidence to practice. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 20,
340--9. Patel V and Prince M (2010). Global mental health: a new global
health field comes of age. Journal of the American Medical Association,
303, 1976--7. Patel V et al.Â (2010). Effectiveness of an intervention
led by lay health counsellors for depressive and anxiety disorders in
primary care in Goa, India (MANAS): a cluster randomised controlled
trial. Lancet, 376, 2086--95. Patel V et al.Â (2011). A renewed agenda
for global mental health. Lancet, 378, 1441--2. PathÃ© M, Mullen PE and
Purcell R (1999). Stalking: false claims of victimisation. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 174, 170--2. Patton GC et al.Â (2016). Our future:
a Lancet commission on adolescent health and wellbeing. Lancet, 387,
2423--78. Pavlou MP and Lachs MS (2006). Could self-neglect in adults be
a geriatric syndrome? Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 54,
831--42. Paykel ES (1978). Contribution of life events to causation of
psychiatric illness. Psychological Medicine, 8, 245--53. Paykel ES et
al.Â (1999). Prevention of relapse in residual depression by cognitive
therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 829--35. Pearce JB (2009).
Counselling and psychotherapy for children. In: MG Gelder, Andreasen NC,
LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr, and Geddes JR (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1764--69. Pearson CM et
al.Â (2015). A risk and maintenance model for bulimia nervosa: from
impulsive action to compulsive behavior. Psychological Review, 122,
516--35. Pedersen CB and Mortensen PB (2001). Family history, place and
season of birth as risk factors for schizophrenia in Denmark: a
replication and reanalysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 46--52.
Pederson LH, Henrikson TB and Olsen J (2010). Fetal exposure to
antidepressants and normal milestone development at 6 and 19 months of
age. Pediatrics 125, e600--8. Pediatric OCD Treatment Study Team (2004).
Cognitive behaviour therapy, sertraline, and their combination for
children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder: the
Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS) randomized controlled trial.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 292, 1969--76.

Peen J and Dekker J (2004). Is urbanicity an environmental risk factor
for psychiatric disorders? Lancet, 363, 2012--13. Pendlebury ST and
Rothwell PM (2009). Prevalence, incidence, and factors associated with
post-stroke dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Neurology, 8, 1006--18. Pennant ME et al.Â (2015). Computerised therapies
for anxiety and depression in children and young people: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 67, 1--18.
Penninx BW et al.Â (1999). Minor and major depression and the risk of
death in older persons. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 889--95.
Penrose L (1938). A Clinical and Genetic Study of 1280 Cases of Mental
Deficiency. HMSO, London. PenttilÃ¤ M et al.Â (2014). Duration of
untreated psychosis as predictor of long-term outcome in schizophrenia:
systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 28,
88--94. Pepper J, Hariz M and Zrinzo L (2015). Deep brain stimulation
versus anterior capsulotomy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: a review
of the literature. Journal of Neurosurgery, 122, 1028--37. Peraala J et
al.Â (2007). Lifetime prevalence of psychotic and bipolar I disorders in
a general population. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 19--28 Peralta
V, Cuesta MJ (2016). Delusional disorder and schizophrenia: a
comparative study across multiple domains. Psychological Medicine, 46,
2829--39. Perez JA et al.Â (2013). Genetics of anxiety disorders. In: DS
Charney, JD Buxbaum, P Sklaar, EJ Nestler (eds). Neurobiology of Mental
Illness. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.Â 537--48. Perley MJ and
Guze SB (1962). Hysteria---the stability and usefulness of clinical
criteria. New England Journal of Medicine, 266, 421--6. Perrin JS et
al.Â (2012). Electroconvulsive therapy reduces frontal cortical
connectivity in severe depressive disorder. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 109, 5464--8. Perry DW et al.Â (2002). Mental
impairment in the West Midlands: 10 years on. Medicine, Science and the
Law, 42, 325--33. Pertusa A et al.Â (2010). Refining the diagnostic
boundaries of compulsive hoarding: A critical review. Clinical
Psychology Review, 30, 371--86. Perugi G et al.Â (2015). Mixed features
in patients with a major depressive episode: The BRIDGE-II-MIX study.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 76, 351--8. Petersen L and Sorensen TIA
(2011). Studies based on the Danish Adoption Register: schizophrenia,
BMI, smoking, and mortality in perspective. Scandinavian Journal of
Public Health, 39 (suppl. 7), 191--5. Petersen L, Mortensen PB and
Pedersen CB (2011). Paternal age at birth of first child and risk of
schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 82--8. Peterson RL
and Pennington BF (2015). Developmental dyslexia. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 11, 283--307. Peterson ZD et al.Â (2011). Prevalence
and consequences of adult sexual assault of men: review of empirical
findings and state of the literature. Clinical Psychology Review, 31,
1--24. Petrides G et al.Â (2015). Electroconvulsive therapy augmentation
in clozapine-resistant schizophrenia: a prospective, randomized study.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 52--8.

841

842

842

References Petronis A (2010). Epigenetics as a unifying principle in the
aetiology of complex traits and diseases. Nature, 465, 721--7. Petry N
(2010). Pathological gambling and the DSM-V. International Gambling
Studies, 10, 113--15. Pezawas L et al.Â (2003). Recurrent brief
depressive disorder reinvestigated: a community sample of adolescents
and young adults. Archives of General Psychiatry, 33, 407--18. Pharoah F
et al.Â (2010). Family intervention for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews, 12, CD000088. Phelan M and Blair G (2008).
Medical history taking in psychiatry. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment,
14, 229--34. Phelan M, Wykes T and Goldman H (1994). Global functioning
scales: A review. Social Psychiatry and Epidemiology, 29, 205--11.
Phelan M et al.Â (1995). The Camberwell Assessment of Need: the validity
and reliability of an instrument to assess the needs of people with
severe mental illness. British Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 589--95.
Phillips KA et al.Â (2006). Delusional versus non-delusional body
dysmorphic disorder: clinical features and course of illness. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 40, 95--104. Phillips ML and Kupfer DJ (2013).
Bipolar disorder diagnosis: challenges and future directions. The
Lancet, 381, 1654--62. Phillips ML and Swartz HA (2014). A critical
appraisal of neuroimaging studies of bipolar disorder: Toward a new
conceptualization of underlying neural circuitry and a road map for
future research. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 829--43. Phillips
PC (2008). Epistasis---the essential role of gene interactions in the
structure and evolution of genetic systems. Nature Reviews Genetics, 9,
855--67. Pichot P (1994). Nosological models in psychiatry. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 232--40. Pickles A et al.Â (2001). Child
psychiatric symptoms and psychosocial impairment: relationship and
prognostic significance. British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 230--5.
Pilling S et al.Â (2011). Diagnosis, assessment, and management of
harmful drinking and alcohol dependence: summary of NICE guidance.
British Medical Journal, 342, d700. Pilling S et al.Â (2013).
Recognition, assessment and treatment of social anxiety disorder:
Summary of NICE guidance. British Medical Journal, 346, f2541. Pine DS
et al.Â (2015). Anxiety disorders. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
pp.Â 822--40. Pinquart M and SÃ¶rensen S (2003). Differences between
caregivers and noncaregivers in psychological health and physical
health: a meta-analysis. Psychology and Aging, 18, 250--67. Pinsky E et
al.Â (2015). Pediatric consultation and psychiatric aspects of somatic
disease. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 586--98. Pirkis J and
Burgess P (1998). Suicide and recency of health care contacts: a
systematic review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 462--74.
Pivonello R et al.Â (2015). Neuropsychiatric disorders in Cushing's
syndrome. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 9, 129. Plack K, Herpertz S and
Petrak F (2010). Behavioral medicine interventions in diabetes. Current
Opinion in Psychiatry, 23, 131--8.

Platt B et al.Â (2010a). Systematic review of the prevalence of suicide
in veterinary surgeons. Occupational Medicine, 60, 436--46. Polanczyk G
et al.Â (2010). Etiological and clinical features of childhood psychotic
symptoms: results from a birth cohort. Archives of General Psychiatry,
67, 328--38. Polanczyk GV et al.Â (2015). Annual research review: A
metaanalysis of the worldwide prevalence of mental disorders in children
and adolescents. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 56,
345--65. Pollock VE et al.Â (1990). Childhood antecedents of antisocial
behavior: parental alcoholism and physical abusiveness. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 147, 1290--3. Pompili M et al.Â (2013). Indications for
electroconvulsive treatment in schizophrenia: a systematic review.
Schizophrenia Research, 146, 1--9. Ponniah K et al.Â (2013). An update on
the efficacy of psychological treatments for obsessive--compulsive
disorder in adults. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related
Disorders, 2, 207--18. Poole R (2010). Illness deception and work:
incidence, manifestations and detection. Occupational Medicine, 60(2),
127--32. Popovic D et al.Â (2014). Risk factors for suicide in
schizophrenia: systematic review and clinical recommendations. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 130, 418--26. Porsteinsson AP et al.Â (2014).
Effect of citalopram on agitation in Alzheimer disease: the CitAD
randomized clinical trial. JAMA, 311, 682--91. Porteous DJ et
al.Â (2014). DISC1 as a genetic risk factor for schizophrenia and related
major mental illness: response to Sullivan. Molecular Psychiatry, 19,
141--3. Posener HD and Jacoby R (2008). Testamentary capacity. In: R
Jacoby, C Oppenheimer, T Dening and A Thomas (eds.) The Oxford Textbook
of Old Age Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 753--60.
Post F (1972). The management and nature of depressive illnesses in late
life: a follow-through study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 121,
393--404. Poulsen S et al.Â (2014). A randomized controlled trial of
psychoanalytic psychotherapy or cognitive-behavioral therapy for bulimia
nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 109--16. Poulton R et
al.Â (2015). The Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and Development Study:
overview of the first 40 years, with an eye to the future. Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 50, 679--93. Powell GE (2009).
Cognitive assessment. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor and JR
Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Pratt JH (1908). Results obtained in treatment
of pulmonary tuberculosis by the class method. British Medical Journal,
ii, 1070--1. Prentky R and Righthand S (2003). Juvenile Sex Offender
Assessment Protocol-II (J-SOAP-II) Manual. US Department of Justice,
Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention Washington, DC. Press Complaints Commission (2007). Newspaper
and Magazine Publishing in the UK: Editors' code of practice. Press
Complaints Commission, London.

843

References Price JL and Drevets WC. (2012). Neural circuits underlying
the pathophysiology of mood disorders. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16,
61--71. Prichard JC (1835). A Treatise on Insanity. Sherwood Gilbert and
Piper, London. Priebe S et al.Â (2005). Reinstitutionalisation in mental
health care: comparison of data on service provision from six European
countries. British Medical Journal, 330, 123--6. Priebe S et al.Â (2013).
Effectiveness of financial incentives to improve adherence to
maintenance treatment with antipsychotics: cluster randomised controlled
trial. British Medical Journal, 347, f5847. Prime Minister's Strategy
Unit (2003). Alcohol Harm Reduction Strategy for England. Cabinet
Office, London. Prince M et al.Â (2013). The global prevalence of
dementia. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Alzheimers and
Dementia, 9, 63--75. Prins JB, Van der Meer JW and Bleijenberg G (2006).
Chronic fatigue syndrome. The Lancet, 367, 346--55. Prins H (2009).
Arson (fire-raising). In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, and J
Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, pp.Â 1965--70. Prochaska JO and DiClemente CC (1986).
Towards a comprehensive model of change. In: WR Miller and N Heather
(eds.) Treating Addictive Behaviours: Processes of change. Plenum Press,
New York. pp.Â 3--27. Project MATCH Research Group (1997). Matching
alcoholism treatments to client heterogeneity: Project MATCH
post-treatment drinking outcomes. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58(1),
7--29. Prossin AR et al.Â (2010). Dysregulation of regional endogenous
opioid function in borderline personality disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 167, 925--33. Prusiner SB (2013). Biology and genetics of
prions causing neurodegeneration. Annual Review of Genetics, 47,
601--23. Psychological Corporation (2004). Wechsler Abbreviated Scales
of Intelligence (WASI). Harcourt Assessment Co., London. Qin P et
al.Â (2003). Suicide risk in relation to socioeconomic, demographic,
psychiatric, and familial factors: a national register-based study of
all suicides in Denmark, 1981--1997. American Journal of Psychiatry,
160, 765--72. Qizilibash N et al.Â (2015). BMI and risk of dementia in
two million people over two decades: a retrospective cohort study.
Lancet Diabetes and Endocrinology, 3, 431--6. Rahkonen T et al.Â (2001)
Systematic intervention for supporting community care of elderly people
after a delirium episode. International Psychogeriatrics, 13, 37--49.
Rahman A et al.Â (2008). Cognitive behaviour therapy-based intervention
by community health workers for mothers with depression and their
infants in rural Pakistan: a clusterrandomised controlled trial. Lancet,
372, 902--9. Rahman A et al.Â (2015). Global psychiatry. In: M Rutter et
al. (eds.) Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 6th edn. Blackwell, Oxford.
pp.Â 201--14. Rai D et al.Â (2013). Country-and individual-level
socioeconomic determinants of depression: Multilevel cross-national
comparison. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 195--203. Raine A et
al.Â (2000). Reduced prefrontal grey matter and reduced autonomic
activity in antisocial personality disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 57, 119--27.

Raine A et al.Â (2005). Neurocognitive impairments in boys on the
life-course persistent antisocial path. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
114(1), 38--49. Rajaraman D et al.Â (2012). The acceptability,
feasibility and impact of a lay health counsellor delivered health
promoting schools programme in India: a case study evaluation. BMC
Health Services Research, 12, 1. Ramchandani P et al.Â (2009). Effect of
parental psychiatric and physical illness on child development. In: MG
Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor, JR Geddes (eds). New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry. OUP, Oxford, pp.Â 1752--8. Rametti G et
al.Â (2011). White matter microstructure in female to male transsexuals
before cross-sex hormonal treatment. A diffusion tensor imaging study.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45, 199--204. Ramtekkar U and Ivanenko
A (2015). Sleep in children with psychiatric disorders. Seminars in
Pediatric Neurology, 22, 148--55. Rang HP et al.Â (2015). Rang & Dale's
Pharmacology. Elsevier Health Sciences. Ranganath C and Ritchey M
(2012). Two cortical systems for memory-guided behaviour. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 13, 713--26. Raphael B and Wilson J (2000). Psychological
Debriefing. Theory, practice and evidence. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge. Rapoport JL et al.Â (2015). Obsessive compulsive disorder. In:
A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 841--57. Rapoport MJ (2012). Depression
following traumatic brain injury: epidemiology, risk factors and
management. CNS Drugs, 26, 111--21. Rapoport RN (1960). Community as
Doctor. Tavistock Publications, London. Ray WA et al.Â (2009). Atypical
antipsychotic drugs and the risk of sudden cardiac death. New England
Journal of Medicine, 360, 225--35. Reardon JM and Nathan NL (2007). The
specificity of cognitive vulnerabilities to emotional disorders: anxiety
sensitivity, looming vulnerability and explanatory style. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 21, 625--43. Reed G et al.Â (2016). Disorders related
to sexuality and gender identity in the ICD-11: revising the ICD-10
classification based on current scientific evidence, best clinical
practices, and human rights considerations. World Psychiatry, 15,
205--21. Reed RV et al.Â (2012). Mental health of displaced and refugee
children resettled in low-income and middle-income countries: risk and
protective factors. Lancet, 379, 250--65. Rees E et al.Â (2014). Analysis
of copy number variations at 15 schizophrenia-associated loci. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 204, 108--14. Rees PM, Fowler CJ and Maas CP
(2007). Sexual dysfunction 2: sexual function in men and women with
neurological disorders. Lancet, 369, 512--25. Rees S et al.Â (2014).
Onset of common mental disorders and suicidal behavior following women's
first exposure to gender based violence: A retrospective,
population-based study. BMC Psychiatry, 14, 312.

843

84

844

References Reichenberg A et al.Â (2016). Discontinuity in the genetic and
environmental causes of the intellectual disability spectrum.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(4), 1098--103.
Reichenpfader U et al.Â (2014). Sexual dysfunction associated with
second-generation antidepressants in patients with major depressive
disorder: results from a systematic review with network meta-analysis.
Drug Safety, 37, 19--31. Regier DA et al.Â (1990). Comorbidity of mental
disorders with alcohol and other drug abuse. Results from the
Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) Study. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 264, 2511--18. Reid AH and Ballinger BR (1987).
Personality disorder in mental handicap. Psychological Medicine, 17,
983--7. Reiss S and Szyszko J (1983). Diagnostic overshadowing and
professional experience with the mentally retarded person. American
Journal of Mental Deficiency, 87, 396--402. Remington G et al.Â (2014).
The neurobiology of relapse in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research,
152, 381--90. Reutens S, Nielsen O and Sachdev P (2010).
Depersonalization disorder. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 23, 278--83.
Reynolds CF III et al.Â (2006). Maintenance treatment of major depression
in old age. New England Journal of Medicine, 354, 1130--8. Reynolds GP
and Kirk SL (2010). Metabolic side effects of antipsychotic drug
treatment---pharmacological mechanisms. Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
125, 169--79. Reynolds S et al.Â (2012). Effects of psychotherapy for
anxiety in children and adolescents: A meta-analytic review. Clinical
Psychology Review, 32, 251--62. Rhebergen D et al.Â (2015). Older age is
associated with rapid remission of depression after electroconvulsive
therapy: a latent class growth analysis. American Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 23, 274--82. Ribe AR et al.Â (2015). Long-term risk of
dementia in persons with schizophrenia. A Danish population-based cohort
study. JAMA Psychiatry, 72, 1095--101. Richards F and Curtice M (2011).
Mania in late life. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 17, 357--64.
Richman N, Stevenson J and Graham PJ (1982). Pre-school to school: a
behavioural study. Behavioural Development: A Series of Monographs.
Ridley NJ et al.Â (2013). Alcohol-related dementia: an update of the
evidence. Alzheimers Research and Therapy, 5, 3. Rieckmann N et
al.Â (2006). Course of depressive symptoms and medication adherence after
acute coronary syndromes: an electronic medication monitoring study.
Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 48, 2218--22. Riemann D
et al.Â (2015). The neurobiology, investigation and treatment of chronic
insomnia. Lancet Neurology, 14, 547--58. Rihmer Z et al.Â (2010). Current
research on affective temperaments. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 23,
12--18. Riisgaard A et al.Â (2015). Long-term risk of dementia in persons
with schizophrenia. A Danish population-based cohort study. JAMA
Psychiatry, 72, 1095--101. Riley RD, Lambert PC and Abo-Zaid, G (2010).
Meta-analysis of individual participant data: Rationale, conduct, and
reporting. British Medical Journal, 340, c221. Ring A et al.Â (2004). Do
patients with unexplained physical symptoms pressurise general
practitioners for somatic treatment? A qualitative study. British
Medical Journal, 328, 1057.

Ritchie K et al.Â (2004). Prevalence of DSM-IV psychiatric disorder in
the French elderly population. British Journal of Psychiatry, 184,
147--52. Ritson B (2005). Treatment for alcohol-related problems.
British Medical Journal, 330, 139--41. Roberts AH (1969). Brain Damage
in Boxers. Pitman, London. Roberts E et al.Â (2016). Mortality of people
with chronic fatigue syndrome: a retrospective cohort study in England
and Wales from the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
Biomedical Research Centre (SLaMBRC) Clinical Record Interactive Search
(CRIS) Register. Lancet, 387, 1638--43. Robertson J et al.Â (2007).
Person-centred planning: factors associated with successful outcomes for
people with intellectual disabilities. Journal of Intellectual
Disability Research, 51, 232--43. Robertson J et al.Â (2015). Prevalence
of epilepsy among people with intellectual disabilities: A systematic
review. Seizure, 29, 46--62. Robins LN (1966). Deviant Children Grown
Up, A Sociological and Psychiatric Study of Sociopathic Personality.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins. Robins LN (1993). Vietnam veterans'
rapid recovery from heroin addiction: a fluke or normal expectation?
Addiction, 88, 1041--54. Robins LN and Regier DA (1991). Psychiatric
Disorder in America: the epidemiological catchment area study. Free
Press, New York. Robins LN et al.Â (1988). The Composite International
Diagnostic Interview. An epidemiologic instrument suitable for use in
conjunction with different diagnostic systems and in different cultures.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 45, 1069--77. Robinson L et al.Â (2010)
Primary care and dementia: 2. Longterm care at home: psychosocial
interventions, information provision, carer support and case management.
International Journal of Psychogeriatrics, 25, 657--64. Robinson P
(2014). Severe and enduring eating disorders: recognition and
management. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 20, 392--401. Robinson RG
and Jorge RE (2016). Post-stroke depression: a review. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 173, 221--31. Robjant K and Fazel M (2010). The emerging
evidence for narrative exposure therapy: A review. Clinical Psychology
Review, 30, 1030--9. Robson P (2009). Forbidden Drugs. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. Rockliff HE et al.Â (2014). A systematic review of
psychosocial factors associated with emotional adjustment in in vitro
fertilization patients. Human Reproduction Update, 20, 594--613. Rodda
J, Morgan S and Walker Z (2009) Are cholinesterase inhibitors effective
in the management of behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
in Alzheimer's disease? International Psychogeriatrics, 21, 821--34.
Rodrigues H et al.Â (2014). Does D-cycloserine enhance exposure therapy
for anxiety disorders in humans? A meta-analysis. PloS One, 9, p.e93519.
Roessner V et al.Â (2013). Pharmacological treatment of tic disorders and
Tourette Syndrome. Neuropharmacology, 68, 143--9. Rogers A et
al.Â (2003). Patients' understanding and participation in a trial
designed to improve the management of antipsychotic medication: a
qualitive study. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 38,
720--7.

845

References Rohde P et al.Â (2013). Key characteristics of major
depressive disorder occurring in childhood, adolescence, emerging
adulthood, and adulthood. Clinical Psychological Science, 1, 41--53.
Rohrer JD et al.Â (2015). C9orf72 expansions in frontotemporal dementia
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Lancet Neurology, 14, 291--301.
Rosanoff AJ, Handy LM and Rosanoff IA (1934). Criminality and
delinquency in twins. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 24,
923--34. Rosell DR et al.Â (2010). Increased serotonin 2A receptor
availability in the orbitofrontal cortex of physically aggressive
personality disordered patients. Biological Psychiatry, 67, 1154--62.
Rosenhan DL (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179,
250--8. Rosenthal NE, Sack DA and Gillin JC (1984). Seasonal affective
disorder: a description of the syndrome and preliminary findings wih
light therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 41, 24--30. Ross CA et
al.Â (2014). Huntington disease: natural history, biomarkers and
prospects for therapeutics. Nature Reviews Neurology, 10, 204--16.
Rossignol D et al.Â (2014). Environmental toxicants and autism spectrum
disorders: a systematic review. Translational Psychiatry, 4, e360.
RÃ¶ssler W et al.Â (2016). Does menopausal transition really influence
mental health? Findings from the prospective long-term Zurich study.
World Psychiatry, 15, 146--54. Rossor MN et al.Â (2010). The diagnosis of
young-onset dementia. Lancet Neurology, 9, 793--806. Roth M (1955). The
natural history of mental disorder in old age. Journal of Mental
Science, 101, 281--301. Roth T et al.Â (2011). Prevalence and perceived
health associated with insomnia based on DSM-IV-TR; International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems,
Tenth Revision; and Research Diagnostic Criteria/ International
Classification of Sleep Disorders, Second Edition Criteria: Results from
the America Insomnia survey. Biological Psychiatry, 69, 592--600.
Rothman D (1971). The Discovery of the Asylum. Little Brown, Boston, MA.
Routley V (2007). Motor vehicle exhaust gas suicide: review of
countermeasures. Crisis, 28, 28--35. Roy A et al.Â (2000). The genetics
of suicidal behaviour. In: K Hawton and K van Heeringen (eds.) The
International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide. John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester. pp.Â 209--22. Royal College of Psychiatrists (2000).
Good Psychiatric Practice. Royal College of Psychiatrists, London. Royal
College of Psychiatrists (2001). Diagnostic Criteria for Psychiatric
Disorders for Use with Adults with LD \[DC-LD\]. Royal College of
Psychiatrists, London. Royal College of Psychiatrists (2005). The Third
Report of the Royal College of Psychiatrists Special Committee on ECT.
Gaskell Press, London. Royal College of Psychiatrists (2010). College
Report CR160 Good Psychiatric Practice: Confidentiality and Information
Sharing. 2nd edn. RCP, London. Rubia K (2012). ADHD: what have we
learned from neuroimaging? Cutting Edge Psychiatry in Practice, 2,
16--21.

Rudolf MCJ and Logan S (2005). What is the long-term outcome for
children who fail to thrive? A systematic review. Community Child
Health, Public Health, and Epidemiology, 90, 925--31. Ruhe HG, Mason NS
and Schene AH (2007). Mood is indirectly related to serotonin,
norepinephrine and dopamine levels in humans: a meta-analysis of
monoamine depletion studies. Molecular Psychiatry, 12, 331--59. Ruocco
AC et al.Â (2013). Neural correlates of negative emotionality in
borderline personality disorder: an activation-likelihoodestimation
meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 73, 153--60. Ruschena D et
al.Â (2003). Choking deaths: the role of antipsychotic medication.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 183, 446--50. Ruscio AM et al.Â (2010).
The epidemiology of obsessivecompulsive disorder in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Molecular Psychiatry, 15, 53--63. Rush
AJ et al.Â (2003). The 16-item Quick Inventory of Depressive
Symptomatology (QIDS) Clinician Rating (QIDS-C) and SelfReport
(QIDS-SR): A psychometric evaluation in patients with chronic major
depression. Biological Psychiatry, 54, 573--83. Rush AJ et al.Â (2008).
Handbook of Psychiatric Measures. American Psychiatric Publishing,
Washington DC. Russell G and Burns A (2014). Charles Bonnet syndrome and
cognitive impairment: a systematic review. International
Psychogeriatrics, 26, 1431--43. Russell GFM (1979). Bulimia nervosa: an
ominous variant of of anorexia nervosa. Psychological Medicine, 9,
429--48. Russell MC (2008). Scientific resistance to research, training
and utilization of eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR)
therapy in treating post-war disorders. Social Science and Medicine, 67,
1737--46. Rutter M (1972). Relationships between child and adult
psychiatric disorders. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 48, 3--21. Rutter
M (1991). Maternal Deprivation Reassessed. Penguin, London. Rutter M
(2005). Environmentally mediated risks for psychopathology: research
strategies and findings. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 44, 3--18. Rutter M (2006). Genes and Behaviour:
Nature--nurture interplay explained. Blackwell, Oxford. Rutter M (2011).
Child psychiatric diagnosis and classification: concepts, findings,
challenges and potential. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
52, 647--60. Rutter M and Rutter M (1993). Developing Minds: Challenge
and continuity across the life span. Basic Books, New York. Rutter M,
Graham P and Birch HG (1970a). A Neuropsychiatric Study of Childhood.
Heinemann, London. Rutter M et al.Â (1976b). Isle of Wight Studies
1964--1974. Psychological Medicine, 6, 313--32. Rutter M et al.Â (1975).
Attainment and adjustment in two geographical areas III: some factors
accounting for area differences. British Journal of Psychiatry, 126,
520--33. Rutter M et al.Â (1976). Isle of Wight Studies 1964--1974.
Psychological Medicine, 6, 313--32. Rutter M et al.Â (eds.) (2008).
Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 5th edn. Blackwell, Oxford.
Rutz W, von Knorring L and Walinder J (1992). Long-term effects of an
educational program for general practitioners given by the Swedish
Committee for the prevention and treatment of depression. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 85, 83--8.

845

846

846

References Ryan R (1994). Post-traumatic stress disorder in persons with
developmental disabilities. Community Mental Health Journal, 30, 45--54.
Ryle A and Kerr IB (2016) Introducing Cognitive Analytic Therapy:
Principles and practice, 2nd edn. Wiley--Blackwell, Oxford. Ryu A and
Kim TH (2015). Premenstrual syndrome: a minireview. Maturitas, 82,
436--40. Sabah M et al.Â (2012). Herpes simplex encephalitis. BMJ, 344,
e3166. Sachdev et al.Â (2014). Classifying neurocognitive disorders: the
DSM-5 approach. Nature Reviews Neurology, 10, 634--42. Sachs K and
Mehler PS (2016). Medical complications of bulimia nervosa and their
treatments. Eating and Weight Disorders, 21, 13--18. Sackett DL (1996).
Evaluation of clinical method. In: DJ Weatherall, JGG Ledingham and DA
Warrell (eds.) Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 3rd edn. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. pp.Â 15--21. Sackheim HA et al.Â (2009). Effect of
concomitant pharmacotherapy on electroconvulsive therapy outcomes.
Short-term efficacy and adverse effects. Archives of General Psychiatry,
66, 729--37. Saez-Fonseca JA, Lee L and Walker Z (2007). Long-term
outcome of depressive pseudodementia in the elderly. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 101, 123--9. Saha S, Chant D and McGrath J (2007).
A systematic review of mortality in schizophrenia---is the differential
mortality gap worsening over time? Archives of General Psychiatry, 64,
1123--31. Sahin M and Sur M (2015). Genes, circuits, and precision
therapies for autism and related neurodevelopmental disorders. Science,
350, aab3897. Sainsbury P and Barraclough B (1968). Differences between
suicide rates. Nature, 220, 1252--3. Saito S and Ihara M (2016).
Interaction between cerebrovascular disease and Alzheimer pathology.
Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 29, 168--73. Sajatovic M et al.Â (2015). A
report on older-age bipolar disorder from the International Society for
Bipolar Disorders Task Force. Bipolar Disorders, 17, 689--704. Samara MT
et al.Â (2016). Early improvement as a predictor of later response to
antipsychotics in schizophrenia: a diagnostic test review. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 617--29. Samartzis L et al.Â (2014). White
matter alterations in early stages of schizophrenia: a systematic review
of diffusion tensor imaging studies. Journal of Neuroimaging, 24,
101--10. Sameroff A et al.Â (1987). IQ scores of 4-year-old children:
socialenvironmental risk factors. Pediatrics, 79, 343--50. Samuels JF et
al.Â (2008). Prevalence and correlates of hoarding behavior in a
community-based sample. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46, 836--44.
Sanacora G (2010). Cortical inhibition, gamma-aminobutyric acid and
major depression: there is plenty of smoke but is there fire? Biological
Psychiatry, 67, 397--8. Santiago PN et al.Â (2013). A systematic review
of PTSD prevalence and trajectories in DSM-5 defined trauma exposed
populations: Intentional and non-intentional traumatic events. PloS One,
8, e59236. Saravanan B et al.Â (2004). Culture and insight revisited.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 107--9.

Sareen J (2014) Posttraumatic stress disorder in adults: Impact,
comorbidity, risk factors, and treatment. Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry, 59, 460--7. Sargant W and Slater E (1963). An Introduction
to Physical Methods of Treatment in Psychiatry. Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Sariaslan A et al.Â (2016). Schizophrenia and subsequent neighborhood
deprivation: revisiting the social drift hypothesis using population,
twin and molecular genetic data. Translational Psychiatry, 6, e796.
Sartorius N et al.Â (2010). WPA guidance on how to combat stigmatization
of psychiatry and psychiatrists. World Psychiatry, 9, 131--44. Satizabal
CL et al.Â (2016). Incidence of dementia over three decades in the
Framingham Heart Study. New England Journal of Medicine, 374, 523--32.
Savitz JB, Price JL and Drevets WC. (2014). Neuropathological and
neuromorphometric abnormalities in bipolar disorder: View from the
medial prefrontal cortical network. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 42, 132--47. Saxena S and Lawler D (2009). Delirium in the
elderly: a clinical review. Postgraduate Medical Journal, 85, 405--13.
Saxena S et al.Â (2006). World Health Organization's Mental Health Atlas
2005:implications for policy development. World Psychiatry, 5, 179--84.
Saxena S et al.Â (2007). Resources for mental health: scarcity, inequity,
and inefficiency. Lancet, 370, 878--89. Saylor D et al.Â (2016).
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder--- pathogenesis and prospects for
treatment. Nature Reviews Neurology, 12, 234--43. Scadding JG (1967).
Diagnosis: the clinician and the computer. Lancet, ii, 877--82. Scaglia
F (ed.) (2014). Inborn Errors of Metabolism: From neonatal screening to
metabolic pathways. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Scalzo SJ et
al.Â (2015). Wernicke--Korsakoff syndrome not related to alcohol use: a
systematic review. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry,
86, 1362--8. Scammell TE (2015). Narcolepsy. New England Journal of
Medicine, 373, 2654--62. Schaefer J et al.Â (2013). The global cognitive
impairment in schizophrenia: Consistent over decades and around the
world. Schizophrenia Research, 150, 42--50. Schanda H et al.Â (2004).
Homicide and major mental disorders: a 25-year study. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 110, 98--107. Schapira K et al.Â (2001). Relationship of
suicide rates to social factors and availability of lethal methods:
comparison of suicide in Newcastle upon Tyne, 1961--1994. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 178, 458--64. Schapiro AHV et al.Â (2014). Slowing
of neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease:
future therapeutic prospects. Lancet, 384, 545--55. Schapira AHV et
al.Â (2017). Non-motor features of Parkinson disease. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience (AOL 8 June 2017). Scheltens P et al.Â (2016). Alzheimer's
disease. Lancet, 388, 505--517. Schiffman J et al.Â (2004). Childhood
videotaped social and neuromotor precursors of schizophrenia: a
prospective investigation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 2021--7.

874

References Schimming C and Harvey PD (2004). Disability reduction in
elderly patients with schizophrenia. Journal of Psychiatric Practice,
10, 283--95. Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics
Consortium (2014). Biological insights from 108 schizophreniaassociated
genomic loci. Nature, 511, 421--7. Schlapobersky J and Pines M (2009).
Group methods in adult psychiatry. In: MG Gelder, Andreasen NC,
LÃ³pez-Ibor JJJr, and Geddes JR (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1350--69. Schmahmann JD
and Pandya DN (2008). Disconnection syndromes of basal ganglia,
thalamus, and cerebrocerebellar systems. Cortex, 44, 1037--66.
Schmahmann JD et al.Â (2008). Cerebral white matter neuroanatomy,
clinical neurology, and neurobehavioral correlates. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 1142, 266--309. Schmidtke A et al.Â (1996).
Attempted suicide in Europe: rates, trends and sociodemographic
characteristics of suicide attempters during the period 1989--1992.
Results of the WHO/ EURO Multicentre Study on Parasuicide. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 93, 327--38. Schmucker M and LÃ¶sel F (2008).
Does sexual offender treatment work? A systematic review of outcome
evaluations. Psicothema, 20, 10--19. Schneider K (1959). Clinical
Psychopathology. Grune and Stratton, New York. Schneider LS, Dagerman K
and Insel PS (2006). Efficacy and adverse effects of atypical
antipsychotics for dementia: metaanalysis of randomized,
placebo-controlled trials. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14,
191--210. Schoeler T et al.Â (2016). Continued versus discontinued
cannabis use in patients with psychosis: a systematic review and
metaanalysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 3, 215--25. Schoeyen HK et al.Â (2014).
Treatment-resistant bipolar depression: A randomized controlled trial of
electroconvulsive therapy versus algorithm-based pharmacological
treatment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 41--51. Schubert CR et
al.Â (2014). Translating human genetics into novel treatment targets for
schizophrenia. Neuron, 84, 537--41. Schwartz MA and Wiggins OP (1987).
Typifications. The first step for clinical diagnosis in psychiatry.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 175, 65--77. Scott A (2005).
College Guidelines on electroconvulsive therapy: an update for
prescribers. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 11, 150--6. Scott AI and
Waite J (2013). Monitoring a course of ECT. In: J Waite, A Eaton (eds.)
The ECT Handbook. RCPsych Publications, London. pp.Â 60--70. Scott J et
al.Â (2006). Cognitive-behavioural therapy for severe and recurrent
bipolar disorders: randomised controlled trial. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 188, 313--20. Scott PD (1960). The treatment of psychopaths.
British Medical Journal, i, 1641--6. Scott S (2009a). Developmental
psychopathology and classification in childhood and adolescence. In: MG
Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez--Ibor and JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
pp.Â 1589--94.

Scott S et al.Â (2015a). Parenting programs. In: A. Thapar et al. (eds).
Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
pp.Â 483--95. Scott S et al.Â (2015b). Oppositional and conduct disorders.
In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 911--30. Scottish Executive Central
Research Unit (2002). The 2000 Scottish Crime Survey Overview Report.
Scottish Executive, Edinburgh. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
Network (SIGN) (2013). Management of Schizophrenia. Edinburgh: SIGN;
2013 (SIGN publication no. 131). Sedman G (1970). Theories of
depersonalization: a reappraisal. British Journal of Psychiatry, 117,
1--14. Seeman MV (2016). Erotomania and recommendations for treatment.
Psychiatric Quarterly, 87, 355--64. Segal H (1963). Introduction to the
Work of Melanie Klein. Heinemann Medical, London. Segal M et al.Â (2016).
Intellectual disability is associated with increased risk for obesity in
a nationally representative sample of US children. Disability and Health
Journal, 9, 392--8. Segal T and Ranjith G (2016). Psychiatric assessment
on medical wards: a guide for general psychiatrists. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 22, 8--15. Segal ZV et al.Â (2012).
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for Depression. Guildford Press, New
York, NY. Seitz DP et al.Â (2013). Pharmacological treatments for
neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia in long-term care: a systematic
review. International Psychogeriatrics, 25, 185--203. Sekar A et
al.Â (2016). Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement
component 4. Nature, 530, 177--83. Selten JP et al.Â (2010).
Schizophrenia and 1957 pandemic of influenza: meta-analysis.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 219--28. Semkovska M and McLoughlin DM
(2010). Objective cognitive performance associated with
electroconvulsive therapy for depression: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 68, 568--77. Sen A (7 A.D.) What
Theory of Justice? Sheldonian Theatre, Oxford: OPHI Conference
http://ophi.org.uk/subindex. php?id=video0. Sendt KV et al.Â (2015). A
systematic review of factors influencing adherence to antipsychotic
medication in schizophreniaspectrum disorders. Psychiatry Research, 225,
14--30. Series H and Esiri M (2012). Vascular dementia: a pragmatic
review. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 18, 372--80. Severus WE et
al.Â (2008). What is the optimal serum lithium level in the long-term
treatment of bipolar disorder? A review. Bipolar Disorders, 10, 231--7.
Sexton CE, Mackay C and Ebmeier K (2009). A systematic review of
diffusion tensor imaging studies in affective disorders. Biological
Psychiatry, 66, 814--23. Shaffer D (1974). Suicide in childhood and
early adolescence. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 15,
275--91. Shafran R et al.Â (2013). Advances in the cognitive behavioural
treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
42, 265--74. Shah N et al.Â (2015). Update in diagnosis and treatment of
chronic pelvic pain syndromes. Current Bladder Dysfunction Reports, 10,
198--206.

847

84

848

References Shah SM et al.Â (2011). Antipsychotic prescribing to older
people living in care homes and the community in England and Wales.
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 26, 423--34. Shamloul R
and Ghanem H. (2013). Erectile dysfunction. Lancet, 381, 153--65.
Shapiro PA (2015). Management of depression after myocardial infarction.
Current Cardiology Reports, 17, 80. Sharp T and Cowen PJ (2011). 5-HT
and depression: is the glass half-full? Current Opinion in Pharmacology,
11, 45--51. Sharpe M (2013). Somatic symptoms: beyond 'medically
unexplained'. British Journal of Psychiatry, 203, 320--1. Sharpe M
(2014). Psychological medicine and the future of psychiatry. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 204, 91--2. Sharpe M and Carson AJ (2001).
'Unexplained' somatic symptoms, functional syndromes, and somatisation:
do we need a paradigm shift? Annals of Internal Medicine, 134, 926--30.
Sharpe M and Mayou R (2004). Somatoform disorders: a help or a hindrance
to good patient care? British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 465--7. Sharpe
M et al.Â (2014). Integrated collaborative care for comorbid major
depression in patients with cancer (SMaRT Oncology2): A multicentre
randomised controlled effectiveness trial. The Lancet, 384, 1099--108.
Sharpe M et al.Â (2015). Rehabilitative treatments for chronic fatigue
syndrome: long-term follow-up from the PACE trial. Lancet Psychiatry, 2,
1067--74. Shaw JM et al.Â (2016). Developing a clinical pathway for the
identification and management of anxiety and depression in adult cancer
patients: an online Delphi consensus process. Supportive Care in Cancer,
24, 22--41. Shaw RJ et al.Â (2012). Impact of ethnic density on adult
mental disorders: narrative review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 201,
11--19. Shear MK et al.Â (2011). Complicated grief and related
bereavement issues for DSM-5. Depression and Anxiety, 28, 103--17.
Sheehan B (2012). Assessment scales in dementia. Therapeutic Advances in
Neurological Disorders, 5, 349--58. Sheldon WH et al.Â (1940). The
Varieties of Human Physique. Harper, London. Shepherd M (1961). Morbid
jealousy: some clinical and social aspects of a psychiatric symptom.
Journal of Mental Science, 107, 687--753. Shepherd M et al.Â (1966).
Psychiatric Illness in General Practice. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Shepherd MK et al.Â (2014). Orofacial pain: a guide for the
headache physician. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain, 54,
22--39. Shimada-Sugimoto M et al.Â (2015). Genetics of anxiety disorders:
Genetic epidemiological and molecular studies in humans. Psychiatry and
Clinical Neurosciences, 69, 388--401. Shiers D et al.Â (2015). Health
inequalities and psychosis: time for action. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 207, 471--3. Shin SH et al.Â (2015). Childhood emotional
neglect, negative emotion-driven impulsivity and alcohol use in young
adulthood. Child Abuse and Neglect, 50, 94--103. Shore JH, Vollmer WM
and Tatum EL (1989). Community patterns of post-traumatic stress
disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 177, 681--5. Shorter E
(1992). From Paralysis to Fatigue. A history of psychosomatic illness in
the modern era. The Free Press, New York.

Sibbald B et al.Â (1996). Investigation of whether on-site general
practice counsellors have an impact on psychotropic drug prescribing
rates and costs. British Journal of General Practice, 46, 63--7. Siegel
JM (2009). The neurobiology of sleep. Seminars in Neurology, 29,
277--96. Sierra M and David AS (2011). Depersonalisation: a selective
impairment of self-awareness. Consciousness and Cognition, 1, 99--108.
Sierra M et al.Â (2012). Depersonalization disorder and anxiety: a
special relationship? Psychiatry Research, 197, 123--7. Siever LJ et
al.Â (2002). The borderline diagnosis III: identifying endophenotypes for
genetic studies. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 964--8. Silberberg D et
al.Â (2015). Brain and other nervous system disorders across the
lifespan---global challenges and opportunities. Nature, 527, S151--4.
Silva AJ et al.Â (1998). The dangerousness of persons with delusional
jealousy. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 26,
607--23. Silveira JM and Seeman MV (1995). Shared psychotic disorder: a
critical review of the literature. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 40,
389--95. Silver SM, Rogers S and Russell M (2008). Eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) in the treatment of war
veterans. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 64, 947--57. Simeone JC et
al.Â (2015). An evaluation of variation in published estimates of
schizophrenia prevalence from 1990--2013: a systematic literature
review. BMC Psychiatry, 15, 193. Simon GE and Savarino J (2007). Suicide
attempts among patients starting depression treatment with medications
or psychotherapy. American Journal of Psychiatry,164, 1029--34. Simon GE
et al.Â (1999). An international study of the relation between somatic
symptoms and depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 341, 1329--35.
Simon GE et al.Â (2006). Suicide risk during antidepressant treatment.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 41--7. Simon L et al.Â (2013).
Regional grey matter structure differences between transsexuals and
healthy controls---a voxel based morphometry study. PLoS ONE, 8, e83947.
Simon NM (2013). Treating complicated grief. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 310, 416--23. Simon SS et al.Â (2015). Cognitive
behavioral therapies in older adults with depression and cognitive
deficits: a systematic review. International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 30, 223--33. Simonoff E et al.Â (2007). ADHD symptoms in
children with mild intellectual disability. Journal of the American
Association of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 591--600. Simonoff E
et al.Â (2015). Intellectual disability. In: Thapar A et al. (eds.)
Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
Chichester, pp.Â 719--37. Sin J and Norman I (2013). Psychoeducational
interventions for family members of people with schizophrenia: a
mixed-methods systematic review. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 74,
E1145--U56. Sinclair J and Green J (2005). Understanding resolution of
deliberate self harm: qualitative interview study of patients'
experiences. British Medical Journal, 330, 1112--15. Singer HS et
al.Â (2012). Moving from PANDAS to CANS. The Journal of Pediatrics,
160(5):725--31.

849

References Singh SP and Burns T (2006). Race and mental health: there is
more to race than racism. British Medical Journal, 333, 648--51. Singh T
et al.Â (2016). Rare loss-of-function variants in SETD1A are associated
with schizophrenia and developmental disorders. Nature Neuroscience, 19,
571--7. Singleton N et al.Â (2003). Substance misuse among prisoners in
England and Wales. International Review of Psychiatry, 15, 150--2. Skegg
K (2005). Self-harm. Lancet, 366, 1471--83. Skegg K et al.Â (2003).
Sexual orientation and self-harm in men and women. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 160, 541--6. Skillback T et al.Â (2015). Cerebrospinal fluid
tau and amyloid-Î²142 in patients with dementia. Brain, 138, 2716--31.
Skinner BF (1953). Science and Human Behaviour. Macmillan, New York.
Skodol A (2008). Longitudinal course and outcome of personality
disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 31, 495--503. Skodol AE
et al.Â (2002). The borderline diagnosis I: psychopathology, comorbidity,
and personality structure. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 936--50. Skodol AE
et al.Â (2005). The collaborative longitudinal personality disorders
study (CLPS): overview and implications. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 19(5), 487--504. Skodol AE et al.Â (2005). Two-year prevalence
and stability of individual DSM-IV criteria for schizotypal, borderline,
avoidant, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders: toward a
hybrid model of Axis II disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162,
883--9. Skoog I (2004). Psychiatric epidemiology of old age: the H70
study---the NAPE lecture 2003. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109,
4--18. Slade M et al.Â (2000). Threshold Assessment Grid (TAG): the
development of a valid and brief scale to assess the severity of mental
illness. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 35, 78--85.
Slade M et al.Â (2014). Uses and abuses of recovery: implementing
recovery-oriented practices in mental health systems. World Psychiatry,
13, 12--20. Slater E (1965). The diagnosis of hysteria. British Medical
Journal, i, 1395--9. Slater E and Shields J (1969). Genetical aspects of
anxiety. In MH Lader (ed.) Studies of anxiety. British Journal of
Psychiatry Special Publication, London. Slater E, Beard AW and Glithero
E (1963). The schizophrenia-like psychoses of epilepsy. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 109, 95--150. Slatkin M (2008). Linkage
disequilibrium---understanding the evolutionary past and mapping the
medical future. Nature Reviews Genetics, 9, 477--85. Slifstein M et
al.Â (2015). Deficits in prefrontal cortical and extrastriatal dopamine
release in schizophrenia. A positron emission tomographic functional
magnetic resonance imaging study. JAMA Psychiatry, 72, 316--24. Slikboer
R et al.Â (2016). A systematic review and meta-analysis of behaviourally
based psychological interventions and pharmacological interventions for
trichotillomania. Clinical Psychologist 21, 20--32. Small JG, Klapper MH
and Kellams JJ (1988). Electroconvulsive treatment compared with lithium
in the management of manic states. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45,
727--32.

Smink F et al.Â (2012). Epidemiology of eating disorders: incidence,
prevalence and mortality rates. Current Psychiatry Reports, 14, 406--14.
Smith DG and Robbins TW (2013). The neurobiological underpinnings of
obesity and binge eating: a rationale for adopting the food addiction
model. Biological Psychiatry, 73, 804--10. Smith DH et al.Â (2013).
Chronic neuropathologies of single and repetitive TBI: substrates of
dementia? Nature Reviews Neurology, 9, 211--21. Smith YL et al.Â (2005).
Sex reassignment: Outcomes and predictors of treatment for adolescent
and adult transsexuals. Psychological Medicine, 35, 89--99. Smyth MG and
Hoult J (2000). The home treatment enigma. British Medical Journal, 29,
305--9. Snowling M et al.Â (2015). Disorders of reading, mathematical and
motor development. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp. 702--18.
Snyder PJ et al.Â (2016). Effects of testosterone treatment in older men.
New England Journal of Medicine, 374, 611--24. Solla P et al.Â (2015).
Paraphilias and paraphilic disorders in Parkinson's disease: a
systematic review of the literature. Movement Disorders, 30, 604--13.
Somashekar B et al.Â (2013). Psychopharmacotherapy of somatic symptom
disorders. International Review of Psychiatry, 25, 107--15. Sonuga-Barke
EJS et al.Â (2015). ADHD and hyperkinetic disorder. In: A. Thapar et
al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester, pp.Â 738--56. Soothill K, Ackerley E and Francis B (2004).
The criminal careers of arsonists. Medicine, Science and the Law, 44,
27--40. SÃ¸rensen P et al.Â (2011). A randomized clinical trial of
cognitive behavioural therapy versus short-term psychodynamic
psychotherapy versus no intervention for patients with hypochondriasis.
Psychological Medicine, 41, 431--41. Sovner R and Hurley AD (1989). Ten
diagnostic principles for recognizing psychiatric disorders in mentally
retarded persons. Psychiatric Aspects of Mental Retardation, 8, 9--15.
Spiegel D et al.Â (2013). Dissociative disorders in DSM-5. Annual Review
of Clinical Psychology, 9, 299--326. Spielberger CD et al.Â (1983).
Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Consulting Psychologists'
Press, Palo Alto, CA. Spielmans GI et al.Â (2013). Adjunctive atypical
antipsychotic treatment for major depressive disorder: A meta-analysis
of depression, quality of life, and safety outcomes. PLoS Medicine, 10,
e1001403. Spina E and Scordo MG (2002). Clinically significant drug
interactions with antidepressants in the elderly. Drugs and Aging, 19,
299--320. Spinelli M (2009). Postpartum psychosis: detection of risk and
management. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 405--8. Spitzer M
(1990). On defining delusions. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 31, 377--97.
Spitzer R, First MB and Williams JBW (1992). Now is the time to retire
the term 'organic mental disorders'. American Journal of Psychiatry,
149, 240--4. Spitzer R et al.Â (2006). A brief measure for assessing
generalized anxiety disorder. The GAD-7. Archives of Internal Medicine,
166, 1092--7.

849

850

850

References Spitzer RL, Williams JBD and Gibbon M (1987). Structured
Clinical Interview for DSMIV (SCID). New York State Psychiatric
Institute, New York. Spitzer RL et al.Â (1994). Utility of a new
procedure for diagnosing mental disorders in primary care. The PRIME-MD
1000 study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 272, 1749--56.
Stack S (2000). Suicide: a 15-year review of the sociological
literature. Part I: cultural and economic factors. Suicide Life
Threatening Behaviour, 30, 145--62. Stack S (2003). Media coverage as a
risk factor in suicide. Journal of Epidemiology Community Health, 57,
238--40. Stafford MR et al.Â (2015). Efficacy and safety of
pharmacological and psychological interventions for the treatment of
psychosis and schizophrenia in children, adolescents and young adults: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One, 10, e0117166. Stalker K
and McArthur K. (2012). Child abuse, child protection and disabled
children: A review of recent research. Child Abuse Review, 21, 24--40.
Stanek G et al.Â (2012) Lyme borreliosis. Lancet, 379, 461-473.
Stanghellini G and Broome MR (2014). Psychopathology as the basic
science of psychiatry. British Journal of Psychiatry, 205, 169--70.
Staniloiu A and Markowitsch HJ (2014). Dissociative amnesia. Lancet
Psychiatry, 1, 226--41. Starcevic V (2015). Hypochondriasis: treatment
options for a diagnostic quagmire. Australasian Psychiatry, 23, 369--73.
Statham DJ et al.Â (1998). Suicidal behaviour: an epidemiological and
genetic study. Psychological Medicine, 28, 839--55. Steadman HJ, Gounis
K, Denis D et al.Â (2001). Assessing the New York City involuntary
outpatient commitment pilot program. Psychiatric Services, 52(3),
330--6. Steege JF and Zolnoun DA (2009). Evaluation and treatment of
dyspareunia. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 113, 1124--36. Steensma TD et
al.Â (2013). Gender identity development in adolescence. Hormones and
Behavior, 64, 288--97. Steiger A and Kimura M (2010). Wake and sleep EEG
provide biomarkers in depression. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 44,
242--52. Stein A et al.Â (2014). Effects of perinatal mental disorders on
the fetus and child. The Lancet, 384, 1800--19. Stein LJ and Test MA
(1980). Alternative to mental hospital treatment. 1. Conceptual model,
treatment program and clinical evaluation. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 37, 392--7. Stein MB and Stein DJ (2008). Social anxiety
disorder. Lancet, 371, 1115--25. Steinbrecher N et al.Â (2011). The
prevalence of medically unexplained symptoms in primary care.
Psychosomatics, 52(3), 263--71 Steinhausen HC (2002). The outcome of
anorexia nervosa in the 20th century. American Journal of Psychiatry,
159, 1284--93. Stenager EN and Stenager E (2000). Physical illness and
suicidal behaviour. In: K Hawton and K van Heeringen (eds.) The
International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide. John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester. Stengel E (1952). Enquiries into attempted sucide.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 45, 613--20. Stengel E
(1959). Classification of mental disorders. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 21, 601--3.

Stengel E and Cook NG (1958). Attempted Suicide: Its social significance
and effects. Chapman & Hall, London. Stephan KE, Friston KJ and Frith CD
(2009). Dysconnection in schizophrenia. From abnormal synaptic
plasticity to failures of self-monitoring. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35,
509--27. Stevens H et al.Â (2015). Post-illness-onset risk of offending
across the full spectrum of psychiatric disorders. Psychological
Medicine, 45, 2447--57. Stinton C et al.Â (2015). Pharmacological
management of Lewy body dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 731--42. Stockings E et al.Â (2016).
Prevention, early intervention, harm reduction and treatment of
substance misuse in young people. Lancet Psychiatry, 3, 280--96.
Stockmeier CA (2003). Involvement of serotonin in depression: evidence
from post-mortem and imaging studies of serotonin receptors and the
serotonin transporter. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 37, 357--73.
Stolte M et al.Â (2016). A critical review of outcome measures used to
evaluate the effectiveness of comprehensive, community based treatment
for young children with ASD. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 23,
221--34. Stone J et al.Â (2005). Systematic review of misdiagnosis of
conversion symptoms and 'hysteria'. British Medical Journal,
doi:10.1136/bmj.38628.466898.55. Stone MH, Hurt SW and Stone DK (1987).
The PI-500: long-term follow-up of borderline inpatients meeting DSM III
criteria. I: global outcome. Journal of Personality Disorders, 1,
291--8. Stores G (2015). Sleep disorders in children and adolescents.
BJPsych Advances, 21, 124--31. Storr A (2000). Analytical psychology
(Jung). In: MG Gelder, JJ LÃ³pez-IborJr and NC Andreasen (eds.) The New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, Chapter 3.3.1. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Strain JJ, Klipstein K and Newcorm J (2009) Adjustment
disorders. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez--Ibor and JR Geddes
(eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford University
Press, Oxford. pp.Â 716--24. Strang J et al.Â (2010). Impact of
supervision of methadone consumption on deaths related to methadone
overdose (1993-- 2008): analyses using OD4 index in England and
Scotland. British Medical Journal, 341, 640. Stroebe M, Schut H and
Stroebe W (2007). Health outcomes of bereavement. Lancet, 370, 1960--73.
StrÃ¶mgren E (1985). World-wide issues in psychiatric diagnosis and
classification and the Scandinavian point of view. Mental Disorders,
Alcohol and Drug Related Problems. Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam. Strydom A
et al.Â (2009). The relationship of dementia prevalence in older adults
with intellectual disability (ID) to age and severity of ID.
Psychological Medicine, 39, 13--21. Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (2010). Overview of findings from the 2009
National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Office of Applied Studies,
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration, Rockville, MD.
Sullivan PF (2013). Questions about DISC1 as a genetic risk factor for
schizophrenia. Molecular Psychiatry, 18, 1050--2. Sullivan PF, Neale MC,
Kendler KS (2000). Genetic epidemiology of major depression: review and
meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157(10), 1552--62.

851

References Sullivan PF, Kendler KS and Neale MC (2003). Schizophrenia as
a complex trait---evidence from a meta-analysis of twin studies.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 1187--92. Suominen K et al.Â (1996).
Mental disorders and comorbidity in attempted suicide. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 94, 234--40. Surtees PD et al.Â (2008). Depression and
ischemic heart disease mortality: evidence from the EPIC-Norfolk United
Kingdom Prospective Cohort Study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165,
515--23. Swaab DF (2009). Sexual differentiation of the human brain in
relation to gender identity and sexual orientation. Functional
Neurology, 24, 17. Swanson JW et al.Â (2000). Involuntary outpatient
commitment and reduction of violent behaviour in persons with severe
mental illness. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 324--31. Swartz MS
et al.Â (1999). Can involuntary outpatient commitment reduce hospital
recidivism?: Findings from a randomized trial with severely mentally ill
individuals. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1968--75. Swendsen J
et al.Â (2012). Use and abuse of alcohol and illicit drugs in US
adolescents: Results of the National Comorbidity Survey-- Adolescent
Supplement. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 390--8. Szanto K et
al.Â (2007). A suicide prevention program in a region with a very high
suicide rate. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 914--20. Szasz TS
(1960). The myth of mental illness. American Psychology, 15, 113--18.
Szmukler G (2001). Violence risk prediction in practice. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 178, 84--5. Szmukler G and Appelbaum P (2008). Treatment
pressures, leverage, coercion and compulsion in mental health care.
Journal of Mental Health, 17 (3), 233--44. Talbot P et al.Â (2010). Key
Concepts in Learning Disabilities. Sage, Los Angeles. Talbott JA,
Jefferies M and Arana JD (1987). CMHCs: relationships with academia and
the state. Community Mental Health Journal, 23, 271--81. Tan MS et
al.Â (2015). Efficacy and adverse effects of Ginkgo biloba for cognitive
impairment and dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal
of Alzheimer's Disease, 43, 589--603. Tandon R et al.Â (2013). Definition
and description of schizophrenia in the DSM-5. Schizophrenia Research,
150, 3--10. Tansella M (2002). The scientific evaluation of mental
health treatments: an historical perspective. Evidence Based Mental
Health, 5, 4--5. Tarrier N et al.Â (1998). Randomised controlled trial of
intensive cognitive behaviour therapy for patients with chronic
schizophrenia. British Medical Journal, 317, 303--7. Taylor D (2008).
Psychoanalytic and psychodynamic therapies for depression: the evidence
base. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 14, 401--13. Taylor D et
al.Â (2011). Pharmacological interventions for people with depression and
chronic physical health problems: systematic review and meta-analyses of
safety and efficacy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 198, 179--88. Taylor
D, Paton C, Kapur S (2015). The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in
Psychiatry, 12th edn. John Wiley, Chichester. Taylor FK (1981). On
pseudo-hallucinations. Psychological Medicine, 11, 265--72.

Taylor JE and Harvey ST (2010). A meta-analysis of the effects of
psychotherapy with adults sexually abused in childhood. Clinical
Psychology Review, 30, 749--67. Taylor JL et al.Â (2002). Evaluation of a
group intervention for convicted arsonists with mild and borderline
intellectual disabilities. Criminal Behavior and Mental Health, 12,
282--93. Taylor M and Perera U (2015). NICE CG178 Psychosis and
Schizophrenia in Adults: Treatment and Management--- an evidence-based
guideline? British Journal of Psychiatry, 206, 357--9. Taylor PJ and
Dunn E (2009). Management of offenders with mental disorder in
specialist forensic mental health services. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen,
JJ Lopez-Ibor, and J Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.Â 2015--21. Taylor PJ,
Mahandra B and Gunn J (1983). Erotomania in males. Psychological
Medicine, 13, 645--50. Taylor WD et al.Â (2013). The vascular depression
hypothesis: mechanisms linking vascular disease with depression.
Molecular Psychiatry, 18, 963--74. Teicher MH and Samson JA (2016).
Annual research review: Enduring neurobiological effects of childhood
abuse and neglect. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines, 57, 241--66. Tess AV and Smetana GW (2009). Medical
evaluation of patients undergoing electroconvulsive therapy. New England
Journal of Medicine, 360, 1437--44. Thapar A (2012). Depression in
adolescence. The Lancet, 379, 1056--67. The European School Survey
Project on Alcohol and Other Drugs 2011).
http://www.espad.org/en/Reports--Documents/ ESPAD-Reports/ Thibaut F et
al.Â (2010). The World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry
(WFSBP) guidelines for the biological treatment of paraphilias. World
Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 11, 604--55. Thomas A, Chess S and
Birch HG (1968). Temperament and Behaviour Disorders in Children.
University Press, New York. Thomas D (2010). Methods for investigating
gene--environment interactions in candidate pathway and genome-wide
association studies. Annual Review of Public Health, 31, 21--36.
Thompson A et al.Â (2014). Behavioral and psychiatric symptoms in prion
disease. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 265--74. Thompson A et
al.Â (2016). At-risk mental state for psychosis: identification and
current treatment approaches. BJPsych Advances, 22, 186--93. Thompson AE
and Pearce JB (2009). The child as witness. In: MG Gelder, NC Andreasen,
JJ Lopez-Ibor, JR Geddes (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 1761--3. Thomson L and Darjee R
(2009). Associations between psychiatric disorder and offending. In: MG
Gelder, NC Andreasen, JJ Lopez-Ibor and J Geddes (eds.) The New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.Â 1917--26.
Thomson M (1998). The Problem of Mental Deficiency. Eugenics, democracy,
and social policy in Britain, c.1870--1959. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. Thornicroft G (2006). Shunned: Discrimination against people
with mental illness. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

851

852

852

References Thornicroft G and Tansella M (2013). The balanced care model:
the case for both hospital- and community-based mental healthcare.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 246--8. Thornicroft G et al.Â (2013).
Clinical outcomes of Joint Crisis Plans to reduce compulsory treatment
for people with psychosis: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet,
381, 1634--41. Tienari P et al.Â (2003). Genetic boundaries of the
schizophrenia spectrum: evidence form the Finnish adoptive family study
of schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1587--94. Tienari
P et al.Â (2004). Genotype--environment interaction in
schizophrenia-spectrum disorder. Long-term follow-up study of Finnish
adoptees. British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 216--22. Tiihonen J et
al.Â (2006). Effectiveness of antipsychotic treatments in a nationwide
cohort of patients in community care after first hospitalisation due to
schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder: observational follow-up
study. British Medical Journal, 333, 224. Tiihonen J et al.Â (2012).
Polypharmacy with antipsychotics, antidepressants, or benzodiazepine and
mortality in schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 476--83.
Tizard J (1964). Community Services for the Mentally Handicapped. Oxford
University Press, London. Tol WA et al.Â (2011). Mental health and
psychosocial support in humanitarian settings: linking practice and
research. Lancet, 378, 1581--91. Toledo JB et al.Â (2013). Contribution
of cerebrovascular disease in autopsy confirmed neurodegenerative
disease cases in the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Centre. Brain,
136, 2697--706. Tondo L et al.Â (1997). Effectiveness of restarting
lithium treatment after its discontinuation in bipolar I and bipolar II
disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 548--50. Tong Y and
Phillips MR (2010). Cohort-specific risk of suicide for different mental
disorders in China. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 467--73. Tonge
BJ et al.Â (2014). A review of evidence-based early intervention for
behavioural problems in children with autism spectrum disorder: the core
components of effective programs, child-focused interventions and
comprehensive treatment models. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 27,
158--65. Torgersen S et al.Â (2000). A twin study of personality
disorders. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 41(6), 416--25. Torgesen S et
al.Â (2001). The prevalence of personality disorders in a community
sample. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 590--6. Torniainen M et
al.Â (2015). Antipsychotic treatment and mortality in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 41, 656--63. Torrey EF and Yolken RH (2010).
Psychiatric genocide: Nazi attempts to eradicate schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 26--32. Tortelli A et al.Â (2015).
Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders in Caribbean-born migrants
and their descendants in England: systematic review and meta-analysis of
incidence rates, 1950--2013. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 50, 1039--55. Toth M (2015). Mechanisms of non-genetic
inheritance and psychiatric disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology, 40,
129--40.

Tracy DK and David AS (2015). Clinical neuromodulation in psychiatry:
the state of the art or an art in a state? BJPsych Advances, 21(6),
396--404. Treasure J (2004). Motivational interviewing. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 10, 331--7. Treasure J et al.Â (2015). Has the
time come for a staging model to map the course of eating disorders from
high risk to severe enduring illness? An examination of the evidence.
Early Intervention in Psychiatry, 9, 173--84. Treiman DM (1999).
Violence and the epilepsy defense. Neurologic Clinics, 17, 245--55.
Triebwasser J et al.Â (2013). Paranoid personality disorder. Journal of
Personality Disorders 27, 795--805. Trim RS et al.Â (2013). Predictors of
initial and sustained remission from alcohol use disorders: Findings
from the 30-year followup of the San Diego prospective study.
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 37, 1424--31. True WR et
al.Â (1993). A twin study of genetic and environmental contributions to
liability of posttraumatic stress symptoms. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 50, 257. Tseng W-S (2006). From peculiar psychiatric
disorders through culture bound syndromes to culture-related specific
syndromes. Transcultural Psychiatry, 43, 554--76. Tsertsvadze A et
al.Â (2009). Oral phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors and hormonal treatments
for erectile dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Annals
of Internal Medicine, 151, 650--W218. Tunbridge EM, Harrison PJ and
Weinberger DR (2006). Catecholo-methyltransferase, cognition and
psychosis: Val158Met and beyond. Biological Psychiatry, 60, 141--52
Turkington D, Martindale B and Bloch-Thorseen GR (2005). Schizophrenia.
In: GO Gabbard, JS Beck and J Holmes (eds.) Oxford Textbook of
Psychotherapy, Chapter 14. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Turner DT et
al.Â (2014). Psychological interventions for psychosis: a meta-analysis
of comparative outcome studies. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171,
523--38. Turner MA et al.Â (2002). Subcortical dementia. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 180, 148--51. Turton P et al.Â (2009). Long-term
psychosocial sequelae of stillbirth: phase II of a nested case-control
cohort study. Archives of Women's Mental Health, 12, 35--41. Tyrer P
(2013). Models for Mental Disorder. 5th edn. WileyBlackwell, Oxford.
Tyrer P (2014). A comparison of DSM and ICD classifications of mental
disorder. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 20, 280--5. Tyrer P and
Baldwin D (2006). Generalized anxiety disorder. Lancet, 368, 2156--66.
Tyrer P and Methuen C (2007). Rating Scales in Psychiatry. RCPsych
Publications, London. Tyrer P, Seivewright H and Johnson T (2004a). The
Nottingham study of neurotic disorder Psychological Medicine, 34,
1385--94. Tyrer P, Reed GM and Crawford MJ (2015) Classification,
assessment, prevalence, and effect of personality disorder. Lancet, 385,
717--25. Tyrer RA and Fazel M (2014). School and community-based
interventions for refugee and asylum seeking children: A systematic
review. PloS One, 9, e89359.

853

References Uchida H et al.Â (2009) Increased antipsychotic sensitivity in
elderly patients: evidence and mechanisms. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 70, 397--405. Uher R and Rutter M (2012). Classification of
feeding and eating disorders: review of evidence and proposals for
ICD-11. World Psychiatry, 11, 80--92. UK Alcohol Treatment Trial
Research Team (2005). Effectiveness of treatment for alcohol problems.
Findings of the randomised UK Alcohol Treatment Trial (UKATT). British
Medical Journal, 331, 54. UK ECT Review Group (2003). Efficacy and
safety of electroconvulsive therapy in depressive disorders: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet, 361, 799--808. Ungar M
(2015). Practitioner review: Diagnosing childhood resilience---a
systemic approach to the diagnosis of adaptation in adverse social and
physical ecologies. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and
Allied Disciplines, 56, 4--17. United Nations (2010). World Population
Ageing 2009. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population
Division. New York. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2010).
International Statistics on Crime and Justice, Harrendorf, Heiskanen &
Malby (eds.). HEUNI Publication Series No.Â 64, Helsinki. UN Population
Division (2015). World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision. New
York: United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs,
Population Division. Unutzer J (2007). Late-life depression. New England
Journal of Medicine, 357, 2269--76. Upthegrove R et al.Â (2015). Adverse
childhood events and psychosis in bipolar affective disorder. The
British Journal of Psychiatry, 206, 191--7. US Office of Surgeon General
(2012). 2012 National Strategy for Suicide Prevention: Goals and
Objectives for Action: A Report of the U.S. Surgeon General and of the
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention. Washington (DC): US
Department of Health & Human Services (US). Vaillant GE (2003). A
60-year follow-up of alcoholic men. Addiction, 98, 1043--51. Valenti M
et al.Â (2008). Electroconvulsive therapy in the treatment of mixed
states in bipolar disorder. European Psychiatry, 23, 53--6. Valenti E et
al.Â (2015). Informal coercion in psychiatry: a focus group study of
attitudes and experiences of mental health professionals in ten
countries. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 50,
1297--308. Valkanova V and Ebmeier KP (2013). Vascular risk factors and
depression in later life: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Biological Psychiatry, 73, 406--13. Vancampfort D et al.Â (2015). Risk of
metabolic syndrome and its components in people with schizophrenia and
related psychotic disorders, bipolar disorder and major depressive
disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. World Psychiatry, 14,
339--47. van de Wouw E et al.Â (2012). Prevalence, associated factors and
treatment of sleep problems in adults with intellectual disability: A
systematic review. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 33, 1310--32.
van Ijzendoorn M (1995). Adult attachment representations, parental
responsiveness, and infant attachment: A meta-analysis

on the predictive validity of the Adult Attachment Interview.
Psychological Bulletin, 117, 387--403. Van Kessel K et al.Â (2008). A
randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavior therapy for multiple
sclerosis fatigue. Psychosomatic Medicine, 7, 205--13. van Kesteren CFMG
et al.Â (2017). Immune involvement in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia:
a meta-analysis on postmortem brain studies. Translational Psychiatry,
7, e1075. van Os J (2016). 'Schizophrenia' does not exist. British
Medical Journal, 352, i375. Van Os J et al.Â (2003). Do urbanicity and
familial liability coparticipate in causing psychosis. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 160, 477--82. Van Os J, Kenis G and Rutten BPF (2010).
The environment and schizophrenia. Nature, 468, 203--12. Van Soest T et
al.Â (2009). The effects of cosmetic surgery on body image, self-esteem,
and psychological problems. Journal of Plastic, Reconstructive &
Aesthetic Surgery, 62, 1238--44. Vaughn CE and Leff JP (1976). The
influence of family and social factors on the course of psychiatric
illness. A comparison of schizophrenic and depressed neurotic patients.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 129, 125--37. Vaughn MG et al.Â (2015).
Deliberate self-harm and the nexus of violence, victimization, and
mental health problems in the United States. Psychiatry Research, 225,
588--95. Vauhkonen K (1968). On the pathogenesis of morbid jealousy with
special reference to the personality traits of an interaction between
jealous patients and their spouses. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica
Supplement, 202, 2--261. VÃ¡zquez GH et al.Â (2013). Overview of
antidepressant treatment of bipolar depression. International Journal of
Neuropsychopharmacology, 16, 1673--85. VÃ¡zquez GH et al.Â (2014).
Pharmacological treatment of bipolar depression. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 20, 193--201. Veale D (2007). Cognitive behavioural therapy
for obsessive compulsive disorder. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment,
13, 438--46. Veale D and Roberts A (2014). Obsessive-compulsive
disorder. British Medical Journal, 348, g2183. Veale D et al.Â (2014).
Atypical antipsychotic augmentation in SSRI treatment refractory
obsessive-compulsive disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMC Psychiatry, 14, 317. Velayudhan L et al.Â (2014). Review of brief
cognitive tests for patients with suspected dementia. International
Psychogeriatrics, 26, 1247--62. Ventriglio A et al.Â (2016). Relevance of
culture-bound syndromes in the 21st century. Psychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 70, 3--6. Verdel BM et al.Â (2010). Use of antidepressant
drugs and risk of osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic fractures. Bone, 47,
604--9. Vergani F et al.Â (2010). Surgical, medical and hardware adverse
events in a series of 141 patients undergoing subthalmic deep brain
stimulation for Parkinson disease. World Neurosurgery, 73, 338--44.
Verghese PB, Castellano JM and Holtzman DM (2011). Apolipoprotein E in
Alzheimer's disease and other neurological disorders. Lancet Neurology,
10, 241--52. Verkuijl N et al.Â (2015). Childhood
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. BMJ, 350, h2168.

853

854

854

References Vicens V et al.Â (2016). Structural and functional brain
changes in delusional disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 208,
153--9. Vickerman KA and Margolin G (2009). Rape treatment outcome
research: empirical findings and state of the literature. Clinical
Psychology Review, 29, 431--48. Victor M et al.Â (1971). The
Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome. Blackwell, Oxford. Victor TA et al.Â (2010).
Relationship between amygdala responses to masked faces and mood state
and treatment in major depressive disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 67, 1128--38. Victoroff J et al.Â (2014). Pharmacological
management of persistent hostility and aggression in persons with
schizophrenia spectrum disorders: a systematic review. Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 26, 283--312. Videnovic A
(2013). Treatment of Huntington disease. Current Treatment Options in
Neurology, 15, 424--38. Viens M et al.Â (2003). Trait anxiety and
sleep-onset insomnia: evaluation of treatment using anxiety management
training. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 54, 31--7. Vieta E et
al.Â (2008). Efficacy and safety of quetiapine in combination with
lithium or divalproex for maintenance of patients with bipolar I
disorder (International trial 126). Journal of Affective Disorders, 109,
251--63. Vigod SN et al.Â (2015). Antipsychotic drug use in pregnancy:
high dimensional, propensity matched, population based cohort study.
British Medical Journal, 350, h2298. Vigod SN et al.Â (2016). Depression
in pregnancy. British Medical Journal, 352, i1547. Vincent A et
al.Â (2011). Autoantibodies associated with diseases of the CNS: new
developments and future challenges. Lancet Neurology, 10, 759--72.
Visscher PM, Hill WG and Wray NR (2008). Heritability in the genomics
era---concepts and misconceptions. Nature Reviews Genetics, 9, 255--66.
Vissers LE et al.Â (2016). Genetic studies in intellectual disability and
related disorders. Nature Reviews Genetics, 17, 9--18. Volkmar F et
al.Â (2014). Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of
children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of the
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 53(2), 237--57.
Vreeker A et al.Â (2015). Cognitive enhancing agents in schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 25, 969--1002. Waern
M et al.Â (2002). Mental disorder in elderly suicides: a casecontrol
study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 450--5. Wagenaar AC, Tobler
AL and Komro KA (2010). Effects of alcohol tax and price policies on
morbidity and mortality. A systematic review. Research and Practice,
100, 2270--8. Waite J (2013). Patients' and carers perspectives on ECT.
In: J Waite, A Eaton (eds.) The ECT Handbook. RCPsych Publications,
London. pp.Â 224--9. Wakefield JC (1992). The concept of mental disorder.
On the boundary between biological facts and social values. American
Psychology, 47, 373--88. Walker A et al.Â (2013a). Treatment of
depression in adults with cancer: a systematic review of randomized
controlled trials. Psychological Medicine, 44, 897--907. Walker J et
al.Â (2013b). Prevalence of depression in adults with cancer: a
systematic review. Annals of Oncology, 24, 895--900.

Walker Z et al.Â (2015). Lewy body dementias. Lancet, 386, 1683--97.
Walle JV et al.Â (2012). Practical consensus guidelines for the
management of enuresis. European Journal of Pediatrics, 171, 971--83.
Walters JTR and Owen MJ (2016). Genome-wide significant associations for
cannabis dependence severity: relevance to psychiatric disorders. JAMA
Psychiatry, 73, 443--4. Wang HF et al.Â (2015). Efficacy and safety of
cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine in cognitive impairment in
Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's disease dementia, and dementia with
Lewy bodies: systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential
analysis. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 86,
135--43. Ward CH et al.Â (1962). The psychiatric nomenclature. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 7, 198--205. Warrell DA, Cox TM and Firth JD
(2010). Oxford Textbook of Medicine. Oxford University Press, New York.
Wasserman D and Wasserman C (eds.) (2009). Oxford Textbook of
Suicidology and Suicide Prevention. Oxford University Press, New York.
Watson JB and Rayner R (1920). Conditioned emotional reactions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 3, 1--14. Watson HJ and Bulik CM (2013).
Update on the treatment of anorexia nervosa: review of clinical trials,
practice guidelines and emerging interventions. Psychological Medicine,
43, 2477--500. Watts J and Priebe S (2002). A phenomenological account
of users' experiences of assertive community treatment. Bioethics, 16,
439--54. Webb RT et al.Â (2012). Suicide risk in primary care patients
with major physical disease: a case-control study. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 69, 256--64. Weinberger DR (1987). Implications of normal
brain development for the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 44, 660--9. Weinberger DR and Levitt P (2011).
Neurodevelopmental origins of schizophrenia. In: Weinberger DR and
Harrison PJ (eds.) Schizophrenia, 3rd edn. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford. pp.
393--412. Weinberger DR and Radulescu E (2016). Finding the elusive
pychiatric "lesion" with 21st-century neuroanatomy: A note of caution.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 27--33. Weissman AM et al.Â (2004).
Pooled analysis of antidepressant levels in lactating mothers, breast
milk, and nursing infants. American Psychiatric Association, 161,
1066--78. Wells A (2013). Advances in metacognitive therapy.
International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 6, 186--201. Wertheimer A
(2001). A Special Scar: The experiences of people bereaved by suicide.
Brunner-Routledge, Hove. Wertheimer J (1997). Psychiatry of the elderly:
a consensus statement. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
12, 432--5. Wesseloo R et al.Â (2016). Risk of postpartum relapse in
bipolar disorder and post-partum psychosis: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 117--27. Westbrook D
et al.Â (2011). An Introduction to Cognitive Behaviour Therapy: Skills
and applications. Sage Publications, London. While et al.Â (2012).
Implementation of mental health service recommendations in England and
Wales and suicide rates, 1997--2006: a cross-sectional and
before-and-after observational study. Lancet, 379, 1005--12.

85

References White PD et al.Â (2011). Comparison of adaptive pacing
therapy, cognitive behaviour therapy, graded exercise therapy, and
specialist medical care for chronic fatigue syndrome (PACE): a
randomized trial. Lancet, 377, 823--36. White PD, Rickards H and Zeman
AZJ (2012). Time to end the distinction between mental and neurological
illnesses. British Medical Journal, 344, e3454. Whiteford HA et
al.Â (2013). Global burden of disease attributable to mental and
substance use disorders: findings from the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2010. Lancet, 382, 1575--86. Whiting D and Cowen PJ (2013). Drug
information update: Agomelatine. The Psychiatrist, 37, 356--8. Whitley E
et al.Â (1999). Ecological study of social fragmentation, poverty, and
suicide. British Medical Journal, 319, 1037. Whitney I, Smith PK and
Thompson D (1994). Bullying and children with special needs. In: PK
Smith and S Sharp (eds.) School Bullying: Insights and perspectives.
Routledge, London. pp.Â 213--40. Whittington CJ et al.Â (2004). Selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors in childhood depression: systematic review
of 363,published versus unpublished data. Lancet, 363, 1341--5.
WichstrÃ¸m L et al.Â (2012). Prevalence of psychiatric disorders in
preschoolers. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 53, 695--705.
Wieck A and Haddad PM (2004). Hyperprolactinaemia. In: PM Haddad, S
Dursun and B Deakin (eds.) Adverse Syndromes and Psychiatric Drugs. A
clinical guide. Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp.Â 69--88. Wijkstra J
et al.Â (2010). Treatment of unipolar psychotic depression: a randomized
double blind study comparing imipramine, venlafaxine and venlafaxine
plus quetiapine. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 121, 190--200. Wilcox
HC (2004). Association of alcohol and drug use disorders and completed
suicide: an empirical review of cohort studies. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 76 (Suppl.), S11--S19. Wiles N et al.Â (2013). Cognitive
behavioural therapy as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy for primary care
based patients with treatment resistant depression: Results of the
CoBalt randomised controlled trial. The Lancet, 381, 375--84. Wilhelm S
et al.Â (2014). Modular cognitive-behavioral therapy for body dysmorphic
disorder: a randomized controlled trial. Behavior Therapy, 45, 314--27.
Wilkinson D and Andersen HF (2007). Analysis of the effect of memantine
in reducing the worsening of clinical symptoms in patients with moderate
to severe Alzheimer's disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive
Disorders, 24, 138--45. Wilkinson D et al.Â (2009). Effectiveness of
donepezil in reducing clinical worsening of patients with mild to
moderate Alzheimer's disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive
Disorders, 28, 244--51. Wilkinson P (2013). Psychological treatments.
In: T Dening and A Thomas (eds). Oxford Textbook of Old Age Psychiatry,
2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Williams JMG and Pollock LR
(2000). The psychology of suicidal behaviour. In: K Hawton and K van
Heeringen (eds.) The International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted
Suicide. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. Williams M and Viscusi JA
(2016). Hoarding disorder and a systematic review of treatment with
cognitive behavioral therapy. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 45, 93--110.

Williams JMG et al.Â (2014). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
preventing relapse in recurrent depression: A randomized dismantling
trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 82, 275--86.
Williams MJ et al.Â (2011). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
severe health anxiety (hypochondriasis): an interpretative
phenomenological analysis of patients' experiences. British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 50, 379--97. Williamson OD et al.Â (2014).
Antidepressants in the treatment for chronic low back pain: questioning
the validity of metaanalyses. Pain Practice, 14, E33--E41. Willner P et
al.Â (2013). Group-based cognitive-behavioural anger management for
people with mild to moderate intellectual disabilities: cluster
randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, bjp. bp.
112.124529. Wilson RP and Bhattacharyya S (2016). Antipsychotic efficacy
in psychosis with co-morbid cannabis misuse: a systematic review.
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 30, 99--111. Wilson S and Pinner G
(2013). Driving and dementia: a clinician's guide. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment, 19, 89--96. Wilson S et al.Â (2004). Prevalence of
irritable bowel syndrome: a community survey. British Journal of General
Practice, 54, 495--502. Wilson S et al.Â (2014). A systematic review of
interventions to promote social support and parenting skills in parents
with an intellectual disability. Child: Care, Health and Development,
40, 7--19. Wilson SJ et al.Â (2010). British Association for
Psychopharmacology consensus statement on evidence-based treatment of
insomnia, parasomnias and circadian rhythm disorders. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 24, 1577--600. Wincze JP and Weisberg RB (2015).
Sexual Dysfunction: A guide for assessment and treatment. Guilford
Publications, New York. Wing JK and Brown GW (1970). Institutionalism
and Schizophrenia. Cambridge University Press, London. Wing JK and
Furlong R (1986). A haven for the severely disabled within the context
of a comprehensive psychiatric community service. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 149, 449--57. Wing JK, Cooper JE and Sartorius N (1974).
Measurement and Classification of Psychiatric Symptoms; an instruction
manual for the PSE and the CATEGO programme. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge. Wing JK et al.Â (1998). Health of the Nation Outcome Scales
(HoNOS). Research and development. British Journal of Psychiatry, 172,
11--18. Winkelman JW (2015). Insomnia disorder. New England Journal of
Medicine, 373, 1437--44. Winstock AR and Schifano F (2009). Disorders
relating the use of ecstasy and other 'party drugs'. In: Gelder MG,
Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor JJ, Geddes JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.Â 494--502.
Winstock AR, Ford C and Witton J (2010). Assessment and management of
cannabis use disorders in primary care. British Medical Journal, 340,
800--4. Winter S et al.Â (2016). Transgender people: health at the
margins of society. Lancet, 388, 390--400. Winterer G and McCarley RW
(2011). Electrophysiology of schizophrenia. In: D Weinberger and PJ
Harrison (eds.) Schizophrenia. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, pp.Â 311--33.

855

856

856

References Winterer G and Weinberger DR (2004). Genes, dopamine and
cortical signal-to-noise ratio in schizophrenia. Trends in
Neurosciences, 27, 683--90. Wisniewski SR et al.Â (2009). Can phase III
trial results of antidepressant medications be generalized to clinical
practice? A STAR\* D report. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166,
599--607. Witlox J et al.Â (2010). Delirium in elderly patients and the
risk of postdischarge mortality, institutionalization, and dementia. A
meta-analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association, 304,
443--51. Wittchen H-U et al.Â (2010). Agoraphobia: a review of the
diagnostic classificatory position and criteria. Depression and Anxiety,
27, 113--33. Wittchen HU et al.Â (2011). The size and burden of mental
disorders and other disorders of the brain in Europe 2010. European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 21, 655--79. Wium-Andersen MK et al.Â (2016).
Elevated C-reactive protein and late-onset bipolar disorder in 78 809
individuals from the general population. British Journal of Psychiatry,
208, 138--45. Wolff HG (1962). A concept of disease in man.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 24, 25--30. Wolitzky-Taylor KB et al.Â (2008).
Psychological approaches in the treatment of specific phobias: A
meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 1021--37. Wolpe J (1958).
Psychotherapy by Reciprocal Inhibition. Stanford University Press,
Stanford, CA. Wolpert L (1999). Malignant Sadness: the anatomy of
depression, 2nd edn. Faber, London. Wolpert M (2009). Organization of
services for children and adolescents with mental health problems. In:
Gelder MG, Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor JJ, Geddes JR (eds.) New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
pp.Â 1807--11. Wong EKO et al.Â (2013a). The interface between neurology
and psychiatry: the case of multiple sclerosis. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 19, 370--7. Wong WB et al.Â (2013b). Statins in the prevention
of dementia and Alzheimer's disease: A meta-analysis of observational
studies and an assessment of confounding. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug
Safety, 22, 345--58. Wooden MDG et al.Â (2009). Frequent attenders with
mental disorders at a general hospital emergency department. Emergency
Medicine Australasia, 21(3), 191--5. Wooff K and Goldberg DP (1988).
Further observations on the practice of community care in Salford.
Differences between community psychiatric nurses and mental health
social workers. British Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 30--7. Woolfenden S
et al.Â (2012). A systematic review of the diagnostic stability of autism
spectrum disorder. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 6, 345--54.
World Health Organization (1973). Report of the International Pilot
Study of Schizophrenia. Vol. 1, World Health Organization, Geneva. World
Health Organization (1984). Mental Health Care in Developing Countries:
A critical appraisal of research findings. World Health Organization,
Geneva. World Health Organization (1992a). Glossary: Differential
definitions of SCAN items and commentary on the SCAN text. World Health
Organization, Geneva.

World Health Organization (1992b). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental
and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical descriptions and diagnostic
guidelines. World Health Organization, Geneva. World Health Organization
(2010). Suicide rates per 100,000 by country, year and sex.
http://www.who.int/mental_health/ prevention/suicide_rates/en/index.html
World Health Organization (2010). mhGAP Intervention Guide for Mental,
Neurological and Substance Use Disorders in Nonspecialized Health
Settings. WHO Press, Geneva. World Health Organization (2012). Public
Health Action for the Prevention of Suicide: A framework. WHO, Geneva.
World Health Organization (2014). Preventing Suicide: A global
imperative. WHO, Geneva. World Medical Association (2000). Declaration
of Geneva: Ethical principles for medical research involving human
subjects. World Medical Association, Edinburgh. Wright C et al.Â (2004).
A systematic review of home treatment services. Classification and
sustainability. Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology, 39,
789--96. Wright D, Ost J and French CC (2006). Recovered and false
memories. The Psychologist, 19, 352--5. Wulff K et al.Â (2010). Sleep and
circadian rhythms disruption in psychiatric and neurodegenerative
disease. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 589--90. Wylie K et
al.Â (2016). Serving transgender people: clinical care considerations and
service delivery models in transgender health. Lancet, 388, 401--11.
Yalom I and Leszcz M (2005). The Theory and Practice of Group
Psychotherapy, 5th edn. Basic Books, New York. Yang YH et al.Â (2015).
Statins reduce the risk of dementia in patients with late-onset
depression: a retrospective cohort study. PLoS One, 10, e0137914.
Yankner BA, Lu T and Loerch P (2008). The aging brain. Annual Review of
Pathology---Mechanisms of Disease, 3, 41--66. Yeh P et al.Â (2012).
Restless legs syndrome: a comprehensive overview on its epidemiology,
risk factors, and treatment. Sleep and Breathing, 16, 987--1007.
Yesufu-Udechuku A et al.Â (2015). Interventions to improve the experience
of caring for people with severe mental illness: systematic review and
meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 206, 268--74. Yilmaz Z et
al.Â (2015). Genetics and epigenetics of eating disorders. Advances in
Genomics and Genetics, 5, 131--50. Yokoi F et al.Â (2002). Dopamine D2
and D3 receptor occupancy in normal humans treated with the
antipsychotic drug aripiprazole (OPC 14597): a study using positron
emission tomography and \[11C\]raclopride. Neuropsychopharmacology, 27,
248--59. Yonkers KA et al.Â (1996). Phenomenology and course of
generalized anxiety disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 168,
308--13. Yonkers KA et al.Â (2011). Does antidepressant use attenuate the
risk of a major depressive episode in pregnancy? Epidemiology, 22,
848--54. Young AH (2014). The effects of HPA axis function on cognition
and its implications for the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder.
Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 6, 331--3. Young AH et al.Â (2010). A
double blind placebo-controlled study of quetiapine and lithium in
adults in the acute phase of bipolar depression (EMBOLDEN I). Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 71, 150--62.

875

References Young JW and Geyer MA (2010). Action of modafinil-increased
motivation via the dopamine transporter inhibition and D1 receptors?
Biological Psychiatry, 67, 784--7. Young RC et al.Â (1978). A rating
scale for mania: reliability, validity and sensitivity. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 133, 429--35. Young S et al.Â (2015). Forensic psychiatry.
In: A. Thapar et al. (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 636--47. Youth Justice Board (2011).
Youth Justice Statistics 2009/10. www.
justice.gov.uk/publications/youth-justice-statistics.htm Yule W et
al.Â (2015). Post traumatic stress disorder. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds).
Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
pp.Â 806--21. Yung AR and McGorry PD (1996). The initial prodrome in
psychosis: descriptive and qualitative aspects. Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 30, 587--99. Yung PM and Keltner AA
(1996). A controlled comparison on the effect of muscle and cognitive
relaxation procedures on blood pressure: implications for the
behavioural treatment of borderline hypertensives. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 43, 821--6. Zachar P and Kendler KS (2007). Psychiatric
disorders: a conceptual taxonomy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164,
557--65. Zanarini MC et al.Â (2006). Prediction of the 10-year course of
borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163,
827--32. Zeanah CH et al.Â (2015). Disorders of attachment and social
engagement related to deprivation. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,
pp.Â 793--805. Zeman A et al.Â (2004). Narcolepsy and excessive daytime
sleepiness. British Medical Journal, 329, 724--8. Zhao GF et al.Â (2008).
A cross-sectional study on the mental status of 780 survivors after
Wenchuan earthquake. Chinese Journal of Evidence-Based Medicine, 8(10),
815--19. Zhou X et al.Â (2015). Comparative efficacy and acceptability of
psychotherapies for depression in children and

adolescents: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. World
Psychiatry, 14, 207--22. Zigman WB. (2013). Atypical aging in down
syndrome. Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 18, 51--67.
Zigmond AS and Snaith RP (1983). The hospital anxiety and depression
scale. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 67, 361--70. Zimbron J et
al.Â (2013). Pre-morbid fertility in psychosis: findings from the AESOP
first episode study. Schizophrenia Research, 156, 168--73. Zimmerman M
et al.Â (2008). The frequency of personality disorders in psychiatric
patients. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 31, 405--20. Zipfel S et
al.Â (2015). Anorexia nervosa: aetiology, assessment, and treatment.
Lancet Psychiatry, 2, 1099--111. Zipursky RB et al.Â (2013). The myth of
schizophrenia as a progressive brain disease. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
39, 1363--72. Zipursky RB et al.Â (2014). Risk of symptom recurrence with
medication discontinuation in first-episode psychosis: a systematic
review. Schizophrenia Research, 152, 408--14. Zohar J, Fostick L and
Juven-Wetzler J (2009). Obsessive compulsive disorder. In: Gelder MG,
Andreasen NC, Lopez-Ibor JJ, Geddes JR (eds.) New Oxford Textbook of
Psychiatry, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.Â 767--73.
Zubiaurre-Elorza et al.Â (2013). Cortical thickness in untreated
transsexuals. Cerebral Cortex, 23, 2855--62. Zucker KJ and Lawrence A
(2009). Epidemiology of gender identity disorder: Recommendations for
the standards of care of The World Professional Association for
Transgender Health. International Journal of Transgenderism, 11, 8--18.
Zucker KJ et al.Â (2015). Gender dysphoria and paraphilic sexual
disorders. In: A. Thapar et al.Â (eds). Rutter's Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp.Â 983--98. Zucker KJ et
al.Â (2016). Gender dysphoria in adults. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 12, 217--47. Zuckerman M (2005). Psychobiology of
Personality. Cambridge University Press, New York.

857

85

859

Index Notes: Tables, boxes and figures are indicated by an italic t, b
and f following the page number.

vs.Â indicates a comparison or differential diagnosis A ABAS, 506t ABC
(Autism Behaviour Checklist), 506t abdominal pain, children, 464
abnormal grief, 156 abnormalities of sexual preference (paraphilias),
330, 336--40 abortion, 669 abreaction, 706 absences, 381 absolute risk
reduction (ARR), 121--2 abstinence from alcohol, 580--1 acamprosate
(calcium acetyl homotaurinate), 582--3 accidents, psychiatric aspects
of, 667--8 Ackner, B, 710 action therapies (psychodrama), 702 activation
paradigm, 116 acute dystonia, 728 acute mania assessment, 247 diagnosis,
247 practical management, 247--9 acute psychiatric disorders head
injury, 378 primary care treatment, 790 specialist care, 792--4 day
hospitals, 792--3 generic care vs., 792, 793t inpatient units, 793--4
provisions for, 792--4 referred cares, 792 acute psychotic disorder,
264--5 acute schizophrenia, 254b clinical features, 254--6 drug
treatments, 292--3 first-rank symptoms, 255b management, 291--3
post-acute episode, 293--4, 294b acute stress disorder/reaction, 139--42
aetiology, 140--1 clinical picture, 139--40 diagnostic convention, 140
epidemiology, 140 management, 141--2 treatment, 141 AD see Alzheimer's
disease (AD) ADHD see attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
adherence therapy, schizophrenia, 291 adjustment disorders, 139,
149--50, 183 Adler, Alfred personality development, 394

psychological treatment development, 682 admission notes, 61--2
adolescent(s), 474--5 consent, 481--2 crime, 520--1 ethics and legal
problems, 481--2 global psychiatry, 679--80 normal development, 417--18
adolescent psychiatric disorders alcohol abuse, 474--5 assessment, 475,
483--4 childhood abuse, 159 common problems, 418 deliberate self-harm,
625--6 depression, 466--7 eating disorders, 474 epidemiology, 474
outcomes, 422 services for, 475 substance use disorder, 474--5 suicide,
614--15 see also child psychiatric disorders adoption studies antisocial
(dissocial) personality disorder aetiology, 405--6 child psychiatric
treatment, 435--6 excessive alcohol consumption aetiology, 575 genetics,
103 schizophrenia aetiology, 270 Advance Decision to Refuse Treatment
(ADRT), 77--8 aetiology, 59 approaches to, 87 biochemical studies,
110--13 classification of causes, 88--9 clinical descriptive studies,
96--7 endocrinology, 114 epidemiology, 97--8 ethology and evolutionary
psychology, 102 experimental and clinical psychology, 100--2 general
issues, 87--90 genetics, 102--10, 110b historical development, 93--6
intuitive understanding, 87--8 models, 90--3 neuropathology, 117
physiology, 114--17 scientific disciplines, contribution of, 96--118,
96b

single case, 90 social sciences, 98--100, 99b understanding and
explanation, 90 affective flattening, schizophrenia, 253 affective
personality disorder, 403 affective symptoms, ratings of, 67 ageing,
539--41 demographics, 539, 540t intellectual disability, 494
neuropsychology, 541 physical changes in brain, 540 physical health, 541
see also elderly aggressive patients, 659--60 aggressive thoughts, 14
agnosias, 46b agomelatine, 219t, 746--7 agoraphobia, 176--80 behaviour
therapy, 689b agraphognosia, 46b AIDS, 665--6, 679 see also HIV
infection AIDS--dementia complex, 666 akathisia, 728 Al-Anon, 584
alarms, enuresis management, 469, 692 alcohol hypnotic drugs,
interaction with, 722--4 units of, 567, 567t alcohol dependence, 570--1
alcohol detoxification, 581--2 alcoholic cirrhosis, 569 alcoholic
hallucinosis, 574 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), 570, 584 alcoholism, 566
alcohol misuse, 566 adolescents, 474--5 detection, 577--9 global
effects, 677t prevention, 585--6, 586b recognition of, 577--9 suicide
aetiology, 612, 612t treatment, 579--85, 580b see also alcohol
detoxification alcohol-related disorders, 566--86 alcohol dependence,
570--1 alcohol withdrawal, 570--1 excessive alcohol consumption, 566--70
aetiology, 574--7 epidemiology, 568--9 suggested limits of intake, 567

860

860

Index alcohol-related disorders (cont.) units of alcohol, 567 linked
physical diseases/disorders, 571--2, 574b medical model, 566 moral
model, 566 psychiatric disorders, 572--4 social damage, 574, 574b
terminology, 566 see also alcohol misuse alcohol withdrawal, 570--1,
571b, 581--2 aldehyde dehydrogenase gene (ALDH2), 575 alleles, 106b
all-or-nothing thinking, 688b alogia, 253 alprazolam, 179, 719
Alzheimer, Alois, 117, 362 Alzheimer's disease (AD), 362--6 aetiology,
364--6 amyloid cascade hypothesis, 365--6 cholinergic hypothesis, 366
environmental factors, 365 genetics, 364--5 inflammatory mechanisms, 366
apolipoprotein E4, 109b clinical features, 359t, 362--3, 363b course of,
363 familial, 366b global effects, 677t investigations, 363
neuropathology, 363--4 presymptomatic diagnosis and biomarkers, 361--2,
362t ambitendence, 17 amenorrhoea anorexia nervosa, 315 antipsychotic
drugs, unwanted effects, 731 amfetamine see amphetamines amisulpride,
725, 726t amitriptyline, 219t amnesia, 18, 354--7 aetiology, 354b, 355
clinical features, 354--5 course and prognosis, 355 criminal court,
relevance, 530 differential diagnosis, 356b dissociative, 654
investigations, 355 management, 355 pathology, 355 post-traumatic
amnesia, 378 psychogenic, 19 short-term, 572 transient global amnesia,
355--6 amnesic disorders, 354--7 amok, 657 amphetamines, 761 drug
misuse, 601--2, 601b induced psychosis, 601--2 urine tests, 592t
amputation, 662

amygdala, 175 amyloid cascade hypothesis, Alzheimer's disease, 365--6
amyloid plaques see senile (amyloid) plaques amyloid precursor protein
(APP) gene, 364 anabolic steroids, 664b analgesics psychological side
effects, 637t suicide prevention, 620 see also non-steroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Angelman syndrome, 498t anger see
irritability and anger angina, 663 anhedonia schizophrenia, 253 severe
depressive episode, 195 anorexia nervosa, 314--21 aetiology, 315--17
family influences, 317 genetics, 315--16 individual psychological
causes, 317 neurology, 316--17 sociocultural factors, 317 assessment,
317, 318b cannabis use, 601 differential diagnosis, 319b epidemiology,
315 management, 319--20 onset, course and prognosis, 315 physical
consequences, 315 physical features, 316b treatment, 318--19
anosognosia, 46b anoxia, 388 Antabuse (disulfiram), 582 antenatal death,
669 antiadrenergic effects, antipsychotic drugs, 729--30 anticholinergic
drugs, 734--5 unwanted effects, 637t anticholinergic effects
antipsychotic drugs, 730 tricyclic antidepressant unwanted effects, 741
anticipatory anxiety, agoraphobia, 176 anticonvulsant drugs bipolar
depression treatment, 244 depression treatment, 220 pregnancy in, 716
antidepressant drugs, 219t, 719t, 735--52, 736t agoraphobia treatment,
179 alcohol abstinence, 584 anorexia nervosa treatment, 319 anxiety,
720--1 augmentation of, 229 bipolar depression treatment, 244--5, 244t
bulimia nervosa treatment, 323 depression acute treatment, 218--19

depressive disorders management, 226--7, 228--9, 228b elderly depressive
disorders, 552 lithium and, 219--20 mechanism of action, 735--6
medically unexplained symptoms, 641 panic disorder treatment, 182
pregnancy in, 716 schizophrenia treatment, 289 suicide prevention, 619
see also monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs); selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs); tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
antiepileptic drugs, 509 antihistamines, sedating, 723 antimanic drugs,
248f antiparkinsonian agents, 637t antipsychiatry models, 92--3
antipsychotic drugs, 719t, 724--34, 725b contraindications to, 732 depot
preparations, 288--9, 727, 728t dosage, 732--3, 733t drug interactions,
727--8 atypical antipsychotic drugs, 724--5 metabolic monitoring, 731b
PET imaging studies, 732--3 pharmacokinetics, 727 pharmacology, 724--7
phenothiazines, 725--6 pregnancy in, 716--17 therapeutic uses, 724 acute
behavioural disturbances, 733--4 alcohol detoxification, 581--2 anxiety,
720--1 bipolar disorder long-term treatment, 246 dementia treatment,
elderly in, 557, 558 depressive disorders management, 229 mania
treatment, 242 schizophrenia-like disorders in elderly, 555
schizophrenia treatment, 287--9, 288t treatment adherence, 288 unwanted
effects, 728--32, 729b antisocial (dissocial) personality disorder,
399--400, 400b aetiology, 405--6 course of, 408 management, 411--12
prevalence rate, 404t anxiety, 5, 136 agoraphobia, 176 generalized
anxiety disorder vs., 164--5 mental state examination, 47 mixed anxiety
and depressive disorder, 183 obsessive--compulsive disorder, 185 rating
scale, 67 severe depressive episode, 195

861

Index terminology, 161 treatment, 721 anxiety disorders, 161--3
children, 459--63 classification of, 163, 163b cognitive behavioural
therapy, 693--4 differential diagnosis depressive disorders vs., 203
generalized anxiety disorder vs., 165 obsessive--compulsive disorder
vs., 186 elderly in, 544, 554 excessive alcohol consumption, 573, 576
global effects, 677t historical background, 161--3 intellectual
disability, 491 prevalence, 163 somatic symptoms, 634 symptoms, 162b
transcultural variations, 184 see also generalized anxiety disorder
(GAD); phobic anxiety disorders anxiolytic drugs, 718--22, 719t
agoraphobia treatment, 179 misuse, 598--600 pregnancy in, 716 tolerance,
718 see also benzodiazepines anxious patients, assessment, 56 anxious
personality disorder see avoidant (anxious) personality disorder apathy,
5 aphasia acquired epigraphic, 443 non-fluent variant primary
progressive, 370b semantic variant primary progressive, 370b
apolipoprotein E4, 109b apolipoprotein E (apoE) gene, 364, 365b
appearance mania, 234 mental state examination, 44--5 severe depressive
episode, 194 Appelbaum, B, 83 APP gene (amyloid precursor protein), 364
apraxia, 46b arctic hysteria (Piblokto), 657 aripiprazole, 726t, 727
bipolar depression treatment, 244t D2 receptor blockade, 733t depot
preparations, 728t ARR (absolute risk reduction), 121--2 arson, 526--7
arts therapies, 291 ASD see autism spectrum disorder (ASD) asenapine,
726 Asher, Richard, 644 Asperger syndrome, 450 Assertive Community
Treatment Teams, 781 assertiveness training, 691

Assertive Outreach Teams (AOT), 785--6, 785b assessment, 35--69
behavioural assessment, 51--2 cognitive assessment, 51 community mental
health teams, 783 conclusions, 58--9, 58b further information, 59
information integration and evaluation, 57--60 laboratory
investigations, 51 Mental Health Act, 81 neuropsychological assessment,
51 patient needs, 59 personality assessment, 52 personality disorder
management, 409 physical examination, 50--1 psychological assessments,
51 risk assessment, 52--3, 53b special types of, 53--5 standardized
methods, 66--8 instruments for measuring symptoms, 67--8 standardized
diagnostic assessments, 66--7 associations, loosening of, 15--16
astereognosia, 46b asylum movement, 778 atomoxetine, 452 atonic
seizures, 381 atopognosia, 46b attachment theory, 394, 682 attempted
suicide, 621b assessment, 627, 628, 628b definition, 621b risk factors,
624b attention, 101 disturbances of, 19--20 mental state examination, 50
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 450--3 aetiology,
451--2 clinical features, 450--1 comorbidities, 451 diagnostic criteria,
451 epidemiology, 451 intellectual disability, 492 prognosis, 452
treatment, 452--3 atypical antipsychotic drugs, 113--14, 726t bipolar
depression treatment, 244 depression treatment, 220 depressive disorders
management, 229 mania treatment, 242 pharmacology, 726--7
schizophrenia-like disorders in elderly, 555 selective D2-receptor
antagonists, 726 atypical depression, 197 auditory hallucinations, 7--8
acute schizophrenia, 254--5 excessive alcohol consumption, 574 mental
state examination, 49

AUDIT questionnaire, 578b Autism Behaviour Checklist (ABC), 506t autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), 444--50 aetiology, 446--7 genetics, 447b
assessment, 448 classification, 445b clinical characteristics, 444--56,
445b comorbidities, 446 management of, 449 differential diagnosis, 448
epidemiology, 446 intellectual disability, 492 management, 449--50
prognosis, 448 risk factors, 446--7 autochthonous delusion, 10 autogenic
training, 706 autoimmune disease, 663 obsessive--compulsive disorder
aetiology, 463 automatism (absence of intention), 530 autonomy
intellectual disability, 510 psychological treatments, 707 autoscopic
hallucinations, 7 avoidant food disorder, 324 avoidant (anxious)
personality disorder, 402, 402b management, 411 prevalence rate, 404t
social phobia vs., 174 avolition, 253 azapirones (buspirone), 721 B back
pain, 653--4 Balint groups, 791 bariatric surgery, 661--2 Basaglia,
Francis, 779 Bayley scales of infant and toddler development, 430t, 506t
BDD see body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) Beck, A T, 683 Beck Depression
Inventory (BDI), 67 behaviour assessment, 51--2 intellectual disability,
492, 492b mental state examination, 44--5 behavioural activation,
depression treatment, 221 behavioural models abnormalities of sexual
preference (paraphilias), 337 aetiological models, 92 behavioural
self-control training, 583t behavioural-variant of frontotemporal
dementia, 370b behaviour therapy, 658, 688, 690--2 agoraphobia, 179,
689b alcohol detoxification, 582 anger, 691 assertiveness training, 691

861

862

862

Index behaviour therapy (cont.) biofeedback, 692 contingency management,
691--2 desensitization, 690 exposure, 690--1 eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing, 692 flooding, 690 habit reversal, 692
intellectual disability, 510 relaxation training, 690 self-control
techniques, 691 social skills training, 691 benzhexol, 734
benzodiazepines, 718--21 agoraphobia treatment, 179 alcohol
detoxification, 581 breastfeeding, 717 compounds, 719 dementia
treatment, elderly in, 558b dependence and withdrawal, 720--1 drug
interactions, 720 drug misuse, 598--9 half-life, 720b long-acting, 169
neonatal toxicity, 716--17 panic disorder treatment, 182
pharmacokinetics, 719 pharmacology, 718--19 toxic effects, 720 unwanted
effects (side effects), 719--20 benztropine, 734 bereavement adjustment
to, 154--7 counselling, 686 definition, 154 morbidity, 156 Berlin,
Isaiah, 72 beta-adrenoceptor antagonists anxiety, 721--2 generalized
anxiety disorder treatment, 169 social phobia treatment, 175 Bethlem
Hospital, 532 beverage alcohol content, 567t Binet, A, 486 binge eating,
314--15, 323 biochemistry aetiology, 110--13 panic disorder aetiology,
181 schizophrenia neurobiology, 281--3 biofeedback, behaviour therapy,
692 biopsychosocial formulation, 634b bipolar depression assessment, 249
practical management, 249--50 treatment, 244--5, 244t NICE guidelines,
250b bipolar disorder, 233--52 aetiology, 239--41 children, 467
classification, 200, 236--7 clinical features, 233--6 course and
prognosis, 241--2

depression see bipolar depression differential diagnosis, 237--8
elderly, 553 epidemiology, 238 global effects, 677t long-term treatment,
245--6 mortality, 242 physical health monitoring, 251b
relapse/recurrence prevention, 250--2 transcultural factors, 236 see
also bipolar depression; mania bizarre delusions, 12 Bleuler, Eugen,
260--1b, 303b blindness, 665 blood phobia, 171 body dysmorphic disorder
(BDD), 651--2 classification, 647 social phobia vs., 174 body image,
disturbance of, 17 borderline personality disorder, 400--1 aetiology,
407 bipolar disorder vs., 238 course of, 408 management, 411, 412b
dialectical behaviour therapy, 697 prevalence rate, 404t boundaries of
self, disturbances of, 18 Bournewood gap, 78 Bowlby, John, 682 boxing,
chronic head injury, 379 BPRS (Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale), 68
Braid, James, 682 brain biochemistry, 111--12 biopsies in
neuropsychiatric disorders, 351 physical changes in ageing, 540
sex-dimorphic brain structure, 341 tumours, 386 brain disorders,
associated symptoms, 346--50 brain imaging aetiology, 111--12 autism
spectrum disorder, 446 bipolar disorder, 241 depression, 210 excessive
alcohol consumption, 573 functional see functional brain imaging;
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) mood disorders, 214--15
neuropsychiatric disorders, 351 obsessive--compulsive disorder
aetiology, 187 post-traumatic stress disorder, 145b structural brain
imaging mood disorders, 214 schizophrenia neurobiology, 279--80 see also
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); positron emission tomography (PET);
single-photon emission tomography (SPET) brain stimulation techniques,
772--5

deep brain stimulation, 773--5 transcranial direct current stimulation,
775 transcranial magnetic stimulation, 772--3 vagal nerve stimulation,
773 breastfeeding, pharmacotherapy, 717 breath alcohol concentration,
579b breathing-related sleep disorders, 328 brief insight orientated
psychotherapy, 697--8 Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), 68 brief
psychodynamic psychotherapy, 682 brief psychotic disorders, 264
diagnosis and classification, 264--5 bright light treatment, 769--70
depression treatment, 222 British Ability Scales, 430t, 506t Broadmoor
Hospital, 532 Brown, A S, 779 bulimia nervosa, 321--3 aetiology, 322
epidemiology, 321 management, 323 onset, course and prognosis, 321--2
physical consequences, 321, 322b self-help, 696b treatment, 322--3
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), 695--6 bullying, 428 buprenorphine
opioid maintenance treatment, 598 opioid withdrawal, 597 urine tests,
592t bupropion, 751--2 burglary, 527 burns, 667 Burton, Robert, 94
buspirone, 721 monoamine oxidase inhibitor interactions, 745
butyrophenones, 725--6 C CAARMS (Comprehensive Assessment of At Risk
Mental State), 259 Caesarian section, 669 CAGE questionnaire, 131--2,
132f calcium acetyl homotaurinate (acamprosate), 582--3 Campbell
Collaboration, 120 cancer, 666--7 cognitive impairment, 386, 386b
candidate gene studies, 106--7 cannabinoids, urine tests, 592t cannabis
drug misuse, 600--1 urine tests, 592t capacity for treatment, 84 Capgras
syndrome, 310 carbamazepine, 757--8 alcohol detoxification, 581

863

Index bipolar disorder long-term treatment, 245--6 breastfeeding, 717
mania treatment, 243 pregnancy in, 717 unwanted effects, 754t carbon
monoxide poisoning, 388 cardiac conduction effects, antipsychotic drugs,
730 cardiac disorders, 663--4 cardiotoxicity, tricyclic antidepressant
unwanted effects, 741 cardiovascular drugs, 637t cardiovascular system
alcohol misuse, 571 lithium unwanted effects, 754t Care Act (2014), 546
care plans, 61b acute schizophrenia management, 293 Care Programme
Approach (CPA), 293 carers elderly, psychiatric disorders, 547--8, 547b
long-term psychiatric services, 795 case finding, 97 case management
community mental health teams, 783 early intervention services, 788 case
notes, 61 case summaries, 62 casualty departments, 633, 634t cataplexy,
17 catatonia, 16 schizophrenia, 256, 263 catecholamine depletion tests,
depression, 211 catecholamine-O-methyltransferase (COMT), 109b
catecholamines, depression, 209--10 categorical classification, 28
Cattell, R B, 392 CBT see cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) CD see
oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)/conduct disorder (CD) cerebellum,
349 alcohol misuse, degeneration in, 571 cerebral blood flow
measurement, 114--16 functional MRI, 115 mood disorders, 214 PET, 115
schizophrenia brain imaging, 281 SPET, 115 cerebral palsy, 500t
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies depression, 210 neuropsychiatric
disorders, 351 cerebrovascular disorders, 377--8 global effects, 677t
stroke, 377 subarachnoid haemorrhage, 377 subdural haemorrhage, 377 CFS
see chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS)

CGI (Clinical Global Impression), 68 Charcot, Jean-Marie, 649b, 682
Charcot, Pierre, 95 Charles Bonnet syndrome, 555--6 checking rituals, 14
chemotherapy, 666 chest pain, 664 childhood disintegrative disorder
(Heller's disease), 450 child maltreatment (childhood abuse), 157--9,
475--81 aetiology, 158--9, 476 deprivation dwarfism, 478--9 emotional
abuse, 478 epidemiology, 158 fabricated or induced illness, 645 false
memory, 158 intellectual disability, 493--4 neglect, 478 NICE
guidelines, 476t non-organic failure to thrive, 478--9 oppositional
defiant disorder /conduct disorder aetiology, 455 physical abuse
(non-accidental injury), 477--8 recovered memory, 158 risk factors, 477b
schizophrenia aetiology, 277--8 sexual abuse see sexual abuse of
children treatment, 158--9 child psychiatric disorders aetiology, 423--8
assessment, 483--4 classification, 419, 420t comorbidities, 420--1, 424b
epidemiology, 419--23 family causes, 99--100 intellectual disability
with, 491--2 outcomes, 422 physical illness aspects, 472--3 psychiatric
treatments, 432--7 psychological treatments, 704--5 syndromes, 437--81
anxiety disorders see anxiety disorders bipolar disorder, 467 deliberate
self-harm, 625--6 dementia, 471 developmental disorders, 439 early-onset
schizophrenia, 471--2 epilepsy, 424--5 faecal soiling, 470 gender
dysphoria, 342, 472 mood disorders, 464--7 obsessive--compulsive
disorder, 186 phobias, 171 psychosis, 471--2 schizophrenia, 296
selective mutism, 470--1 somatoform and related disorders, 463--4
stammering, 471 suicide, 614 tic disorders, 471

Tourette syndrome, 377 see also learning disorders see also adolescent
psychiatric disorders child psychiatry, 415--84 developmental
psychopathology, 418--19 forensic, 456--9 child-rearing practices child
psychiatric disorders, 426 oppositional defiant disorder /conduct
disorder aetiology, 455 children abduction, 526 assessment, 57 cancer,
667 confidentiality, 74 consent, 77 court in, 528 crime, 520--1
development, 416--19 adolescence, 417--18 environmental influences, 418
first year of life, 416 middle childhood, 417 personal history, 42
preschool years, 417 schizophrenia aetiology, 276 second year, 417
ethics and legal problems, 481--2 global psychiatry, 679--80 hospital
in, 473 murder by parents, 522 personal history, 42--3 personality, 393
physical examination, 431--2 psychiatric assessment, 428--30 child
interviews and observations, 429 family interviews, 429--30 interviews
and observations, 429 parental interviews, 429 psychological assessment,
430, 430t psychiatric disorders see child psychiatric disorders as
witnesses, 431--2 Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders, 3rd
Edition (CCMD-3), 33b chloral, 720b chloral hydrate, 723
chlordiazepoxide alcohol detoxification, 581 half-life, 720b
chlormethiazole, 723 half-life, 720b chlorpromazine, 725 D2 receptor
blockade, 733t choking phobia, 171 cholinergic hypothesis, Alzheimer's
disease, 366 cholinesterase inhibitors Alzheimer's disease, elderly in,
559 dementia treatment, elderly in, 558 unwanted effects, 559

863

864

864

Index chromosomal (cytogenetic) abnormalities, 105 intellectual
disability aetiology, 497b, 498t chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), 641--3,
642b aetiology, 642 children, 463--4 clinical features, 641 course and
prognosis, 642 epidemiology, 641--2 management, 643 treatment, 642--3
chronic pelvic pain, 654 chronic schizophrenia clinical features, 256,
256b subsyndromes, 257, 257t CIDI (Composite International Diagnostic
Interview), 66--7 circadian-rhythm sleep disorder (sleepwake schedule
disorder), 328--9 CISD (critical incident stress debriefing), 141
cisgender, 340b citalopram breastfeeding, 717 characteristics, 739t
pharmacokinetics, 736--7 civil law, 84--5 CJD (Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease), 371--2 classification, 21--34 aetiology, 88--9 categorical
classification, 28 child psychiatry, 419 comorbidity, 29 criticism of,
24 current issues, 32--4 diagnoses, disease and disorders, 23
dimensional classification, 28 eating disorders, 313--14, 314b
hierarchies of diagnosis, 28--9 history of, 26 multiaxial
classification, 28 national systems, 33b neurosis, 27--8 organic and
functional, 26--7 psychosis, 27 Research Domain Criteria, 34 see also
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM); International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) cleaning rituals, 14 client-centred counselling, 685
Clinical Global Impression (CGI), 68 clinical psychology, 100--2
clinical trials randomized clinical trials, 711 clomipramine, 741
agoraphobia treatment, 179 obsessive--compulsive disorder treatment, 189
clonidine, 637t clopenthixol, 725--6 clouding of consciousness, 19

clozapine, 113, 726t, 727 D2 receptor blockade, 733t schizophrenia
treatment, 289 unwanted effects, 731--2 Clubhouse model, 795 CMHT see
community mental health teams (CMHT) CMV (cytomegalovirus) infection,
500t CNV see copy number variants (CNV) cocaine, 602--3 Cochrane
Collaboration, 120 codeine, 592t codes of practice, 72--3 coercion,
informal, 82--3 co-fostering studies, 103 cognition agoraphobia
aetiology, 178 assessment, 51 autism spectrum disorder, 447--8
conversion disorder aetiology, 648 depression aetiology, 208--9, 209f
depressive, 194--5 impairments cancer, 386, 386b chronic head injury,
379 inter-ictal disturbances, 383 mild see mild cognitive impairment
mental state examination, 49--50 panic disorder aetiology, 182
post-traumatic stress disorder, 144--5 schizophrenias, 257--8
schizophrenia, symptoms of, 254 social phobia aetiology, 174 specific
phobia aetiology, 171--2 stroke, deficits in, 377 cognitive analytic
therapy (CAT), 683, 698--9 cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), 688--97
agoraphobia, 178--9 anxiety disorder, 693--4 assessment for, 689--90,
689b bipolar disorder, 246 bulimia nervosa, 695--6 children, 433--4
depression, 221 depressive disorders, 694--5 development, 683 general
features, 688--9 generalized anxiety disorder, 167, 168 hypochondriasis,
696 medically unexplained symptoms, 641 obsessive--compulsive disorder,
189--90, 463 panic disorder, 693--4 post-traumatic stress disorder, 146,
694 schizophrenia, 290, 696--7 social phobia, 175 treatment study, 122
cognitive therapy, 683, 688 children, 433--4 depression treatment, 223
development, 102 panic disorder treatment, 182--3

personality disorders, 697 schizophrenia, 290 coma, 19 community care
beginnings of, 779 difficulties with, 798--9 juvenile delinquency, 458
offenders with mental disorder, 532 rehabilitation, 796--7 rise of, 780
suicide risk management, 617, 617b see also long-term psychiatric
services community mental health centres (CMHC), 780 community mental
health teams (CMHT), 782--4 community psychiatric nurses, 795 community
reinforcement, alcohol abstinence, 583t Community Treatment Orders
(CTO), 82 comorbidities, 29, 635--7, 635b aetiology, 635--6 definition,
632 medical disorder treatment, 636 personality disorder classification,
396--7 prevention, 636 psychiatric disorder management, 637--8
psychiatric treatment effectiveness, 636--7 compensation neurosis, 668
competence, 482 refusal of consent, 76 competence to stand trial,
528--30 absence of intention (automatism), 530 fitness to be punished,
530 fitness to plead, 528 legal insanity (not guilty by reason of
insanity), 529 complex hallucinations, 7 complex partial seizures,
380--1, 380t complicated grief, 156 Composite International Diagnostic
Interview (CIDI), 66--7 Comprehensive Assessment of At Risk Mental State
(CAARMS), 259 compulsions, 14 mental state examination, 48 compulsive
behaviour, 13--14 secondary neuropsychiatric disorder, 389b computer
diagnosis, 30 COMT (catecholamine-Omethyltransferase), 109b
concentration disturbances of, 19--20 mental state examination, 50
concordance, pharmacotherapy, 715 conditioning theory social phobia, 174

865

Index specific phobia, 171--2 conduct disorder (CD) see oppositional
defiant disorder (ODD)/conduct disorder (CD) confabulation, 18--19
confidentiality, 73--5 adolescents, 481 children, 74, 481 couples
therapy, 75 ethics, 73--4 exceptions to rules of, 75 group therapy, 75
problems, 74--5 psychological treatments, 707 conflicts of interest
children and adolescents, 481 intellectual disability, 510 confusion, 19
assessment, 56 Conolly, John, 710, 778 consciousness, clouding of, 19
consciousness, disturbances of, 19 consent adolescents, 481--2 children,
77, 481--2 electroconvulsive therapy, 768 individual treatment studies,
123--4 information disclosure, 74 learning disability, 77 legal
capacity, 77 maintaining, 76 neurosurgery, 772 problems with, 660
refusal of, 76--7 competence, 76 research, 79 research, for, 482
intellectual disability, 511 treatment to, 76--9 in advance, 77--8
intellectual disability, 510--11 legal aspects of, 77 legal capacity, 77
maintaining consent, 76 obtaining of, 76 by proxy, 78 refusal of, 76--7,
78b when not required, 76 see also legal aspects constructional apraxia,
46b construct validity, 30 consultation--liaison psychiatry, 658
contingency management, behaviour therapy, 691--2 control, delusions of,
11, 48--9 control event rate (CER), 121--2 conversion, 646b conversion
disorder, 648--50 coping strategies, 135, 136--7 alcohol abstinence,
583t maladapted, 136 coping styles, 136--7 coprolalia, 376 copy number
variants (CNV)

genetic variation, 106 intellectual disability aetiology, 497b
schizophrenia aetiology, 272, 272t Cornelia de Lange syndrome, 499t
corpus callosum, 348 cortical dementia, 358, 360t
cortico-striatal-thalamic loops, 187, 188 cortico-subcortical circuits,
349 corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), 213 Cotard's syndrome, 196
counselling, 685--6 crisis intervention, 686, 687b gender dysphoria
treatment, 342 genetic see genetic counselling grief management, 157
interpersonal, 685 problem-solving see problem-solving
counselling/strategies suicide prevention, 619 countertransference, 684
counting rituals, 14 County Asylum Act (1808), 778 couples therapy, 703
confidentiality issues, 75 depression treatment, 222 court reports see
forensic psychiatry Couvade syndrome, 669 CPA (Care Programme Approach),
293 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), 371--2 CRH (corticotropin-releasing
hormone), 213 CRHT (crisis resolution/home treatment) teams, 786, 787b
cri du chat syndrome, 498t crime assault, psychiatric aspects of, 667
causes of, 515 child abduction, 526 competence to stand trial see
competence to stand trial epilepsy, 519 frequency, 516--17 impulse
control disorders, 519 intellectual disability, 494--5, 518 intermittent
explosive disorder, 519 mental disorders and, 516--20 mood disorders,
518 morbid jealousy, 519 nature of association, 517, 517t offences
against property, 526--7 organic mental disorders, 519 pathological
gambling, 519--20 post-traumatic stress disorder, 519 psychiatric
disorders, 518b schizophrenia, 518--19 sexual offences see sexual
offences specific offender groups, 520--1 substance dependence, 517
victims of, 514--15, 527--8 violent crimes, 521--3

see also domestic violence; homicide (murder) see also forensic
psychiatry criminology, 514--15, 515f see also forensic and
rehabilitation teams; forensic psychiatry crisis intervention
counselling, 686, 687b long-term psychiatric services, 796 crisis
resolution/home treatment (CRHT) teams, 786, 787b crisis teams, 786--7
critical incident stress debriefing (CISD), 141 critical psychiatry
models, 92--3 Crow's lateralization hypothesis, schizophrenia genetics,
273 CSF see cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies CTO (Community Treatment
Orders), 82 Cullen, William, 26 cultural factors, 4, 98 alcohol
consumption, 568--9 bipolar disorder, 236 child psychiatric disorder
aetiology, 427--8 conversion disorder aetiology, 648 deliberate
self-harm aetiology, 622 depression, 198--9 dissociative disorders, 657
excessive alcohol consumption, 570 schizophrenias, 261b see also
ethnicity Cushing's syndrome, 664b cyclothymic personality disorder, 403
cytochrome P450 enzymes, 713 cytogenetic abnormalities see chromosomal
(cytogenetic) abnormalities cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, 500t D
DALYs see Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) Dangerous Severe
Personality Disorder (DSPD), 396, 532 Darwin, Erasmus, 710 day centres,
elderly, 546 day hospitals, acute psychiatric disorders, 792--3 daytime
sleepiness, 327, 327b DBS see deep brain stimulation (DBS) deafness,
301, 665 debriefing, 685 acute stress reaction/disorder, 141 De
ClÃ©rambault's syndrome, 308 deep brain stimulation (DBS), 773--5
de-escalation techniques, violence in health care settings, 533--4, 534b
defence mechanisms, 135, 137--8, 137b, 417 deficit syndrome, chronic
schizophrenia, 256 deinstitutionalisation in UK, 779--80

865

86

866

Index deliberate self-harm, 620--30 aetiology, 622--3 assessment, 626--8
children and adolescents, 625--6 definition, 621b epidemiology, 622 HIV
infection, 666 management, 626--30, 628--9, 630b motivation, 623--4,
623b outcomes, 623 self-injury, 621--2 self-poisoning, 621 suicide
after, 623, 625b terminology, 621b treatment, 624--5 patient acceptance,
628 see also suicide delirium, 351--4 aetiology, 352 cancer in, 666
clinical features, 351--2, 352b crime and, 519 diabetes mellitus, 663
elderly in, 542 epidemiology, 351 intellectual disability, 491
investigations, 353b management, 352--3 outcome, 354 prevention, 352--3
treatment, 353 delirium tremens, 572--3 delusional disorders (paranoid
psychoses), 299, 304--5 aetiology, 305 classification, 304--5
epidemiology, 305 neurobiology, 305 prognosis, 312 schizophrenia vs.,
267 specific types, 306--10, 306b Capgras syndrome, 310 De ClÃ©rambault's
syndrome, 308 delusional misidentification syndrome, 309--10 erotomania,
308 Fregoli syndrome, 310 intermetamorphosis, 310 pathological jealousy
see pathological jealousy querulant delusions, 309 reformist delusions,
309 shared (induced) delusional disorder, 310 somatic delusional
disorder, 309 stalking, 309 subjective doubles syndrome, 310 treatment,
311--12 see also delusions delusional memory, 11 delusional
misidentification syndrome, 10--11, 309--10 delusional mood, 10
delusional perceptions, 8, 10

delusions, 8--13 acute schizophrenia, 255 Alzheimer's disease, 363
autochthonous, 10 bizarre, 12 concerning possessions, 11--12 control, 11
definition problems, 9b false beliefs, 9b grandeur of, 300b grandiose
see grandiose delusions guilt of see guilt, delusions of jealousy, 12
mental state examination, 48--9 psychotic depression, 196 querulant, 309
reference of, 11, 300b reformist, 309 secondary, 10 shared, 11 themes,
11 types, 10b see also delusional disorders (paranoid psychoses)
dementia, 356--73 aetiology, 357b, 360b assessment, 359--60 screening
tests, 361b Alzheimer's disease see Alzheimer's disease (AD) assessment,
358--62 children, 471 clinical features, 357--8, 359t cortical, 358,
360t crime and, 519 diabetes mellitus, 663 differential diagnosis
depressive disorders vs., 203 generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) vs.,
165 early detection, 360--2 frontotemporal dementia see frontotemporal
dementia (FTD) global effects, 677t intellectual disability, 491 mixed,
373 Pick's disease, 369--70 post-stroke, 367 presenile and senile, 358
prion disease, 371--2 screening tests, 361b subcortical, 358, 360t
vascular see vascular dementia dementia, elderly in, 542, 543t, 544t
behavioural symptoms, 556b dementia with Lewy bodies, 560 depressive
disorders and, 553 frontotemporal dementia, 560 pseudodementia, 552
psychological symptoms, 556b treatment, 556--60 vascular dementia, 560
dementia pugilistica, 379 dementia with Lewy bodies, 368--9

clinical features, 359t clinical terminology, 369b elderly, treatment,
560 terminology, 368b denial, 137b Denver developmental screening test,
430t dependence, 564 dependent personality disorder, 402, 403b
management, 411 prevalence rate, 404t depersonalization, 16, 656 mental
state examination, 47 obsessive--compulsive disorder, 185 severe
depressive episode, 195 depot antipsychotic drug preparations, 727, 728t
depression, 5--6, 136, 193--231 acute treatment, 218--22
anticonvulsants, 220 antidepressant drugs, 218--19 atypical
antipsychotic drugs, 220 bright light treatment, 222 electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT), 220, 763t lithium, 219--20 monoamine oxidase inhibitors,
745--6 psychological treatment, 220--2 selective serotonin re-uptake
inhibitors, 737 sleep deprivation, 222 adolescents, 466--7 aetiology,
204--6 abnormal grief, 156 bipolar disorder, 236 cancer in, 667 early
environment, 206 5-HT transporter gene, 109b genetics, 205--6 immune
system, 213, 214b neurobiology, 209--15 obsessive--compulsive disorder,
185 personality, 206 post-stroke, 377 pregnancy, 668--9, 668b
psychological approaches, 208--9 schizophrenias, 258 terminal illness,
152, 154 transcultural factors, 198--9 atypical, 197 children, 464--7
classification, 199--202 clinical features, 193--201 course and
prognosis, 216--18 elderly in, 542--4 episodes ICD-0, 194b generalized
anxiety disorder vs., 164--5 long-term treatment, 222--4 major see major
depression melancholic, 199--200

876

Index mixed, 197 non-melancholic, 200 postnatal, 671 post-stroke, 377
precipitating factors, 207--8 prognostic factors, 217--18 recurrent
brief see recurrent brief depression relapse, 224t retarded, 196 sleep
changes in, 214 stupor, 196--7 suicide aetiology, 612 unipolar see
unipolar depression depressive disorders, 193 assessment, 224--5
atypical depression, 197 clinical features, 193--6 somatic symptoms, 634
suicide aetiology, 612t terminal illness in, 154 crime and, 518
depressive stupor, 196--7 differential diagnosis, 203 agoraphobia vs.,
177 generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) vs., 165 obsessive--compulsive
disorder vs., 186 social phobia vs., 173 DSM-5, 202b elderly, 552--3
epidemiology, 203--4 global effects, 677t maintenance treatment, 230--1
cognitive behavioural therapy, 694--5 selective serotonin re-uptake
inhibitors, 739--40 management, 225--31 activity, 227 antidepressant
drugs, 226--7, 228--9, 228b antipsychotic drugs, 229 combination
strategies, 229 electroconvulsive therapy, 227, 230 family information,
226b guidelines, 226b lithium augmentation, 229--30 psychotherapy,
227--8 tri-iodothyronine, 230 mild depressive states, 197--8 minor
anxiety depressive disorder see minor anxiety depressive disorder
mortality, 217 psychotic see psychotic depression recurrent see
recurrent depressive disorder retarded depression, 196 severe depressive
episode see severe depressive episode deprivation dwarfism (PSSS),
478--9 deprivation of liberty, 78 derailment, 16 derealization, 16

mental state examination, 47 descriptive psychopathology, 2 primary and
secondary, 3 subjective and objective, 2--3 symptoms and signs, 2 terms
and concepts, 2--4 understanding and explanation, 3 desensitization,
behaviour therapy, 690 desmopressin (des-amino-D-arginine), 469--70
development aetiological models, 92 child psychiatry, 418--19
Developmental, Dimensional and Diagnostic Interview, 506t dexamethasone
suppression test, 213 diabetes mellitus antipsychotic drugs, unwanted
effects, 730--1 organic psychiatric syndromes, 663 psychiatric aspects
of, 662--3 diagnosis of psychiatric disorders, 23, 58 assessment, 35 by
computer, 30 evidence-based medicine, 131--2 explanation to patient,
60--1, 61b hierarchies of, 28--9 international studies of criteria,
29--30 reliability, 29--30 standardized diagnostic assessments, 66--7
standardized interview schedule, 30 validity of, 30 Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual (DSM), 31--2 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV
(DSM-IV) conversion disorder, 648 somatoform disorder classification,
647--8, 647t Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 5 (DSM-5), 32
agoraphobia, 177b anxiety disorders classification, 163b children, 460b
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, 451 autism spectrum disorder,
445b bipolar disorder classification, 236--7, 237t borderline
personality disorder, 401, 401t bulimia nervosa, 321 child psychiatric
disorders, 419, 420t communication disorders in children, 442 delusional
disorders (paranoid psychoses) classification, 305b depression
classification, 201, 201t depressive disorders, 202b dissociative
disorder classification, 655b, 655t eating disorders, 313, 314b
factitious disorders, 644

hoarding disorder, 191 hypomania, 235 ICD-10 vs., 32, 33t intellectual
disability, 486--7 learning disorders, 440b mania, 235 melancholic
depression, 199 neuropsychiatric disorders, 346, 347t
obsessive--compulsive disorder diagnostic criteria, 186 oppositional
defiant disorder /conduct disorder, 453--4 panic disorder diagnostic
criteria, 180 personality disorder classification, 397--8, 398t phobia
classification, 170 postpartum psychosis (puerperal psychosis), 670
psychiatric disorder definition, 23 schizophrenia diagnosis and
classification, 262t, 263b, 264--6 schizophrenia-like disorders, 264--5
sexual-related disorders, 331t sleep disorders, 324, 325b social phobia
diagnostic conventions, 173t somatoform disorder classification, 646,
647--8, 647t somatoform pain disorders, 652 stressful events, 139b
substance classifications, 564t substance use disorders, 563--5, 564y,
565b trichotillomania, 192 dialectical behaviour therapy, 411, 697
diazepam, 719 breastfeeding, 717 half-life, 720b Differential Ability
Scale, 506t di George syndrome, 498t digitalis, 637t dimensional
classification, 28 diminished responsibility, 529 Diogenes syndrome, 191
disability, 23 Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs), 675 The
Disability Assessment Scale, 506t discharge notes, 62 The Disease
Concept of Alcoholism (Jellinek), 566 diseases concepts of, 59--60
definitions, 23 disorder of the form of thought, 15 disorders,
definition, 23 disorganized (hebephrenic) schizophrenia, 256
displacement, 137b disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC 1), 273 dissocial
personality disorder see antisocial (dissocial) personality disorder
dissociation, 646b

867

86

868

Index dissociative amnesia, 654 dissociative disorders, 654--8
classification, 655t cultural syndromes, 657 depersonalization disorder,
656 dissociative amnesia, 654 dissociative fugue, 654 dissociative
identity disorder, 655--6 dissociative stupor, 656--7 factitious
dissociation identity syndrome, 658 false-memory syndrome, 657 Ganser's
syndrome, 657 recovered memory, 657 symptoms definition, 646b severe
depressive episode, 196 trance and possession disorder, 657 types of,
654 see also somatoform and related disorders dissociative fugue, 654
dissociative identity disorder, 655--6 dissociative stupor, 656--7
disulfiram (Antabuse), 582 diuretics, 637t diviners, 706 DNA sequencing,
107 doctors patient relationship, 73 psychiatric problems with, 797--8
suicide, 615 domestic violence, 522--3, 522b L-Dopa, 637t dopamine
bipolar disorder aetiology, 240 depression, 209--10, 210b, 212
receptors, antipsychotic drugs, 724 schizophrenia neurobiology, 281--2
dopaminergic function/ dysfunction, 109b Down's syndrome (trisomy 21),
105, 497, 498t, 500--1 aetiology, 501, 501b dream anxiety disorder
(nightmares), 329 dressing apraxia, 46b dressing rituals, 14 drinking
history, alcohol misuse, 578--9, 579b driving elderly, psychiatric
disorders, 551 fitness to, 85 drug(s) see pharmacotherapy drug
dependence definition, 588 gender, 590 neurobiological mechanisms, 589
drug history, drug misuse diagnosis, 591--2, 591b drug interactions,
713--14 drug misuse aetiology, 587--9 comorbidities, 590

definition, 588 diagnosis, 590--2 laboratory tests, 592 urine tests,
592t epidemiology, 586--7, 587b global effects, 677t intravenous use,
589--90, 589b prevention, 592 rehabilitation, 594 treatment, 592--4 aims
of, 593 dual diagnosis patients, 595 harm reduction, 594 maintenance
therapy, 593 motivational aspects, 592 physical complications, 593
psychosocial treatment, 594 stages, 593b see also drug withdrawal types
amphetamines, 601--2, 601b anxiolytic drugs, 598--600 benzodiazepines,
598--9 cannabis, 600--1 cocaine, 602--3 gabapentin, 599--600
hallucinogens, 604 hypnotic drugs, 598--600 ketamine, 604--5 legal highs
(recreational drugs), 607, 607t MDMA (ecstasy), 603--4 opioids see
opioid misuse phencyclidine, 604--5 pregabalin, 599--600 stimulant
drugs, 601--2 volatile substances, 605--6 unwanted effects, 589--90
pregnancy in, 590 sexual dysfunction, 333b social consequences, 590,
591b suicide aetiology, 612, 612t see also drug dependence drug use,
definition, 588 drug withdrawal, 713--14 maintenance therapy, 593--4
principles, 593 DSM see Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) DSM-IV
see Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV (DSM-IV) DSM-5 see Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual 5 (DSM-5) DSPD (Dangerous Severe Personality
Disorder), 396, 532 Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 499t duloxetine, 749
depression treatment, 218 Durkheim, Emile, 612 duty-based approach to
ethics, 71--2 dynamic psychotherapy depression treatment, 222
obsessive--compulsive disorder treatment, 190

schizophrenia treatment, 291 social phobia treatment, 175 dysarthria,
46b dyslexia, 439--40 dysmnesia, 18 dysmorphophobia see body dysmorphic
disorder (BDD) dyspareunia, 336 dysphasia, 46b dysthymia epidemiology,
204 global effects, 677t major depression in, 217 dystonias, 376 acute,
728 E early intensive behavioural interventions (EIBI), 449 Early
Intervention in Psychosis Services (EIS), 295, 787--8, 787b early
intervention, schizophrenia management, 295 early-onset schizophrenia,
471--2 eating disorders, 313--24 adolescents, 474 anorexia nervosa see
anorexia nervosa avoidant/restrictive food disorder, 324 binge eating
disorder, 323 bulimia nervosa see bulimia nervosa classification,
313--14, 314b diabetes mellitus, 662 intellectual disability, 491 pica,
324 psychogenic vomiting, 324 restrictive food disorder, 324 temporal
movement between, 314f EBM see evidence-based medicine (EBM) Ebstein's
anormaly, 716 echopraxia, 17 ecstasy, 603--4 ECT see electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT) education autism spectrum disorder management, 449--50
intellectual disability care, 508 oppositional defiant disorder /conduct
disorder aetiology, 454--5 personal history, 42 Edward's syndrome, 498t
EEG see electroencephalography (EEG) EER (experimental event rate),
121--2 effect sizes clinical relevance, 123 individual treatment
studies, 121 systematic reviews, 126 EIBI (early intensive behavioural
interventions), 449 EIS (Early Intervention in Psychosis Services), 295,
787--8, 787b elation, 6 elderly

869

Index abuse of, 551 assessment, 57 physical health, 541 social
circumstances, 541 suicide, 614 see also ageing elderly, psychiatric
disorders Alzheimer's disease see Alzheimer's disease (AD) anxiety
disorders, 544, 554 bipolar disorder, 553 clinical features, 552--6
delirium, 542 dementia see dementia, elderly in depression, 542--4
depressive disorders, 552--3 epidemiology, 541--4 health services,
545--6 legal and ethical issues, 550--1, 550b mild cognitive impairment,
560 mood disorders, 542--4 personality disorders, 555 psychiatric
assessment, 548--9 schizophrenia-like disorders, 544, 554--5 senile
squalor syndrome, 555 service organization, 544--8 social services, 547
treatment, 549--50, 552--6 voluntary/third sector services, 547--8
carers, 547--8, 547b electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 761--9 bilateral,
764, 766--7 unilateral vs., 764 consent, 768 contraindications, 765 EEG
patient monitoring, 767 elderly, 550 depressive disorders, 552 ethics,
769 indications for, 220, 761--2, 762b acute mania, 249 bipolar
depression, 245 depression, 220, 763t depressive disorders, 227, 230
mania, 243 memory disorder, 764--5 schizophrenia, 289 introduction of,
710--11 mechanism of action, 762--3 NICE guidelines, 762, 762b
physiological changes, 764 techniques, 765--6 unilateral, 764 bilateral
vs., 764 fixed-dose right unilateral, 766 unwanted effects, 764
mortality, 765, 767--8 electroencephalography (EEG), 116--17
neuropsychiatric disorders, 351 schizophrenia neurobiology, 281
electronic records, 65--6 elementary hallucinations, 7 Ellis, Havelock,
336

emergencies, 61b drug treatment, 660 interviews, 54 emotional abuse, 478
emotional incontinence, 5 emotional tone history-taking, 43 mental state
examination, 45 emotion, expression, schizophrenias, 285--6 employment,
supported, 795--6 encephalitis, 387--8 subacute, 666 encephalitis
lethargica (post encephalitic parkinsonism), 388 encounter groups, 702
endocrinology aetiology, 114 antipsychotic drugs, unwanted effects, 731
bipolar disorder aetiology, 240 depression, 212--13 lithium unwanted
effects, 754t psychiatric aspects of, 663, 664b enuresis alarms, 469,
692 enuresis, functional see functional enuresis environment, 97--8
gene-environment interactions, 108 epidemic hysteria, 650 epigenetics,
110 epilepsy, 379--85 aetiology, 381--2 alcohol misuse, 571 children,
424--5 crime and, 519 diagnosis, 382 epidemiology, 381 global effects,
677t intellectual disability in, 489 psychiatric aspects, 382--5, 383b
ictal disturbances, 383 inter-ictal disturbances, 383--4 post-ictal
disturbances, 383 pre-ictal disturbances, 383 seizure types, 380--1,
380b social aspects, 384--5 treatment, 385 epistasis, 108 erectile
dysfunction, 335--6 erotic delusions, 308 erotomania, 308 ERP (exposure
and response prevention), 463 escitalopram, 736, 738--9, 739t Esquirol,
Jean-Ãtienne, 26, 95, 486 ethics, 71--85, 72b confidentiality, 73--4
deep brain stimulation, 774--5 doctor-patient relationship, 73
duty-based approach to, 71--2 elderly, 550--1, 550b electroconvulsive
therapy, 769 forensic psychiatry, 514b

genetics, 108, 110 HIV infection, 666 individual treatment studies,
123--4 intellectual disability, 510--11 neurosurgery, 772
pharmacotherapy, 715 placebos, 123--4 principles of, 72 psychological
treatments, 707--9 refusal of treatment, 661b research in, 78--9, 79b
utilitarian approach, 72 ethnicity crime, 521 criminology, 514 excessive
alcohol consumption, 570 psychiatric services, 797 schizophrenia
aetiology, 277 suicide, 615 see also cultural factors ethology, 102
Eugenics Movement, 94--5 evidence-based medicine (EBM), 72, 119--34 see
also systematic reviews; individual treatment studies evoked potentials,
electroencephalography, 117 evolutionary psychology, 102 exercise,
schizophrenia treatment, 291 exhibitionist disorder, 339 exome
sequencing, 107 experimental event rate (EER), 121--2 experimental
psychology, 100--2 experimental psychopathology, 2 explanation, 3
aetiology, 90 exposure agoraphobia treatment, 178 behaviour therapy,
690--1 exposure and response prevention (ERP), 463 expressed emotion,
schizophrenias, 285--6 expressive dysphasia, 46b extracampine
hallucinations, 7 extrapyramidal movement disorders, 738 eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing behaviour therapy, 692 post-traumatic
stress disorder, 146 Eysenck, H J, 392 F fabricated or induced illness
(FII), 645 face validity, 30 facial pain, 653 factitious disorders,
644--5 health care workers, 645b by proxy, 645 factitious dissociation
identity syndrome, 658 faecal soiling, 470 false accusations, 530

869

870

870

Index false confessions, 530 false memory syndrome, 19, 657 childhood
abuse, 158 familial Alzheimer's disease, 366b family aetiology,
depression, 205 community care, 798 depressive disorders management,
226b disease aetiology, 99--100 agoraphobia, 176, 178 anorexia nervosa,
317 child psychiatric disorders, 425, 426 deliberate self-harm, 622
excessive alcohol consumption, 575 intellectual disability, 494
oppositional defiant disorder / conduct disorder, 455 schizophrenia,
278b intellectual disability care, 507--8 long-term psychiatric
services, working with, 796 psychiatric assessment, 428--30
schizophrenias, 285--6 suicide risk management, 618 terminal illness,
informing of, 154 family history history-taking, 40, 40b, 41 suicide
aetiology, 613 family interviews, 55, 429--30 family law, 84--5 family
studies genetics, 103 schizophrenia aetiology, 269--70, 269t family
therapy, 703--4 anorexia nervosa treatment, 318 bipolar disorder
long-term treatment, 246 child psychological treatment, 434
schizophrenia treatment, 290, 290b fatal familial insomnia, 372 fear
conditioning, post-traumatic stress disorder, 144 female orgasmic
disorder, 336 female sexual arousal disorder, 335 fertility alcohol
misuse, 571--2 schizophrenias, 268 fetal alcohol syndrome, 500t
fetishistic disorder, 338 fibromyalgia, 643 FII (fabricated or induced
illness), 645 finger agnosia, 46b first rank symptoms, 255b, 255t
fitness drive to, 85 plead to, 528 fixed effects model, 126 flight of
ideas, 15 flooding, behaviour therapy, 690 floppy baby syndrome, 717
flow of speech, mental state examination, 45 flumazenil, 719

fluoxetine breastfeeding, 717 characteristics, 739t clinical use, 738
bipolar depression, 244t pregnancy in, 716 flupenthixol, 725, 728t, 733t
fluphenazine, 725, 728t fluvoxamine, 738, 739t flying phobia, 171 FMR1
gene, 501 fMRI see functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) food
ADHD treatment, 452 monoamine oxidase inhibitor interactions, 743--4,
744b restrictive food disorder, 324 forensic and rehabilitation teams,
788 forensic psychiatry, 513--38 appearance in court, 538 children,
456--9 abduction of, 526 physical examination, 431, 432b criminal court,
role in, 528--30 ethics, 514b intention, 528 offenders with a mental
disorder, treatment of, 530--2 psychiatric report (court report), 536--8
role of, 536--7, 537t sexual offences see sexual offences violent
crimes, 521--3 risk assessment, 534--6, 535b, 535f see also domestic
violence; homicide (murder) see also crime; legal aspects formal thought
disorder, 15 formulations, 63--5, 64b fostering, 435--6 Foucault,
Michel, 92 fragile X syndrome, 498t, 501--2, 503b Franklin, Benjamin,
119 Fraser guidelines, 482 Fregoli syndrome, 310 Freud, Anna, 138, 705
Freud, Sigmund, 93b, 95--6, 301 anxiety disorders, 161--2 hysteria, 649b
personality development theory, 393--4 psychological treatment
development, 682 frontal leucotomy, 771 frontal lobe, 346--8
frontotemporal dementia (FTD), 369--70 behavioural-variant of, 370b
clinical features, 359t, 369--70, 370b subtypes of, 370b frotteuristic
disorder, 339 functional brain imaging aetiology, 100--1 bipolar
disorder, 241 neuropsychiatric disorders, 351

schizophrenia neurobiology, 280--1 see also functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) functional enuresis, 468--70 functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) cerebral blood flow measurement,
115--16 schizophrenia brain imaging, 281 functional mental disorders,
26--7 functional non-epileptic attacks (pseudoseizures), 382 functional
somatic symptoms, 638--9 funnel plots, meta-analysis, 128 G GABA see
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) gabapentin, 760 drug misuse, 599--600 GAD
see generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) GAF (Global Assessment of
Functioning), 68 galactorrhoea, 731 galactosaemia, 498t Galen, 26, 94
Gall, Franz, 94 gambling, pathological, 519--20 gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), 589 schizophrenia neurobiology, 282--3
gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase (GGT), 579b Ganser's syndrome, 645, 657
gastrointestinal disorders alcohol misuse, 571 lithium unwanted effects,
754t selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor, unwanted effects, 737,
737t Gaupp, R, 303b gender alcohol misuse, 571 crime, 520 criminology,
514, 515 deliberate self-harm, 623f drug dependence, 590 excessive
alcohol consumption, 569 identity, 330 identity disorder see gender
dysphoria gender-confirming (sex reassignment) surgery, 342 gender
dysphoria, 340--2, 340b aetiology, 341 children, 342, 472
classification, 331t epidemiology, 340--1 treatment, 341--2
gene-environment interactions, 108 General Health Questionnaire (GHQ),
68 general hospital interviews, 55 generalized anxiety disorder (GAD),
163--70 aetiology, 166--7 clinical features, 163--4

871

Index comorbidities, 164--5 diagnostic conventions, 164 differential
diagnosis, 165--6 epidemiology, 166 history of, 162 management, 169--70,
169b prognosis, 167--8 treatment, 168--9 generalized tonic--clonic
seizures, 381 general paresis, neurosyphilis, 385 general practice
interviews, 54--5 letters to, 65 psychiatric disorders encountered, 633,
634t genetic(s) adoption studies, 103 aetiology, 102--10, 110b alleles,
106b association studies, 106--8, 110 clinical implications, 108, 110
conditions Alzheimer's disease, 364--5 anorexia nervosa, 315--16
antisocial (dissocial) personality disorder, 405--6 attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder, 451--2 autism spectrum disorder, 447b bipolar
disorder, 239 causes of crime, 515 childhood depression, 465, 466t child
psychiatric disorder, 423, 424b depression, 205--6 excessive alcohol
consumption, 575--6 gender dysphoria, 341 generalized anxiety disorder,
166 intellectual disability, 495, 496t, 497b narcolepsy, 327--8
obsessive--compulsive disorder, 187, 462 oppositional defiant disorder
/conduct disorder aetiology, 454 panic disorder, 181 post-traumatic
stress disorder, 144 reading disorder, 440--1 schizophrenia, 271 social
phobia, 174 suicide, 613 developmental psychopathology, 418 ethics, 108,
110 family studies, 103 heritability, 103--4, 104b mode of inheritance,
104--5 non-Mendelian disorders, 104--5 personality, 393 single gene
disorders, 497b, 499t single nucleotide polymorphisms see single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) twin studies, 103 genetic counselling

intellectual disability care, 507 psychiatric aspects, 660 genetic
testing intellectual disability assessment, 503 neuropsychiatric
disorders, 351 genitopelvic pain/penetrative disorder, 336 genome-wide
association studies (GWAS), 107 bipolar disorder aetiology, 239
post-traumatic stress disorder, 144 schizophrenia aetiology, 271--2
genotype-phenotype association, 108 Gertsmann--StrÃ¤ussler--Scheinker
syndrome, 372 GGT (gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase), 579b GHQ (General
Health Questionnaire), 68 Gillick competence, 482 Gingko biloba extract,
560 Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF), 68 global psychiatry,
675--80 global rating scales, 68 glucocorticoid-receptor hypothesis,
depression, 213 glue-sniffing, 605--6 glutamate bipolar disorder
aetiology, 240 schizophrenia neurobiology, 282, 282b goal-directed
behaviour, severe depressive episode, 195 Goffman, E, 779 grammar
disorders, 443 grandiose delusions, 12 mania, 234 grief definition, 154
stages of, 155--6, 155b Griesinger, Wilhelm, 95, 260b Griffiths mental
development scale, 506t grimacing, 17 grounding, 133 group analysis, 702
group homes, 795 group psychoeducation bipolar disorder long-term
treatment, 246 generalized anxiety disorder treatment, 168 group therapy
confidentiality issues, 75 interpersonal, 701--2 small group
psychotherapy, 700--1 guidance psychological treatments, 684b self-help,
generalized anxiety disorder treatment, 168 guilt, delusions of, 12 GWAS
see genome-wide association studies (GWAS) gynaecology, 672--3

see also obstetrics H HADS (Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale), 67
haemorrhages subarachnoid, 377 subdural, 377 hallucinations, 6--8, 7b
Alzheimer's disease, 363 auditory see auditory hallucinations autoscopic
hallucinations, 7 clinical associations, 7--8 complex, 7 elementary, 7
extracampine, 7 mania, 234 olfactory, 7, 8 reflex, 7 second-person, 7
tactile, 7, 8 third-person, 7 visual see visual hallucinations
hallucinogens, 604 haloperidol, 725--6 acute behavioural disturbances,
734 D2 receptor blockade, 733t depot preparations, 728t Hamilton Anxiety
Scale (HAS), 67 Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D), 67 Hare
Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R), 400 harmful use, 564, 565t HAS
(Hamilton Anxiety Scale), 67 headache, 653 head injury, 378--9 child
psychiatric disorder aetiology, 425 Health of the Nation Outcome Scale
(HoNOS), 68 health risks, counselling, 686 heart attacks, 663--4
hebephrenic (disorganized) schizophrenia, 256 Heller's disease
(childhood disintegrative disorder), 450 HELP (Hospital Elder Life
Program), 353 hepatitis, 590 herbalists, 706 heritability, genetics,
103--4, 104t herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection, 387--8
heterozygosity, 106b Hill, Austin Bradford, 119 Hill, Gardiner, 778
Hippocratic oath, 73--4 history-taking, 39--44, 40b family history, 40,
40b, 41 informants, 39 intellectual disability assessment, 502 mood and
emotional tone, 43 neuropsychiatric disorder assessment, 350

871

872

872

Index history-taking (cont.) past psychiatric and medical history,
40--1, 43 personal history, 40 personality, 41, 43--4 referral reasons,
41 relationships, 43 sexual dysfunction, 333 suicide risk assessment,
616 histrionic personality disorder, 401, 402b aetiology, 407 prevalence
rate, 404t HIV infection associated dementia, 666 deliberate self-harm,
666 encephalopathy, 666 global psychiatry, 679 intravenous drug misuse,
590 psychiatric aspects of, 665--6 see also AIDS hoarding disorder, 191
homeless people, 797 homicide (murder), 521--3 psychiatric assessment,
529 psychological impact, 527 homozygosity, 106b HoNOS (Health of the
Nation Outcome Scale), 68 hormonal therapy, gender dysphoria treatment,
342 hormone replacement therapy (HRT), 560 Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale (HADS), 67 Hospital Elder Life Program (HELP), 353
hostels, 795 HPA see hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA) HSV
(herpes simplex virus) infection, 387--8 5-HT1A receptor, azapirones
(buspirone), 721 5-HT-D2-receptor antagonists, 726--7 HTT (huntingtin)
gene, 376 5-HT toxicity syndrome, 738 5-HT transporter gene, 109b PET
and SPECT studies, 111 humanitarian emergencies, 680 huntingtin (HTT)
gene, 376 Huntington, George, 374 Huntington's disease, 374--6 Hurler's
syndrome, 499t hydrocephalus, 500t normal pressure see normal-pressure
hydrocephalus hyperadrenalism, 664b hyperbilirubinaemia, 500t
hypercalcaemia, idiopathic infantile, 498t hyperemesis gravidarum, 669
Hypericum perforatum (St John's Wort), 751 hypersomnia, 327 hyperthymic
personality disorder, 403

hyperthyroidism, 664b hyperventilation, 181b generalized anxiety
disorder, 164 panic disorder, 180, 182 hypnosis, 706 hypnotic drugs,
719t, 722--4 drug misuse, 598--600 hypochondriasis, 650--1 cognitive
behavioural therapy, 696 delusions of, 12 hypomania DSM-5, 235 ICD-10,
235 NICE treatment guidelines, 249b hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
(HPA) depression, 212--13 post-traumatic stress disorder, 145b
hypothermia, 731 hypothyroidism, 500t, 664b hysterectomy, 673 hysteria
epidemic, 650 history of, 649b see also conversion disorder I IBS
(irritable bowel syndrome), 643 ICD see International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) ICD-9 see International Classification of Diseases 9
(ICD-9) ICD-10 see International Classification of Diseases 10 (ICD-10)
ICD-11 (International Classification of Diseases 11), 34 ictal
disturbances, epilepsy, 383 ideas overvalued, 14--15 reference of, 300b
identity development of, 417 dissociative disorder, 655--6 ideomotor
apraxia, 46b idiopathic infantile hypercalcaemia, 498t illness, 22
behaviour, 151 beliefs in somatic symptom aetiology, 639b concepts of,
59--60 phobia, 171 illusions, 6 imagery, 6 imipramine, 179, 182
immediate memory, 18 immune system depression, 213, 214b schizophrenia
genes and, 274b impairment, 23 impotence, 335--6 impulses control
disorders in crime, 519 obsessive--compulsive disorder, 185, 188

impulsive personality disorder, 401 inborn errors of metabolism, 495,
498, 498--9t incompetency, refusal of consent, 76--7 incontinence
emotional, 5 intellectual disability in, 489 indecent assault, 524
indecent exposure, 524 induced (shared) delusional disorder, 310
infanticide, 522, 529--30 infections cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection,
500t herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection, 387--8 HIV infection see HIV
infection intellectual disability aetiology, 500t intracranial
infections, 385--6 meningovascular syphilis, 385 neurosyphilis, 385--6
psychiatric aspects of, 665--6 schizophrenia aetiology, 275 inflammation
Alzheimer's disease, 366 schizophrenia, 275 inflammatory markers,
schizophrenia, 283 informants elderly, psychiatric assessment, 548
history-taking, 39 inheritance, mode of, 104--5 injury phobia, 171
inpatient wards, 781--2 acute psychiatric disorders, 793--4 elderly, 546
insight, 20 mental state examination, 50 insomnia, 325--7 assessment,
325--6 cannabis use, 601 fatal familial, 372 treatment, 326--7, 326b
intellectual disability, 485--511 aetiology, 495--502, 496t, 497b abuse,
493--4 ageing, 494 childhood maltreatment, 493--4 assessment, 502--4
care of, 504--9 clinical features, 487--8, 488t crime, 518 criminal
justice system, 494--5 Down's syndrome see Down's syndrome (trisomy21)
epidemiology, 486--7 ethical and legal issues, 510--11 family effects,
494 historical background, 486 mild (IQ 50-70), 487, 488t moderate (IQ
35-49), 487--8, 488t physical disorders, 488--9 profound (IQ 20), 488t
psychiatric disorders, 489--93 severe (IQ 20-34), 488, 488t

873

Index sexuality, 493 terminology, 485--6 treatment, 509--10 intelligence
quotient (IQ) intellectual disability, 486--7 oppositional defiant
disorder /conduct disorder aetiology, 454--5 intentions absence of
(automatism), 530 deliberate self-harm assessment, 627 inter-ictal
disturbances, epilepsy, 383--4 intermetamorphosis, 310 intermittent
explosive disorder, crime and, 519 International Classification of
Diseases (ICD), 30--1 International Classification of Diseases 9
(ICD-9), 31 International Classification of Diseases 10 (ICD-10), 31,
31b agoraphobia, 177b anxiety disorders classification, 163, 163b
children, 460b attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, 451 autism
spectrum disorder, 445b bipolar disorder, 236--7, 237t borderline
personality disorder, 401, 401t child psychiatric disorders, 419, 420t
communication disorders in children, 442 depression, 201, 201t
depressive episode, 194b dissociative disorder, 655t, 656--7 DSM-5 vs.,
32, 33t eating disorders, 313, 314b grief reaction coding, 139 harmful
use, 565t hypomania, 235 insomnia, 325 learning disorders, 440b mania,
235, 235b melancholic depression, 199 neuropsychiatric disorders, 346,
347t obsessive--compulsive disorder, 186 oppositional defiant
disorder/conduct disorder, 453--4 panic disorder diagnostic criteria,
180--1 personality changes, 395 personality disorder, 397--8, 398t
post-traumatic stress disorder, 143b psychiatric disorder, 23
schizophrenia, 262t, 263, 264--6, 264b schizophrenia-like disorders,
264--5 sexual-related disorders, 331t sleep disorders, 324, 325b social
phobia, 173t somatoform disorder, 646, 647--8, 647t stressful events,
139, 139b

substance, 564t substance use disorders, 563--5, 564t, 565b
trichotillomania, 192 International Classification of Diseases 11
(ICD-11), 34 International League Against Epilepsy, 380 internet-based
therapies, child psychological treatment, 434--5 interpersonal
counselling, 685 interpersonal group therapy, 701--2 interpersonal
learning, group therapies, 701b interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), 683,
687--8 bipolar disorder long-term treatment, 246 depression treatment,
221--2, 223--4 interviews characteristics affecting interview, 56--7
child psychiatric assessment, 429 cognitive behavioural therapy
assessment, 689--90 Composite International Diagnostic Interview, 66--7
Developmental, Dimensional and Diagnostic Interview, 506t emergencies,
54 family interviews see family interviews general hospital interviews,
55 general practice, 54--5 Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview
(MINI), 67 motivational interviewing, alcohol misuse treatment, 580,
580b parents, 429 preparation, 36, 38b psychiatric see psychiatric
interview psychiatric disorders diagnosis, 30 psychiatric services in
medical setting, 658 standardized interview schedule, 30 Structured
Clinical Interview for Diagnosis (SCID), 66 see also mental state
examination; psychiatric history; psychiatric interview intoxication
definition, 564 intoxication phenomena, 572 intracranial infections,
385--6 IPT see interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) IQ see intelligence
quotient (IQ) irritability and anger, 6 behaviour therapy, 691 cannabis
use, 601 oppositional defiant disorder/conduct disorder management, 456
psychiatric services in medical setting, 659--60 irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS), 643

isocarboxazid, 743 isoniazid, 637t Italy, mental hospital admission
prohibition, 779 J jamais vu, 18 Jaspers, Karl, 2, 3 jealousy morbid,
519 pathological see pathological jealousy jealousy, delusions of,
12--13 Jellinek, E Morton, 566 jet lag, 325 Jung, Carl personality
development, 394 psychological treatment development, 682
schizophrenias, 260b juvenile delinquency, 456--9 see also adolescent(s)
K Kahlbaum, K, 26 paranoid symptoms, 303b schizophrenias, 260b ketamine,
604--5 Kleine-Levin syndrome, 328 Klein, Melanie, 93b, 682, 704--5
kleptomania, 520 knight's move, 16 Koch, Julius, 396 koro, 184
Korsakoff's syndrome, 355, 573 Kraepelin, Emil, 26 paranoid symptoms,
303b physical treatment, 710 schizophrenias, 260b Kreitmann, N, 620
Kretschmer, E, 303b kuru, 372 L laboratory investigations/tests, 51
alcohol misuse, 579 drug misuse diagnosis, 592 intellectual disability
assessment, 503 Laing, R D, 92 lamotrigine, 759--60 bipolar depression,
244t, 250 bipolar disorder, 245 Langfeldt, G, 261b language disorders
assessment, 57 attainment of language, 454--5 children, 443 latah, 657
lay mental health workers, 678 learning disorders, 439--50, 440b
assessment, 57 attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder see
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

873

874

874

Index learning disorders (cont.) childhood disintegrative disorder
(Heller's disease), 450 communication disorders, 442--50 consent, 77
excessive alcohol consumption aetiology, 575--6 mathematic disorders,
441--2 reading disorders, 439--41 Rett syndrome, 450 violence risk, 517t
see also intellectual disability legal aspects capacity, 77 civil law,
84--5 competence to stand trial see competence to stand trial elderly,
psychiatric disorders, 550--1, 550b intellectual disability, 510--11
liberty, deprivation of, 78 not guilty by reason of insanity, 529
refusal of treatment, 661b representation and confidentiality
exceptions, 75 see also consent; crime; forensic psychiatry legal highs
(recreational drugs), 607, 607t Leonhard, K, 261b Lesch--Nyhan syndrome,
499t leucotomy, 771 leverage, 83, 83b Lewy body dementia, 368 see also
dementia with Lewy bodies Lewy body disease, 368 see also dementia with
Lewy bodies liaison, community mental health teams, 784 liasion
psychiatry, 658 liberty, deprivation of, 78 life events study, 98--9
schizophrenia, 277 Lincoln Asylum, 778 Lind, James, 119 linkage, 105
linkage disequilibrium, 106b Linnaeus, 26 lithium, 752--7 augmentation
in depressive disorders, 229--30 breastfeeding, 717 contraindications,
756 pregnancy in, 716 dosage and plasma concentration, 752--3 drug
interactions, 755, 756b monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 745 excretion, 712
indications, 757 bipolar depression, 244, 244t bipolar disorder, 245,
251 depression, 219--20, 231 mania, 242--3 introduction of, 711

mechanism of action, 752 pharmacokinetics, 752 toxic effects, 754--5,
755t neonatal toxicity, 716--17 unwanted effects, 753--4, 754t
withdrawal, 755--6 Living Well With Dementia (National Dementia
Strategy), 545 LMICs see low and middle-income countries (LMICs)
lofepramine, 741 characteristics, 219t depression, 218 depressive
disorders, 226--7 lofexidine, 597 long-term memory, 18 long-term
psychiatric services, 794--7 individual dynamic psychotherapy, 699 see
also community care loosening of associations, 15--16 loperamide, 597
lorazepam, 720b, 734 lormetazepam, 723 low and middle-income countries
(LMICs), 675 Lunacy Act (1890), 778 lurasidone, 244t, 726, 726t Lyme
disease, 642 M MacArthur Perceived Coercion Scale, 83 MADRS
(Montgomery-Ãsberg Depression Rating Scale), 67 Magic Mint, 607t
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 111--12 functional see functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) schizophrenia neurobiology, 280
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), 112, 112t magnetoencephalography
(MEG), 117 maintenance factors, 89 maintenance therapy drug misuse
treatment, 593 opioid misuse, 598 major depression course and prognosis,
216--17 elderly in, 543 epidemiology, 203--4 global effects, 677t major
tranquillizers see antipsychotic drugs maladaptive coping response, 136
post-traumatic stress disorder, 142 male erectile disorder (erectile
dysfunction/impotence), 335--6 male orgasmic disorder, 336 malingering,
645--6 mania acute see acute mania clinical features, 233--5
continuation treatment, 243

differential diagnosis, 237--8 DSM-5, 235 ICD-10, 235, 235b NICE
treatment guidelines, 249b treatment, 242--3 manic stupor, 234--5
mannerisms, 16 MAOIs see monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) maternal
attachment/deprivation, child psychiatric disorders, 425--6 mathematic
disorders, 441--2 Maudlsey Hospital, 778 Maudsley, Henry, 95, 396 MCA
(Mental Capacity Act) (2005), 77 McNaughton Rules, 529 MCV (mean
corpuscular volume), alcohol misuse, 579b MDMA (ecstasy), 603--4 MDPV
(Vanilla Sky, Purple Rain), 607t Medicaid, 779 medical disorders see
physical diseases/ disorders medication see pharmacotherapy medicine,
631--73 aetiological models, 91--2 diagnosis, 631--2 drug misuse
diagnosis, 591 evidence-based see evidence-based medicine (EBM)
procedures, 660--8 unexplained symptoms, 640--1, 640b medicine men and
women, 706 meditation, 706 mefloquine, 637t MEG
(magnetoencephalography), 117 melancholic depression, 199--200
memantine, 558, 559--60 memory, 101--2 delusional, 11 immediate, 18
long-term, 18 loss see amnesia mental state examination, 50
neuroanatomy, 349--50 recovered see recovered memory remote, 50 severe
depressive episode, 196 short-term, 50 memory disorders, 18--19
blackouts, excessive alcohol consumption, 572 post-electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT), 764--5 Mendelian disorders, 104--5 menopause, 672--3
Mental Capacity Act (MCA) (2005), 77 Mental Deficiency Act (1913), 505
intellectual disability, 486 mental disorders see mental illness Mental
Health Act, 80--2, 80b assessment section, 81

875

Index Community Treatment Orders, 82 criteria for detention, 80--1
police powers & powers of entry, 82 restriction orders and transfers,
81--2 structure, 81b treatment section, 81 Mental Health Act (1959), 780
personality disorders, 396 Mental Health Act (1983), 780 personality
disorders, 396 Mental Health Act (2007), 780 mental health gap (mhGAP),
675, 678 Mental Health National Service Framework (1999), 785--9 mental
health services research (MHSR), 784 mental illness biomedical
vs.Â social concepts, 22--3 cannabis use, 600--1 concepts of, 22--3
consent, 77 crime and see crime definitions, 22 global burden of,
675--6, 677t intellectual see intellectual disability refusal of
consent, 77 mental retardation see intellectual disability mental state
examination, 44--50, 46b anxiety, 47 appearance and behaviour, 44--5
attention and concentration, 50 auditory hallucinations, 49 cognitive
function, 49--50 compulsions, 48 depersonalization and derealization, 47
facial appearance, 44 fluctuating and incongruous mood, 47 general
appearance, 44 insight, 50 intellectual disability assessment, 502--3
memory, 50 mood, 45, 47 obsessions, 48 orientation, 49 perceptions, 49
posture and movement, 45 social behaviour, 45 speech, 45, 46b, 47
suicidal ideation, 47 suicide risk assessment, 616 thoughts, 47--9
visual hallucinations, 49 mental subnormality see intellectual
disability Mental Temperament Act (1930), 778 Mephedrone (Meow-Meow),
607t Mesmer, Anton, 682 meta-analysis, 126--8, 127f metabolic syndrome
acute schizophrenia, 292

antipsychotic drugs, unwanted effects, 730--1 metabolism
pharmacotherapy, 712 psychiatric aspects of, 663 methadone, 596 opioid
maintenance treatment, 598 opioid withdrawal, 596--7, 596b urine tests,
592t methyldopa, 637t 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA/ecstasy),
603--4 methylphenidate, 761 Meyer, Adolf, 95 mhGAP (mental health gap),
675, 678 microcephaly, 500t migraine, 677t migrants/migration, 100
psychiatric services, 797 schizophrenia aetiology, 277 selective, 100
mild cognitive impairment, 356 dementia diagnosis, 360--1 elderly, 560
mind--body dualism, 631--3, 632t mindfulness-based cognitive therapy,
223 mind, theory of see theory of mind Mini International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI), 67 Mini-Mental State Examination
(MMSE), 49, 68 minor anxiety depressive disorder, 198 course and
prognosis, 217 epidemiology, 204 mirtazapine, 219t, 227, 558b, 736t, 747
misidentification syndrome, delusional, 10--11, 309--10 mitgehen, 17
mitochondrial disorders, 496t mixed anxiety and depressive disorder,
183--4 mixed dementia, 373 mixed depression, 197 mixed mood (affective)
states, bipolar disorder, 235--6 MMSE see Mini-Mental State Examination
(MMSE) moclobemide, 175, 743, 744, 746 modafinil, 761 molecular
genetics, 106b monoamine hypothesis, depression, 209--12 monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), 742--6 available compounds, 743
contraindications, 745 drug interactions, 744--5 efficacy, 743 food
interactions, 743--4, 744b indications, depression, 219, 745--6
introduction of, 711 pharmacokinetics, 743 pharmacology, 743

unwanted effects, 743--4, 744b withdrawal from, 746 Montgomery-Ãsberg
Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), 67 mood history-taking, 43 mental state
examination, 45 mood disorders aetiology, 202t, 205b brain imaging,
214--15 children, 464--7 congruent delusions, 12 crime and, 518
delusional, 10 elderly in, 542--4 excessive alcohol consumption, 573,
576 intellectual disability, 491 mania, 233 mental state examination,
45, 47 neuropsychological assessment, 215, 215b paranoid symptoms, 302
postpartum mental disorders, 670 schizophrenia vs., 267 secondary
neuropsychiatric disorder, 389b severe depressive episode, 194
mood-stabilizing drugs, 719t, 752--60 acute mania, 248 bipolar
depression, 250 gabapentin, 760 pregnancy in, 716--17 schizophrenia, 289
see also carbamazepine; lamotrigine; lithium; valproate morbid jealousy,
519 Morel, Benedict Augustin, 94 Morgagni, Giovanni Battista, 94
morphine, 592t motivational interviewing, alcohol misuse treatment, 580,
580b motor symptoms and signs, 16--17 intellectual disability in, 489
rating scales, 68 see also movement disorders mourning, 154 movement
disorders, 373--7 chronic schizophrenia, 256 dystonias, 376 Huntington's
disease see Huntington's disease occupational dystonia, 376 Parkinson's
disease, 373--4, 374b, 375b tics, 376--7 movement, mental state
examination, 45 MPS I (mucopolysaccharidosis type I), 499t MRI see
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) MRS (magnetic resonance spectroscopy),
112, 112t MS (multiple sclerosis), 387, 387b

875

876

876

Index mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I), 499t multiaxial
classification, 28 multidisciplinary teams community mental health
teams, 782 elderly, psychiatric disorders, 545 pain clinics, somatoform
pain disorders, 653 multiple sclerosis (MS), 387, 387b multisystem
therapy, juvenile delinquency, 458 Munchausen's syndrome by proxy, 645
murder see homicide (murder) mutations, 106b genetic variation, 105--6
mutism, selective, 470--1 myocardial infarction (MI), 663--4 myoclonic
seizures, 381 Mystic Sage, 607t myxoedema, 664b N nalmefene, 583--4
naltrexone, 583, 598 narcissistic personality disorder, 401--2, 402b
prevalence rate, 404t narcolepsy, 327--8 psychostimulant drugs, 761
National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide, 613 National
Dementia Strategy (Living Well With Dementia), 545 Nazi regime, 779 need
assessment, 504 negativism, 17 neglect, child maltreatment, 478
neo-Freudians, 682 network meta-analysis, systematic reviews, 126
neurasthenia, 647 neurobiology aetiological models, 91 alcohol misuse,
571 alcohol-related disorders, 573 anorexia nervosa, 316--17
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, 451 bipolar disorder, 240
childhood depression, 465 delusional disorders (paranoid psychoses), 305
depression, 209--15 disease aetiology, 117 disorders, global effects,
677t drug dependence, 589 drug misuse, 588--9 generalized anxiety
disorder, 167 obsessive--compulsive disorder, 462--3 post-traumatic
stress disorder, 144, 145b reading disorder, 441 schizophrenias, 258,
280

neurodevelopmental model, schizophrenias, 283, 283b neuroendocrine
tests, 114 depression, 210--11 neurofibrillary tangles, 540 Alzheimer's
disease, 364 neurofibromatosis 1, 499t neuroimaging see brain imaging
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 731--2 neuroleptics see antipsychotic
drugs neurological, metal health, developmental , and substance use
(NMDS), 675 neurophysiology conversion disorder aetiology, 648
schizophrenia neurobiology, 281 neuropsychiatric disorders, 345--89
amnesia see amnesia anoxia, 388 assessment, 350--1 associated symptoms,
346--50 brain tumours, 386 carbon monoxide poisoning, 388
cerebrovascular disorders, 377--8 classification, 346, 347t delirium see
delirium dementia see dementia encephalitis, 387--8 epilepsy see
epilepsy head injury, 378--9 HIV infection, 666 hypoglycaemia, 388
intracranial infections, 385--6 movement disorders see movement
disorders multiple sclerosis, 387, 387b normal pressure hydrocephalus,
388 secondary syndromes, 389, 389b selective serotonin re-uptake
inhibitor, unwanted effects, 737, 737t systemic lupus erythematosus, 388
see also organic psychiatric disorders neuropsychology aetiology, 100--1
ageing, 541 assessment, 51 mood disorders, 215, 215b bipolar disorder
aetiology, 241 obsessive--compulsive disorder aetiology, 188 neurosis,
27--8 neurosurgery, 770--2 neurosyphilis, 385--6 nightmares (dream
anxiety disorder), 329 night terror disorder, 329 nihilistic delusions,
12 NMDS see neurological, metal health, developmental , and substance
use (NMDS) NNT see numbers needed to treat (NNT) NOFTT (non-organic
failure to thrive), 478--9

non-accidental injury, child maltreatment, 477--8 non-binary, 340b
non-cardiac chest pain, 664 non-fluent variant primary progressive
aphasia, 370b non-organic failure to thrive (NOFTT), 478--9
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) Alzheimer's disease,
elderly in, 560 opioid withdrawal, 597 noradrenaline depression,
209--10, 210b, 211 post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 145b
noradrenaline re-uptake inhibitors, 452 normalization, intellectual
disability, 510 normal-pressure hydrocephalus, 388 clinical features,
359t NSAIDs see non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) number
needed to treat (NNT), 121--2 O obsessional behaviour, 13--14 secondary
neuropsychiatric disorder, 389b obsessional phobias, 13 obsessional
thoughts, 13 obsessions, 13--14, 13b mental state examination, 48
obsessive--compulsive disorder (OCD), 184--90, 403, 403b aetiology,
187--8, 188b, 407 children, 462--3 clinical picture, 185, 185b
diagnostic criteria, 186 differential diagnosis, 186 management, 190,
410--11 prevalence rate, 404t prognosis, 188--9 related disorders,
190--2 treatment, 189--90 obstetrics, 668--73 antenatal death, 669
Caesarian section, 669 couvade syndrome, 669 hyperemesis gravidarum, 669
postnatal depression, 671 postpartum mental disorders, 670--1 postpartum
psychosis (puerperal psychosis), 670--1 pregnancy, 668--9 pseudocyesis,
669 schizophrenia aetiology, 275 spontaneous abortion, 669 termination
of unwanted pregnancy, 669 see also gynaecology occipital lobe, 348
occupational dystonia, 376 occupational therapy child psychiatric
treatment, 435

87

Index long-term psychiatric care, 796 OCD see obsessive--compulsive
disorder (OCD) ODD see oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)/conduct
disorder (CD) odds ratio individual treatment studies, 121 numbers
needed to treat calculation, 122--3 systematic reviews, 125--6, 126b
Oedipus complex, 93b oestrogen, 240 olanzapine, 726, 726t acute
behavioural disturbances, 734 bipolar depression treatment, 244t D2
receptor blockade, 733t dementia treatment, elderly in, 558b depot
preparations, 728t Oldham, A J, 710 olfactory dysfunction,
schizophrenias, 258--9 olfactory hallucinations, 7, 8 oneiroid states,
19 opioid misuse, 595--8 clinical effects, 595 dependency, course of,
596 epidemiology, 595 maintenance treatment, 598 planned withdrawal
(detoxification), 596--7 pregnancy, 597--8 treatment, 596, 596b
withdrawal from, 595--6 oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)/ conduct
disorder (CD), 453--6 organic psychiatric disorders, 26--7 crime and,
519 diabetes mellitus, 663 mood disorder, 64b obsessive--compulsive
disorder vs., 186 see also neuropsychiatric disorders organ
transplantation, 662 orgasm disorders classification, 331t female
orgasmic disorder, 336 orientation, mental state examination, 49
orphenadrine, 734, 735 overgeneralization depressive disorders, 695b
selective abstraction, 688b overvalued ideas, 14--15 P P50, 281 P300,
281 paediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with
streptococcal infection (PANDAS), 187 paedophilia, 338--9 pain
insensitivity, schizophrenias, 259 pain syndromes, 653--4 paliperidone,
728t

PANDAS (paediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with
streptococcal infection), 187 panic disorder, 180--3 aetiology, 181--2
clinical features, 180, 180b course and prognosis, 182 diagnostic
criteria, 180--1 differential diagnosis, 181 agoraphobia vs., 177 social
phobia vs., 173 epidemiology, 181 management, 183 treatment, 182--3
cognitive behavioural therapy, 693--4 Paracelsus, 94 paramnesia, 18
paraneoplastic syndrome, 666 paranoid personality disorder, 301
aetiology, 406 agoraphobia vs., 177 description/diagnosis, 398, 399b
management, 410 prevalence rate, 404t paranoid psychoses see delusional
disorders (paranoid psychoses) paranoid schizophrenia, 256 paranoid
symptoms, 302, 304 paranoid symptoms, 12b, 300--1, 300b aetiology,
300--1 assessment, 311 historical features, 302--3b psychiatric
disorders in, 302, 304 treatment, 311--12 paraphilias see abnormalities
of sexual preference (paraphilias) parasomnias, 329 parasuicide, 621b
parents child interactions, developmental psychopathology, 418--19
child's illness effects, 473 death of, 427 deprivation, depression
aetiology, 206 interviews with, 429 mental disorder, 426 separation,
child psychiatric disorders, 426, 427 parent training attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder treatment, 452 child psychological treatment, 434
oppositional defiant disorder/conduct disorder management, 456 parietal
lobe, 348 Parkinsonian syndrome, 728--9 Parkinson's disease (PD),
373--4, 374b, 375b dementia, 368 paroxetine, 716, 739t Parson, Talcott,
151 partial seizures complex, 380--1, 380t simple, 380

passive--aggressive personality disorder, 404t passivity, 11 passivity
of thought, 48--9 pathological gambling, 519--20 pathological jealousy,
306--8 excessive alcohol consumption, 573--4 Pathology and Therapy of
mental Disorders (Greisinger), 95 The Pathology of the Mind (Maudsley),
95 Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ), 67 PCL-R (Hare Psychopathy
Checklist-Revised), 400 PD see Parkinson's disease (PD) Peabody
(British) Picture vocabulary Test, 506t peer groups, 417--18 pelvic
pain, chronic, 654 perceptions delusional, 8, 10 disturbances of, 6--8
mental state examination, 49 perinatal mental illness, 679 persecutory
delusions, 11 mania, 234 psychotic depression, 196 perseveration, 15
personal history, history-taking, 40, 42--3 personal injury, 85
personality, 391--4 assessment, 52, 394 biological basis, 393--4
attachment theory, 394 childhood experiences, 393--4 children, 393
genetics, 393 changes in, 395 chronic head injury, 379 secondary
neuropsychiatric disorder, 389b stroke, 377 history-taking, 41, 43--4
importance of, 391--2 inter-ictal disturbances, 383--4 origins of,
393--4 pathological factor as, 391 predisposition, 391 agoraphobia, 178
depression, 206 excessive alcohol consumption, 576 generalized anxiety
disorder, 167 schizophrenia, 278--9 somatic symptom, 639b premorbid,
300--1 treatment, relation to, 392 types, 392--3 personality disorders,
395--412 aetiology, 405--7 classification, 396--8 comorbidities, 396--7
nomenclature, 397 related conditions, 397 clinical population rate, 404
cluster A, 398--9, 398t

877

87

878

Index personality disorders (cont.) management, 410--12 prevalence rate,
404t see also paranoid personality disorder; schizoid personality
disorder; schizotypal personality disorder cluster B, 398t, 399--402
prevalence rate, 404t see also antisocial (dissocial) personality
disorder; borderline personality disorder; histrionic personality
disorder; impulsive personality disorder; narcissistic personality
disorder cluster C, 398t, 402--3 course of, 408 management, 410--12
prevalence rate, 404t see also affective personality disorder; avoidant
(anxious) personality disorder; dependent personality disorder;
obsessive-- compulsive disorder (OCD) concept of, 395 course of, 407--8
cyclothymic, 403 dependent see dependent personality disorder
descriptions and diagnostic criteria, 398--403 elderly, 555 ethical
problems, 412 historical background, 396 impulsive, 401 management,
409--12 narcissistic see narcissistic personality disorder paranoia see
paranoid personality disorder prognosis, 410 treatment, 408--9 cognitive
therapy, 697 violence risk, 517t personalization, 688b pervasive
developmental disorder not otherwise specified, 450 PET see positron
emission tomography (PET) phaeochromocytoma, generalized anxiety
disorder vs., 165 pharmacodynamics, 713 pharmacogenomics, 714b
pharmacokinetics, 712--13 pharmacotherapy, 113--14 anticholinergic
drugs, 734--5 antidepressant drugs see antidepressant drugs
classification, 717--18, 719t collaboration, 715 compliance, 715
concordance, 715 dose, 714 drug combinations, 714

drug interactions, 713--14 drug withdrawal, 713--14 duration, 714
ethics, 715 historical aspects, 709--11 drug introductions, 711b
hypnotic drugs, 722 pharmacokinetics, 712--13 prescription of, 714--16
psychological side effects, 637t psychostimulant drugs, 760--1 special
groups, 715--17 specific disease/disorder agoraphobia, 179--80
Alzheimer's disease, elderly in, 559--60 anorexia nervosa, 319
antisocial (dissocial) personality disorder, 411--12 attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder, 452 bulimia nervosa, 323 childhood depression,
465--6 child psychiatric disorders, 433 chronic fatigue syndrome, 643
delusional disorders (paranoid psychoses), 311--12 dementia , elderly
in, 557--8, 558b functional enuresis, 469--70 generalized anxiety
disorder, 168--9 intellectual disability, 509 obsessive--compulsive
disorder, 189 paranoid symptoms, 311--12 personality disorder, 410
psychiatric disorder management in medical disorder comorbidity, 638
schizophrenia, 286--9, 287b social phobia, 175, 176 therapeutic
response, lack of, 717 see also antipsychotic drugs; anxiolytic drugs;
mood-stabilizing drugs phenacetin, 637t phencyclidine, 604--5
phenelzine, 175, 743 phenomenological psychopathology see descriptive
psychopathology phenomenology see descriptive psychopathology
phenothiazines, 725--6 phenylketonuria, 498t phobic anxiety disorders,
162, 170--80 agoraphobia see agoraphobia children, 461 classification,
170 generalized social, 173 obsessional, 13 obsessive--compulsive
disorder, 185 social see social phobia specific see specific phobia
specific phobia see specific phobia phototherapy, 769--70 physical abuse
(non-accidental injury), child maltreatment, 477--8 physical
diseases/disorders

adjustment to, 151--2 depression, 207--8 alcohol misuse, 571, 577--8
anxiety as secondary symptom, 165--6 drug misuse diagnosis, 591 drug
misuse unwanted effects, 589b elderly, 541 generalized anxiety disorder
vs., 165 intellectual disability, 488--9 psychiatric aspects, 660--8
psychiatric disorder prevention, 636, 636b psychiatric disorder with see
comorbidities schizophrenias, 284--5 somatic symptoms see somatic
symptoms physical examination, 50--1 intellectual disability assessment,
503 neuropsychiatric disorder assessment, 350 sexual dysfunction, 333,
334b physical treatment elderly, psychiatric disorders, 549--50 history
of, 709--11 see also pharmacotherapy physiology, aetiology, 114--17
Piblokto (arctic hysteria), 657 pica, 324 pre-school children, 438
Pick's disease, 369--70, 371 Pinel, Philippe, 396 pipotiazine, 728t
placebos, 123--4 planned withdrawal (detoxification), opioids, 596--7
plastic surgery, 661--2 plead, fitness to, 528 PMDD (premenstrual
dysphoric disorder), 672 PMS (premenstrual syndrome), 672 police powers,
Mental Health Act, 82 polymorphisms, 106b see also single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) The Portage Guide to Early Education, 506t positron
emission tomography (PET), 111--12 antipsychotic drug trials, 733t
cerebral blood flow measurement, 115 schizophrenia neurobiology, 280
post-concussional syndrome, 378 post encephalitic parkinsonism
(encephalitis lethargica), 388 post-ictal disturbances, epilepsy, 383
post-mortem studies aetiology, 111 depression, 210 schizophrenia, 280
postnatal depression, 671 postoperative period, 661 postpartum psychosis
(puerperal psychosis), 670--1

879

Index post-stroke dementia, 367 post-stroke depression, 377
post-traumatic amnesia (PTA), 378 post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
138, 142--6 aetiology, 144--5 burns, 667 assessment, 145 children,
461--2 clinical picture, 142--3, 143b crime and, 519 diagnosis, 143
differential diagnosis, 143 ICD-10, 143b maintaining factors, 145
medication, 146 neurobiology, 144, 145b onset and course, 142--3
prevalence, 143 psychological factors, 144--5 treatment, 145--6, 147b
cognitive behavioural therapy, 694 posture, mental state examination, 45
posturing, 17 power of attorney, 84 powers of entry, Mental Health Act,
82 Prader--Willi syndrome, 498t pragmatic trials, 128--9 precipitating
factors, 89 predisposing factors, 89 predisposition, 99 prefrontal
cortex, 175 pregabalin, 599--600, 722 pregnancy depression, 668--9
diabetes mellitus, 662--3 drug misuse, 590 opioid misuse, 597--8
oppositional defiant disorder /conduct disorder aetiology, 454 personal
history, 42 pharmacotherapy, 715--17 psychiatric aspects, 668--9, 668b
termination, 669 pre-ictal disturbances, epilepsy, 383 premature
ejaculation, 336 premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), 672
premenstrual syndrome (PMS), 672 premorbid personality, 300--1 presenile
dementia, 358 presenilin 1 (PSEN 1), 364 presenilin 2 (PSEN 2), 364
Present State examination (PSE), 66 primary care, psychiatric disorders
in, 789--92 primary delusions, 10 primary progressive aphasia,
non-fluent variant, 370b primary symptoms, 3 PRIME (Programme for
Improving Mental health care), 678 prion disease, 371--2 clinical
features, 359t

see also Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD); kuru Pritchard, J C, 396
problem drinking, 566 problem lists, 65, 65b problem-solving
counselling/strategies, 136, 685 adjustment disorders, 150 depression
treatment, 221 procyclidine, 734 progesterone, 240 Programme for
Improving Mental health care (PRIME), 678 projection, 137b promethazine,
734 property, offences against, 526--7 protective factors, 99 child
psychiatric disorders, 426 proton (Â¹H) magnetic resonance spectroscopy,
112 PSE (Present State examination), 66 PSEN 1 (presenilin 1) gene, 364
PSEN 2 (presenilin 2) gene, 364 pseudocyesis, 669 pseudodementia, 552
pseudohallucinations, 8 pseudoseizures (functional non-epileptic
attacks), 382 Psichiatria Democratica, 779 psychiatric history, 39--44
history-taking, 39--41 psychiatric interview, 36--9 see also assessment
psychiatric referral, 154 psychiatric report (court report) see forensic
psychiatry psychiatric services, 777--99 acute disorders, 792--4 see
also acute psychiatric disorders aspects in medical procedures and
disorders, 660--8 child psychiatric treatment, 432--3 community mental
health teams see community mental health teams (CMHT) components of,
780--9 doctors with psychiatric problems, 797--8 effectiveness in
medical disorders, 636--7 elderly, psychiatric disorders, 545--6 ethnic
minorities, 797 historical perspective, 777--80 homeless people, 797
inpatient wards, 781--2 intellectual disability care, 509 international
principles, 799 long-term care see long-term psychiatric services
medical settings, in, 658--60 Mental Health National Service Framework
(1999) see Mental Health National Service Framework (1999)

mental health services research, 784 migrants, 797 outpatient clinics,
782 refugees, 798 suicide aetiology, 612 suicide prevention, 619
psychoanalysis, 93b psychoanalytical theories abnormalities of sexual
preference (paraphilias), 337 agoraphobia aetiology, 178 depression
aetiology, 208b generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), 166--7
obsessive--compulsive disorder aetiology, 187--8 specific phobia
aetiology, 171 psychodrama (action therapies), 702 psychodynamic
theories children, therapies for, 434 conversion disorder aetiology, 648
counselling, 685 post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 145
psychopathology, 2 psychogenic amnesia, 19 psychological assessments, 51
psychological reaction, 89--90 psychological treatments/psychotherapy,
681--708 children, 433--5, 704--5 depression management, 465
classification, 683--4 cognitive behavioural therapy see cognitive
behavioural therapy (CBT) common factors, 684, 684b counselling see
counselling couple therapy, 703 dynamic see dynamic psychotherapy
elderly, 550, 705 dementia, 556--8 ethical problems, 707--9 family
therapy, 703--4 group therapies, 700--3, 701b historical
aspects/development, 682--3, 706--7 individual dynamic psychotherapies,
697--9 brief insight orientated psychotherapy, 697--8 cognitive analytic
therapy, 698--9 long-term individual dynamic psychotherapy, 699
interpersonal psychotherapy, 687--8 supportive see supportive
psychotherapy terminology, 681 psychomotor changes chronic schizophrenia
subsyndromes, 257t severe depressive episode, 195 psychopathology, 2
cultural variations, 4

879

80

880

Index psychopathology (cont.) descriptive see descriptive
psychopathology experimental, 2 psychophysiological measures, 114
psychosis, 27 Alzheimer's disease, 363 amphetamine-induced, 601--2
children, 471--2 head injury, 379 paranoid see delusional disorders
(paranoid psychoses) Parkinson's disease, 374 secondary neuropsychiatric
disorder, 389b psychosomatic medicine, 658 psychostimulant drugs, 719t,
760--1 psychosurgery see neurosurgery Psychotherapy by Reciprocal
Inhibition (Wolpe), 683 psychotic depression classification, 200
symptoms, 196 treatment, 200 psychotic disorder acute, 264--5 brief see
brief psychotic disorders intellectual disability, 490--1 transient,
264--5 psychotropic drugs, electroconvulsive therapy, 767 PTA
(post-traumatic amnesia), 378 PTSD see post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) puerperal psychosis (postpartum psychosis), 670--1 punch-drunk
syndrome, 379 Purple Rain (MDPV), 607t pyromania, 520 Q QIDS (Quick
Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology), 67 QT interval, antipsychotic
drugs, 727 qualitative research, quantitative research vs., 134t
quality-of-life scales, 68 quantitative research, 133--4, 134t querulant
delusions, 309 quetiapine, 726, 726t acute behavioural disturbances, 734
bipolar depression, 244t, 250 bipolar disorder, 251 dementia treatment,
elderly in, 558b schizophrenia, 288f Quick Inventory of Depressive
Symptomatology (QIDS), 67 R randomized clinical trials (RCTs), 711 rape,
146--7, 525--6 psychological impact on victim, 527 Rape Crisis, 527
rapid cycling disorders, 236

see also bipolar disorder rapid eye movement (REM), 329 rationalization,
137b Rayner, R, 683 RCTs (randomized clinical trials), 711 reaction
formation, 137b reading disorders see learning disorders reboxetine,
219t, 750 receptive dysphagia, 46b recognition, disturbances of, 18--19
recording information, 36 recovered memory, 657 childhood abuse, 158
recurrent brief depression classification, 201 epidemiology, 204
recurrent depressive disorder bipolar disorder vs., 238 reductionist
aetiological models, 91 reduplication phenomenon, 17 reference,
delusions of, 11 reflex hallucinations, 7 reformist delusions, 309
refugees, 148, 149b psychiatric services, 798 refusal, consent of, 76--7
regression, 137b rehabilitation community care, 796--7 drug misuse, 594
relapse prevention, alcohol abstinence, 583t relative risk, 121
relaxation training, behaviour therapy, 690 reliability of diagnosis,
29--30 REM (rapid eye movement), 329 remote memory, 50 repression, 137b
Research Domain Criteria, 34 residential care child psychiatric
treatment, 435 elderly, psychiatric disorders, 547 inpatient wards, 782
intellectual disability care, 508 residual schizophrenia, 257 restless
legs syndrome, 329 restrictive food disorder, 324 retarded depression,
196 The Retreat (York), 778 Rett syndrome, 450, 499t Reynell Scales of
Language Development, 506t risks assessment, 53b assessment conclusions,
58 reduction, 121--2 relative risk, 121 risperidone, 726, 726t acute
behavioural disturbances, 734 D2 receptor blockade, 733t dementia
treatment, elderly in, 558b depot preparations, 728t

schizophrenia, 288t rituals, obsessive--compulsive disorder, 185
rivastigmine, 558b road traffic accidents (RTAs), 667 Rogers, Carl, 685
RTAs (road traffic accidents), 667 rubella, 500t ruminations,
obsessive--compulsive disorder, 185 S SAD (seasonal affective disorder),
200--1 Sakel, Manfred, 710 Salvia (Magic Mint, Mystic Sage), 607t SCAN
(Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry), 66 Schedules for
Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry (SCAN), 66 schizoaffective
disorder, 265 schizoid personality disorder, 399, 399b aetiology, 406--7
management, 410 prevalence rate, 404t schizophrenia, 253--97, 296 acute
see acute schizophrenia aetiology, 268--79, 269t environmental risk
factors, 274--6, 274t family factors, 278b genes, 272--4, 274b genetics,
269--74, 271b neurodevelopmental model, 283, 283b psychological factors,
278--9, 278b social factors, 276--8 chronic see chronic schizophrenia
clinical features, 253--9 cognitive features, 257--8 subtypes, 256--7
comorbidities, 266 course and prognosis, 284--6 crime and, 518--19
cultural variations, 261b diagnosis and classification, 259--67 DSM-5,
262t, 263b, 264--6 ICD-10, 262t, 263, 264--6, 264b differential
diagnosis, 266--7, 266b generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) vs., 165
mania vs., 237--8 obsessive--compulsive disorder vs., 186 social phobia
vs., 174 discussions with patients and carers, 297 early-onset, 471--2
late-onset vs., 554b epidemiology, 267--8 global effects, 677t
hebephrenic (disorganized), 256 historical aspects, 260--1, 260--1b
intellectual disability, 490--1 late-onset, early-onset vs., 554b

81

Index maintenance treatment, 288 management, 291--6, 292b neurobiology,
279--83 paranoid see paranoid schizophrenia prodrome, 259 relapse
prevention, 288 residual, 257 simple, 256--7 symptom ratings, 68
treatment, 286--91 cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), 696--7
treatment-resistant type, 294--5, 295b type I subtype, 257 type II
subtype, 257 undifferentiated, 257 violence risk, 517t
schizophrenia-like disorders diagnosis and classification, 264--5
elderly, 544, 554--5 paranoid symptoms, 304 schizophreniform disorders,
264 schizotypal personality disorder, 399 aetiology, 407 prevalence
rate, 404t Schneider, Kurt, 396 Schneider's symptoms of the first rank,
255b, 255t School Health Promotion and Empowerment programme (SHAPE),
679--80 schools, 427--8 refusal, 467--8 SCID (Structured Clinical
Interview for Diagnosis), 66 screening questionnaires, alcohol misuse,
577, 578b screening tests, dementia, 361b seasonal affective disorder
(SAD), 200--1 secondary delusions, 10 secondary symptoms, 3
second-person hallucinations, 7 secure units, 531--2 seizures
antipsychotic drugs, unwanted effects, 731 atonic, 381 complex partial,
380--1, 380t generalized tonic--clonic, 381 partial see partial seizures
simple partial, 380 selective mutism, 470--1 selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 113, 736--40, 736t characteristics, 219t
clinical use, 738--40 agoraphobia, 179 depression, 218, 737 depression
in pregnancy, 669 depressive disorders, 226--7, 739--40 generalized
anxiety disorder, 169 obsessive--compulsive disorder, 189 social phobia,
175

suicide prevention, 619 differences between, 739t drug interactions,
738, 739t monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 745 pharmacokinetics, 736--7
pharmacology, 736 tolerance to, 218 unwanted effects, 737--8, 737t
self-control techniques, behaviour therapy, 691 self-cutting, repeated,
630 self, disturbances of, 17--18 self-harm see deliberate self-harm
self-help (mutual-help) groups, 700--1 self-monitoring, cognitive
behavioural therapy assessment, 689 self-mutilation, 621b
self-poisoning, 621 semantic variant primary progressive aphasia, 370b
senile dementia, 358 senile (amyloid) plaques, 540 Alzheimer's disease
(AD), 364 senile squalor syndrome, 191, 555 sensory disabilities, 489
sensory disorders, 665 separation anxiety disorder, 460--1 serotonin
(5-HT) antisocial (dissocial) personality disorder aetiology, 406
depression, 209--10, 210--11, 210b obsessive-compulsive disorder, 187
schizophrenia neurobiology, 283 suicide aetiology, 613 serotonin and
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), 736t depression treatment,
218 serotonin syndrome, 744--5, 745b sertindole, 726 sertraline, 716,
739t severe depressive episode, 194--6 sex reassignment
(gender-confirming) surgery, 342 sex therapy, 334--5 sexual abuse of
children, 478--81, 523--4 sexual delusions, 13 sexual dysfunction, 330,
332--6 aetiology, 332--3, 333b assessment, 333, 334b classification,
331t definition, 330 diabetes mellitus, 662--3 female orgasmic disorder,
336 female sexual arousal disorder, 335 gender dysphoria see gender
dysphoria genitopelvic pain/penetrative disorder, 336 intellectual
disability, 493 male erectile disorder (erectile dysfunction/impotence),
335--6 male orgasmic disorder, 336 masochism disorder, 340 premature
ejaculation, 336 prevalence, 332, 332t

selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor, unwanted effects, 737 sexual
desire, loss of, 335 treatment, 334--6, 335b types of, 335 see also
abnormalities of sexual preference (paraphilias) sexual history, 42
sexual offences, 523--6, 525b abuse of children, 523--4 indecent
assault, 524 indecent exposure, 524 rape, 525--6 stalking, 524--5
violent offences, 523 sexual orientation, 340b sexual-related disorders,
330--42 classification, 331t sexual dysfunction see sexual dysfunction
sexual sadism disorder, 339--40 shamans, 706 shared care, psychiatric
disorders, 791--2 shared (induced) delusional disorder, 310 shared
delusions, 11 Shepherd, Michael, 119 shoplifting, 526 short-term
amnesia, 572 short-term memory, 50 shyness, social phobia vs., 174
sibling rivalry disorder, 461 sick role, 151 simple partial seizures,
380 simple schizophrenia, 256--7 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
106b, 107 single-photon emission tomography (SPET), 111--12 cerebral
blood flow measurement, 115 schizophrenia neurobiology, 280 Skinner, B
F, 683 sleep deprivation acute mania, 247 depression treatment, 222
sleep disorders, 324--9 assessment, 325, 326b breathing-related, 328
bright light treatment, 770 circadian-rhythm sleep disorder (sleep-wake
schedule disorder), 328--9 classification, 324--5, 325b daytime
sleepiness, 327, 327b epidemiology, 325 generalized anxiety disorder,
164 hypersomnia, 327 insomnia see insomnia intellectual disability,
492--3 Kleine-Levin syndrome, 328 narcolepsy, 327--8 nightmares (dream
anxiety disorder), 329 night terror disorder, 329

881

82

882

Index sleep disorders (cont.) parasomnias, 329 Parkinson's disease, 374
pre-school children, 438 rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behaviour
disorder, 329 restless legs syndrome, 329 severe depressive episode, 195
sleep paralysis, 329 see also sleep deprivation sleep education (sleep
hygiene), 326, 326b sleep hygiene, 326, 326b sleepiness, daytime, 327,
327b sleep paralysis, 329 sleep-wake schedule disorder (circadianrhythm
sleep disorder), 328--9 sleepwalking disorder, 329 small group
psychotherapy, 700--1 Smith--Magendie syndrome, 499t SNPs see single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) SNRIs see serotonin and noradrenaline
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) social anxiety disorder, 461 social
(pragmatic) communication disorder, 444 socialization, group therapies,
701b social phobia, 172--6 aetiology, 174--5 clinical picture, 172--3
course and prognosis, 175 differential diagnosis, 173--4 agoraphobia
vs., 177 epidemiology, 174 generalized, 173 management, 175--6
transcultural variations, 184 treatment, 175 social skills, inadequacy
vs.Â social phobia, 174 social skills training alcohol abstinence, 583t
behaviour therapy, 691 schizophrenia treatment, 291 sodium valproate see
valproate somatic symptoms, 638--46 aetiology, 639 definition, 646b
epidemiology, 639 medically unexplained symptoms, 640--1, 640b
psychiatric disorders with, 634 terminology, 638--9 somatization,
632--3, 638 somatization disorder, 650 somatoform and related disorders,
646--54 body dysmorphic disorder, 651--2 children, 463--4
classification, 646--8, 647t definition, 638, 646b delusional disorder,
309 hallucinations, 8

hypochondriasis, 650--1 pain disorders, 652--3 psychiatric symptoms, 634
somatization disorder, 650 see also conversion disorder; dissociative
disorders specialist services acute psychiatric disorders see acute
psychiatric disorders education for child psychiatric treatment, 435
hospitals, offenders with mental disorder, 531--2 psychological impact
on victim, 528 terminal illness in, 154 specific phobia, 170--2 speech
chronic schizophrenia, 256 mania, 234 mental state examination, 45, 46b,
47 speech disorders children, 442--3 mental state examination, 45 SPET
see single-photon emission tomography (SPET) Spice (Genie, Yucatan
Fire), 607t Spurzheim, Johann, 94 SSRIs see selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) STAI (State-Trait Anxiety Inventory), 67
stalking, 309, 524--5 stammering, 471 Stanford--Binet test, 430t
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), 67 statins, 560 stereotactic
neurosurgery, 771b unwanted effects, 772b stereotypes, 16 sterilization,
673 steroids, 637t, 664b stigma, 25b personality disorders, 412
stimulant drugs, 601--2 St John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum), 751
stress, 89, 135--59 acute disorder/reaction see acute stress
disorder/reaction adverse reactions to, 138, 142 see also adjustment
disorders; posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) coping strategies, 135,
136--7 defence mechanisms, 135, 137--8, 137b emotional and somatic
response, 136 generalized anxiety disorder, 166 mixed anxiety and
depressive disorder, 183 reaction classification, 138--9, 139b response
to, 135--8 special kinds of adjustment, 151--9 special kinds of stress,
146--9 stroke, 377 global effects, 677t

Structured Clinical Interview for Diagnosis (SCID), 66 stupor,
dissociative, 656--7 subacute encephalitis, 666 subarachnoid
haemorrhage, 377 subcortical dementia, 358, 360t subdural haemorrhage,
377 subjective doubles syndrome, 310 sublimation, 137b substance use
disorders, 563--607 adolescents, 474--5 classification, 563--5, 564t
crime, 517 epidemiology, 586--7 generalized anxiety disorder vs., 165
global effects, 677t paranoid symptoms, 302 personal history, 43
schizophrenias, 276, 296 substance classifications, 564t see also
alcohol misuse; alcoholrelated disorders; drug misuse sudden unexplained
death in epilepsy (SUDEP), 489 suggestion, psychological treatments,
684b suicidal ideation, 47 suicide, 609--20 adolescents, 614--15
aetiology, 611--13, 611b abnormal grief, 156 biological factors, 613
epilepsy, 384 excessive alcohol consumption, 573 HIV infection, 666
investigation methods, 611--12 medical conditions, 635 medical factors,
612, 612t mood disorders and intellectual disability, 491 psychiatric
factors, 612 psychological factors, 613 schizophrenias, 284--5, 296
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors, 737--8 social factors, 612--13
at-risk patient management community, 617, 617b hospitals, 617--18, 618b
attempted see attempted suicide deliberate self-harm after, 623, 625b
elderly, 614 epidemiology, 610--11 ethnic groups, 615 global rates, 610f
homicide, following, 522 occupational groups, 615 pacts, 615 prevention,
619--20, 619b psychiatric services, 613--14 rational, 614 risk
assessment, 615--16 see also deliberate self-harm sulpiride, 726, 726t

83

Index breastfeeding, 717 D2 receptor blockade, 733t supported
accommodation, 782 supported employment, 795--6 support groups, 700
grief management, 157 psychological impact on victim, 527 supportive
psychotherapy, 686--7, 687b depression, 221 personality disorder, 409
surgery, 660--1 see also neurosurgery surgical wards, 633--4, 634t
Sydenham, Thomas, 94 symptoms and signs, 2, 4--20 instruments for
measuring, 67--8 synonymous polymorphisms, 106b syphilis congenital,
500t meningovascular, 385 tabes dorsalis, 385 systematic family therapy,
704 systematic reviews, 124--9 systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 388
Szasz, Thomas, 22, 92 T tabes dorsalis, neurosyphilis, 385 tactile
hallucinations, 7, 8 TADS (Treatment for Adolescents with Depression)
study, 466--7 taijin-kyofu-sho, 184 talking past the point, 16 tardive
dyskinesia, 729--30 tardive dystonia, 730 TCAs see tricyclic
antidepressants (TCAs) TDCS (transcranial direct current stimulation),
775 temazepam, 720b, 723 temperament child psychiatric disorder
aetiology, 423 oppositional defiant disorder /conduct disorder
aetiology, 454 temper tantrums, 417 pre-school children, 437--8 temporal
lobe, 348 terminal illness, adjustment to, 152--4 termination of
pregnancy, 669 terrorist crimes, 527 thalamus, 349 theory of mind autism
spectrum disorder, 447 schizophrenias, 258 therapeutic communities,
702--3 opioid misuse treatment, 598 therapeutic groups, 701--3 thinness,
pursuit of, 314 thioxanthenes, 725 third-person hallucinations, 7
thought block, 15 thought disturbances, 8--15 aggressive, 14
broadcasting, delusions of, 48

disorders in acute schizophrenia, 254 disturbances of, 15--16
insertions, 11 delusions of, 48 mania, 234 mental state examination,
47--9 obsessional, 13 withdrawal, 12 delusions of, 48 thought, passivity
of, 48--9 thyroid disorders depression, 213 enlargement, lithium, 753
thyrotoxicosis generalized anxiety disorder vs., 165 psychiatric aspects
of, 664b thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 114 tics, 16, 376--7
children, 471 tinnitus, 665 TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation),
772--3 tolerance anxiolytic drugs, 718 definition, 564 topiramate, 584
torpor, 19 torts, 85 torture victims, 148, 149b Tourette syndrome,
376--7 toxoplasmosis, 500t traditional healing, 706--7 trance and
possession disorder, 657 transcranial direct current stimulation (TDCS),
775 transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 772--3 transcultural
factors see cultural factors transference, psychological treatments, 684
transgender, 340b transient global amnesia, 355--6 transient psychotic
disorder, 264--5 transsexuality, 340b transvestic disorder, 338
tranylcypromine, 743 trauma, dissociative identity disorder, 655--6
trazodone, 736t, 747--8 characteristics, 219t dementia treatment,
elderly in, 558b Treatise on Insanity (Pinel), 26 treatment capacity
for, 84 consent for see consent indications, 59 Mental Health Act, 81
refusal, 635 deliberate self-harm management, 629, 629b ethics, 661b
legal aspects, 661b terminal illness, adjustment to, 153

treatment-resistant schizophrenias, 294--5, 295b TRH
(thyrotropin-releasing hormone), 114 trichotillomania, 191--2 tricyclic
antidepressants (TCAs), 736t, 740--2 clinical use, 742 depression, 218
depressive disorders, 227 maintenance and prophylaxis, 742
contraindications, 742 drug interactions, 741--2 monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, 745 introduction of, 711 pharmacokinetics, 740 pharmacology,
740 toxic effects, 741 neonatal toxicity, 716--17 unwanted effects 741,
741t trifluoperazine, 725, 733t tri-iodothyronine, 230 trisomy21 see
Down's syndrome (trisomy 21) tryptophan, 750--1 depletion studies in
depression, 211 depression, 210 tuberous sclerosis, 499t Tuke, Samuel,
778 Tuke, William, 778 twin studies depression, 205 excessive alcohol
consumption, 575 generalized anxiety disorder, 166 genetics, 103, 104b
personality, 393 post-traumatic stress disorder, 144 schizophrenia, 270
tyramine, 743--4 U understanding, 3 aetiology, 90 intuitive, 87--8
undifferentiated schizophrenia, 257 unipolar depression continuation
treatment, 223 global effects, 677t maintenance treatment, 223 unity of
self, disturbance of, 18 unwanted pregnancy, termination of, 669 urine
tests, drug misuse, 592t US--UK Diagnostic Study (1972), 30
schizophrenias, 260 V vagal nerve stimulation, 773 vaginismus, 336
validity of diagnosis, 30 valproate, 758--9 bipolar depression, 244t
bipolar disorder, 245, 251

883

84

884

Index valproate (cont.) breastfeeding, 717 dementia treatment, elderly
in, 558b mania, 243 pre exposure in autism spectrum disorder, 447
pregnancy in, 717 unwanted effects, 754t values-based practice, 72
Vanilla Sky (MDPV), 607t variant Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease (vCJD), 372
vascular dementia, 366--8 aetiology, 367--8 clinical features, 359t, 367
elderly, treatment, 560 risk factors, 368b subtypes, 367b vascular
factors, elderly depressive disorders, 552 vCJD (variant
Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease), 372 velocardiofacial syndrome, 273b, 498t
genetics, 272 venlafaxine, 748--9 agoraphobia, 179 characteristics, 219t
depression, 218 monoamine oxidase inhibitors, interaction with, 745
verbigeration, 16 Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Scale, 506t violence
forensic psychiatry, 521--3 see also domestic violence; homicide
(murder)

juvenile delinquency, 457--8 pathological jealousy, 307 relative risk,
517t risk assessment, 534--6, 535b, 535f schizophrenia management, 296
visual hallucinations, 7, 8 mental state examination, 49 vocabulary
disorders, 443 vocational rehabilitation, 795 vomiting, psychogenic, 324
von Meduna, Ladislas, 761 von Recklinghausen's syndrome, 499t
vortioxetine, 749--50 voyeuristic disorder, 339 vulnerability, 99 W WAIS
V (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale), 506t ward groups, 702 warm baths,
710 Watson, J B, 683 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS IV), 506t
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, 430t Wechsler Pre-School and
Primary Scale of intelligence, 430t Wernicke--Korsakoff syndrome see
Korsakoff's syndrome Wernicke's encephalopathy, 355 excessive alcohol
consumption, 573 Wescher Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC IV), 506t
Wever, Johan, 94 white matter hyperintensities, 349

mood disorders, 214 WHO see World Health Organization (WHO) WHODAS
(World Health Organization Disability Assessment Scale), 68 Williams
syndrome, 498t Willis, Thomas, 94 Wing, J K, 779 WISC IV (Wescher
Intelligence Scale for Children), 506t withdrawal phenomena,
alcohol-related disorders, 572--3 withdrawal state, 565 Wolpe, Joseph,
683 Wood, Paul, 180 World Health Organization (WHO) child maltreatment,
475--6 intellectual disability, 486 psychiatric services, 799 World
Health Organization Disability Assessment Scale (WHODAS), 68 X X-linked
inheritance, 104--5 X-linked intellectual disability, 501--2 Y yoga, 706
Youth Offending Teams, 458 Z ziprasidone, 726 zolpidem, 723 zopiclone,
723 zuclopenthixol, 728t

85

86

87

8


